Rich Kid, Smart 
Kid 
Giving Your Child a Financial Head Start  
Robert T. Kiyosaki with 
Sharon L. Lechter, C.P.A  
RICH DAD SERIES  
Rich Dad, Poor Dad 
#1 New York Times , #1 Wall Street Journal, #1 
Business Week , #1 Publishers Weekly , as well as a San 
Francisco Chronicle  and USA Today  bestseller. 
Also featured on the bestseller lists of 
Amazon.com, Amazon.com UK and Germany,  
E-trade.com, Sydney Morning Herald  (Australia), 
Sun Herald  (Australia), Business Review Weekly  
(Australia) Borders Books and Music  (U.S. and 
Singapore), Barnes & Noble.com , 
Wall Street Journal, New York Times Business  
and Business Week  bestseller. 
Also featured on the bestseller lists of the 
Sydney Morning Herald  (Australia), Sun 
Herald  (Australia), Business Review Weekly  
(Australia), Amazon.com, Barnes &  
Noble.com, Borders Books and Music  
(U.S. and Singapore) 
USA Today, Wall Street Journal, New York Times  
Business, Business Week  and Publishers  
Weekly  bestseller.  Page 1 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comRich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid 
Giving Your Child a Financial Head Start  
by ROBERT T. KIYOSAKI  
with  Sharon L. Lechter, C.P.A.  
Published by Warner Books 
A Time Warner Company 
If you purchase this book without a cover you should 
be aware that this book may have been stolen property 
and reported as "unsold and destroyed" to the publisher. 
In such case neither the author nor the publisher has 
received any payment for this "stripped book." 
This publication is designed to provide competent and 
reliable information regarding the subject matter covered. 
However, it is sold with the understanding that the author 
and publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, 
financial, or other professional advice. Laws and practices 
often vary from state to state and if legal or other expert 
assistance is required, the services of a professional 
should be sought. The author and publisher specifically 
disclaim any liability that is incurred from the use or 
application of the contents of this book. 
Although based on a true story, certain events in the 
book have been fictionalized for educational content and 
impact. 
Warner Books Edition 
Copyright © 2001 by Robert T Kiyosaki and Sharon L. 
Lechter All rights reserved. 
Published by Warner Books in association with 
CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc. Monopoly® is a 
registered trademark of Hasbro, Inc. CASHFLOW is a 
trademark of CASHFLOW Technologies, Inc. 
Warner Business Books are published by Warner 
Books, Inc., 1271 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 
10020 
Visit our Web site at www.twbookmark.com  
A Time Warner Company 
The Warner Business Book logo is a trademark of 
Warner Books, Inc. Printed in the United States of 
America 
First Printing; January 2001 
10 987654321  Page 2 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comLCCN: 00-109230 ISBN: 0-446-67748-5 
This book is dedicated to parents and teachers 
everywhere. 
You have the most important job in the world because 
our children are our future!  Page 3 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comTable of Contents 
lIntroduction: Why Your Banker Does Not Ask You 
for Your Report Card   
lChapter 1: All Kids Are Born Rich Kids and Smart 
Kids   
lChapter 2: Is Your Child a Genius?   
lChapter 3: Give Your Children Power—Before You 
Give Them Money   
lChapter 4: If You Want to Be Rich, You Must Do 
Your Homework   
lChapter 5: How Many Winning Formulas Will Your 
Child Need?   
lChapter 6: Will Your Child Be Obsolete by Thirty?   
lChapter 7: Will Your Child Be Able to Retire Before 
Thirty?   
lChapter 8: My Banker Has Never Asked Me for My 
Report Card   
lChapter 9: Kids Learn by Playing   
lChapter 10: Why Savers Are Losers   
lChapter 11: The Difference Between Good and Bad 
Debt   
lChapter 12: Learning with Real Money   
lChapter 13: Other Ways to Increase Your Child's 
Financial IQ   
lChapter 14: What Is an Allowance For?   
lChapter 15: How Do You Find Your Child's Natural 
Genius?   
lChapter 16: Success Is the Freedom to Be Who You 
Are  
lConclusion: The Most Important Job in the World   
lAppendix A: Allowance or No Allowance: The Age-
Old Battle   
lAppendix B: Financial Field Trips: Money Exercises 
for Parents to Do with Their Children   
Introduction: Why Your Banker 
Does Not Ask You for Your 
Report Card Page 4 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com: Contents - Next  
Education is more important today than at any other 
time in history. As we leave the Industrial Age behind and 
enter the Information Age, the value of one's education 
continues to increase. The question today is, Is the 
education you or your child receives in school adequate to 
meet the challenges of this brave new world we enter? 
In the Industrial Age you could go to school, graduate, 
and start your career. You usually did not need additional 
education to succeed simply because things did not 
change that fast. In other words, the education you 
learned in school was all you needed for your lifetime. 
As millions of baby boomers get ready to retire today, 
however, many are faced with the realization that they 
have not been adequately educated for the new world they 
face. For the first time in history, many well-educated 
people are facing the same economic difficulties that the 
less educated are facing. They repeatedly find themselves 
having to get additional education and training in order to 
satisfy their current job requirements. 
When Do You Measure the Success of Your 
Education?  
When do you measure the success of your education? 
Is it the final report card the day you graduate from 
school, let's say at age twenty-five, or is education's 
effectiveness measured when you retire, let's say at age 
sixty-five? 
In the Sunday, July 16, 2000, issue of my local paper, 
the Arizona Republic , an article included the following 
statistic: "About 700,000 seniors will be cut from their 
Medicare Choice HMOs according to a survey released 
earlier this month by the American Association of Health 
Plans." 
The article went on to state that providing health care 
for senior citizens was too expensive and was not 
profitable for insurance companies, so senior citizens are 
being dropped from supplemental health care protection. 
The health care problem for seniors will only increase, as 
seventy-five million baby boomers hit that age bracket in 
the next ten years. 
Health Education and Welfare Stats  
Based on a study performed by the Department of 
Health, Education and Welfare, of every one hundred 
people at age sixty -five, one is rich, four are comfortable, Page 5 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfive are still working, fifty -six are needing government 
support or family support, and the rest are dead. 
It is not becoming the one rich person that this book is 
about. It is the fifty-six who still need someone else to 
support them I am concerned about. I do not want you or 
your child to wind up in that big statistic. 
People often say to me, "I won't need much money 
when I retire because when I retire, my living expenses go 
down." While it is true that your living expenses may go 
down after you retire, there is one thing that often goes up 
dramatically, and that is health care. And that is why the 
HMOs (health maintenance organizations) in the 
previous article are cutting seniors from supplemental 
medical coverage. Senior citizens are just too expensive to 
cover. In the next few years it will be clear that health care 
will literally be a life-and-death issue for millions of older 
people. Putting it bluntly, if you have money, you may 
live; and if you don't have money, you may die. 
The question is, Did these senior citizens' education 
prepare them for this financial challenge at the end of 
their lives? 
The next question is, What does the plight of these 
senior citizens have to do with your child's education? 
There are two answers to these two questions. 
Answer number one is that it is your child who will 
ultimately have to pay for the health care of these millions 
of senior citizens if they cannot pay for it themselves. 
Answer number two is another question: Will your 
children's education prepare them to be financially secure 
enough not to need government financial and medical 
support at the end of their working days? 
The Rules Have Changed  
In the Industrial Age, the rules were go to school, get 
good grades, find a safe, secure job with benefits, and stay 
there all your life. After twenty years or so you retire, and 
the company and the government take care of you for the 
rest of your life. 
In the Information Age, the rules have changed. The 
rules now are go to school, get good grades, find a job, and 
then retrain yourself for that job. Find a new company 
and a new job and retrain. Find a new company and a new 
job and retrain, and hope and pray you have enough 
money set aside to last you much longer than age sixty-
five because you will live well beyond the age of sixty -five.  Page 6 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comIn the Industrial Age, the defining theory of the era 
was Einstein's E = mc2. In the Information Age, the 
defining theory of the era is Moore's law, which spawned 
the current ideology that the amount of information 
doubles every eighteen months. In other words, to keep 
up with change, you need to virtually relearn everything 
every eighteen months. 
In the Industrial Age, change was slower. What you 
went to school to learn was valuable for a longer period of 
time. In the Information Age, what you know becomes 
obsolete very quickly. What you learned is important, but 
not as important as how fast you can learn, change, and 
adapt to new information. 
Both my parents grew up during the Great Depression. 
For them job security was everything, which is why there 
was always a little bit of panic in their voice when they 
said, "You must go to school so you can get a safe, secure 
job." In case you have not noticed, today jobs are 
plentiful. The challenge is not to get left behind because 
you become obsolete working at your current job. 
Other subtle yet significant changes between the ages: 
In the Industrial Age, the employer was responsible for 
your retirement plan. 
In the Information Age, the employee is responsible. If 
you run out of money after age sixty-five, it is your 
problem, not the company's problem. 
In the Industrial Age, you became more valuable the 
older you got. In the Information Age, you become less 
valuable the older you get. 
In the Industrial Age, people were employees for life. 
In the Information Age, more people are now free agents. 
In the Industrial Age, the smart kids went on to 
become doctors and lawyers. They made the big bucks. 
In the Information Age, the people who make the big 
bucks are the athletes, actors, and musicians. Many of the 
doctors and other professional people are actually making 
less than they did in the Industrial Age. 
In the Industrial Age, you could count on the 
government to bail you out if you and your family got in 
financial trouble. 
As the Information Age begins, we hear more and more 
politicians promising to save Social Security and other 
government safety net programs. You and I are smart Page 7 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comenough to know that when politicians begin to make 
promises to save something, the chances are what they 
are proposing to save is already gone. 
When change occurs there is typically resistance. In 
the last few years there are many examples of people 
recognizing the opportunities that arise during a period of 
change. 
1. Bill Gates became the richest man in the world 
because the older men at IBM failed to see the market and 
the rules changing. Because of these older executives' 
failure to see these changes, the investors in IBM literally 
lost billions of dollars. 
2. Today we have Information Age companies, started 
by twenty-year-olds, buying Industrial Age corporations 
run by forty-five-year-olds (AOL and Time Warner are 
two examples). 
3. Today we have twenty-year-olds becoming 
billionaires because forty-five-year-old executives failed to 
see the opportunities the twenty year-olds saw. 
4. Today we have twenty-year-old self-made 
billionaires who have never had a job, and at the same 
time we have forty-five-year-olds who are starting over, 
retraining for a new job. 
5. It is said that in the near future, the individuals will 
go on-line and bid for jobs rather than apply for jobs. It is 
said that people who want jobs longer than a year (greater 
security) will have to accept less money for that security. 
6. Instead of hoping to find a good job with a big 
company, more and more students are starting their own 
businesses in their dorm rooms. Harvard University even 
has a special office that assists students in developing 
their incubator businesses—touted as a way to help them 
build the business, but more likely intended as an 
incentive to keep them in school. 
7. And at the same time, half of the employees of one of 
America's largest employers earn so little that they qualify 
for food stamps. What will happen to these employees 
when they are too old to work? Was their education 
adequate? 
8. Home schooling is no longer a fringe form of 
alternative education. Today the number of kids being 
educated at home is increasing by 15 percent per year. 
9. More and more parents are seeking other 
educational systems, such as the Catholic system, Page 8 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWaldorf, or Montessori, just to remove their children 
from an antiquated government-run educational system 
that does not cater to their child's needs. More and more 
parents realize that their child's early education is as 
important to a child's development as college is. 
Super Camp is a shorter-term, intensive learning 
environment utilizing the latest teaching techniques to 
improve test scores and increase a teen's self-confidence. 
It is sponsored by the Learning Forum and can be found 
at www.supercamp.com . 
10. Simply put, the Information Age will bring 
economic changes that will dramatically increase the gap 
between the haves and have-nots. For some people, these 
changes will be a blessing; for others, these coming 
changes will be a curse; and for still others, these changes 
will make no difference at all. As my rich dad said, "There 
are people who make things happen; there are people who 
watch things happen; and there are people who say, 'What 
happened?'" 
Education Is More Important Than Ever Before  
Education is more important than ever before because 
things will be changing faster than we have ever seen 
before. For the first time in history, those who do well in 
school may face the same economic challenges as those 
who did not do well. All of us need to pay attention when 
our bankers ask for our financial statements rather than 
our report cards. Your banker is trying to tell you 
something. This book is about what your children need to 
learn for personal and financial success in the real world. 
Is the education your children are receiving today 
adequately preparing them for the future they face? 
Is the school system catering to the special needs of 
your child? 
What do parents do if their child dislikes school or is 
doing poorly in school? 
Do good grades insure lifelong professional and 
financial success? 
Does your child even need to go to a traditional brick-
and-mortar school in order to receive the education he or 
she needs? 
Whom Is This Book For?  
This book is written for parents who realize that the 
world has changed and suspect that our current system of Page 9 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comeducation may not be adequately catering to the 
special needs of their children. This book is written for 
parents who are willing to take a more active role in their 
child's education, rather than leave the responsibility to 
the school system. 
It is written to assist parents in preparing for the real 
world… the world after school is over. It is written 
specifically for parents who: 
want to give their child a financial head start in life 
without costing them a fortune.  
want to insure that their child's natural genius and 
learning style are protected and their child leaves school 
excited about being a lifelong learner. 
may have a child who does not like school or a child 
who is having difficulty learning in school. 
All of the above. 
How This Book Is Organized  
This book is written in three parts. 
Part I is an overview of education both academic and 
financial. Those who have read my other books already 
know that I had two father figures in my life. One man I 
called my rich dad was my best friend Mike's dad; and one 
man I called my poor dad was my real dad. The benefit I 
had was that both men were geniuses in their own right. 
The man I call my poor dad in my opinion was an 
academic genius and educator. After the age of nine I 
began having serious problems in school. I did not like 
what I was learning and how I was being taught. I saw no 
relevance between what I was being forced to learn and 
how I could apply it to the real world. 
Part I of this book was how my smart but poor dad 
continued to guide me through this very difficult part of 
my life. If not for my smart dad, I would have dropped or 
flunked out of school and never would have gone on to 
graduate with my college degree. 
Part I of this book is also about the educational process 
my other dad, rich dad, put me through. I would say my 
rich dad was a financial genius and also a great teacher. In 
part I of this book I explain how rich dad began preparing 
my young mind to think like a rich person. Between the 
ages of nine and twelve and because of my rich dad's 
guidance, I was absolutely certain that I would attain 
great wealth, whether or not I did well in school or got a 
high -paying job. By the age of twelve I knew that Page 10 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combecoming rich had little to do with what I was learning 
in school. Knowing I was going to be rich, regardless of 
how I did in school, did create some unique attitude 
problems for me while I was still in school. Part II of this 
book is how both dads worked to keep my attitude 
problem in check and guided me to complete my college 
education. 
Part II is about some simple action steps, academically 
and financially, parents can take to begin preparing their 
child for the real world. I begin part II with a story of how 
I almost failed high school because of my changes in 
attitude about school. In part II you will begin to gain 
further insights into how my smart dad and rich dad kept 
me in school and how my rich dad used my academic 
failures to prepare me to become rich. 
In part II my rich dad explains to me why his banker 
never asked him for his report card. My rich dad goes on 
to say, "My banker has never asked me if I had good 
grades. All my banker wants to see are my financial 
statements. The problem is, most people leave school not 
knowing what a financial statement is. Rich dad would 
also say, "Understanding how financial statements work 
is essential for anyone wanting to build a life of financial 
security." And in today's world of less and less job 
security, it is essential that your child have the skills to 
insure a life of financial security. 
When you look at an overview of the current 
educational system, it is obvious that the system focuses 
on two mam areas of education. 
Scholastic Education the ability to read, to write, and 
to do arithmetic. 
Professional Education the education to become a 
doctor, lawyer, plumber, secretary or whatever you want 
to do to earn money once you leave school. 
America and many Western nations have done an 
excellent job in making these two fundamental types of 
education available to their citizens. This education has 
contributed greatly to the advantage the West has in the 
world today. The problem is, as stated previously, the 
rules have changed. In the In-formation Age, we need 
more new education not more of the same education. 
Each and every student now needs some of the basic 
education my rich dad gave me. 
Financial Education  the education requited to turn the Page 11 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commoney you earn from your profession into lifelong 
wealth and financial security. The financial education 
those seven hundred thousand senior citizens didn't have. 
The financial education that will help insure that your 
child does not wind up a financial failure late in life 01 
financially destitute and alone after a life of raising a 
family and working hard 
The reason your banker does not want to see your 
report catrd is that he or she wants to see how smart you 
are after you leave school. He or she wants to see a 
measure of your financial intelligence, not your scholastic 
intelligence. Your financial statement is a much better 
measure of your financial intelligence than your report 
card. 
Part II has some simple, concrete examples of things 
parents can do to give their child a financial head stait 
into the real world of jobs and money. 
Part III is about some of the latest technological 
breakthroughs in education that will enhance parents' 
ability to find their child's natural learning ability and 
natural genius Part III is about giving your child an 
academic head start. 
Years ago one of Albert Einstein's teachers scoffed and 
said, "He will never amount to anything.' Math teachers 
thought him dull-witted because of his failure to learn by 
rote memorization. 
A year later in his life, when Einstein was told that a 
prominent inventor declared that fact knowledge was 
vitally important, Einstein disagreed. He said A person 
does not need to go to college to learn facts. He can learn 
them from books. The value of a liberal arts college 
education is that it trains the mind to think He also said," 
Imagination is more important than knowledge." 
While being questioned by a group of reporters, one 
asked, "What is the speed of sound" Einstein replied, "I 
don't know. I don't carry information in my mind that is 
readily available in books. 
Almost every parent I have met is certain that his or 
her child is smart and a genius. When that child reaches 
school, however, the child's natural genius is often shoved 
aside or takes a subordinate role to the single genius and 
single learning style emphasized by the educational 
system as the right way to learn. My smart dad and many 
other educators realize that the current school system Page 12 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdoes not cater to the various different geniuses that 
children are born with. 
It is unfortunate that our current educational system is 
mired in contro-versy and old ideas. While our current 
system may be aware of many of these educational 
breakthroughs the politics and red tape surrounding the 
profession of education prevent many of these new 
innovative ways of assessing your child's genius from 
becoming part of the system. 
My smart dad was the head of the educational system 
of Hawaii. He did his best to change the system but was 
crushed by the svstem instead He later said to me, There 
are three different types of teachers and adminis-trators 
in the system. There is one group that works diligently to 
change the system There is another group that works 
diligently against any kind part of change. And the third 
group does not care if the system changes or not. All this 
group wants is their job security and their paycheck. And 
that is why the system has remained the same for years." 
In Conclusion  
It was my smart dad who often said, "A child's most 
important teachers are his or her parents. Many parents 
say to their children, 'Go to school and study hard. A good 
education is important.' The problem is that many 
parents who say these words do not continue with their 
own education or studies." My smart dad also said, 
"Parents are the child's most important teachers… but 
students learn by watching more than they do by 
listening. Children are tuned in to watching for 
discrepancies between words and actions." Children love 
to catch parents saying one thing and doing something 
else. My rich dad used to say, "Your actions speak louder 
than your words." He also said, "If you want to be a good 
parent, you need to walk your talk." 
If you have children, I thank you for taking an interest 
in a book on education and an interest in your children's 
education. Most parents say their child's education is 
important, but few pick up books on educating their 
children. 
In each of our books we like to provide an audio 
interview as a bonus with additional insights. As a thank-
you to you for reading this book, you may go to the Web 
site www.richdad.com/richkid  and download an audio of 
my discussion with Kathy Kolbe called "Find Out How 
Your Child Learns Best … Because All Children Learn Page 13 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comDifferently."  
Thank you for your interest in your child's financial 
education. 
PART I: "M ONEY  IS AN IDEA " 
When I was a little boy, my rich dad often said, 
"Money is an idea. "He would go on to say, "Money can 
be anything you want it to be. If you say, I'll never be 
rich,' then the chances are you'll never be rich. If you say , 
7 can't afford it,' then chances are you can't ." 
My smart dad said much the same about education.  
Is it possible that every child is born with the potential 
to be rich and smart? There are some people who think it 
is possible… and there are others who don't. The first 
part of this book is dedicated to protecting that 
possibility for your child.  
Chapter 1: All Kids Are Born Rich 
Kids and Smart Kids 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
Both my dads were great teachers. Both men were 
smart men. But they were not smart in the same subjects, 
and they did not teach the same things. Yet as different as 
they were, both dads believed the same things about all 
kids. Both dads believed that all kids are born smart and 
all kids are born rich. Both believed a child learns to be 
poor and learns to believe that he or she is less smart than 
other kids. Both dads were great teachers because they 
believed in bringing out the genius that each child is born 
with. In other words, they did not believe in putting 
knowledge in, they believed in bringing the child's genius 
out. 
The word education  comes from the Latin word 
educare , which means "to draw out." Unfortunately for 
many of us, our memories of education are long, painful 
sessions of cramming little bits of information into our 
heads, memorizing them for the test, taking the test, and 
then forgetting what we had just learned. Both my dads 
were great teachers because they rarely tried to cram their 
ideas into my head. They often said very little, waiting 
instead for me to ask when I wanted to know something. 
Or they asked me  questions, seeking to find out what I 
knew, rather than simply telling me  what they knew. Both Page 14 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commy dads were great teachers, and I count them as some 
of the top blessings in my life. 
And not to forget the moms. My mom was a great 
teacher and role model also. She was my teacher for 
unconditional love, kindness, and the importance of 
caring for other people. Unfortunately my mom died at 
the young age of forty-eight. She had been sick most of 
her life, battling with a heart weakened from rheumatic 
fever from childhood. It was her ability to be kind and 
loving to others in spite of her personal pain that taught 
me a vital lesson. Many times when I am hurt and want to 
lash out at others, I simply think of my mom and 
remember to be kinder… instead of angrier. And for me, 
that is an important lesson I need reminding of daily. 
I once heard that boys marry women just like their 
moms, and I would say that is true for me. My wife, Kim, 
is also an extremely kind and loving person. I regret that 
Kim and my mom never got to meet each other. I think 
they would have been best of friends, as Kim is with her 
mother. I wanted to have a wife who was also my partner 
in business, because the happiest days of my parents' 
marriage were the days they worked together in the Peace 
Corps. I remember when President Kennedy announced 
the creation of the Peace Corps. Both my mom and dad 
were thrilled by the idea and could not wait to be a part of 
the organization. When my dad was offered the position 
as director of training for Southeast Asia, he took it and 
asked that my mom be the staff nurse. I believe those 
were the happiest two years in their marriage. 
I did not know my best friend Mike's mom very well. I 
saw her when I was over for dinner, which was often, but I 
cannot say I really knew her. She spent a lot of time with 
her other kids, while Mike and I spent most of our time 
with his dad at work. Yet the times I was over at their 
home, Mike's mother was also very kind and attentive to 
what we were doing. I could tell that she was a great life 
partner for Mike's dad. They were affectionate, kind, and 
interested in whatever was going on with each other. 
Although a very private person, she was always interested 
in what Mike and I were learning at school and in the 
business. So although I did not know her very well, I 
learned from her the importance of listening to others, 
letting others talk, and being respectful to the ideas of 
others even if they clashed with your ideas. She was a 
great communicator in a very quiet way.  Page 15 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comLessons from Mom and Dad  
The number of single-parent families I see today 
concerns me. Having both a mom and a dad as teachers 
was important in my development. For exam pie, I was 
bigger and heavier than most kids, and my mom was 
always afraid that I would use my size advantage and 
become a bully. So she really stressed that I develop what 
people today would call "my feminine side." As I said, she 
was a very kind, loving person, and she wanted me to also 
be kind and loving. And I was. One day I came home from 
the first grade with my report card, and on it the teacher 
had written, "Robert needs to learn to assert himself 
more. He reminds me of Ferdinand the Bull [from the 
story about a big bull that instead of fighting the matador 
sat down in the ring and smelled the flowers the fans were 
throwing… coincidentally one of my mom's favorite 
bedtime stories for me]. All the other boys pick on him 
and push him around, although Robert is so much bigger 
than they are." 
When my mom read the report card, she was thrilled. 
When my dad came home and read the same report card, 
he turned into a raging bull, and not one that smelled the 
flowers. "What do you mean the other boys push you 
around? Why do you let them push you around? Are you 
turning into a wimp?" he said, noticing the comment 
about my behavior rather than my grades. When I 
explained to him that I was just listening to Mom's 
instructions, my dad turned to my mom and said, "Little 
boys are bullies. Learning how to deal with bullies is 
important for all kids to learn. If they do not learn how to 
deal with bullies early in life, they often grow up allowing 
themselves to be bullied as adults. Learning to be kind is 
one way of dealing with bullies, but so is pushing back, if 
and when kindness does not work." 
Turning to me, my dad asked, "And how do you feel 
when the other boys pick on you?" 
Bursting into tears, I said, "I feel terrible. I feel helpless 
and afraid. I don't want to go to school. I want to fight 
back, but I also want to be a good boy and do what you 
and Mom want me to do. I hate being called 'fatty' and 
'Dumbo' and being pushed around. What I hate most is 
just standing there and taking it. I do feel like I am a sissy 
and a wimp. Even the girls laugh at me because I just 
stand there and cry." 
My dad turned to my mom and glared at her for a Page 16 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commoment, letting her know that he did not like what I 
was learning. "So what do you want to do?" he asked. 
"I'd like to hit back," I said. "I know I can beat them. 
They're just little punks who pick on people, and they like 
picking on me because I am the biggest in my class. 
Everyone says don't hit them because I am bigger, but I 
just hate standing there and taking it. I wish I could do 
something. They know I won't do anything, so they just 
keep picking on me in front of everyone else. I'd love to 
just grab them and punch their lights out." 
"Well, don't hit them," my dad said quietly. "But you 
let them know in whatever way you can that you are not 
going to be picked on anymore. You are learning a very 
important lesson in self-respect right now and standing 
up for your rights. Just don't hit them. Use your mind to 
find a way to let them know that you will not be picked on 
anymore." 
My crying stopped. I felt much better as I wiped my 
eyes and found some courage and self-esteem reentering 
my body. I was now ready to go back to school. 
The next day my mom and my dad were called to my 
school. The teacher and the school principal were very 
upset. As my mom and dad entered the room, I was 
sitting in a chair in the corner, splattered with mud. 
"What happened?" my dad asked as he took his seat. 
"Well, I can't say that the boys did not have it coming 
to them," said the teacher. "But after I wrote you the note 
on Robert's report card, I knew something would change." 
"Did he hit them?" my dad asked with great concern. 
"No, he didn't," said the principal. "I watched the 
whole thing. The boys began teasing him. But this time, 
Robert asked them to stop instead of just standing there 
and taking it… yet they continued. He patiently asked 
them to stop three different times, and they just taunted 
him more. Suddenly Robert went back into the classroom, 
grabbed the boys' lunch pails, and emptied them into that 
big mud puddle. As I rushed over from across the lawn, 
the boys then attacked Robert. They started hitting him, 
but he did not hit back." 
"What did he do?" my dad asked. 
"Before I could get there to break it up, Robert grabbed 
the two boys and pushed them into the same mud puddle. 
And that is how he got splattered with mud. I sent the 
other boys home to change their clothes because they Page 17 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwere soaking wet."  
"But I didn't hit them," I said from my corner. 
My dad glared at me, put his index finger over his lips 
indicating that I should shut up, then turned back to the 
principal and teacher and said, "We will take care of this 
at home." 
The principal and the teacher nodded their heads as 
the teacher said, "I'm glad I was witness to the whole 
event developing over the past two months. If I had not 
known the history leading up to the mud puddle event, I 
would have reprimanded only Robert. But you may rest 
assured that I will be having the parents and the other two 
boys in for counseling also. I do not condone throwing the 
boys and their lunches into the mud, but I hope now we 
will see an end to this bullying that has been going on 
between the boys." 
The next day there was a meeting between the two 
boys and me. We discussed our differences and shook 
hands. At recess that day, other kids came up to me and 
shook my hand and patted me on the back. They were 
congratulating me for standing up to the two bullies who 
were also picking on them. I thanked them for their 
congratulations but also said to them, "You should learn 
to fight your own fights. If you don't, you will go through 
life being a coward, letting the bullies of the world push 
you around." My dad would have been proud hearing me 
repeat his original lecture to me. After that day, the first 
grade was much more pleasant. I had gained some 
valuable self-esteem, I gained respect from my class, and 
the prettiest girl in my class became my girlfriend. But 
what was more interesting was that the two bullies 
eventually became my friends. I learned to bring peace by 
being strong rather than allowing terror and fear to 
persist because I was weak. 
Over the next week, I learned several valuable life 
lessons from both my mom and dad from this mud puddle 
incident. The mud puddle incident was a hot topic of 
discussion at dinner. I learned that in life there is not a 
right answer or a wrong answer. I learned that in life we 
tend to make choices, and each choice has a consequence. 
If we do not like our choice and consequence, then we 
should look for a new choice with a new consequence. 
From this mud puddle incident, I learned the importance 
of being both kind and loving from my mom and being 
strong and prepared to fight back from my dad. I learned Page 18 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthat too much of one or the other, or only one and not 
the other, can be self-limiting. Just as too much water can 
drown a plant dying of thirst, we humans in our behavior 
can often swing too far in one direction or the other. As 
my dad said the night we got back from the principal's 
office, "Many people live in a black-and-white world or a 
right-and-wrong world. Many people would have advised 
you, 'Never push back,' and still others would have said, 
'Push back.'" But the key to being successful in life is this: 
If you must push back, you must know exactly how hard 
to push back. Knowing exactly how hard to push requires 
much more intelligence than simply saying, 'Don't push 
back,' or, 'Push back.'" 
My dad would often say, "True intelligence is knowing 
what is appropriate  rather than what is simply right  or 
wrong ." As a six-year-old boy, I learned from my mom 
that I needed to be kind and gentle… but I also learned 
that I could be too kind and gentle. From my dad I 
learned to be strong, but I also learned I need to be 
intelligent and appropriate with my strength. I have often 
said that a coin has two sides. I have never seen a one-
sided coin. But all too often we forget that fact. We often 
think the side we are on is the only  side or the right side. 
When we do that, we may be smart, we may know our 
facts, but we also may be limiting our intelligence. 
One of my teachers once said, "God gave us a right foot 
and a left foot. God did not give us a right foot and a 
wrong  foot. Humans make progress by first making a 
mistake to the right and then making a mistake to the left. 
People who think they must always be right  are like 
people with only a right foot. They think they are making 
progress, but they usually wind up going in circles." 
I think as a society we need to be more intelligent with 
our strengths and our weaknesses. We need to learn to 
operate more intelligently from our feminine side as well 
as our masculine side. I remember when I was angry with 
another guy at school back in the 1960s, we would 
occasionally go behind the gym and fight with our fists. 
After one or two punches were thrown, we would begin to 
wrestle and get tired, and then the fight would be over. 
The worst that ever happened was an occasional torn shirt 
or bloody nose. We often became friends after the fight 
was over. Today kids get angry, start thinking in the less 
intelligent "right and wrong" thinking, break out their 
guns, and shoot each other … and that goes for both boys Page 19 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comand girls. We may be in the Information Age and kids 
may be more "worldly" than their parents, but we could 
all learn to be more intelligent with our information and 
our emotions. As I said, we need to learn from both our 
moms and our dads, because with so much more 
information, we need to become more intelligent. 
This book is dedicated to parents who want to raise 
kids who are smarter, richer, and also more financially 
intelligent. 
Chapter 2: Is Your Child a 
Genius? 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
"What's new?" I asked a friend I had not seen in 
several years. He immediately pulled out his wallet and 
showed me a picture of his eleven-month-old daughter. 
Smiling proudly, he said, "She is so smart. I cannot 
believe how fast she learns." For the next twenty minutes 
this proud dad related in exacting detail all the things his 
brilliant daughter was learning. Finally he realized that he 
had not stopped talking and said apologetically, "I'm 
sorry. I'm just so proud of my daughter. I am just amazed 
at how smart she is and how fast she learns. I'm certain 
she is a genius." 
Is this proud boasting limited to only a few new 
parents? I think not. At least not in my experience. If 
there is one thing I have noticed from my observation of 
all parents, it is that they are all astounded by how fast 
their children learn. Every new parent I have met is sure 
that his or her child is the smartest in the world, maybe 
even a genius. And I agree with them. I think all children 
are born geniuses. But for many children, something 
happens to that genius along the way as they grow up. For 
some children, that genius seems to disappear, gets 
pushed down, or goes in other directions. 
Although my wife, Kim, and I do not have children, 
newborn babies always fascinate me. I love looking in 
their eyes. When I look into their eyes, I see a most 
curious and inquisitive being staring back. It is easy to see 
that children are learning in quantum leaps. By quantum, 
I mean learning exponentially. Their knowledge base 
must be doubling each second. Everything they can soak 
in with their eyes is new, is a wonderment, and is being 
added to their databank unedited, qualified, or without Page 20 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commuch prejudice. They are soaking in this new 
experience called life. 
Just the other day I went to another friend's home. He 
was in the pool with his three-year-old daughter. As I 
waved and walked up to the pool, he shouted, "Look at my 
little girl. She is going to be an Olympic swimming star." I 
watched this little girl bravely churning up the water, 
nearly drowning, but still making progress as she swam 
toward her proud father. I held my breath as this young 
girl, who had no flotation devices on and was barely 
getting her head up to get a breath of air, thrashed her 
way toward her dad, waiting in the deep end of the pool. 
Finally I sighed in relief as her dad put his arms around 
her and said, "That's my brave little swimmer. You're 
going to be an Olympic swimming star someday." And I 
think she will be. 
What was amazing to me was that only a week before, 
this same little girl was terrified of the water. Only a week 
before, she was so afraid of the water, she cried when her 
dad carried her into the pool. Now he is calling her a 
future Olympic swimming star. That, to me, is the kind of 
quantum learning only a genius is capable of… and every 
child is born capable of learning at that level. 
My Dad Believed That All Kids Are Born 
Geniuses  
As described in an earlier book, Rich Dad Poor Dad , 
my real dad was the superintendent of education of the 
state of Hawaii in the late 1960s and early 1970s. He 
ultimately resigned from office to run for lieutenant 
governor of the state as a Republican, which was not the 
smartest of decisions. He chose to run out of moral 
conscience. He was very upset with the levels of 
corruption he found in government, and he wanted to 
change the educational system. He thought that he could 
do something to reform the system if he ran for office. 
Knowing that he would probably not win, he ran anyway 
and used his campaign to bring to light the wrongs he 
thought should be righted. But as we all know, the public 
does not always vote for the most honest and truthful 
candidates. 
I still believe my dad was an academic genius. He was a 
voracious reader, a great writer, a brilliant speaker, and a 
great teacher. He was a top student all through school and 
served as a class officer. He graduated from the University 
of Hawaii way ahead of the rest of his class and went on to Page 21 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combecome one of the youngest school principals in 
Hawaii's history. He was invited to do graduate work at 
Stanford University, the University of Chicago, and 
Northwestern University. In the late 1980s he was 
selected by his peers as one of the top two educators in 
Hawaii's 150-year history of public education and 
awarded an honorary doctorate degree. Even though I call 
him my poor dad because he was always broke regardless 
of how much money he made, I was very proud of him. He 
often said, "I'm not interested in money." And he also 
said, "I'll never be rich." And those words became self-
fulfilling prophecies. 
After reading Rich Dad Poor Dad , many people say, "I 
wish I had read this book twenty years ago." Some then 
ask, "Why didn't you write it earlier?" My reply is, 
"Because I waited for my dad to pass on before writing it." 
I waited for five years out of respect. I know the book 
would have hurt him if he'd read it when alive… but in 
spirit form, I think he supports the lessons that we all can 
learn from his life. 
In this book, Rich Kid Smart Kid , many of the ideas 
about how children learn and why all children are born 
smart come from my dad. The following story is about a 
classmate of mine who was labeled a genius early in life. It 
is also about how we are all geniuses in one way or 
another. 
Does Your Child Have a High Financial IQ?  
When you say someone has a high IQ, what does that 
mean? What does your IQ measure? Does having a high 
IQ guarantee that you will be successful? Does having a 
high IQ mean you will be rich? 
When I was in the fourth grade, my teacher announced 
to the class, "Students, we are honored to have a genius in 
our midst. He is a very gifted child, and he has a very high 
IQ." She then went on to announce that one of my best 
friends, Andrew, was one of the brightest students she 
had ever had the privilege to teach. Up until that time, 
"Andy the Ant," as we all called Andrew, was just one of 
the kids in the class. We called him "Andy the Ant" 
because he was tiny and had thick glasses that made him 
look like a bug. Now we had to call him "Andy the Brainy 
Ant." 
Not understanding what IQ meant, I raised my hand 
and asked the teacher, "What does IQ mean?"  Page 22 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comThe teacher sputtered a little and replied, "IQ means 
intelligence quotient." She then gave me one of those 
glaring looks that said silently, "Now do you know what 
IQ means?" 
The problem was, I still had no idea what IQ meant, so 
I raised my hand again. The teacher did her best to ignore 
me, but finally she turned and said in a long-drawn-out 
tone, "Yes. What is your question this time?" 
"Well, you said IQ stood for intelligence quotient, but 
what does that mean?" 
Again she sputtered a little with impatience. "I told you 
that if you did not know the definition of something, you 
should look it up. Now get the dictionary and look it up 
for yourself." 
"Okay," I said with a grin, realizing that she did not 
know the definition either. If she had known, she would 
have proudly told the entire class. We knew that when she 
did not know something, she would never admit it but 
instead tell us to look it up. 
After finally locating "intelligence quotient" in the 
dictionary, I read the definition out loud. Quoting 
directly, I read, "Noun (1916): A number used to express 
the apparent relative intelligence of a person determined 
by dividing his mental age as reported on a standardized 
test by his chronological age and multiplying by 100." 
When I finished reading the definition, I looked up and 
said, "I still don't understand what IQ means." 
Frustrated, the teacher raised her voice and said, "You 
don't understand because you don't want to understand. 
If you don't understand it, then you need to do your own 
research." 
"But you're the one who said it was important," I shot 
back. "If you think it's important, at least you can tell us 
what it means and why it's important." 
At that point Andy the Ant stood up and said, "I'll 
explain it to the class." He climbed out from behind his 
wooden desk and walked to the chalkboard at the front of 
the room. He then wrote on the board: 
18 (mental age)_____ X 100 = 180 IQ 
10 (chronological age)  
"So people say I am a genius because I am ten years of 
age but have test scores of a person who is eighteen years 
of age."  Page 23 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comThe class sat silently for a while to digest the 
information that Andy had just put on the board. 
"In other words, if you don't increase your abilities to 
learn as you get older, then your IQ could come down," I 
said. 
"That's how I would interpret it," said Andy. "I might 
be a genius today, but if I don't increase what I know, my 
IQ comes down with each year. At least that is what the 
equation represents." 
"So you could be a genius today but be a dummy 
tomorrow," I said with a laugh. 
"Very funny," said Andy. "But accurate. Yet I know I 
don't have to worry about you beating me." 
"I'll get even after school," I shouted back. "I'll meet 
you on the baseball diamond and then we'll see who has 
the higher IQ." With that I laughed, and so did other 
students in the class. Andy the Ant was one of my best 
friends. We all knew he was smart, and we knew he would 
never be a great athlete. Yet even though he could not hit 
or catch the ball, he was still very much a part of our 
team. After all, that is what friends are for. 
What Is Your Financial IQ?  
So how do you measure people's financial IQ? Do you 
measure it by how big their paycheck is, their net worth, 
the kind of car they drive, or the size of their house? 
Several years later, long after the discussion about 
Andy the Ant being a genius, I asked my rich dad what he 
thought financial IQ meant. He quickly replied, "Financial 
intelligence is not about how much money you make, it's 
about how much money you keep and how hard that 
money works for you." 
Yet as time went on, he refined his definition of 
financial intelligence. He once said, "You know your 
financial intelligence is increasing if as you get older your 
money is buying you more freedom, happiness, health, 
and choices in life." He went on to explain that many 
people made more money as they got older, but their 
money only bought them less freedom—less freedom in 
the form of having bigger bills to pay. Having bigger bills 
meant the person had to work harder to pay them. To rich 
dad this was not financially intelligent. He also explained 
that he saw many people making a lot of money, but their 
money did not make them happier. To him, that was not 
financially intelligent. "Why work for money and be Page 24 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comunhappy?" He said, "If you must work for money, find 
a way to work and be happy. That is financial 
intelligence." 
When it came to health he would say, "Too many 
people work too hard for money and slowly kill 
themselves in the process. Why work hard sacrificing the 
mental and physical well-being of your family as well as 
yourself? That is not financially intelligent." When it came 
to health he also said, "There is no such thing as a sudden 
heart attack. Heart attacks and other diseases such as 
cancer take time to develop. They are caused by lack of 
exercise, a poor diet, and not enough joy in one's life over 
extended periods of time. Of the three, I think lack of joy 
is the greatest cause of heart attacks and disease." He 
said, "Too many people think about working harder 
rather than about how to have more fun and enjoy this 
great gift of life." 
When it came to choices he would say this: "I know the 
first-class section of an airplane arrives at the same time 
as the economy section. That is not the issue. The issue is, 
Do you have the choice of flying first class or flying 
economy? Most people in the economy section have no 
choice." My rich dad went on to explain that financial 
intelligence gave a person more choices in life by saying, 
"Money is power because more money gives you more 
choices." But it was his lesson about happiness that he 
stressed more and more the older he got. As he neared the 
end of his life and he had more money than he had 
dreamed possible, he restated again and again, "Money 
does not make you happy. Never think that you will be 
happy when you get rich. If you are not happy while 
getting rich, chances are you will not be happy when you 
do get rich. So whether you are rich or poor, make sure 
you are happy." 
Those of you who have read my other books realize 
that my rich dad did not measure his financial IQ in 
traditional financial measurements. In other words, he 
was never really fixated by how much money he had, or 
his net worth, or the size of his portfolio. If I were to 
define what financial intelligence bought him, it would be 
"freedom." 
He loved having the freedom to work or to not work 
and the freedom to choose with whom he worked. He 
loved the freedom to buy whatever he wanted without 
worrying about the price. He loved the health, happiness, Page 25 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comand choices he could afford because he was free. He 
loved the freedom and financial ability he had to donate 
to charity to help causes in which he believed. And instead 
of complaining about politicians and feeling powerless to 
change the system, he had politicians coming to him 
seeking his advice (and hoping for his campaign 
contributions). He loved having power over them. 
"They call me, I don't call them. Every politician wants 
the poor person's vote, but they don't listen to the poor 
person. They really can't afford to… and that is tragic," he 
said. 
Yet what he cherished most was the free time that 
money bought him. He loved having the time to watch his 
children grow up and to work on projects that interested 
him, whether or not they made money. So my rich dad 
measured his financial IQ in time more than money. The 
later years of his life were the most joyous because he 
spent most of his time giving his money away rather than 
trying to conserve and hang on to it. He seemed to have as 
much fun giving it away as a philanthropist as he did 
making it as a capitalist. He lived a rich, happy, and 
generous life. Most important, he had a life of boundless 
freedom, and that is how he measured his financial IQ. 
What Is Intelligence?  
It was my real dad, the head of education and gifted 
teacher, who ultimately became the personal tutor to 
"Andy the Ant." Andy was so smart that he should have 
been in his senior year of high school rather than the fifth 
grade. His mom and dad were pressured to have him skip 
many grades, yet they wanted him to stay with his age 
group. Since my real dad was also an academic genius, a 
person who graduated from a four-year university in two 
years, he understood what Andy was going through and 
respected his parents' wishes. In many ways he agreed 
with them, realizing that academic age is not as important 
as emotional and physical development. He agreed that 
Andy should mature emotionally and physically rather 
than go to high school or college with students twice his 
age. So after attending elementary school with regular 
kids, Andy would go to my dad, the superintendent of 
education, and spend the afternoons studying with him. I, 
on the other hand, went to my rich dad's office and began 
my education in financial intelligence. 
I find it interesting to reflect back upon the fact that 
different fathers took it upon themselves to spend time Page 26 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comteaching other parents' children. It's nice to see it still 
happening today as many parents volunteer their time to 
teach sports, arts, music, dance, crafts, business skills, 
and more. Ultimately, all adults are teachers in one way or 
another… and as adults we are teachers more by our 
actions than by our words. When our teacher announced 
to the class that Andy was a genius with a high IQ, in 
essence she also told us that the rest of us were not. I went 
home and asked my dad what his definition of intelligence 
was. His reply was simple. All he said was, "Intelligence is 
the ability to make finer distinctions." 
I stood there for a moment, not understanding what he 
had said. So I waited for him to explain further, knowing 
that because he was a true teacher, he could not leave me 
standing there with a dumb expression on my face. 
Finally he realized that I did not understand his 
explanation, so he began to speak in the language of a ten-
year-old. "Do you know what the word sports  means?" my 
dad asked. 
"Sure I do," I said. "I love sports." 
"Good," he replied. "Is there a difference between 
football, golf, and surfing?" 
"Of course there is," I said excitedly. "There are huge 
differences between those sports." 
"Good," my father continued in his teacher mode. 
"Those differences are called 'distinctions.'" 
"You mean distinctions are the same as differences?" I 
asked. 
My dad nodded. 
"So the more I can tell the differences between 
something, then the more intelligent I am?" I asked. 
"That is correct," my dad answered. "So you have a 
much higher sports IQ than Andy… but Andy has a much 
higher academic IQ than you. What this really means is 
that Andy learns best by reading and you learn best by 
doing. So Andy has an easier time learning in the 
classroom and you have an easier time learning on the 
athletic field. Andy will learn history and science quickly 
and you will learn baseball and football quickly." 
I stood there silently for a while. My dad, being a good 
teacher, let me stand there until the distinctions settled 
in. Finally I recovered from my trance and said, "So I 
learn by playing games, and Andy learns by reading."  Page 27 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comAgain my dad nodded. He paused awhile and then 
said, "Our school system puts great importance upon 
academic or scholastic intelligence. So when they say 
someone has a high IQ, they mean a high scholastic or 
academic IQ. The current IQ test measures primarily a 
person's verbal IQ, or their ability to read and write. So 
technically, a person with a high IQ is someone who 
learns quickly by reading. It does not measure all of a per 
son's intelligence. So that IQ is not a measure of a 
person's artistic IQ, physical IQ, or even their 
mathematical intelligence, which are all legitimate 
intelligences." 
Continuing on, I said, "So when my teacher says that 
Andy is a genius, it means that he is better at learning by 
reading than I am. And I am better at learning by doing." 
"Yes," my dad said. 
Again I stood there, thinking for a moment. Slowly I 
began to understand how this new bit of information 
applied to me. "So I need to find ways to learn things that 
best suit my learning style," I finally said. 
My dad nodded. "You still need to learn to read, but it 
seems that you will learn faster by doing than by reading. 
In many ways, Andy has a problem in that he can read but 
cannot do. In some ways, he may find the real world a 
harder place to adapt to than you will. He will do well as 
long as he remains in the world of academics or science. 
And that is why he has a hard time on the baseball field or 
in talking to the rest of the kids. This is why I think it's 
great that you and your friends allow him to be on your 
sports teams. You are teaching him things that a 
schoolbook could never teach him… subjects and skills 
that are very important for success in the real world." 
"Andy is a great friend," I said. "But he would rather 
read than play baseball. And I would rather play baseball 
than read. So it means he is smarter in the classroom 
because he learns better there. But that does not mean he 
is smarter than me. His high IQ means he is a genius at 
learning by reading. So I need to find a way to make more 
distinctions faster so I can learn faster… in a way that 
works best for me." 
Multiply by Dividing  
My educator dad smiled. "That's the attitude. Find a 
way to make distinctions quickly, and you will learn 
quickly. Always remember that nature multiplies by Page 28 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdividing," he said. "Just as a cell increases by 
splitting… the same is true with intelligence. The moment 
we split a subject into two, we have increased our 
intelligence. If we then split the two into two, we get four, 
and our intelligence is now multiplying… multiplying by 
dividing. That is called 'quantum learning,' not linear 
learning.'" 
I nodded, understanding how learning could get faster 
once I figured out how I learned best. "When I first 
started playing baseball, I didn't know much," I said. "But 
I soon found out the difference between striking out, a 
home run, and an RBI. Is that what you mean by my 
intelligence increases by dividing or making finer 
distinctions?" 
"That is correct," my dad replied. "And the more you 
play the game, the more you will keep discovering new 
and finer distinctions. Don't you find yourself improving 
as you learn more?" 
"Yeah," I said. "When I first started playing baseball, I 
couldn't even hit the ball. Now I can bunt, drag hit, hit 
line drives, or go for the fence with a home run. You know 
that I've hit three home runs this year?" I said proudly 
with a grin. 
"Yes, I know," my dad said. "And I'm very proud of 
you. And do you realize that there are many people who 
do not know the difference between a bunt and a home 
run? They have no idea what you're talking about, and 
they certainly aren't able to do what you're talking about." 
"So my baseball IQ is really high," I said with a smile. 
"Very high," said my dad. "Just as Andy's academic IQ 
is really high… but he can't hit a baseball." 
"You're telling me," I said. "Andy may know the 
difference between a bunt and a home run, but he 
couldn't do either one of them if his life depended upon 
it." 
"And that is the problem with judging a person only on 
their academic IQ," my educator dad said. "Often people 
with high academic IQs do not do well in the real world." 
"Why is that?" I asked. 
"That is a good question for which I really have no 
answer. I think it is because educators focus primarily on 
mental skills and not on converting mental knowledge 
into physical knowledge. I also think that we educators 
punish people for making mistakes, and if you are afraid Page 29 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comof making mistakes, you will not want to do anything. 
We in education place too much emphasis on the need to 
be right and the fear of being wrong. It is the fear of 
making a mistake and then looking foolish that prevents 
people from taking action… and ultimately, we all learn 
via taking action. We all know we learn by making 
mistakes, yet in our school system we punish people for 
making too many of them. The world of education is filled 
with people who can tell you all you need to know about 
the game of baseball, but they cannot play baseball 
themselves." 
"So when our teacher says Andy is a genius, does that 
mean he's better than me?" I asked. 
"No," said my dad. "But in school, he'll have an easier 
time learning than you will because his reading skills are 
at a genius level. However, on the athletic field, you'll 
learn faster than he does. That is all it means." 
"So having a high IQ may only mean he learns faster by 
reading… but it doesn't mean I can't learn as much as he 
knows," I replied, seeking greater clarity. "In other words, 
I can learn something if I want to learn it. Isn't that true?" 
"That's it," said my dad. "Education is attitude… and if 
you have that kind of positive attitude toward learning, 
you will do well. But if you have a loser's attitude, or a 
defeated attitude toward learning, then you will never 
learn anything." 
I pulled my baseball magazine out of my back pocket. 
It was worn and tattered. "I love to read this magazine. I 
can tell you the scores, batting averages, and salaries of all 
the players. But when I read this magazine in the 
classroom, my teacher takes the magazine away." 
"As she should," my dad said. "But she should have 
encouraged you to read it after school." 
I nodded. I finally understood why Andy had a higher 
IQ. But most important, I learned how I learned best. 
That day I learned that I learn best by doing first and then 
reading about it. For example, with baseball, the more I 
played the game, the more I wanted to read about it. But if 
I did not play the game, I had no interest in reading about 
it. It was a way of learning that worked best for me. It was 
a way I would learn for the rest of my life. If I tried 
something first and then found it interesting, I would be 
more excited about reading about it. But if I could not be 
involved physically first, or could only read about Page 30 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comsomething, I was rarely interested and hence did not 
want to read about it. Being only ten years old, I had 
learned enough for the day. My attention span had been 
exhausted. Clutching my baseball glove and bat, I headed 
out the door to go make finer distinctions about the game 
of baseball. I had some baseball IQ to improve, and 
practice was the best way for me to do that. Besides, I 
knew that if I didn't keep practicing, Andy the Ant might 
replace me on the team. 
That one explanation from my educator dad was the 
primary reason I finished high school and went on to 
survive a very tough federal military academy with a 
rigorous academic curriculum. Because of this 
explanation I knew that although I did not have a high 
academic IQ, it did not mean I was not smart. It merely 
meant I had to find a way of learning that worked best for 
me. Without this valuable knowledge, I might have 
dropped out of high school long before graduating. 
Personally I found school too slow, boring, and 
uninteresting. I was not interested in most of the subjects 
I was required to study, but I found a way to learn those 
subjects and pass the tests. What kept me going was the 
knowledge that once I left school with my college degree, 
my real education would begin. 
How Many Different Geniuses Are There?  
In the early 1980s a man named Howard Gardner 
wrote a book entitled Frames of Mind . In his book he 
identified seven different geniuses or intelligences. They 
are as follows: 
1. Verbal-linguistic : This is the genius that our 
educational system currently uses to measure a person's 
IQ. It is a person's native ability to read and write words. 
It is a very important intelligence because it's one of the 
primary ways humans gather and share information. 
Journalists, writers, attorneys, and teachers are often 
blessed with this genius. 
2. Numerical : This is the genius that deals with data 
measured in numbers. Obviously a mathematician would 
be blessed with this genius. A formally trained engineer 
would need to be good at both verbal linguistic and 
numerical genius. 
3. Spatial : This is the genius many creative people—
artists and designers—have. An architect would have to be 
good at all three of these first geniuses, because the 
profession would require words, numbers, and creative Page 31 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdesign.  
4. Physical : This is the genius that many great athletes 
and dancers are blessed with. There are also many people 
who do not do well in school who are gifted physically. 
These are often people who learn by doing, what is often 
called "hands on" learning. Many times people with this 
genius gravitate toward mechanics or the building trades. 
They probably love wood shop or cooking classes. In other 
words, they are geniuses by seeing, touching, and doing 
things. A person who designs racing cars would need to 
possess all of the first four geniuses. 
5. Intrapersonal  This is the genius often called 
"emotional intelligence." It's what we say to ourselves, for 
example, when we are fearful or angry. Frequently people 
are unsuccessful at something not from a lack of mental 
knowledge, but because they are afraid to fail. For 
example, I know many smart people with good grades 
who are less successful than they could be simply because 
they live in terror of making a mistake or failing. Many 
times people do not make money simply because they fear 
losing money more than they could enjoy making money. 
There is a book written by Daniel Goleman entitled 
Emotional Intelligence  that I recommend people read if 
they are ready to make significant changes in their lives. 
In it Goleman quotes the sixteenth-century humanist 
Erasmus of Rotterdam, who states that emotional 
thinking can be twenty-four times more powerful than 
rational thinking. In other words, the ratio looks like this: 
24:1 emotional brain : rational brain 
I am quite certain most of us have experienced the 
power of our emotional brains over our rational brains, 
particularly when we are more fearful than logical or 
when we say something we know we should never have 
said. 
I agree with Goleman that intrapersonal intelligence is 
the most important of all the geniuses. I say that because 
intrapersonal genius is our control over what we say to 
ourselves. It's me talking to myself and you talking to 
yourself. 
6. Interpersonal : This is the genius found in people 
who can talk easily with others. People with this genius 
are often charismatic communicators, great singers, 
preachers, politicians, actors, salespeople, and speakers. 
7. Environmental : This is the genius that emanates Page 32 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfrom humans to the things around them. There are 
people who are naturally gifted in dealing with such 
things as trees, plants, fish, the ocean, animals, and the 
land. This is the genius that great farmers, animal 
trainers, oceanographers, and park rangers possess. 
Since the distinction among these different geniuses 
was made, over thirty other geniuses have been 
identified… so our intelligence about the subject of genius 
continues to increase because we keep making finer 
distinctions. 
People Who Fail in School  
People who do not do well in school, even if they try 
very hard, often do not have a strong verbal-linguistic 
genius. These people do not learn by sitting still, listening 
to lectures, or by reading. They learn, or are gifted, in 
other areas. 
My real dad was definitely gifted verbal-linguistically, 
which is why he read well, wrote well, and had a high IQ. 
He was also a great communicator, which meant he was 
also strong in interpersonal genius. 
My rich dad, on the other hand, was gifted in the 
genius that is second on the list… the mathematical 
genius. He was below average in verbal-linguistic skills, 
which is why I think he never went back to school. He was 
a poor writer and a poor reader. Yet he was a very good 
speaker, and his interpersonal skills were excellent. He 
had hundreds of employees who loved working for him. 
He also was not afraid of taking risks, which meant his 
intrapersonal genius was very strong. In other words, he 
had the ability to pay strong attention to numerical details 
combined with an ability to take investment risks, and he 
was also able to build companies that people loved to 
work for. 
My real dad was strong in most geniuses, but his fear 
of losing money was his weakness. When he tried to start 
his own business and it ran out of money, he panicked 
and went back to working at a job. One thing a great 
entrepreneur must have, especially when starting to build 
a business without money, is intrapersonal genius. 
The person who falls and stands up again is calling on 
intrapersonal genius, or emotional intelligence. People 
often call that genius "tenacity" or "determination." When 
people do things they are terrified of doing, they are 
calling on their intrapersonal genius. People call it "guts" Page 33 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comor "courage." When a person makes a mistake and has 
the intrapersonal genius to admit it and apologize, that 
genius is often called "humility." 
Why Some People Are More Successful Than 
Others  
When I study the life of Tiger Woods, it is easy to 
understand why he is such a superstar. In order to be a 
great student, to be accepted to Stanford University, to be 
possibly the best golfer who ever lived, and to be such an 
influential media star, he has to be a genius in all of the 
seven geniuses listed. As any golfer will tell you, the game 
of golf requires tremendous physical genius, but more 
important, it takes tremendous intrapersonal genius. That 
is why so many people say golf is a game that is played 
inside of you. When you watch Tiger on television, you 
know why he gets paid the big dollars for endorsing 
products. He is paid a lot because he is a great 
communicator, which means his interpersonal genius is 
very strong. He is very charismatic and convincing as a 
media star. He is a hero to millions of people throughout 
the world, which is why companies love to have him 
endorse their products. 
In the late 1930s the Carnegie Institute did a study on 
successful people that showed that technical expertise 
constituted less than 15 percent of the reason for their 
success. In other words, some doctors are more successful 
than others not necessarily because of what school they 
went to or how smart they are. All of us know of people 
who did very well in school, and are very smart, yet do not 
do well in the real world. When you look at the seven 
different geniuses, some of the other reasons for a 
person's success and lack of success can be identified. In 
other words, you can make further distinctions, the 
foundation of intelligence. 
The Carnegie Institute study reported that a full 85 
percent of a person's success in life was due to "skill in 
human engineering." The ability to communicate and get 
along with people was much more important that 
technical expertise. 
Highlighting the point made by Carnegie was a study 
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau of Hiring, Training 
and Management. Three thousand employers were asked, 
"What are the two top skills you look for when hiring 
people?" The top six skills were: 
1. good attitude.  Page 34 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com2. good communication skills. 
3. previous work experience. 
4. what a previous employer had said about the 
employee. 
5. how much training the employee had. 
6. how many years of schooling the employee had 
completed. 
Once again, attitude and communication skills ranked 
higher than technical competence in determining 
successful employment. 
Find Your Genius and Become a Genius  
My dad, the head of education, knew that I would not 
do well in school. He knew that sitting in a room, listening 
to lectures, reading books, and studying subjects without 
any physical mass to them was not my best way of 
learning. In fact, he often said, "I doubt any of my kids 
will do well in school." He knew that all kids do not learn 
in the same ways. One of my sisters is a great artist, 
brilliant in color and design. Today she works as a 
commercial artist. My other sister is a nun and is very 
much in tune with the environment. She loves being in 
harmony with all of God's creatures and creations. My 
brother is a very physical learner. He loves doing and 
learning with his hands. Give him a screwdriver and he 
wants to fix things. He is also a great communicator, 
which is why he loves talking to people and helping them 
to help others. This is why I think he loves working at the 
Blood Bank. He loves to calm nervous people and ask 
them to donate blood to help others. I would say that I 
have good intrapersonal skills, which allows me to 
overcome personal fear and take action. It is why I love 
being an entrepreneur and an investor or why I enjoyed 
being a marine and flying a helicopter gunship in 
Vietnam. I have learned to take my fear and convert it 
into excitement. 
My dad was smart enough to encourage his kids to find 
their own genius and their own ways of learning. He knew 
each of his kids was different, had different geniuses, and 
learned differently… although we were all from the same 
parents. When he found out I was really interested in 
money and capitalism, subjects in which he had no 
interest, he encouraged me to seek teachers who could 
teach me those subjects. That is why, at the age of nine, I 
began to learn from my rich dad. Although my real dad Page 35 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comrespected my rich dad, they did not see eye to eye on 
many subjects. My dad, being a great educator, knew that 
if a child was interested in a subject, that child had a 
better chance of discovering his or her native geniuses. He 
allowed me to study subjects of my interest even though 
he did not particularly like the subject. And when I did 
not get good grades in school, he did not become upset, 
even though he was the head of the educational system. 
He knew that even though school was important, it was 
not the place where I would discover my genius. He knew 
if children studied what they were interested in, they 
would find their geniuses and succeed. He knew his kids 
were smart. He told us we were smart, even though we 
often had poor grades in school. Being a great teacher, he 
knew that the true definition of education was to draw out 
your genius, not just cram information in. 
Protecting Your Child's Genius  
My dad was adamant about protecting the genius of all 
children. He knew that the school system recognized 
primarily one genius, the verbal-linguistic. He also knew 
that a child's individual genius could be crushed in school, 
especially if the child was weak in the genius from which 
IQ is recognized. He was concerned about me because I 
was a very active child and hated slow, boring subjects. 
He knew I had a short attention span and would have 
trouble in school. For those reasons he encouraged me to 
play sports and study with my rich dad. He wanted me to 
stay very active and study a subject I was interested in, to 
make sure that my self-esteem, which is linked directly to 
genius, remained intact. He did the same for my brothers 
and sisters. 
Today I would be labeled as having attention deficit 
disorder, or ADD, and would probably be drugged to keep 
me in my seat and force me to study subjects I was not 
interested in. When people ask me what ADD is or 
wonder if they have it, I tell them that many of us have it. 
If we did not have it, there would be only one television 
channel and we would all sit there and watch it 
mindlessly. Today ADD could also be known as "channel 
surfing." When we get bored, we simply push the button 
and look for something of interest. Unfortunately our kids 
do not have that luxury in school. 
The Tortoise and the Hare  
My dad loved the classic fable of the tortoise and the 
hare. He used to say to his kids, "There are kids in school Page 36 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwho are smarter than you in some ways. But always 
remember the story of the tortoise and the hare." He 
would go on to say, "There are kids who are faster 
learners than you. But that does not mean they are ahead 
of you. If you will study at your own pace and keep on 
learning, you will pass people who learn quickly but then 
stop learning." He would also say, "Just because a child 
has good grades in school does not mean that child will do 
well in life. Remember, your true education begins once 
you leave school." That was my dad's way of encouraging 
his children to become lifetime learners, as he was. 
Your IQ Can Go Down  
It is obvious to me that life is a lifelong learning 
experience. Just as the tortoise lay down and went to 
sleep, many people will lie down and go to sleep after 
leaving school. In today's rapidly changing world, that 
kind of behavior can be expensive. Reexamine the 
definition of IQ: 
__Mental age___  X 100 = IQ 
Chronological age 
By definition, your IQ technically goes down with each 
year your age goes up. That is why my dad's story of the 
tortoise and the hare is true. When you go to a high school 
reunion, you can often spot the rabbits who fell asleep at 
the side of the road. Many times they were the students 
voted "Most Likely to Succeed"… but they didn't. They 
forgot that life's education goes on long after school is 
over. 
Find Your Child's Genius  
"Is your child a genius?" I think so, and I hope you do, 
too. In fact, your child probably has multiple geniuses. 
The problem is, our current educational system 
recognizes only one genius. If your child's genius is not 
the genius the system recognizes, your child may learn to 
feel stupid in school rather than smart. Worst of all, your 
child's genius may be ignored or may be damaged in the 
system. I know that many kids are made to feel less smart 
because they are compared with other kids. Instead of 
recognizing a child for his or her unique genius, all 
children are held to one IQ standard. Kids leave school 
feeling they are not smart. Children who leave school 
mentally and emotionally believing that they are not as 
smart as other kids leave school with a tremendous 
handicap in life. It is vitally important for parents to Page 37 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comidentify the child's native geniuses early in life, 
encourage those geniuses to grow strong, and protect 
those geniuses from a "single genius" educational system. 
As my dad said to his kids, "Our school system is designed 
to teach some kids, but unfortunately it is not designed to 
teach all kids." 
When people ask me if I think all kids are smart, I 
reply, "I have never seen a baby who was not curious and 
excited about learning. I have never seen a baby who had 
to be told to learn to talk or to walk. I have never seen a 
baby who fell while learning to walk, refuse to get up 
again, and say, while lying facedown on the floor, 'I failed 
again. I guess I'll never learn to walk.' I have only seen 
babies stand and fall, stand and fall, stand and fall, and 
then finally stand and begin to walk and later run. Babies 
are newborn creatures that are naturally excited about 
learning. On the other hand, I have met a number of kids 
who are bored in school, or who leave school angry, or 
leave feeling like failures, or leave vowing never to go back 
to school again." 
Obviously for these kids something happened to their 
natural love of learning between birth and the end of 
school. My dad would say, "A parent's most important job 
is to keep their children's geniuses and their love of 
learning alive, especially if the children do not like 
school." If he had not done that for me, I would have left 
school long before graduating. Much of this book is about 
how my smart dad kept my love of learning alive. I stayed 
in school, even though I hated it. He kept my love of 
learning alive by encouraging me to develop my geniuses, 
even though I was not an academic genius in school. 
Chapter 3: Give Your Children 
Power—Before You Give Them 
Money 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
One day my classmate Richie invited me to spend the 
weekend at his family's beach house. I was thrilled. Richie 
was one of the coolest kids in school, and everyone 
wanted to be his friend. Now I had been invited to the 
ultimate, his beach house, located in a private estate 
about thirty miles from my home. 
My mom helped me pack my bag and thanked Richie's Page 38 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commom and dad when they came to pick me up. I had a 
fabulous time. Richie had his own boat and many other 
neat toys. We played from morning until night. By the 
time his parents dropped me off back at home, I was 
sunburned, exhausted, and thrilled. 
For the next few days all I talked about at home and at 
school was my weekend at the beach house. I talked about 
the fun, the toys, the boat, the good food, and the 
beautiful beach house. By Wednesday my family was tired 
of hearing about my weekend at the beach. On Thursday 
night I asked my mom and dad if we could buy a beach 
house near Richie's beach house. With that, my dad 
exploded. He had heard enough. 
"For four days now, all this family has heard about is 
your weekend at Richie's beach house. I'm tired of hearing 
about it. Now you want us to buy a beach house. That is 
the last straw. What do you think I'm made of . . money ? 
The reason we don't buy a fancy beach house is because I 
can't afford it. I can barely pay the bills and keep food on 
this table. I break my back working all day, I come home 
to bills I can't pay, and now you want me to buy us a 
beach house. Buy you a boat. Well, I can't afford it. I am 
not rich like Richie's parents. I put food in your stomach 
and clothes on your back, and I can barely afford that. If 
you want to live like Richie, then why don't you move in 
with them?"  
Later that night my mom came to my room and quietly 
closed the door behind her. In her hand she had a stack of 
envelopes. Sitting at the side of my bed, she said, "Your 
dad is under a lot of stress financially." 
I lay there in the darkened room, my body churning 
with emotional turmoil, looking up at my mom. Being 
only nine years old, I was sad, shaken, angry, and 
disappointed. I hadn't meant to upset my dad. I knew we 
were in tough economic times. I just wanted to share with 
the family a little happiness and a picture of the good 
life ... a life that money could buy ... a life that maybe we 
could aspire to. 
My mom began showing me the bills, many with 
numbers typed in red. "We are overdrawn at the bank, 
and we have all these bills yet to pay. Some of these bills 
are two months overdue." 
"I know, Mom. I know,'' I said. "I didn't want to upset 
him. I just wanted to bring some fun and happiness to our 
family. I just wanted to share with the family what a life Page 39 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwith money could be like."  
My mom stroked my forehead and pushed my hair 
back. "I know you meant well. I know that things have not 
been too happy in our family lately. But right now we are 
in financial trouble. We are not rich people and probably 
never will be." 
"Why?" I asked, nearly pleading for some sort of 
explanation. 
"We just have too many bills, and your dad does not 
make that much money. On top of that his mother, your 
grandmother, just asked if we could send money to help 
them out. Your dad just got that letter today, and he's 
worried because they're also having a tough time. We just 
can't afford the things that Richie's parents can afford." 
"But why?" I asked. 
I don't know why," my mom said. "I just know that we 
can't afford what they can afford. We aren't rich people 
like they are. Now close your eyes and get some sleep. You 
have school in the morning, and you need to have a good 
education if you want to be successful in life. If you get a 
good education, then maybe you can be rich like Richie's 
parents." 
"But Dad has a good education. You have a good 
education," I shot back. "So why aren't we rich? All we 
have is a lot of bills. I don't understand," I said quietly. "I 
don't understand." 
"Never mind, son. Don't worry about money. Your dad 
and I will handle our money problems. You have school in 
the morning, so you need to get a good night's sleep." 
In the late 1950s my dad had to drop out of his 
graduate degree program at the University of Hawaii 
because he had too many bills to pay. He had planned on 
staying in school and getting his doctorate in education. 
But with a wife and four kids, the bills piled up. Then my 
mom got sick, I got sick, my two sisters got sick, and my 
brother fell from a wall and needed to be hospitalized. The 
only one not in the hospital or needing medical attention 
was my dad. He left the graduate program, moved the 
family to another island, and began working as the 
assistant to the superintendent of education for the island 
of Hawaii. He would eventually take over that position 
and then move back to Honolulu to become 
superintendent of education for the entire state of Hawaii. 
That was the reason we as a family had so many bills to Page 40 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.compay. It took us years to pay them off, but soon after 
paying off one set of bills, we would find ourselves owing 
money for something else that put our family back in 
debt. 
By the time I was nine years old and met classmates 
like Richie, I knew there was a big difference between my 
family and many of my classmates' families. In Rich Dad 
Poor Dad I described how by a fluke of boundary lines, I 
attended the rich kids' elementary school instead of the 
poor and middle-class kids' elementary school. Having 
rich friends while being in a family with excessive debt, at 
the tender age of nine, became a turning point in the 
direction of my life. 
Doesn't It Take Money to Make Money?  
One of the most common questions I am asked is, 
"Doesn't it take money to make money?"  
My answer is, "No, it does not." I then go on to say, 
"Money comes from your ideas simply because money is 
just an idea." 
Another question I am asked is, "How do I invest if I 
don't have any money to invest? How can I invest when I 
can't even afford to pay my bills?" 
My reply is, "The first thing I would recommend is to 
stop saying, 'I can't afford it.'" 
I know that for many people my answers are 
unsatisfactory, since many times people are looking for 
immediate answers on how to get a few dollars quickly so 
they can invest and get ahead in life. I want people to 
know that they have the power and the ability to have all 
the money they want… if they want it. And that power is 
not found in money. The power is not found outside of 
them. The power is found in their ideas. It has nothing to 
do with money. It has to do with power… the power of 
their ideas. The good news is that it doesn't take money… 
all it takes is the willingness to change a few ideas. Change 
a few ideas and you can gain power over money, rather 
than allowing money to have power over you. 
My rich dad often said, "Poor people are poor simply 
because they have poor ideas." He also said, "Most poor 
people learn their ideas about money and life from their 
parents. Since we teach nothing about money in school, 
the ideas of money are handed down from parent to child, 
for generations." 
In Rich Dad Poor Dad , rich dad's lesson number one Page 41 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwas, "The rich don't work for money." My rich dad 
taught me to have money work for me. Although I did not 
understand why Richie's family was richer than our family 
when I was nine, years later I did understand why. 
Richie's family knew how to have money work for them, 
and they taught that knowledge to their kids. Richie is still 
a very rich man and getting richer. Today, whenever we 
see each other we are still the best of friends, and when 
we meet it is the same friendship we had over forty years 
ago. Five years may pass between meetings, yet every time 
we meet it is as if we saw each other only yesterday. I now 
understand why his family was richer than my family; I 
see him passing that knowledge on to his children. But it 
is more than just the "how to" of money that I see Richie 
passing on. I see him passing on the power over money. 
And it is this power over money that makes people rich… 
not money alone. It is this power over money that I want 
this book to pass on to you so you can pass it on to your 
children. 
In Rich Dad Poor Dad , the story of my rich dad taking 
my ten cents an hour away from me drew quite a reaction 
from our readers. In other words, he had me work for him 
for free. A friend who is a medical doctor called me up 
after reading the book and said, "When I read that your 
rich dad made you stack canned goods in his store for 
free, my blood boiled. I understand what your message is, 
but I don't agree. That was cruel. You have to pay people. 
You can't expect someone to work for free, especially 
when someone else is making money." 
Rich People Don't Need Money  
When my rich dad took my ten cents an hour away, he 
was taking the money away so I could find my power over 
money. He wanted me to know that I could make money 
without money. He wanted me to find the power to create  
money rather than learn to work  for money. Rich dad 
said, "If you do not need money, you will make a lot of 
money. People who need money never really become rich. 
It is that neediness that robs you of your power. You must 
work hard and learn to never need money." 
Although he gave his other kids an allowance, he did 
not give his son Mike an allowance, and he did not pay us 
for working for him. He said, "By giving a child an 
allowance, you teach that child to work for money rather 
than learn to create money." 
Now I am not saying  that you should have your kids Page 42 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwork for free. And I am not saying to not give your 
child an allowance. I would not be foolish enough to tell 
you what to tell your own child, since every child is 
different and every situation is different. What I am 
saying is that money comes from ideas, and if you truly 
want to give your child a financial head start in life, I 
would be very vigilant over your ideas and your child's 
ideas. There is an overused saying that goes "A journey of 
a thousand miles begins with a single step." A more 
accurate saying would be "A journey of a thousand miles 
begins with the idea  to make the journey." When it comes 
to money, many people start their life's journey with poor 
ideas or ideas that limit them later in life. 
When Do You Teach a Child About Money?  
I am often asked, "At what age should I start teaching 
my child about money?" 
My answer is, "When your child becomes interested in 
money." Then I say, "I have a friend with a five-year-old 
son. If I were to hold up a five-dollar bill or a twenty-
dollar bill and ask the child, 'Which one do you want?' 
which one will the child go for?" The person who asks me 
the question often says without hesitation, "The twenty-
dollar bill." I reply, "Exactly, even a five-year-old child 
already understands the difference between a five- and a 
twenty-dollar bill." 
My rich dad took the ten cents an hour away because I 
asked him to teach me to be rich. He did not do it just to 
teach me something about money. I asked to learn to be 
rich. I did not just want to learn about money—and there 
is a difference. If the child does not necessarily want to 
learn to be rich, then obviously the lessons should be 
different. One of the reasons rich dad did give his other 
children an allowance was that his children were not 
interested in getting rich, so he taught them different 
lessons about money. Although the lessons were different, 
he still taught them to have the power over money rather 
than to spend a life in need of money. As rich dad said, 
"The more you need money, the less power you have." 
The Ages Between Nine and Fifteen  
Different educational psychologists have told me that 
the ages between nine and fifteen are crucial in a child's 
development. This is not an exact science, and different 
experts will say different things. I am not an expert in 
child development, so take what I say as a general 
guideline rather than the words of professional Page 43 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comexperience. One expert I talked to said that at 
approximately the age of nine, children begin to break 
away from their parents' identity and seek their own. I 
know that it was true for me because at the age of nine I 
began to work with my rich dad. I wanted to break away 
from my parents' reality of the world, so I needed a new 
identity. 
Another expert has said that between these ages, 
children develop what they call their "winning formula." 
This expert described the winning formula as the child's 
idea on how he or she will best survive and win. I knew by 
age nine that school was not a part of my winning 
formula, especially after my friend Andy was labeled a 
genius and I wasn't. I thought that I had a better chance of 
being a sports star or being rich than an academic like 
Andy and my dad. In other words, if a child thinks that he 
or she is good in school, his or her winning formula may 
be to stay in school and graduate with honors. If the child 
is not doing well in school, or does not like school, the 
child may seek a different formula. 
This expert also had a few other notable points on 
winning formulas. This expert said that conflicts between 
parent and child begin when the child's winning formula 
for success is not the same as the parents'. The expert also 
said that family problems begin when the parents begin to 
impose their winning formula on the child without first 
respecting the child's formula. A parent needs to listen 
closely for the child's winning formula. 
There will be a little more on the importance of a 
child's winning formula later in the book. But before we 
continue with giving your child power over money, there 
is something worth mentioning for adults. 
This expert also said that many adults get into trouble 
later in life when they realize that the winning formulas 
they came up with as kids are no longer winning for them. 
Many adults then seek job or career changes. Some 
continue to try to make the formula work even after they 
realize it is not working. Still others go into a depression, 
thinking they have failed in life, rather than realize it was 
a winning formula that had stopped winning. In other 
words, people are generally happy if they are happy with 
their winning formula. People become unhappy with life if 
they are tired of their formula, or the formula is no longer 
winning, or they realize that their formula is not getting 
them where they want to go.  Page 44 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comAl Bundy's Winning Formula  
For an example of people living with winning formulas 
that are no longer working, take a look at the television 
sitcom Married with Children . At first I hated the 
program; I refused to watch it. But now I realize that I 
may have hated the program because it hit close to home. 
For those who may not be familiar with the program, Al 
Bundy, the star of the show, is an ex-high school football 
star. His claim to fame was scoring four touchdowns for 
Polk High School. His wife won in school by using sex as a 
big part of her winning formula. Because he was the 
football star, she granted him sex and became pregnant. 
They were married and had kids… hence the name 
Married with Children . Twenty years later he's a shoe 
salesman living in the memory of his four touchdowns. 
He still thinks, acts, and talks about things he did when he 
was a football star. His wife sits at home, watching TV and 
still dressing like the sexy young thing she was in high 
school. Their two children are following in their parents' 
footsteps. I can see the humor in the show, because I can 
recognize the Al Bundy inside of me. I find myself living 
in the glory of my past on the football field and in the 
Marine Corps. Being able to laugh at the program and my 
own life, I can see many people who are Al and Peg Bundy 
in real life. That television comedy is an example of 
winning formulas that stopped winning. 
Winning Formulas with Power  
When it comes to money, many people develop a 
winning formula without any power. In other words, 
people often set up a losing formula for money because 
they have no power. As strange as it may seem, they set up 
a formula that loses them money because that is the only 
formula they know. 
For example, I recently met a person who is stuck in a 
career he now hates. He runs a car dealership for his dad. 
He makes a good income, but he is unhappy. He hates 
being his dad's employee, and he hates being known as 
the boss's son. Yet he stays there. When I asked him why 
he stays there, his only reply is, "Well, I didn't think I 
could build this Ford dealership on my own. So I thought 
I'd best stick it out until the old man retires. Besides, I'm 
making too much money." His formula is to win with 
money, but he loses finding out how powerful he could be 
if he broke free from security. 
Another example of a losing winning formula is a Page 45 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfriend's wife who stays at a job she loves but where she 
is not getting ahead financially. Instead of changing her 
formula by learning some new skills, she takes on odd 
jobs over the weekends and then complains that she does 
not have enough time with her kids. Obviously her 
formula is "Work hard at what I love, and endure." 
Finding the Power to Create a Winning 
Formula That Wins  
One of the most important things a parent can do is to 
help their child create winning formulas that win. And it 
is very important that a parent be aware of how to do this 
without interfering with the child's own development. 
Recently a well-known pastor called me and asked if I 
would speak at his church. My record for church 
attendance is spotty at best. My family went to the 
Methodist church, but at the age of ten I began looking at 
other churches. I did this because I was studying the U.S. 
Constitution and became interested in the idea of the 
separation of the church and state and the freedom of 
religious choice. So at school I would ask my classmates 
what church they attended, and I would invite myself 
along. This did not make my mom too happy, yet I did 
remind her that the Constitution allowed me the freedom 
of religious choice. For a few years I enjoyed the 
experience of going to the different churches that my 
different classmates attended. I went to very ornate 
churches, simple churches, churches in people's homes, 
and even a church that was no more than four poles, a tin 
roof, and no walls. It was quite an experience sitting in 
church and getting soaked by the driving rain. I definitely 
felt the spirit that day. 
I also made it a point to visit the houses of worship of 
many different denominations: Lutheran, Baptist, 
Buddhist, Jewish, Catholic, Pentecostal, Muslim, and 
Hindu. I would have gone to more, but the town I lived in 
was small and I soon ran out of different churches to 
attend. I enjoyed my experience, but by the time I turned 
fifteen my interest in attending church waned and I went 
less and less frequently. 
So when Pastor Tom Anderson asked me to be a guest 
speaker at his church, I was both flattered and ashamed of 
my attendance record. When I told him that there were 
people far more qualified to speak to his church, he said, 
"I'm not asking you to deliver a message on religion. I am 
asking you to share your lessons on money."  Page 46 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWhen he said that, I rocked back in my chair and 
chuckled. Not believing what I was hearing, I said, "You 
want me to go to your church and talk about money?" 
"Yes," he replied with a quizzical grin. "What is so 
strange about my request?" 
Again I chuckled. I had to ask the question again. "You 
mean you want me to go to your church, stand at the 
pulpit where you normally stand, and talk to your 
congregation about money?" 
And again the pastor said, "Yes. What is strange about 
that?" 
I sat there grinning, looking back at this famous man of 
God, a pastor with a twelve-thousand-member 
congregation, just to make sure he was certain about what 
he was asking me to do. "Because in church I learned that 
the love of money was evil. I also learned that poor people 
had a better chance of going to heaven than rich people. 
There was some lesson about a camel, a rich man, and the 
eye of a needle. I never really understood the lesson, but I 
did not like the message because I definitely had plans on 
becoming a rich man. That is why I find it strange that 
you would want me to come to your church and tell them 
how to become rich." 
This time Pastor Tom leaned back in his chair and 
grinned. "Well, I do not know what churches you've been 
attending," he said, "but that is certainly not what I teach 
in this church." 
"But aren't there some religious groups that teach the 
idea that money is evil?" I asked. "Aren't there some 
people who believe that poor people have a better chance 
of going to heaven than rich people?" 
"Yes, that is true," the pastor replied. "Different 
churches teach different things. But that is not what I 
want to teach in my church. The God I know loves the rich 
and the poor equally." 
As Pastor Tom Anderson continued with his thoughts, 
I reflected back upon my own experience of church and 
the guilt I often felt because I truly wanted to be rich. 
Maybe I had interpreted the church's message 
inaccurately. Maybe my guilt about my love of money had 
caused me to receive the message inaccurately. In other 
words, I felt guilty so I heard a message of guilt. When I 
shared this idea with Tom, he said something that again 
caused me to sit back in my seat. He said, "Sometimes an Page 47 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comounce of perception takes a ton of education to 
change." 
Those words of wisdom stayed with me. I thought 
about what he said for a long time. The depth of thought 
and accuracy that is found in those words is profound. 
Three months later I spoke to his congregation. The 
privilege to speak from the pulpit was an experience that 
helped me change a personal ounce of perception. 
An Ounce Versus a  Ton  
My rich dad often said, "You can never teach a poor 
person to be rich. You can only teach a rich person to be 
rich." 
My poor dad often said, "I'll never be rich. I'm not 
interested in money." And, "I can't afford it." Maybe it 
was having all those medical bills to pay or struggling 
financially for much of his adult life that caused him to 
say these things. But I don't think so. I think it was his 
ounce of perception that helped bring on much of his 
financial problems. 
When Sharon Lechter, my coauthor, asked me if I 
wanted to write this book for parents, I jumped at the 
opportunity. It was my meeting with Pastor Tom 
Anderson that caused me to become passionate about 
writing this book, because it is the parents who can most 
influence a child's perceptions on life. 
As mentioned before, my wife, Kim, and I do not have 
children, so I dare not tell parents how to be better 
parents. I write about how to help mold a child's 
perceptions on money. The most important thing a parent 
can do when it comes to money is to influence the child's 
perception about money. I want parents to give their 
children the perception that the child has power over 
money, rather than being a slave to money. As my rich 
dad said, "The more you need money, the less power you 
have over money." 
Today young people receive credit cards at very early 
ages. You may recall from Rich Dad Poor Dad  that my 
coauthor and business partner, Sharon Lechter, joined me 
because her own son was trapped by credit card debt in 
college, in spite of the fact that she is a CPA and was 
teaching him what she thought were sound money 
management skills. Even after learning sound money 
management, her son was tempted and succumbed to the 
"thrill" of "charging it" on credit cards. Sharon realized Page 48 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthat if her child was having trouble, millions of other 
kids and parents must also be getting into financial 
problems early in life. 
You Don't Have to Be Born Poor to Become 
Poor  
Many poor people are poor because they learn to be 
poor at home. People can also develop a poor perception 
of themselves, even though they come from rich and 
middle-class families. Something happens to them along 
the road of life, and they pick up the perception that they 
will always be poor. I believe that is what happened to my 
dad. And as Pastor Tom Anderson states, it often takes a 
ton of education to change that perception. In my dad's 
case, he kept working harder, making more money. But 
even a ton of money, like a ton of education, may not 
change that ounce of perception. 
When I went bust and lost my first company, the 
hardest thing I had to do was preserve my perception of 
myself. If not for my rich dad's lessons on self-perception, 
I do not know if I would have recovered and gotten 
stronger from the experience. 
I have friends today who have gone bust, and although 
they have recovered financially, they were left with a 
weakened self-perception from the experience. That is 
why I begin my lessons for parents with the importance of 
being aware of and protecting the self-perceptions of your 
child. 
Much of this book is about teaching your children how 
to have a strong self-perception in order to carry them 
through the ups and downs of life— financially, 
academically, in relationships, professionally, and 
through the other challenges their lives will encounter. 
This book will help you teach your child how to recover 
and build a stronger financial self-perception because of 
the ups and downs. How to protect my self-perceptions 
was one of the most important lessons my two dads 
taught me. One dad taught me how to come out stronger 
academically when I was set back, and the other taught 
me how to become stronger financially. 
Many people gain a weakened self-perception along 
the road of life. I can hear it in their voices when they say 
such things as 
• I'm so deeply in debt, I can't stop working. 
• I can't afford to quit.  Page 49 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com• If I could just make a few more dollars… 
• Life would be much easier if I didn't have kids. 
• I'll never be rich. 
• I can't afford to lose money. 
• I'd like to start my own business, but I need the 
steady paycheck. 
• How can I afford to invest when I can't even pay my 
bills? 
• I'll take out a home equity loan to pay off my credit 
cards. 
• Not everybody can be rich. 
• I don't care about money. Money is not that 
important to me. 
• If God wanted me to be rich, God would have given 
me the money. 
As my rich dad said, "The more you need money, the 
less power you have." There are many people who did well 
in school and landed that high-paying job. But because 
they were not taught how to make money work for them, 
they worked hard for money and got into long-term debt. 
The more they need money and the longer they need it, 
the more uncertain their self-perception grows. 
I have friends who are professional students. Some 
have been in school all their lives and still have not had a 
job. I have one friend who has two master's degrees and 
one doctorate. He does not have a ton of education. He 
has ten tons of education, and he still struggles 
professionally and financially. I suspect it is one of those 
ounces of perception that are still in his way. 
Money Does Not Make You Rich  
Many people collect money in hopes of becoming rich, 
while others collect college degrees and good grades, 
hoping to become smart. My personal battle was to 
overcome my poor financial perception and the 
perception that I was not as smart as other kids—
perceptions I did not really have until I began to compare 
myself with other kids. In other words, I did not know I 
was poor until I met kids who came from families with 
money; and I did not know I was not too smart until I was 
compared against kids who had better grades. 
And that is why the title of this book is Rich Kid Smart 
Kid. It is my sincere belief that all kids are born with the 
potential to be rich and smart … as long as that perception  Page 50 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comof themselves is reinforced and protected from the tons  
of education they will receive in school, church, business, 
the media, and the world itself. Life is tough enough, but 
it can be even tougher if your self-perception is that you're 
not smart and that you'll never be rich. The most 
important role a parent can have is to mold, nurture, and 
protect children's perception of themselves. 
Teaching Adults to Forget What They Have 
Learned  
As a teacher of adults, I find it easier to teach a rich 
person to be richer and a smart person to be smarter. It is 
very difficult to teach someone to be rich when all you 
hear is 
• "But what if I lose my money?" 
• "But you've got to have a safe, secure job." 
• "What do you mean, work for free? You've got to pay 
people!" 
• "Don't get into debt." 
• "Be a good hardworking man/woman and save 
money." 
• "Play it safe and don't take risks." 
• "If I become rich, I'll become evil and arrogant." 
• "The rich are greedy." 
• "We don't discuss money at the dinner table." 
• "I'm not interested in money." 
• "I can't afford it." 
• "It's so expensive." 
Questions or statements such as these come from 
deep-seated core personal perceptions. I found that when 
I raised the price of my classes into the hundreds and 
thousands of dollars, many of these comments 
disappeared and I could get on with my content. 
Never Say, "I Can't Afford It"  
My rich dad was not a trained therapist, yet he was 
smart enough to know that money was just an idea. He 
forbade his son and me from saying, "I can't afford it," to 
help us change our perceptions of ourselves. That was 
why he had us say, instead, "How can I afford it?" I realize 
that by constantly saying, "I can't afford it," I was 
reinforcing the perception of myself as a poor person. By 
saying, "How can I afford it?" I was reinforcing the 
perception of myself as a rich person. I recommend not Page 51 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comsaying around your child, "I can't afford it." And when 
your child asks you for money, you may want to say, 
"Write me a list of ten different things that you can do, 
legally and morally, so that you can afford what you want 
without asking me for the money." 
If you examine these two statements, you will see that 
"How can I afford it?" opens your mind to examining the 
possibilities of accumulating wealth. "I can't afford it," on 
the other hand, closes your mind to any possibility of 
attaining what you desire. 
As I stated at the start of this book, the word education  
comes from the Latin educare , which means "to draw 
out." By simply being aware of our words, we can detect 
our self-perceptions. By changing our words, we can begin 
to change our self-perceptions, if we want to change them. 
So by simply reminding myself to say "How can I afford 
it?" I was able to bring out the rich person inside me. By 
saying, "I can't afford it," I was reinforcing the poor 
person who was already there. 
Life Begins with Perceptions  
The other day I was being interviewed by a reporter 
who asked, "Tell me how you became a millionaire." 
And I replied, "I built businesses and bought real 
estate." 
The reporter then responded, "Well, not everyone can 
do that. I know that I can't do that. Tell me what I can do 
to become a millionaire." 
I then replied, "Well, you can keep your job and buy 
real estate." 
And the reporter answered, "But the real estate market 
is too high. I can't afford it, and I don't want to manage 
property. Tell me what else I can do." 
I then said, "Well, the stock market is hot right now. 
Why don't you invest in some stocks?" 
"Because the stock market is too risky. It might crash 
any day now And I have a wife and kids and I have bills to 
pay, so I can't afford to lose money like you can," said the 
reporter. 
Finally I realized that I was doing what my rich dad 
had taught me not to do. I was giving answers to someone 
who first needed a change in perception. So I stopped 
answering and began asking questions. I said, "Tell me 
how you can become a millionaire."  Page 52 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comHe said, "Well, I can write a book and sell a couple of 
million copies like you did." 
"Good," I said out loud. "You are a good writer, and I 
think that's a very good idea." 
"But what if I can't find an agent to represent my book? 
And what if the agent rips me off? You know, I wrote a 
book once, but no one wanted to read the book," replied 
the reporter. He was on to a new subject, but his self-
perception was the same. 
The most important thing a parent can start with is 
developing and protecting the child's self-perceptions. We 
all have private perceptions of other people, right or 
wrong. You may think the person is a jerk, or stupid, or 
smart, or rich. I remember when I was in high school 
there was a girl I thought was stuck-up and arrogant. So 
as much as I was attracted to her, my perception of her 
caused me not to ask her out. Then one day I actually 
talked to her and found her to be kind, warm, and 
friendly. After changing my perception of her, I finally 
asked her out. Her reply was, "Oh, I wish you had asked 
me out earlier. I just started dating Jerry, and he and I are 
going steady now." The moral of the story is, just as we 
have perceptions of other people, we often have 
perceptions of ourselves—and just as perceptions of 
others can be changed, so can people's perceptions of 
themselves. 
Rich and Smart Are Only Perceptions  
My real dad, the schoolteacher, told me of a famous 
study that was conducted in the Chicago school system 
some years ago. Educational researchers asked a group of 
schoolteachers for their help. The teachers were told that 
they were chosen for their superior teaching abilities. 
They were also told that only gifted children would be 
placed in their classrooms. The teachers were told that 
neither the children nor their parents would know of the 
experiment because they wanted to see how gifted 
children would perform if they did not know they were 
gifted. 
As expected, the teachers reported that the children 
performed exceptionally well. The teachers reported that 
working with the children had been absolutely delightful, 
and they wished that they could work with such gifted 
children all the time. 
There was a hidden agenda for the project. What the Page 53 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comteachers did not know was that the teachers did not 
have exceptional teaching abilities. They were chosen at 
random. Also, the children were not chosen for their 
gifted abilities. They too were chosen at random. But 
because expectations were high, performance was high. 
Because the children and teachers were perceived as 
smart and exceptional, they performed exceptionally. 
What does this mean? It means that your perceptions  
of your children can greatly affect the outcome of their 
lives. In other words, if you can see the genius in your 
child, you will help your child become smarter. If you see 
your child as rich, you will help your child become richer. 
And if you teach your children to have those same 
perceptions, they will stand a better chance of having the 
rest of the world see the same self-perceptions and treat 
them accordingly. 
And to me, this is where your child's education begins. 
And that is why I say, "Give your children power, before 
you give them money." Help them develop a strong self-
perception, and you help them become rich kids and 
smart kids. If they don't have that, then all the education 
or money in the world will not help them. If they have 
that, getting smarter and richer will only get easier. 
Gifts from My Two Dads  
Possibly the best gifts I have received came from my 
two dads in the times when I was in the most trouble. 
When I was flunking out of high school, my schoolteacher 
dad always reminded me of how smart I was. When I was 
losing my shirt financially, my rich dad kept reminding 
me that truly rich men have lost more than one business. 
He would also say that it was the poor people who lost the 
least money and lived in the most fear of losing the little 
they had. 
So one dad encouraged me to take my academic 
failures and turn them into strengths. And my rich dad 
encouraged me to take my financial losses and turn them 
into financial gains. They may have taught different 
subjects, but in many ways both dads were saying the 
same thing. 
It is when children see the worst in themselves that it is 
the parents' job to see only the best. You may notice that 
this works not only on little kids, but on grown-up kids 
also. 
When things are the very worst in your child's life, you Page 54 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comas a parent are presented with a great opportunity —the 
opportunity to be the best teacher and friend your child 
will ever have. 
Chapter 4: If You Want to Be 
Rich, You Must Do Your 
Homework 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
Both my parents and Mike's parents continually 
reminded us to do our homework. Again, the difference 
was that they did not recommend the same type of 
homework. 
"Have you done your homework?" my mom asked. 
"I'll do it as soon as this game is over," was my reply. 
"You've been playing long enough! Stop playing right 
now and hit the books. If you don't get good grades, you 
won't get into college, and then you won't get a good job," 
she scolded. 
"Okay, okay. I'll put the game away, but after I buy one 
more hotel." 
"Listen to your mother and put that game away now. I 
know you love the game, but it's time to study." 
That was my dad's voice, and he did not sound happy. 
Knowing better than to ask for more time, I stopped 
immediately and began putting the game away. It hurt me 
to sweep up the little green houses, red hotels, and 
property deeds I had spent hours collecting. I was close to 
controlling one whole side of the board. Yet I knew my 
parents were right. I did have a test the next day and I had 
not yet begun to study. 
There was a period of my life when I was utterly 
fascinated by the game 
Monopoly®. I played it regularly from the time I was 
eight until I turned fourteen, which was when I started 
playing high school football. I suspect I would have kept 
playing Monopoly regularly if I could have found more 
kids my age to play the game. But by the time you're in 
high school, it's not the cool thing to do. Although I played 
the game less frequently, I never lost my love of it, and 
once I was old enough, I began playing the game in real 
life. 
Building Blocks from My Rich Dad  Page 55 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comAfter a strong and healthy self-perception, one of the 
most important building blocks to wealth is homework. 
In my previous books I explained how I learned about 
money while working for my rich dad from the age of nine 
into my college years. In exchange for my labor, he would 
spend hours teaching his son and me the ins and outs of 
running a business as well as the skills needed to be an 
investor. There was many a Saturday I would have rather 
been surfing with my friends or playing some other sport, 
yet I found myself sitting in my rich dad's office, learning 
from a man who would one day become one of the 
wealthiest private citizens in Hawaii. 
During one of these Saturday lessons, my rich dad 
asked Mike and me, "Do you know why I will always be 
richer than the people who work for me?" 
Mike and I sat blankly for a while, searching our minds 
for an appropriate answer. At first it seemed like a stupid 
question, but knowing rich dad, we knew there was 
something important to learn from his question. Finally I 
ventured what I thought was the obvious answer. 
"Because you make more money than they do," I said. 
"Yeah," Mike said, nodding in agreement. "After all, 
you own the company, and you decide how much you get 
paid and how much they get paid." 
Rich dad rocked back in his chair, grinning. "Well, it is 
true that I decide how much everyone gets paid. But the 
truth is, I get paid less than many of the employees who 
work for me." 
Mike and I both looked at his dad with a suspicious 
gaze. "If you own this business, how can other people be 
paid more than you?" Mike asked. 
"Well, there are several reasons why," replied rich dad. 
"Do you want me to tell you?" 
"Of course," Mike replied. 
"Well, when you're starting up a business, cash is often 
tight, and the owner is usually the last to be paid." 
"You mean the employees always get paid first?" asked 
Mike. 
Rich dad nodded. "That is correct. And not only do 
they get paid first, they often get paid more than I do 
when I do get paid." 
"But why is that?" I asked. "Why own a business if you 
get paid last and get paid the least?"  Page 56 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Because that is what a business owner often needs to 
do at first if he plans to build a successful business." 
"That makes no sense," I replied. "Tell me why you do 
it, then." 
"Because employees work for money, and I work to 
build an asset," said rich dad. 
"So as you build this business, your pay will go up?" 
Mike asked. 
"It may and it may not. I say this because I want you to 
know the difference between money and an asset," rich 
dad continued. "I may or may not pay myself more later 
on, and I am not working hard for the paycheck. The 
reason I work hard is to build an asset that increases in 
value. I may someday sell this business for millions of 
dollars, or I may hire a president to run it for me one day, 
and I will go on to build another business." 
"So to you building a business is building an asset. And 
the asset is more important to you than money," I said, 
doing my best to understand the distinction between 
money and an asset. 
"That's right," said rich dad. "And the second reason I 
get paid less is that I already have other sources of 
income." 
"You mean you have money from other assets?" I 
asked. 
Again rich dad nodded. "And that is the reason I asked 
you boys the question in the first place. That is why I 
asked you why I will always be richer than my employees, 
regardless of who makes the most money in salary. I am 
doing my best to teach you a very important lesson." 
"And what is the lesson?" asked Mike. 
"The lesson is, you don't get rich at work. You get rich 
at home," said rich dad strongly, making sure we did not 
take his words lightly. 
"I don't understand," I commented. "What do you 
mean, you get rich at home?" 
"Well, it's at work where you earn  your money. And it 
is at home where you decide what you are going to do with 
your money. And it is what you do with your money after 
you earn it that makes you rich or poor," replied rich dad. 
"It's like homework," Mike said. 
"Exactly," said rich dad. "That is exactly what I call it. I 
call getting rich my homework."  Page 57 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"But my dad brings a lot of work home," I said almost 
defensively. "And we're not rich." 
"Well, your dad brings his work home, but he really 
does not do his homework," said rich dad. "Just as your 
mom does housework… that is not what I mean by 
homework." 
"Or yardwork," I added. 
Rich dad nodded. "Yes, there is a difference between 
yardwork, the schoolwork you bring home, and the work 
your dad brings home from his office, and the kind of 
homework I am talking about." It was then my rich dad 
said something to me I have never forgotten: "The 
primary difference between the rich, the poor, and the 
middle class is what they do in their spare time." 
"Their spare time," I said in a questioning tone. "What 
do you mean, their spare time?" 
Rich dad smiled at his son and me for a moment. 
"Where do you think this restaurant business was 
started?" he asked. "Do you think that this business came 
out of thin air?" 
"No," said Mike. "You and Mom started this business 
at our kitchen table. That is where all your businesses 
have been started." 
"That's correct," said rich dad. "Do you remember the 
first small store we started with years ago?" 
Mike nodded. "Yes, I do," he said. "Those were very 
tough days for the family. We had so little money." 
"And how many stores do we have now?" asked rich 
dad. 
"We own five," Mike replied. 
"And how many restaurants?" asked rich dad. 
"We own seven," said Mike. 
As I sat there listening, I began to understand a few 
new distinctions. "So the reason you earn less from this 
restaurant is that you have income from many other 
businesses?" 
"That is partly the answer," rich dad said with a grin. 
"The rest of the answer is found on this Monopoly game 
board. Understanding the game of Monopoly is the best 
kind of homework you can do." 
"Monopoly?" I asked with a grin. I could still hear my 
mom's voice telling me to put my Monopoly game away Page 58 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comand do my homework. "What do you mean, Monopoly 
is homework?" 
"Let me show you," said rich dad as he opened up the 
world's most familiar game. "What happens when you go 
around Go?" he asked. 
"You collect two hundred dollars," I replied. 
"So every time you go around Go, that is like you 
collecting your paycheck. Is that correct?" 
"Yeah. I guess so," said Mike. 
"And to win the game, what are you supposed to do?" 
asked rich dad. 
"You're supposed to buy real estate," I said. 
"That's right," said rich dad. "And buying real estate is 
your homework. That is what makes you rich. Not your 
paycheck." 
Mike and I sat there in silence for a long period of 
time. Finally I ventured a question to rich dad. "So are 
you saying a big paycheck does not make you rich?" 
"That's correct," said rich dad. "A paycheck does not 
make you rich. It is what you do with that paycheck that 
makes a person rich, poor, or middle-class." 
"I don't understand," I said. "My dad is always saying 
that if he got a bigger pay raise, we would be rich." 
"And that is what most people think," said rich dad. 
"But the reality is that the more money most people make, 
the further in debt they get. So they have to work harder." 
"And why is that?" I asked. 
"It's because of what they do at home. It's what they do 
in their spare time," said rich dad. "Most people have a 
poor plan or a poor formula for their money after they 
make it." 
"So where does a person find a good formula for 
wealth?" Mike asked. 
"Well, one of the better formulas for wealth is found 
right here on the Monopoly board," rich dad said, 
pointing to the game board. 
"What formula?" I asked. 
"Well, how do you win the game?" asked rich dad. 
"You buy several pieces of real estate, then you begin 
putting houses on them," Mike answered. 
"How many houses?" asked rich dad.  Page 59 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Four," I said. "Four green houses." 
"Good," said rich dad. "And after you have those four 
green houses, then what do you do?" 
"You turn those four green houses in and buy a red 
hotel," I said. 
"And that is one of the formulas for great wealth," said 
rich dad. "Right here on the game board of Monopoly, you 
have one of the best formulas for wealth in the world. It is 
a formula that many people have followed to become 
richer beyond their wildest dreams." 
"You're kidding me," I said with a bit of disbelief. "It 
can't be that simple." 
"It's that simple," rich dad confirmed. "For years I have 
taken the money I have earned in my business and simply 
bought real estate. Then what I do is live off the income 
from my real estate and continue to build my businesses. 
The more money I make from my business, the more 
money I invest in real estate. That is the formula of great 
wealth for many people." 
"So if it is so simple, why don't more people do it?" 
asked Mike. 
"Because they don't do their homework," said rich dad. 
"Is it the only formula for wealth?" I asked. 
"No," said rich dad. "But it is a very sound plan that 
has worked for many wealthy people for centuries. It 
worked for kings and queens of old, and it still works 
today. The difference is that today you don't have to be 
nobility to own real estate." 
"So you have been playing the game of Monopoly in 
real life?" asked Mike. 
Rich dad nodded. "Years ago, when I was a kid playing 
Monopoly, I decided that my plan for great wealth was to 
build businesses and then have my businesses buy my real 
estate. And that is all I have been doing. Even when we 
had very little money, I was still going home and looking 
for real estate." 
"Does it have to be real estate?" I asked. 
"No," said rich dad. "But when you get older and begin 
to understand the power of corporations and tax law, you 
will understand why real estate is one of the best 
investments." 
"What else can you invest in?" asked Mike.  Page 60 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Many people like stocks and bonds," said rich dad. 
"Do you have stocks and bonds?" I asked. 
"Of course," said rich dad. "But I still have more real 
estate." 
"Why?" I asked. 
"Well, it's because my banker will give me a loan to buy 
real estate, but he frowns on giving me a loan to buy 
stocks. So I can leverage my money better with real estate, 
and the tax laws favor real estate. But we're getting off the 
point." 
"And what is the point?" I asked. 
"The point is, you get rich at home, not at work," said 
rich dad. "I really want you to understand that. I don't 
care if you buy real estate or stocks or bonds or build a 
business. I do care that you understand that most people 
do not get rich at work. You get rich at home by doing 
your homework." 
"I got the lesson," I said. "So when you finish working 
here at the restaurant, where do you go next?" 
"Glad you asked," said rich dad. "Come on. Let's get in 
my car and take a ride. I'll show you where I go after work 
is done." 
A few minutes later we arrived at a large tract of land 
with row after row of houses on the land. "This is twenty 
acres of prime real estate," rich dad said as he pointed to 
the land. 
"Prime real estate?" I said cynically. I may have been 
only twelve years old, but I knew a low-rent neighborhood 
when I saw one. "This place looks terrible." 
"Well, let me explain something to you," said rich dad. 
"Think of these houses as those green houses on the 
Monopoly board. Can you see that?" 
Mike and I nodded slowly, doing our best to stretch 
our imaginations. The houses were not the neat clean 
green houses on the Monopoly board. "So where is the big 
red hotel?" we asked almost simultaneously. 
"It's coming," said rich dad. "It's coming. But it's not 
going to be a red hotel. Over the next few years our little 
town will grow out in this direction. The city has 
announced plans to locate the new airport on the other 
side of this property." 
"So these houses and land will be between the town 
and the airport?" I asked.  Page 61 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"You got it," said rich dad. "Then, when the time is 
right, I will tear down all these rental houses and convert 
this land into a light industrial park. And then I will 
control one of the most valuable pieces of land in this 
town." 
"Then what will you do?" Mike asked. 
"I will follow the same formula," said rich dad. "I'll buy 
more green houses and when the time is right turn them 
into red hotels, or light industrial parks, or apartment 
houses, or whatever the city needs at that time. I'm not a 
very smart man, but I know how to follow a successful 
plan. I work hard, and I do my homework." 
When Mike and I were twelve years old, rich dad had 
begun his move to become one of the richest men in 
Hawaii. Not only had he already purchased this piece of 
industrial land, he had also purchased a piece of prime 
beachfront property, utilizing the same formula. At the 
age of thirty-four he was making his move from being an 
obscure businessman to becoming a powerful, rich 
businessman. He had been doing his homework. 
In Rich Dad Poor Dad , rich dad's lesson number one 
was that the rich did not work for money. Instead the rich 
focused on having their money work for them. I also 
wrote about Ray Kroc, the founder of McDonald's, who 
said, "I'm not in the hamburger business. My business is 
real estate." As a young boy, I will always remember the 
impact of comparing the lesson from the game board of 
Monopoly to the lesson in real life with my rich dad and 
many other very wealthy individuals. Their wealth was 
really gained in what rich dad called "doing their 
homework." For me, the idea that wealth was gained at 
home and not at work was a powerful lesson from my rich 
dad. My real dad brought a lot of work home, but he did 
very little homework. 
Once I returned from Vietnam in 1973,1 immediately 
signed up for a real estate investment course I saw 
advertised on television. The course cost $385. That 
single course has made my wife and me millionaires, and 
the income from the real estate we bought using the 
formula taught by that course has bought us our freedom. 
My wife and I never need to work again, owing to the 
passive income from real estate coming in from our real 
estate investments. So that $385 course has paid me back 
in something far more important than money. The Page 62 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.cominformation gained from that course has bought my 
wife and me something far more important than job 
security. It has bought us financial security and financial 
freedom. We worked hard at work, and we also did our 
homework. 
As my rich dad said while playing Monopoly with Mike 
and me, "You don't get rich at work, you get rich at 
home." 
The Motley Fools Are No Fools  
In my opinion, one of the best books on investing is 
written by two brothers who call themselves the Motley 
Fools. Their book The Motley Fool Invest-ment Guide  has 
been on the best-seller lists for years. 
Recently on their Web site they had this to say about 
the use of games as teaching tools: 
… in addition to their fun and the social interaction 
they promote, good games make you smarter. Good 
games force you to think, to plan, to risk, sometimes just 
to guess or hope… but always—and ay, here's the rub—the 
results, your destiny, are tied up in those thoughts and 
actions. The act of acting and winning, or failing and 
learning, is an act that emerges naturally from the playing 
of games. One of our Foolish leitmotifs, personal 
responsibility, is taught and illustrated beautifully by 
games. 
Games Require More Than One Genius  
The school system focuses primarily on the genius of 
verbal-linguistics. Earlier I discussed the challenges a 
child may have if his or her genius is not the genius of 
verbal-linguistics, the genius that IQ is traditionally 
measured from. In school I was not good in reading, 
writing, listening, and taking tests on my own. Just sitting 
in a classroom was painful. Being hyperactive even today, 
I learn best by calling on the geniuses found in physical, 
interpersonal, intrapersonal, spatial, and mathematical 
learning. In other words, I learn best by involving more 
than one genius. I learn best by doing, talking, working in 
groups, cooperating, competing, and having fun. While I 
can read and write, they are the most painful ways for me 
to absorb and disseminate information. That was why 
school was painful and why I loved games as a kid and 
why I still love them today as an adult. More than one 
genius is required to learn and to win a game. Games are 
often better teachers than a teacher standing in front of a Page 63 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comclassroom, lecturing.  
I hated sitting in the confined space of a classroom. I 
still to this day refuse to sit in an office. I often hear 
people say, "Someday I'll have the corner office with 
windows on two sides." I never wanted to sit in an office. I 
have owned office buildings, but I do not have an office. If 
I have to have a meeting, I use the company's conference 
room or go to a restaurant. I hated being confined as a 
kid, and I hate being confined today. The best way to keep 
me seated in a confined space is to play a game, and today 
I go to work and continue to play games—but this time it 
is the game of Monopoly played with real money. I play 
because that is how I learn best. 
When my real dad saw my love of games and sports, he 
realized that I learned best by doing rather than by 
listening. He knew that I would not do well in a true 
academic college. Realizing that I was an active learner, 
he began encouraging me to choose a school that taught 
students by doing rather than by listening. That is why I 
applied for and received congressional nominations to the 
U.S. Naval Academy and the U.S. Merchant Marine 
Academy. I applied to schools that would send me to sea 
on board ships to study all over the world. I learned to be 
a ship's officer by being on a ship. After graduation, I went 
into the Marine Corps to learn to fly, and I loved it. I loved 
learning on board a ship, and I loved learning inside an 
airplane. 
I was able to tolerate the required confined classroom 
work because it led to the real-life learning of sailing and 
flying. I studied in the classroom because I wanted to 
learn, and when I wanted to learn, I would study harder, I 
was not bored, I felt smarter, and I got better grades. 
Better grades meant I could do more exciting things like 
sailing or flying to Tahiti, Japan, Alaska, Australia, New 
Zealand, Europe, South America, Africa, and, of course, 
Vietnam. 
If my real dad had not explained the different styles of 
learning to me, I might have dropped out of school. I 
would probably have chosen a normal classroom-type 
school, gotten bored, partied too much, and stopped 
attending classes. I hate being confined, I hate being 
bored and lectured to, and I hate studying subjects that I 
cannot see, touch, and feel. My dad was a verbal-linguistic 
genius, yet he was smart enough to know that his kids 
were not. The reason he rarely criticized us for not doing Page 64 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwell in school, even though he was the head of 
education, was because he knew that his four children 
learned in different ways. Instead of criticizing us for not 
having good grades, he encouraged us to find the ways 
that we naturally learned best. 
My real dad also understood that I needed an 
incentive, a reward, at the end of my studies. He knew I 
was belligerent and rebellious enough not to simply follow 
his orders of "Go to school." I needed a reason. He was 
smart enough to know that saying to me, "Go to school, 
get good grades so you can get a good job and sit in an 
office," was not going to motivate me to love school. He 
knew that I needed to study what I wanted to study, learn 
in the ways I learned best, and that I had to have an 
exciting reward at the end of my studies. He helped me 
understand this about myself. Although he did not like the 
idea of my playing Monopoly for hours with my rich dad, 
he was a smart enough teacher to know that I was playing 
for the rewards I could get from the game. He knew I 
could see my future. That was why he said, "Go to school 
and see the world. You can play Monopoly all over the 
world. I can't afford to send you all over the world, but if 
you get into a school that lets you study all over the world, 
you'll enjoy your education." 
My dad did not realize that this idea would stick in my 
head, but it did. To him, traveling the world to play 
Monopoly did not make sense. Yet once he saw me light 
up at the idea of traveling the world to study, he began to 
encourage me. He found something that interested me. 
He even began to like the idea of my playing Monopoly, 
although he could not comprehend the idea of investing in 
real estate all over the world because it was not in his 
reality; but he could see it becoming a part of my reality. 
Since I already had a Monopoly board, he began to bring 
home more books about going to sea and traveling the 
world. 
So in the end even my schoolteacher dad did not mind 
my playing Monopoly. He could see that not only was it 
fun, but I was interested in it. He was able to marry a 
game with subjects I wanted to study. He found the 
reward I would study hard for—and that reward was to 
travel the world and play Monopoly in real life. He felt it 
was a childish and immature reality, yet it was a reality I 
could get excited about. Somehow my dad knew that 
when I played Monopoly I could see my future at the end Page 65 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comof the game. He could not see it, but he knew I could 
see it… and he used what I could see or was beginning to 
see as the incentive to keep me in school and study hard. 
Today I travel the world and play Monopoly with real 
money. Although my reading and writing skills are not 
strong, I read and write because my schoolteacher dad 
was smart enough to find subjects I was interested in 
rather than force me to read and write about subjects I 
had no interest in. 
The Winning Formula  
One of the most important things I learned from 
Monopoly was my winning formula. I knew that all I had 
to do was buy four green houses and convert them into a 
red hotel. I did not know how specifically I was going to 
do it, but I knew I could do it… at least that was my 
perception of myself at the time. In other words, between 
the ages of nine and fifteen, I learned that I was not an 
academic genius as my friend Andy the Ant was. When I 
found the formula on the game board of Monopoly, and 
then went and actually could see, touch, and feel my rich 
dad's green houses, I found the winning formula for me. I 
knew that my poor dad's formula of study hard and work 
hard for job security and sit all day in an office was not for 
me. So that was the good news. But as I said, each coin 
has two sides. The bad news was that by the time I was 
fifteen, the threat of, "If you don't study hard, get good 
grades, and get a good job, you won't be successful," had 
little impact on my motivation to study subjects I did not 
want to study. 
When I look at the falling test scores of kids today, I 
believe the same lack of reason or motivation that affected 
me is affecting kids today. Kids aren't stupid. In fact, kids 
know far more about real life than many adults. One of 
the reasons the school system is having a difficult time 
teaching them is that no one has given them the exciting 
reason to study hard and stay in school. I think many kids 
would be more interested in studying if they started 
playing Monopoly in the first grade and then were asked 
which of them wanted to join the "Who Wants to Be a 
Millionaire When You Graduate?" curriculum. If a child 
really wanted to be a millionaire, you could still feed them 
the same curriculum I had as a kid. The child might really 
be willing to study it, because the reward at the end was 
exciting and worth studying for. 
So the good news was that by playing Monopoly, I Page 66 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfound my winning formula. I could see my future at the 
end of the game. Once I knew I could make it, I wanted to 
become a millionaire. To me that was exciting, and I was 
willing to study to achieve that. But more than becoming 
rich, I could see that my future would be financially 
secure and financially free at the end of the game. I did 
not have the self-perception that I needed a secure job or 
a company or the government to take care of me. At the 
age of fifteen, I knew I was going to be rich. I did not just 
think it, I knew it. When I knew that, my self-perception 
soared. I knew that even if I did not have good grades, go 
to a good school, or have a good job, I was still going to be 
rich. 
The bad news was that I grew more restless. If not for 
my schoolteacher dad and my rich dad encouraging me to 
stay in school and get my college degree, I might have left 
school early. I am very grateful for the wisdom of my 
schoolteacher dad, my rich dad, and a few high school 
teachers guiding me, rather than scolding me, through 
that very difficult time of my life. With their help, I found 
a way to want to stay in school and be a good student. 
They helped me find out how I learned best rather than 
forcing me to study in the way that the school system 
wanted me to learn. 
My schoolteacher dad could see that I learned best by 
doing rather than by reading and listening. He kindled my 
dreams of traveling the world and married those dreams 
with the game of Monopoly. Knowing that, he found ways 
to encourage me to stay in school and helped me find a 
school that best suited my learning style. He was not 
concerned about my grades or about my attending a 
prestigious school of higher intellectual learning. He was 
concerned with my staying in school, getting a college 
degree, and, most important, continuing to learn. In other 
words, my real dad had done his homework. 
My rich dad taught me different things from the game 
of Monopoly. He taught me one of the winning formulas 
of the rich. He changed my perception of myself by 
teaching me that I could win at the game of life even if I 
did not do well in school or have a high-paying job. He 
showed me his winning formula, a winning formula that I 
adopted for my life. In other words, my rich dad had also 
done his homework. As he often said, "You do not get rich 
at work. You get rich by doing your homework." 
Teaching Rich and Smart Kids  Page 67 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comIn early 2000 I was asked by one of the leading 
network marketing companies to teach what they called 
"the next generation" about investing. Curious as to what 
the next generation was, I was told that they were the kids 
whose parents were successful in the network marketing 
business. When I asked why these "kids" needed to learn 
about investing, the reply was, "Because most of these 
young people will be inheriting million-dollar, and in 
some cases billion-dollar, businesses. We have been 
teaching them the business skills, and now we need you to 
teach them investing skills." With that answer, I knew 
why I was being asked to speak to them. 
I spent two days in a ski resort talking to seventy-five 
young people, ages running from fifteen to thirty-five, 
about the importance of investing. It was nice because 
there were no questions such as "Where do I get the 
money to invest?" As my rich dad said, "There are only 
two kinds of money problems. One problem is not enough 
money, and the other problem is too much money." And 
these young people had the second problem. 
On the second day of the course, I could not help but 
notice how different these young people were. They were 
unlike many of the young people I had met previously. 
Even the teenagers could hold a conversation about 
money, business, and investing that was adult to adult, 
not teenager to adult. I was old enough to be their father, 
and I often felt as though I were talking to a peer across a 
boardroom table. I then realized that these young people 
had grown up in the business, and many of them were 
managing cash flows and investment portfolios much 
larger than mine. It was a humbling experience for me, 
yet as wealthy as these young people already were, there 
was not the jerky arrogance, cockiness, or aloofness that I 
occasionally find in some young people. I realized that 
many of these young people grew up at home with their 
parents and their parents' business. Not only were they 
comfortable with adults, they were comfortable with 
speaking to adults about money and business. I had 
previously seen some of these young people, some only 
fourteen years old, stand up on stage in front of forty 
thousand people and deliver a speech that inspired the 
entire room. I was thirty-seven before I ever stood up and 
gave a speech, and it was a boring speech at that. 
As I was driven down the mountain back to the airport, 
I realized that my best friend, Mike, and I had been given Page 68 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commuch the same experience. I also realized that he 
studied much harder at college because his reward at the 
end of his studies at business school was taking over a 
multimillion-dollar business. I realized that I was also a 
beneficiary of a parent who worked from home and had 
the time to teach his son and me life skills that could 
transfer to real life. 
When I speak to people considering a home-based 
business—anything from a network marketing business to 
a franchise to something they're starting on their own—I 
comment on the young people I met up on that mountain. 
A home-based business can provide benefits far beyond 
the additional source of income and tax breaks, and some 
of those benefits are immeasurable and priceless. For 
some people with children, a home-based business is their 
way of doing their homework and teaching their kids to 
do the same. As my rich dad said, "You don't get rich at 
work. You get rich at home." And that may include a 
richness that is far beyond money. 
Throughout history, some of the richest people became 
rich by starting at home. Henry Ford started in his garage. 
Hewlett-Packard was founded in a garage. Michael Dell 
started in his dorm room. Colonel Sanders did not 
become rich until after a freeway was built over his 
restaurant and he was forced out of business. So my rich 
dad's advice that you don't get rich at work has worked for 
many very rich people. 
As a side note, the board game CASHFLOW 101™ was 
created on my dining table. Rich Dad Poor Dad , which 
has sold over two million copies to date, was originally 
written in our cabin in the mountains. CASHFLOW 
Technologies, Inc., with the Web site richdad.com, is a 
multimillion-dollar business that ships and licenses rich 
dad educational products all over the world—and it was 
started in a spare bedroom in Sharon Lechter's home. The 
business that started on our kitchen table, then moved to 
Sharon's home, is now in an office building and even rents 
office space to other businesses. I still do not have an 
office, because even today I dislike being confined to a 
small space. I operate with the same winning formula I 
learned with the help of my two dads—to travel the world 
and play Monopoly with real money. In other words, I am 
still doing my homework. 
Chapter 5: How Many Winning Page 69 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comFormulas Will Your Child Need? 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
In looking back at the lives of my rich dad and my poor 
dad, I have come to realize that one was more successful 
than the other simply because one had more winning 
formulas . 
A friend of mine recently called asking me for some 
advice. Adrian worked for a large corporation for many 
years until she was downsized in the early 1990s. 
Undaunted and always wanting to start her own business, 
Adrian bought a travel agency franchise with her savings 
and severance pay from her old company. Just as she got 
a handle on the business, the airlines began cutting the 
commissions they paid on the tickets that travel agents 
sold. Suddenly, instead of getting an $800 commission on 
a ticket, the airlines paid her a flat rate of less than $100 
and even down to $50. She is now faced with closing 
down her travel agency, but this time she is out of savings 
and will not receive a severance package from her own 
company. Her franchise is up for sale, but its value has 
been greatly diminished by the decreased revenue from 
the airlines. 
I believe one of the reasons Adrian is struggling later in 
life is that she did not have enough winning formulas to 
prepare her for the length of her life. Adrian is not the 
only person I know who is struggling because she is short 
on winning formulas. There are many people who did well 
in school but did not leave with enough winning formulas 
to do well in life. The following chapter is written for 
parents to prepare their children with enough winning 
formulas to win at the game of life. 
Your Child Needs a Minimum of Three 
Winning Formulas  
There are three primary winning formulas a child 
needs to learn for professional and financial success later 
in life: 
A winning learning  formula A winning professional  
formula A winning financial  formula 
Finding Your Child's Winning Formula for 
Learning  
My friend Adrian did well in school because she was a 
fast learner and enjoyed school. Adrian found reading, 
writing, and arithmetic easy. Adrian sailed through Page 70 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comcollege and received a bachelor of arts degree. Because 
Adrian did well in school, she liked school and it was a 
positive experience. Since her experience of school was a 
positive one, I recommended that she close her travel 
agency and go back to school to learn a new winning 
professional formula. She is now back in school, at the age 
of fifty-three, gathering enough credits so she can apply to 
law school. 
Adrian is an example that illustrates my dad's point on 
different winning learning formulas for different people. 
While Adrian's winning learning formula would work for 
her, it would probably not work for me. I did not like 
school, and I doubt if I will ever return to the halls of 
formal education as a student. 
Developing a Winning Learning Formula  
The years from birth to approximately age fifteen are 
very important; this is the time when children develop 
their own winning formulas for learning. If a child is 
happy in school, learns easily, and has good grades, the 
child should develop a viable winning formula for 
learning. But when children have difficulty learning the 
three Rs in school because they are not strong in the 
verbal-linguistic genius or for other reasons, their years in 
school can be painful from then on. If children have a 
difficult time in school during these early ages, or are 
made to feel not as smart as the other kids, they may 
begin to develop lowered self-esteem and a poor attitude 
toward school in general. Kids may learn to feel "stupid" 
and feel that they cannot survive inside the educational 
system. They begin to get labeled with terms intended to 
account for their so-called handicaps—terms such as ADD 
or "slow" instead of the coveted "gifted" or "bright" or 
"genius." As an adult I hate being called "stupid" or being 
made to feel inferior. How do you think a child of twelve 
or younger handles such labels? What is the cost, 
mentally, emotionally, and physically? 
Academic rating systems are another reason kids begin 
to feel less secure academically. In a bell curve scoring 
system, if there are ten kids, two will be at the head of the 
curve, two will be at the bottom, and six will be found in 
the middle. In general scholastic aptitude tests I was 
usually rated in the top 2 percent with potential, but near 
the bottom 2 percent in grades. Because of this bell curve 
method of rating students, my schoolteacher dad often 
said, "The school system is not really a system of Page 71 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comeducation  as much as a system of elimination ." His job 
as a parent was to keep me mentally and emotionally 
secure and prevent me from being eliminated from the 
system. 
The Nine-Year Change  
A leading and often controversial educator is Rudolf 
Steiner, whose educational philosophies are incorporated 
in the Waldorf schools, reportedly one of the fastest-
growing systems of schools in the world today. Steiner 
often wrote and spoke about what he called "the nine-year 
change." His findings are that around the age of nine, 
children begin to separate from their parents' identity and 
seek their own. Steiner has found that this period is often 
very lonely for the child, a time of perceived isolation. The 
child begins to seek his or her own "I" and not a "we" as 
family. During this period, the child needs to learn 
practical survival skills. For this reason, children in the 
Waldorf system at that age are taught to plant gardens, 
build a shelter, bake bread, and the like. It is not that they 
are learning these skills as future professions; rather, they 
are learning these skills as a personal reassurance that 
they can survive on their own. The children need  to know 
that they can survive during this period of seeking their 
own identity. If they do not develop a sense of personal 
security during this period, the effects can dramatically 
affect the children's future direction and choices in life. 
Obviously, how each child responds or reacts to this 
identity crisis is different, which is why a parent's careful 
observations and sensitivity are vital. A teacher with thirty 
kids cannot possibly be aware of each child's different 
choices and needs at this stage of life. 
My smart dad was not aware of Rudolf Steiner's work, 
but he was aware of this period of development in a 
child's life. When he noticed that I was not doing well in 
school, and how being Andy the Ant's friend affected me 
when I was informed that Andy was a genius and I wasn't, 
he began to observe me and guide me a little closer. That 
was why he encouraged me to play sports more. He knew 
that Andy learned by reading and I learned by doing. He 
wanted me to know that I too could survive academically 
in my own way. He wanted me to find a way to maintain 
my self-confidence in school, even if it was through sports 
rather than academics. 
Our family was also having money problems at this 
point in my life. I suspect that my smart dad realized how Page 72 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commuch his inability to earn enough money affected me. 
He knew that I often came home to find my mom crying 
over all the bills we had to pay. I think he knew that I 
would probably begin to seek a different identity from 
him, and I did. I began studying with my rich dad at the 
age of nine. In retrospect, I was looking for my own 
answers on how I could help out my family during this 
period of economic struggle. I was definitely seeking an 
identity that was not like my mom and dad's. 
Adrian's Formula Versus My Formula  
Because Adrian's experience of school was positive, it 
only made sense that she return to the halls of education 
to learn a new profession. My learning formula is 
different. It is the formula I learned at age nine, which is 
the formula to seek a mentor and learn by doing. Today I 
still seek mentors to learn at their feet. I seek mentors 
who have already done what I want to do, or I listen to 
audiotapes of them telling me what they did. I also read, 
but only as a last resort. Instead of going back to business 
school to learn about business, I built my own business, 
because I learn by doing rather than sitting in a 
classroom. I would seek a mentor, take action, make 
mistakes, and then seek books and tapes telling what I did 
wrong and what I could learn from my mistakes. For 
example, when the marketing campaign in one of my 
businesses began to fail, I went into a massive study and 
research mode to find new answers. Today I am a pretty 
good marketer… but I would not have been one if I'd just 
sat in a classroom, read books, and listened to teachers 
who might or might not have owned their own companies. 
Each child will have a separate and unique winning 
formula for learning. It is the parent's job to observe and 
support the child in choosing the formula that works best 
for the child. If the child is not doing well in school, work 
closely without smothering the child and support the 
child in finding the ways that he or she will learn best. 
If your children do well in school and love school, feel 
blessed. Let them excel and enjoy their experience. If they 
do not like school, let them know that they are still 
geniuses, and encourage them to find their own way of 
learning in a system that recognizes only one genius. If 
they can learn to do that, they will be gaining excellent 
educational survival skills for the real world, a world that 
requires multiple geniuses to survive. That is what my dad 
encouraged me to do. He encouraged me to find my own Page 73 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comways of learning, in spite of the fact that I hated what I 
was learning. It was great training for real life. 
How to Become a Professional Student  
I have also noticed that many times people do well in 
school out of their fear of not being able to survive. The 
children learn that getting good grades is how they can 
best survive. So they gain the survival skills known as 
"getting good grades." While this is good during their 
youth, problems arise when they get older and may need 
to leave and depend upon other survival skills… other 
survival skills necessary for the real world. 
I suspect that children who learn to survive by doing 
well in school could easily become professional students, 
and some may never leave the system—some may become 
Ph.D.'s, seeking security via tenure. My smart dad 
realized that he was on this career path until his family 
got sick and forced him out into the real world. He said, 
"It is easy to stay inside the walls of education if you need 
the walls of education to shelter you from the real world." 
Eroding Self-Perception  
I have stated that debt and lack of a sense of financial 
security can erode a person's financial self-perception. In 
other words, if you have too many financial setbacks, or 
feel trapped by your need for job and paycheck security, 
your financial self-confidence can get pretty rocky. The 
same thing can happen to children academically, if all 
they are told is that they are not as smart as someone else. 
But for my dad's support, I would have left school early in 
life simply because no one likes being made to feel stupid. 
I knew that I was not stupid. I knew I was bored and not 
interested in the subjects being taught. Nonetheless, my 
poor grades in school still began to erode my academic 
self-perception. It was my smart dad who protected me 
during this trying period of my life. Even when I had poor 
grades, even failing grades, he kept reassuring me that I 
was smart in my own ways and that I needed to find my 
own ways of learning in order to survive in school. If not 
for his love and academic wisdom, I would surely have 
dropped out of school, hurt, angry, and feeling inferior to 
those who did well in school. In other words, if not for my 
smart dad, I would have left school learning the formula 
of a loser. 
Whether or not your children are doing well in school, 
be observant and encourage them to find their own 
learning formula, because once they leave school and Page 74 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comenter the real world, their education really begins.  
Teachers Are Now Cheating  
Most parents are aware that tests scores are coming 
down, and the pressure on educators to get those test 
scores up is taking its toll on teachers. The pressure on 
teachers to raise the test scores of their students is now 
causing teachers to cheat. In affluent suburban Maryland, 
a school principal resigned because of charges of cheating. 
The June 19, 2000, issue of Newsweek  published an 
article entitled "When Teachers Are Cheaters": 
This spring has been a season of embarrassment for 
the nation's public schools. In suburban Maryland, an 
elementary school principal resigned last month after 
parents complained their children were coached to give 
the right answers on state tests. In Ohio, state officials are 
investigating charges of cheating at a Columbus 
elementary school that was recently praised by President 
Clinton for raising test scores. And in New York City, 
more than four dozen teachers and administrators from 
30 schools stand accused of urging their students to cheat 
on various standardized city and state tests. 
It's bad enough when kids get kicked out for cheating. 
But as the school year ends, an alarming number of 
teachers and principals face charges of fixing the numbers 
on high-stake tests that determine everything from 
whether an individual kid gets promoted to an entire 
district's annual budget. 
The article continues: 
The problem is high scores—not high standards—have 
become the Holy Grail. 
In some parts of the country, educators get bonuses of 
as much as $25,000 if they raise their students' scores. In 
other places, school officials can lose their jobs if their 
students don't produce the right numbers. 
And the article also states that schools are now 
teaching kids to take tests rather than gain a solid 
education. In other words, the teachers are giving the kids 
the answers so they can pass the tests in order to obtain 
higher test scores, not better-educated kids. 
This sort of "teaching to the test" is a far more serious 
threat than outright cheating, according to some experts. 
Renzulli calls it the "ram, remember, regurgitate" 
curriculum, a new version of the three Rs. "It's nonsense 
content," says Linda McNeil, a professor of education at Page 75 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comRice University and author of Contradictions of School 
Reform-. The Educational Costs of Standardized Tests . In 
Texas, she says, some kids spend months doing nothing 
but preparing for the tests. "It's like you're mentally 
teaching kids to hit the delete key," she says. "You're 
teaching them to forget. The real cheating is of a solid 
academic education." 
So How Did the Teachers Get Caught?  
Whenever I say that kids are smarter than adults, I 
often get this sideways glance from more intelligent 
adults. Yet I remember as a kid being much more tuned in 
to the world than my teachers or my parents gave me 
credit for. I knew about the first issue of Playboy  
magazine long before my mom and her friends knew 
about it. Today, with the Internet, kids have access to 
things I'm afraid to find out about. Yet we continue to 
treat kids like kids. 
The Newsweek  report goes on to state that the 
principal at the Maryland school got caught because the 
kids knew she was cheating. In the same issue of 
Newsweek , the following article, titled "Bitter Lessons," 
gave the whole story: 
The kids were the heroes in the scandal. What happens 
when role models teach dishonesty? 
The first hints of something wrong came from the kids. 
Whispering to one another in the hallways and on the 
playground, then telling their parents after school, a few 
fifth graders began describing the peculiar behavior of 
their principal, as she supervised the state assessment 
tests in mid-May. Some children who had already finished 
the test were reportedly summoned by the principal and 
told to "review" their answers. "You might want to look at 
this one again," she would say, according to the children. 
Other students were given an extra 20 to 45 minutes to 
complete the test. At one point during the social studies 
section of the test, she was said to have held up a map and 
pointed to the country the students were being quizzed 
about. 
The kids were bothered and confused. "Some kids were 
saying to each other, 'I don't think she's allowed to do 
that,'" one fifth grader told Newsweek . The student, a 10-
year-old boy, recounted that he was given extra time on 
the math test. "There was another part, on the language 
arts section," he continued, "where the principal helped 
me get the right answer. On that part I definitely thought Page 76 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comshe was cheating, but I thought if I said anything, I 
would get in trouble or something." The parent of another 
student told The Washington Post  that her child came 
home and said, "Mom, I kind of thought it was cheating, 
but why would a principal do that?" 
Not Learning to Learn  
Something tragic is happening in the school systems 
today. On Sunday, May 7, 2000, my local newspaper, the 
Arizona Republic , ran a story with a headline that read 
LA. SCHOOLS TO HOLD THOUSANDS BACK: 
Los Angeles—The nation's second-largest school 
system backed down from plans to flunk huge numbers of 
students this year, but still will hold back up to 13,500 
this fall when it stops automatically promoting poor-
performing students to the next grade. 
Los Angeles Unified School District officials originally 
expected to hold back as many as one-third of the 
system's 711,000 students, or 237,000 students, but the 
promotion guidelines were relaxed out of concern that 
mass flunkings would cripple schools. 
In other words, the LA school system has failed to 
educate over a quarter of a million kids with the basic 
skills of learning. Rather than have a quarter of a million 
kids backing up in the system, like a drain backs up with a 
hairball, the system merely lowered its standards and 
pushes these kids out into the real world. In my opinion, 
it is a system that is failing, not the kids. 
Why Private Schools and Home Schooling Are 
Increasing  
Kids aren't the only ones who realize they're being 
cheated out of an important phase of education. For years 
home schooling was considered a fringe group of radical 
parents. Today more and more parents are taking their 
kids out of school and educating them at home. It has 
been reported that the home schooling movement 
increases by 15 percent per year. Many people said that 
children could not get a good education at home. Yet this 
year, the first year of the new millennium, home schoolers 
won the national spelling contest. Charter schools are 
boldly springing up, and schools that follow the 
Montessori and Waldorf systems are rapidly gaining in 
numbers. In other words, parents are taking back from 
the government the responsibility of educating their 
children.  Page 77 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comA great resource for these parents is the Web site 
www.homeschool.com . Established by Rebecca 
Kochenderfer, this site has a wealth of information for all 
parents. Rebecca shares our mission to help parents 
better prepare their children for the world they face. 
My Smart Dad's Concerns  
Years ago my schoolteacher dad tried to change the 
system. He was aware that different children had different 
geniuses. He was also aware that the system was a "one 
size fits all" type of system, which was good for about 30 
percent of the kids and horrible for all the others. He 
often said, "The system is worse than a dinosaur. At least 
dinosaurs became extinct… but the school system will not 
die. That is why it is worse than a dinosaur. The 
educational system is more like an alligator, a reptile that 
survived even after the dinosaurs died off." He went on to 
say, "The reason the school system does not change is that 
it is not a system that is designed to change. It is a system 
that is designed to survive." 
Most of us know that the teachers are doing the best 
they can to educate children. The problem is, the teachers 
are working within a system that is designed not to 
change. It is a system designed for survival. It is a system 
that will drug kids to slow them down rather than change 
by speeding up. Then, after giving the drugs to the active 
kids, they go on to say to the same kids, "Don't do drugs." 
To me, that is one tough system. It is the only business I 
know that fails to give its customers what they want and 
then blames them for its failures. Instead of saying we as a 
system are boring, they say, "Your child has a learning 
deficiency." They say that rather than say, "We as a 
system have a teaching deficiency." As I said, it is the only 
business that blames the customers for its own failures. 
Years ago my real dad realized that it was a system that 
had tremendous flaws in it. He became very disturbed 
when he found out that the educational system used by 
most English-speaking countries is an educational system 
that originated hundreds of years ago in Prussia. He 
became deeply disturbed once he realized that he was part 
of a system that was not designed to educate kids, but to 
create good soldiers and employees. One day he said to 
me, "The reason we have words like 'kindergarten' in our 
school system is that our system originated in Prussia 
several hundred years ago. Kinder  is a Prussian word that 
means 'children,' and garten  means 'garden.' In other Page 78 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwords, a garden of children for the state to educate, or 
'indoctrinate.' It was a system that was designed to take 
the responsibility of education away from the parent and 
educate children who would best serve the wants and 
needs of the state." 
Where the Word Elementary Comes From  
My smart dad also said, "The reason the early years of 
school are called 'elementary' is that we as educators took 
the subject of interest  out of learning and broke it into 
elements. When you take the subject of interest out of the 
process of learning, education becomes boring." He went 
on to explain himself: "For example, if a child is interested 
in houses, the subject of the house is removed and broken 
into elements, such as math, science, writing, and art. So 
the students who do well in school are students who are 
interested in math as a subject, or writing as a subject, or 
science as a subject. But the student who is interested in 
the bigger subject, in this case the subject of a house, is 
often bored. His or her subject of interest has been 
removed, and the elements that make up the subject are 
all that is left to study. That is where the term elementary 
school  or elementary education  comes from, and that is 
why so many students find school boring. The subject of 
interest has been removed." 
I think that these are several reasons home schooling 
and the number of private schools are increasing. They 
are taking back the power of education from the state and 
giving the power of education back to the parent and 
child. 
From Samurai to Doctors to Teachers  
My father's side of the family was of the warrior class, 
or the samurai class, during the feudal system in Japan. 
But soon after trade with the West was opened by 
Commodore Perry, the feudal system began to erode. My 
father's side of the family began giving up the ways of the 
samurai and became medical doctors instead. My father's 
father was supposed to become a doctor, but he ran away 
to Hawaii instead, so he broke the chain. Although my 
grandfather was not a medical doctor, it was expected that 
my dad would go to medical school, but he too broke the 
chain. 
When I asked my dad why he did not become a doctor, 
he said, "While I was in high school, I began to wonder 
why so many of my classmates were suddenly missing 
from school. One day my friend would be there, and the Page 79 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comnext day he would be gone. I became curious and 
began to ask questions of the school administrators. I 
soon found out that the sugar and pineapple plantations 
had a requirement that the school system fail a minimum 
of 20 percent of the children of immigrants from Asia. It 
was the plantations' way of insuring they had a steady 
stream of uneducated manual laborers. My blood boiled 
when I found that out, and it was then that I decided to 
enter the field of education rather than medicine. I 
wanted to insure the system gave each and every child a 
chance for a good education. I was willing to fight big 
business and the government in order to insure that each 
child had the best education possible." 
My dad fought to change the system all his life and was 
ultimately beaten in his attempt to change it. Near the end 
of his life he was recognized as one of the top two 
educators in Hawaii's 150-year history of public 
education. Although he was recognized for his courage by 
the people in the system, the system for the most part 
remains the same. As I said, it is a system designed for 
survival rather than change. That is not to say that the 
system has not done a good job for many people. It has 
done an excellent job for about 30 percent of the people 
who do well within the system. The problem is, the 
current system was created hundreds of years ago during 
the Agrarian Age, a time before cars, airplanes, radio, 
television, computers, and the Internet. It is a system that 
has failed to keep up with technological as well as 
sociological changes. It is a system that is stronger than a 
dinosaur and as tough as an alligator. That was why my 
dad was diligent in guiding our education at home, often 
saying to his kids, "Good grades are not as important as 
finding your genius." In other words, every child learns 
differently. It is up to the parent to be diligent in 
observing the ways in which each child learns best—and 
then support that child in developing his or her own 
winning formula for learning. 
Whenever I see babies, I see young geniuses excited 
about learning. A few years later I sometimes see those 
same young geniuses bored in school, wondering why 
they are being forced to study things they may find 
irrelevant. Many students report feeling insulted because 
they are graded on those same subjects they have no 
interest in and then end up being labeled smart or not so 
smart. One young man said to me, "It's not that I am not 
smart. I'm just not interested. First tell me why I should Page 80 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combe interested in the subject and how I can use it, then 
maybe I will study it." 
The problem is more than bad grades. My smart dad 
recognized, of course, that grades can affect a student's 
future positively or negatively, but he was equally 
concerned with the effect bad grades can have on a 
student's self-perception and self-confidence. He often 
said, "Many kids enter school excited about learning but 
soon leave, having learned only to hate school." His advice 
was, "If a parent has one of these children who is learning 
to hate school, a parent's most important job at this stage 
of a child's life is not to make sure the child gets good 
grades: The parent's most important job is to make sure 
that the child preserves his or her God-given love of 
learning. Find out your children's natural genius, find out 
what they are interested in learning, and keep them 
excited about learning, even if it is not in school." 
The reality is the child will have to learn much more 
than we ever did. If they do not, they fall behind in the 
next two winning formulas, which are covered in the next 
chapter. That is why in my opinion, developing your 
children's winning learning formula at home is far more 
important than the grades they will receive at school. As 
both my smart dad and my rich dad said, "Your real 
education begins when you leave school and enter the real 
world." 
Chapter 6: Will Your Child Be 
Obsolete by Thirty? 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
When I was a boy, my parents' assumption was that I 
would graduate from school, get a job, be a loyal 
employee, work my way up the corporate ladder, and stay 
there till I retired. After I retired I would receive the gold 
watch and play golf at some retirement community and 
drive my golf cart off into the sunset. 
The Older You Get, the Less Valuable You 
Become  
The idea of one job for life is an Industrial Age idea. 
Since 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down and the 
World Wide Web went up, the world and rules of 
employment have changed. One of the rules that has 
changed is The older you get, the more valuable you 
become" (to the business). That may have been true in the Page 81 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comIndustrial Age, but the rules are exactly opposite today 
For many people in the Information Age, the older you 
get, the less valuable you become. 
That is why a child's winning learning  formula needs 
to be in place just to keep up with the changes that are 
coming. A child's winning learning formula must be a ^ 
ell-rehearsed learning formula just to keep up with the 
changes in his or her winning professional  formulas. In 
other words, the chances are your child will probably be 
obsolete by thirty and need to learn a new professional 
formula just to keep up with professional changes 
demanded by the marketplace. Saying it another way, if 
your child has the old idea of one profession for life and is 
not prepared to learn and change quickly, the chances are 
your child will fall further behind with each passing year. 
The Best Grades Don't Count  
The future does not belong to the child who leaves 
school with the best grades. It belongs to the child with 
the best winning formula for learning and the freshest 
technical ideas. More important than learning how to take 
tests for good grades, a child needs to learn how to learn; 
learn how to change; and learn how to adapt faster than 
his or her classmates. Why? Because many of the skills 
employers and business will pay big money for in the 
future are not taught in school today. Just look at today's 
business climate. The people most in demand are people 
who understand the Web, a subject not taught in school 
only a few years ago. The people who are least in demand 
are people of my generation, who want large salaries but 
are out of touch with the Information Age. 
Shortage of Workers  
It seems strange to be talking about people becoming 
obsolete when there is a shortage of workers. I have 
friends who are not worried saying to me, "So what if I am 
older and have limited computer skills? There are plenty 
of jobs, and I can name my price wherever I want to 
work." 
We have a shortage of workers simply because we are 
in a boom economy. There are literally billions of dollars 
betting on companies that will not be in business in a few 
years. When many of these flimsy new-technology 
companies begin to fold because they are out of money, 
the market will again be flooded with workers. And when 
companies begin to close, other businesses also begin to 
close.  Page 82 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comBooms and Busts  
To best understand this boom we are in and the 
shortage of jobs, it is best to look a few years back at other 
booms and busts. 
1. In 1900 there were 485 carmakers. By 1908 only half 
remained. Today only 3 of the 485 are technically 
standing. 
2. In 1983 there were approximately forty computer 
manufacturers in America. Today there are four. 
3. In 1983 Burroughs, Coleco, Commodore, and Zenith 
were among the leaders in emerging computer 
technology. Today many young people working in the 
computer industry have never heard of these companies. 
4. The Internet start-ups are currently pushing a lot of 
money into the market. But what happens when they fail 
to become profitable and eventually run out of money? 
Will we continue to have a shortage of workers and too 
many high-paying jobs? 
5. Technology will skip continents. Almost every 
country I travel to today has an area it calls "Silicon 
Valley." Your child's competitors for a job may not even 
be competing for a job in this country—and they will 
definitely not be asking for the same salary. 
At What Age Are You Too Old?  
While in Australia recently, my friend Kelly Richie 
handed me a copy of his local newspaper, the West 
Australian . "Here," Kelly said. "This article summarizes 
what you have been trying to say to people for years about 
knowing at what age you are too old. It verifies that how 
old you are is now relative to your profession." Across the 
page of the April 8, 2000, issue of the paper ran the 
headline ARE YOU PAST IT? The color edition had 
pictures of a young graphic designer, a gymnast, a lawyer, 
and a model. Under the photo of each of these people 
representing different professions was a black caption 
box: 
1. Graphic Designer use by date: 30 years 
2. Gymnast use by date: 14 years 
3. Lawyer use by date: 35 years 
4. Model use by date: 25 years 
In other words, in these professions, when you reach 
these ages, you are too old. The article began with a story 
of a model who is not a supermodel yet makes $2,000 a Page 83 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comweek. By age twenty -eight she is out of work. As the 
article further explained: 
Many careers have trip wires that can derail a career at 
20, 25, 30, or 40—wherever it is placed, it usually comes 
long before retirement age. They can be physical: models' 
looks fading, sporty types whose bodies won't do what 
they used to. They can be mental: the mathematician who 
makes more errors more often; the advertising or design 
wunderkind whose ideas are no longer quite on the 
money. They can be stamina-related: investment bankers 
and lawyers, exhausted, divorced, burnt out (or all three) 
by 40. It doesn't mean you'll never work in the industry 
again, but the opportunity to reach the top will have 
passed. You will become an also-ran. 
The article continued: 
The days when you began a career at 20 and beavered 
away for years, slowly rising on each rung until you finally 
landed somewhere near the top at age 55, are long gone. 
Today's truth is that if you haven't made it by 40, you 
never will. And in some industries, you'll know by 20 or 
25 whether you need to start thinking of a fresh start in 
the bush with a lawn mowing business. Country towns are 
filled with old graphic designers doing a bit of painting, or 
a bit of pottery, or even running a local bakery… 
The manager of the careers unit at the University of 
Melbourne, Di Rachinger, says this modern trend for 
careers to peak and decline by 40 means people should 
always be working towards their next career and devoting 
some time to retraining or networking towards the new 
career. She says some professions, including graphic 
design, are seen as young and cutting edge, which 
necessarily excludes the over 40s. 
And what happens to these older workers? The article 
had this to say: 
But in these edgy, up-with-the-pace industries, the foot 
soldiers tend to be like Melissa: young, ambitious, and 
willing to work 12-hour days. 
The best of the older workers tend to be pushed 
onwards and upwards into management. The rest tend to 
be pushed out. And crippling old foot soldiers is 
surprisingly easy. Last September, a national computing 
firm advertised for a programming troubleshooter to join 
them. Naturally all applications were beautifully finished 
with all the would -bes bringing every ounce of their Page 84 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwhizzy desktop skills to their applications.  
And, of course, they could all do the job, given half the 
chance. So how did the interviewers start to sort the 
wheat from the chaff? 
Simple. "We just looked at the birth date of the 
applicants and divided them into the over-35's and the 
under-35's," our insider reports. "And chucked the over-
35's in the reject pile. It's illegal, but doesn't it have a 
certain Darwinian simplicity?" 
Survival of the fittest, failure of the oldest. 
My Smart Dad's Trip Wire  
For those who have read my previous books, you may 
already know how sensitive I am to the idea of a career 
"trip wire," as expressed in this article. For those who 
have not read my previous books, my smart dad, the head 
of education, hit his trip wire at the age of fifty. Here was 
a man with a good education, honest, hardworking, and 
dedicated to improving the educational system of the 
state of Hawaii. But at the age of fifty he was left out in the 
cold without a job and no real survival skills for life 
outside the walls of education. Although a great student in 
school, with a great learning formula, his winning 
learning formula  was not able to reeducate him to survive 
in the real world when his winning professional formula  
failed. 
Working Hard in a Dead-End Job  
My friend Kelly Richie gave me the ARE YOU PAST 
IT? story from the West Australian  newspaper because 
for years I have been saying to my classes, "Most people 
follow their parents' advice of 'Go to school, get good 
grades, and get a safe, secure job.' That is an old idea. It is 
an Industrial Age idea. And the problem is, most people 
who follow that advice wind up in a deadend job. They 
may have had good grades, and they have found a safe, 
secure job, they may earn a lot of money, but the problem 
is, the job does not come with a ladder." 
There are people who are working, still earning a good 
income, but their minds and bodies are tired, many are 
burned out… and there is no ladder to get out and over 
the top. Somewhere along the way they tripped the trip 
wire and did not know it. While they still may have their 
jobs, or they still have their business, nonetheless 
somewhere along the way, the ladder to the top 
disappeared. I have many friends who did well in school, Page 85 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwent to graduate school, and attained some degree of 
success by forty, but then the professional magic stopped 
and the downhill slide began. In these cases, I believe the 
winning professional formula  stopped working because 
the winning learning formula  stopped also. In other 
words, my friends are using the same winning learning 
formula, and that formula is stopping the magic 
professionally. 
Rich by Forty and Broke by Forty-Seven  
I have a classmate who did very well in high school. He 
went to a prestigious Ivy League school on the East Coast 
and then returned to Hawaii. Immediately he joined his 
dad's country club, married a girl whose father is a 
member of the same club, and had kids, and now his kids 
go to the same private school he went to. 
After working a few years, gaining a little work 
experience, and playing golf with the right people, he was 
involved in some very large real estate transactions. His 
smiling face was on the cover of the local business 
magazines, and he was hailed as one of the next 
generation's rising business leaders. Before the age of 
forty he was set for life. In the late 1980s the real estate 
market in Hawaii went bad when the Japanese pulled 
their investment money out of the state, and he lost most 
of his fortune. He and his wife split up because he was 
having an affair, and now he supports two households. He 
was broke by age forty-seven, with massive bills to pay. 
I saw him just a few months ago. He has just turned 
fifty and has recovered from most of his losses and even 
has a new girlfriend. But as much as he says things are 
fine and he is doing well, I can see the fire is gone. 
Something has changed inside, and he is working harder 
than ever just to maintain his image from years past. He 
seems more cynical and edgy. 
One night over dinner, his girlfriend was telling us 
about the new Internet business she was starting up. She 
was very excited, and it seemed the business was doing 
very well and receiving orders from all over the world. 
Suddenly my friend snapped. It seemed he had too many 
drinks, and the pressure from the inside was cracking his 
cool exterior. Obviously annoyed at his girlfriend's 
newfound success, or his lack of success, he said, "How 
can you do well? You didn't go to the right college, and 
you don't have a master's degree. Besides, you don't know 
the right people like I do."  Page 86 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comAs Kim and I drove home that night, she commented 
on his sudden loss of temper. "It seems he is trying to 
make his old formula for success work, and it doesn't 
seem to be working." 
I nodded and reflected on what the Australian 
newspaper had said about tripping a trip wire. I thought 
about the young person saying that he divided the stack of 
resumes by those applicants older than thirty-five and 
those younger than thirty-five. I thought about Adrian, 
the friend who was downsized, bought a travel agency 
franchise, and was now in law school, expecting to 
graduate at age fifty-seven. And I thought of my smart 
dad, a man who truly believed in the power of a good 
education, although his good education did not save him 
in the end. Finally coming out of my private thoughts, I 
said to Kim, "Sounds like old economy ideas versus new 
economy ideas." 
"You can tell that she has new economy ideas and he 
has old economy ideas?" Kim asked. 
I nodded. "We can even leave off the word economy . 
Just say that she has new ideas, and he is still operating 
on ideas he developed in high school. They're only a few 
years apart, but her ideas are new… not original, but for 
her they are new, refreshing, and exciting, so she seems 
new and refreshing. His ideas are not new, not original, 
and he has held on to them for forty years, since we were 
kids." 
"So people don't become obsolete. Their ideas can 
become obsolete." 
"Yeah. Sure seems that way. Their ideas, but more 
specifically their winning formula becomes obsolete," I 
replied. "He gets up and goes to work, but instead of being 
the new wonder kid in town, the new mover and shaker 
with the new ideas, he is now the old guy with the old 
ideas, and he is only fifty years old. The trouble is, he was 
old and obsolete ten years ago, and he didn't know it. He 
is still operating with the same old winning formulas, and 
the trouble is that he is not willing to change his formula. 
Today he is going around town with his resume in hand, 
competing for a job with kids his kids' age." 
"So the advice of 'Go to school, get good grades, get a 
good job' was good advice when he was a kid," Kim said, 
"but it is bad advice for him as an adult." 
"And the trouble is, he is trapped by his winning Page 87 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comformula and doesn't know it," I added softly. "He does 
not realize that his good advice in the past is bad advice in 
the present, so his future is bleak." 
"Trapped and doesn't know it?" asked Kim. 
"That happened to my dad at age fifty. The advice of 
'Go to school and get a job' was good advice for him as a 
kid. It was a great formula. He got the good grades, he got 
the great job, and he did rise to the top. But then the 
formula stopped working and his downhill slide began." 
"And  he kept using the same formula," said Kim. 
"Not only did he continue to use it… the less it worked 
for him, the more insecure he got, the more  he told other 
people to follow his advice— his formula—even though it 
was not working for him." 
"The less it worked for him, the more he told others to 
follow his advice?" Kim said quietly, more to herself. 
"I think he is stuck in two places," I said. "He is stuck 
in what is not working, and he is frustrated and tired… yet 
he continues on. And he is stuck in the past, a time in his 
life when the formula did work. And because it worked in 
the past, he wants to reassure himself that he is doing the 
right thing today." 
"So he tells everyone else to do what he did," Kim said. 
"Even though it stopped working." 
"I think he says it because that is all he knows about 
what worked for him. He has not yet figured out what isn't 
working." 
"The moment he figures that out, he will tell everyone 
else what he did do," said Kim. "He might become the 
evangelist for the new way of doing things. When he finds 
it, he'll go around shouting, 'I found the way! I found the 
way!' But until then, he will preach about the old way 
until he finds the new winning formula for his life." 
"If he finds it," I replied. "When you graduate from 
school, no one hands you a roadmap to success. Once the 
trail disappears, many of us wind up hacking our way 
through the jungle, hoping to find the trail again. Some 
find it again, and some don't. And when you don't find the 
new trail, you often sit and think about the old trail. That 
is real life." 
High School Heroes  
Earlier I mentioned Al Bundy, the character in the 
television sitcom Married with Children . Al Bundy is a Page 88 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtragic comic characterization of someone who was a 
hero in high school but did not change his formula. In the 
show, Al stands in his shoe store reminiscing about the 
day he scored four touch downs and won the game for his 
high school. Someday we may all become like Al Bundy, 
sitting in our rocking chair, looking back upon the times 
when life was magic. But problems arise when you're not 
ready to look back—and you still want to accomplish 
something more with your life. Problems arise when you 
live in the present trying to recapture the joys of the past. 
People who cannot stop when they should stop are often 
like old prizefighters who enter the ring and get pounded 
by a younger opponent. They fight on with an old winning 
formula, just so the old fighter can relive the memories of 
days gone by. 
Many people may have done well in school or in their 
last job, but something has stopped working for them. 
High school reunions are great places to see the football 
star who never went any further… or the academic star 
who never went any further. You meet them again after 
ten, twenty, or thirty years, and you know the magic is 
gone. For them, if they are unhappy, it might be time to 
change an old winning professional  formula and to 
recognize that they may need to change their old winning 
learning  formula. And today it is important to let your 
children know that change is part of their future. In fact, it 
might be important to let your children know that their 
ability to change and learn quickly is probably more 
important than what they are learning in school today. 
Ideas for Parents  
A couple of years ago I saw a television program where 
mothers were taking their daughters to work to show their 
daughters what they did. The TV commentator just 
gushed at the idea, saying, "This is a bold new idea—
mothers teaching their daughters to be the good 
employees of the future." 
All I could say to myself was, What an old idea. 
When I talk to young adults today, I often ask them 
whose winning formula they are operating with. Is it their 
formula or their parents' formula? 
When I was a kid in the 1960s, most parents were 
saying to their kids, with panicked tones in their voices, 
"Get a good education so you can get a good job." The 
reason for the panic was that many parents grew up in the 
Great Depression, a period when there were no jobs. For Page 89 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commany people of my parents' era —generally those born 
between 1900 and 1935—their emotional fears, the fear of 
unemployment and the fear of not having enough money, 
greatly affected their thoughts, words, and actions. 
If you take a look around today, there are "Help 
Wanted'' signs everywhere. Employers are desperately 
looking for anyone who can read and write, is pleasant, 
can smile, and is trainable. While technical skills are 
important, the fact remains that there are many other 
attributes that mean more to an employer than technical 
skills. Although there are plenty of jobs around, I continue 
to hear young people repeating to their kids the same 
words, with the same emotional panic, their parents said 
to them: "Get a good education so you can get a good job." 
When I hear someone say, "But you've got to have a 
job," I say, "Take it easy. Calm down. Take a break. Take a 
look around. There are plenty of jobs. The Depression is 
over. Capitalism won. It saved the world. Communism is 
dead. The Internet is up and running. And stop handing 
down advice based upon ancient history. Today, if you 
want a safe, secure job you can find a job. So take a 
moment to stop and think." 
Some people calm down, but many don't. Most people 
I meet are absolutely terrified of not having a job, not 
having money coming into the house, and most people 
cannot think rationally because of old fears handed down 
from parent to child. 
One of the most important things a parent can do is 
stop, think, and look into the future, rather than hand out 
advice based upon events from the past. As I said, the 
Depression is over. 
Many kids are dropping out of school or are not taking 
their education seriously because the threat of not being 
able to get a safe, secure job as a reason for going to 
school is not working anymore. The kids in school know 
they can get a job. The kids in school can see that the big 
dollars aren't paid to academic stars anymore. The kids 
know that the people who make the most money are 
people who are stars in sports, music, or movies. The kids 
today watch Al Bundy on TV and know he got a job. They 
also see their parents go off to work, work hard, not come 
home, and hire nannies, and the kids then say, "Is that 
what I am going to go to school to eventually do? Is that 
what I want for my life? Do I want to do this to my kids?" 
I Had to Stop Doing What I Was Good At  Page 90 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWhen I retired in 1994 at the age of forty-seven, the 
question "What will I do for the rest of my life" weighed 
heavily on my mind. Instead of resting for a year, I 
decided to do what people call "reinvent" myself. That 
meant I needed to change my winning learning formula 
and my winning professional formula. If I didn't, I would 
have been like the aging prizefighter who gets back in the 
ring after a year off. By reinventing myself, I had to stop 
doing what I was good at and enjoyed doing. This meant I 
had to stop teaching business and investing seminars. In 
order to reinvent myself, I had to start learning something 
I needed to learn, in order to change the way I did things. 
To do that, I created a board game to teach what I used to 
teach, and I had to learn to write, a subject I had failed at 
twice in high school. Today I am better known as a writer 
than in any other profession I have had in the past. If not 
for having a winning learning, professional, and financial 
formula, I would not have had the luxury of moving on 
with my life. If I had not moved on, I would have been 
obsolete at forty-seven… spending my life reminiscing 
about the good old days and the success of my past. 
What Has Job Security Done to Family Life?  
Parents today need to be smarter because their kids are 
smarter. Parents need to look beyond school and beyond 
job security because kids can see that far ahead. They can 
see what job security has done to their family life. They 
can see that their parents have a job but may not have a 
life. That is not the future many kids want. And to be a 
successful parent with a successful relationship with your 
child, a parent must look into the crystal ball—but not 
their crystal ball. A parent today must constantly be 
looking into their child's crystal ball. A parent today must 
share the child's vision of the future rather than force the 
child to see the parent's vision of the future, a vision that 
is often based on the past. 
I stated earlier in this book that many arguments 
between parent and child are clashes between the winning 
formula of the parent and the winning formula of the 
child—for example, a parent saying, "You must go to 
school," and the child saying, "I am going to drop out." 
That is an example of a clash of winning formulas. To 
have a successful relationship, parents must do their best 
to see what the child sees, for obviously the child sees 
something, and a good education may not be a part of the 
vision. At this point, I am not saying parents should cave Page 91 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comin and let the child do whatever he or she wants to do. 
All I am saying is that parents need to look beyond the 
clash of winning formulas and do their best to find out 
what vision is in their child's head. I know it may not be 
easy, but I think it is better than fighting. 
Once a parent sees what the child sees and where the 
child wants to go, there may be a chance of 
communication and hopefully some guidance. This is 
crucial, because the moment a parent says to a child, "I 
don't want you to do that," the child is going to do it or 
already has done it. Sharing a vision and minimizing the 
clashes of winning formulas is vital for long-term 
guidance. 
Once good communication is in place, I would 
recommend that parents begin sharing with their children 
that they will most likely have many professions in their 
lifetime, rather than one job for a lifetime. And if a child 
can grasp that idea, he or she may then have an increased 
respect for education. If a child can gain an increased 
respect for education and lifelong learning, it may become 
a little easier to communicate why the idea of developing 
a personal winning learning  formula and why staying in 
school is so important. I think it is important because I 
don't think any parent wants their children stuck in a 
dead-end job, becoming less valuable the older they get. 
A COMPARISON OF IDEAS 
In summary, you and your child will have more options 
than your parents ever had. The above-listed Industrial 
Age choices are not better than or worse than the listed Industrial Age Information Age 
Free agent, virtual companies Seniority Paid for results 
One job Many professions 
Work until sixty-five Retire early 
Punch a time clock Work when interested in working 
Schools Seminars 
Degrees and credentials Core talents 
Old knowledge New ideas 
Company retirement plan Self-directed portfolio 
Government retirement plan Don't need it 
Government medical plan Don't need it 
Work at company Work at home Page 92 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comInformation Age choices. The point is that today there 
are more choices, and kids know it. The challenge today is 
for our school system and parents to prepare our children 
to have the learning skills so they can have as many 
choices as possible. I don't think any parent wants his or 
her child stuck in a shoe store because the child followed 
the parent's advice of "Go to school so you can get a job." 
Today children need to be better educated than that. 
A Final Note  
I teach adults. When I say to them that it is the advice 
of "Go to school and get a job" that is trapping them, 
many hands go up and ask for further clarification. Many 
do understand that it was good advice as a kid but bad 
advice as an adult… but now they want to know more. 
In one of my classes where this discussion took place, a 
participant asked, "But how does having a good job trap 
you?" 
"Good question," I said. "It's not the job that traps you. 
It's the tag line that is added to the statement to 'Go to 
school to get a job' that traps you." 
"Tag line?" asked the participant. "What tag line?" 
"The tag line that goes, 'Play it safe and don't make 
mistakes.'" 
Chapter 7: Will Your Child Be 
Able to Retire Before Thirty? 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
One day I asked my rich dad why he was so rich. His 
reply was, "Because I retired early. If you don't have to go 
to work, you have a lot of time to become rich." 
Through the Looking Glass  
In the earlier chapter on homework, my rich dad said, 
"You don't get rich at work, you get rich at home. That is 
why you must do your homework." Rich dad did his 
homework by teaching me the formula for great wealth by 
playing the game of Monopoly. Taking the time to play the 
game with his son and me, he was doing his best to take 
our minds into a world that very few people see. 
Somewhere between the ages of nine and fifteen I crossed 
over mentally from the world of my poor dad into the 
world of my rich dad. It was the same world everyone 
could see; it was just that the perception was different. I 
could see things I had never seen before.  Page 93 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comIn Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland , Alice goes 
through the looking glass into a different world. Rich dad 
took me through his looking glass via the game of 
Monopoly and let me see the world through his eyes… 
from his perspective. Instead of saying to me, "Go to 
school, get good grades, and find a safe, secure job," he 
kept encouraging me to change my mind and think 
differently. He kept saying, "Buy four green houses, sell 
them, and then buy one red hotel. That is the formula that 
will make you a rich man when you grow up." I did not 
know what he wanted me to see, but I knew he wanted me 
to know something he could sense that I did not see at 
that moment. 
Being a kid, I did not understand what he was trying to 
do. I just knew that he thought that buying four green 
houses, selling them, and then buying one red hotel was a 
very important idea. Through constantly playing the game 
with my rich dad, treating it as something important 
rather than just a silly kid's game, I began to change my 
thinking. I began to see things differently. Then one day, 
while we were visiting his banker, my mind made the 
transition. For a moment I could see into my rich dad's 
mind and see the world my rich dad saw. I was going 
through the looking glass. 
A Change in Self-Perception  
The mental change came when I sat in on a meeting 
rich dad had with his banker and his real estate agent. 
They discussed a few details, signed some documents, 
rich dad handed the banker a check, and then he took 
possession of some keys from the real estate agent. It 
dawned on me that he had just bought another green 
house. Getting in his car, the banker, the real estate agent, 
rich dad, Mike, and I drove over to the property to inspect 
his new green house. As we drove, I was beginning to 
realize that I was actually seeing in real life what I was 
doing on the game board of Monopoly. Getting out of the 
car, I watched rich dad walk up the steps, put the key in 
the door, turn the key, push the door open, step inside, 
and say, "It's mine." 
As I said, I learn best by seeing, touching, feeling, and 
doing. I don't do well by sitting, listening, reading, and 
taking tests on paper. When I understood the tangible 
relationship between the game, the little green house, and 
the house he had just bought, my mind changed and my 
world changed because my perception of myself was Page 94 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comchanging. I was no longer a poor kid who came from a 
family that was having financial difficulties. I was 
becoming a rich kid. My perception of myself was 
changing. I was no longer hoping to be rich. In my soul I 
was beginning to know with certainty I was rich. I was 
rich because I was beginning to see the world through my 
rich dad's eyes. 
When I saw him write a check, sign some papers, and 
take the keys, I got the relationship between the game, the 
deeds, and the little green house. I 
said to myself, I can do this. This is not hard. I don't 
have to be that smart to be rich. I don't even need good 
grades. It felt as if I were going through the looking glass 
and entering another world. But entering this world also 
caused some problems with the world I was leaving 
behind. I had found my winning formula. It was a formula 
that would require a winning learning, professional, and 
financial formula. It was the formula I would follow for 
the rest of my life. At that moment I knew I was going to 
be rich. I had no doubts. I understood the game of 
Monopoly. I liked the game of Monopoly. I saw my rich 
dad play the game with real money, and if he could do it, I 
knew I could do it, too. 
Back and Forth Between Two Worlds  
Mentally I was going back and forth through the 
looking glass. The problem was, the world I was entering, 
the world of my rich dad, seemed to make sense. The 
world I was leaving seemed to be the world that seemed 
insane. The world I returned to on school days seemed 
like the world of the Mad Hatter, the marching cards, and 
the Cheshire cat. On Mondays the teacher would ask us to 
hand in our homework. She would then hand out more 
assignments and ask us to study things I really could not 
see, touch, or feel. I was asked to study subjects that I 
knew I would never use. I would solve complex math 
problems and know that I would probably never need to 
use such complex math formulas in real life. I saw how 
much math my rich dad used to buy his green house, and 
he did not use any algebra formulas to buy it. Simple 
addition and subtraction were all it took. I knew that 
buying those four green houses was not that hard. Once I 
had the four green houses to sell, buying the one red hotel 
seemed easy, even logical—but it made sense only if you 
really wanted to get rich and have more free time. One 
large hotel made more money with less effort. I was Page 95 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comconfused, because each time I went through the 
looking glass one side definitely looked much saner to me 
than the other. 
I never understood why we studied subjects that we 
knew we would never use… or at least were never told 
how to use. And then to have to take tests on those same 
subjects in which I was not interested, and to be labeled 
smart or stupid depending on how I did on those tests, 
really seemed like Alice's Wonderland to me. 
Why Am I Studying These Subjects?  
One day I decided to ask the question that had been 
puzzling me for years. I finally worked up enough courage 
and asked my teacher, "Why am I studying and taking 
tests on subjects I am not interested in and will never 
use?" 
Her reply was, "Because if you don't get good grades, 
you won't get a good job." 
It was the same reply I heard from my real dad. It 
sounded like an echo. The problem was that the reply did 
not make much sense. What did studying subjects I was 
not interested in and would not use have to do with 
getting a job? Now that I had found my winning formula 
for life, the idea of going to school and studying subjects I 
would not use to get a job, a job I now did not plan on 
getting, made even less sense. After thinking about it for a 
while, I replied, "But what if I don't want a job?" 
With that I was soundly told to "sit down and get back 
to your schoolwork." 
School Is Important  
I am not suggesting that you take your child out of 
school and buy a game of Monopoly. A sound education is 
very important. School teaches basic scholastic and 
learning skills, and then it teaches professional skills. 
Although I do not agree entirely with how the system 
teaches or what it teaches, going to school and getting 
through college or trade school is still basic to most 
success in life today. 
The problem is, school does not teach basic financial 
skills, and because it does not teach those skills, many 
kids leave school without a winning financial formula. In 
fact, many leave with a losing  financial formula. Many 
young people today leave school with credit card debt and 
debt from school loans. Many never get out of debt. Many 
leave school and begin buying cars, homes, boats, and so Page 96 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comon. Many will die and pass that debt on to their kids. In 
other words, they may leave school well educated, but 
they also leave school without one very important 
formula—the winning financial  formula for their life. 
Both Dads Were Concerned  
My schoolteacher dad realized that something was 
missing from education, but he never really identified 
what was missing. 
My rich dad knew what was missing. He knew that 
schools did not teach much, if anything, about money. He 
knew the lack of a winning financial formula kept many 
people working hard, clinging to job security, and never 
getting ahead financially. When I told him my dad's story 
of the plantations using the school system to insure a 
steady stream of workers, all he said in a quiet voice was, 
"Not much has changed." He knew that people held on to 
a job and worked hard simply because they had to. He 
knew he would always have a steady stream of workers. 
He too was concerned about the financial welfare of 
those who worked for him. It bothered him to see people 
work hard for him only to go home and get further in 
debt. As he said, "You don't get rich at work. You get rich 
at home. That is why you must do your homework." He 
also knew that most of his workers did not have the basic 
financial education to do their financial homework, and 
that was what concerned and saddened him. 
Rich Dad's Way of Teaching  
I learned so much from my rich dad because he had a 
unique way of teaching, a way of teaching that worked 
best for me. 
Once more I refer to the story from Rich Dad Poor Dad  
where rich dad paid me ten cents an hour after he 
promised to teach me how to become rich. I worked for 
him for three Saturdays for three hours, making a grand 
total of thirty cents each day. Finally very upset, I went to 
his office and told him that he was taking advantage of 
me. Shaking and crying, I stood in front of his desk, a 
nine-year-old boy demanding that he keep his end of the 
bargain. 
"You promised to teach me how to be rich. I've now 
worked for you for three weeks, and I've not seen you at 
all. You don't come and watch me work, much less teach 
me anything. I get paid thirty cents, and that is not going 
to make me rich. When are you going to teach me Page 97 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comsomething?"  
Rich dad rocked back in his chair, looking over his 
desk at a very upset nine-year-old boy. After a very long 
minute of deathly silence, he smiled and said, "I am 
teaching you something. I am teaching you the most 
valuable lesson you can learn if you want to be rich. Most 
people work all their lives and never learn the lesson you 
are learning, if you learn it." He went silent, rocked in his 
chair, and continued to look back at me as I stood 
shaking, letting his words sink in. 
"What do you mean, 'If I learn it?' If I learn what? 
What am I supposed to be learning that other people 
never learn?" I said, rubbing my nose on the sleeve of my 
T-shirt. I was calming down, yet it upset me to hear him 
saying to me that he was teaching me something. I had 
not seen him since I had agreed to work for him, and now 
he was telling me that he was teaching me something. 
Over the years I would realize how important that 
lesson was—that most people do not get rich by working 
hard for money and job security. Once I understood the 
distinction between my working for money and having 
money work for me, I became a little more intelligent. I 
realized that schools teach us to work for money, and if I 
wanted to be rich, I needed to learn how to have money 
work for me. A small distinction, but it changed my 
choices in education and what I chose to spend my time 
studying. As stated earlier, intelligence is the ability to 
make finer distinctions. And the distinction that I needed 
to learn was how to have money work for me if I wanted 
to be rich. While my classmates were studying hard to get 
a job, I was studying hard to not need a job. 
I realized what rich dad meant when he said, "Most 
people never learn the lesson." Rich dad would later 
explain to me that most people go to work, collect their 
paycheck, go to work, collect their paycheck, go to work… 
forever… and never learn the lesson he was teaching me. 
He said, "When you asked me to teach you to be rich, I 
thought the best way to teach you this first lesson was to 
simply see how long it would take you to learn that 
working for money will not make you rich. It took you 
only three weeks. Most people work all their lives and 
never get the lesson. Most people come back and ask for a 
raise, and while they may get more money, they rarely get 
the lesson." That's the way rich dad taught his lessons, 
and his style of teaching involved action first, mistakes Page 98 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comsecond, and lessons third. And for those of you who 
read the first book, rich dad then took the ten cents an 
hour away, and I had to work for free. The next lesson had 
begun, but only if I wanted it. 
The Other Side of the Table  
Another lesson that greatly influenced me was the 
lesson I often call "the other side of the table." After that 
first lesson at age nine, rich dad realized that I was serious 
about learning to be rich, and he began inviting me to 
watch him do different things, as he did with taking me to 
watch him buy a rental house. At around the age of ten he 
began inviting me to sit with him while he interviewed 
people for job positions he was filling. I would sit next to 
him, on the other side of the table, as he asked job 
applicants questions about their resumes or about their 
attitude toward working for his companies. It was always 
an interesting process. I saw people with no high school 
education willing to work for less than $1 an hour. 
Although only a kid, I knew that it would be hard to 
support a family on less than $8 a day before taxes. When 
I looked at their resumes or job applications and saw how 
many kids some of these workers had to support, my 
heart grew heavy. I realized that my family was not the 
only one having a tough time financially. I wanted to help 
them as I wanted to help my family, but I still did not 
know how. 
The Value of a Good Education  
Seeing the difference in pay scales was an important 
lesson I got from sitting at my rich dad's side. Seeing the 
difference in pay scale between a worker without a high 
school degree and a worker with a college degree was 
incentive enough for me to stay in school. After that, any 
time I thought about quitting school, the memories of the 
differences in basic pay came back to remind me why a 
good education was important. 
What fascinated me the most, though, was the 
occasional person who had a master's degree or doctorate 
degree who still applied for jobs that paid so little. I did 
not know much, but I knew that rich dad made much 
more money per month, when you included all his 
different sources of income, than these very educated 
individuals. I also knew that rich dad had not graduated 
from high school. While there were pay differences 
between workers with a good education and those who 
had dropped out of high school, I also realized that my Page 99 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comrich dad knew something these college graduates did 
not know. 
After going through this process of sitting on the other 
side of the desk about five times, I finally asked rich dad 
why he had me sit there. His reply was, "I thought you 
would never ask. Why do you think I ask you to just sit 
and watch me interview people?" 
"I don't know," I replied. "I thought you just wanted 
me to keep you company." 
Rich dad laughed. "I would never waste your time like 
that. I promised I would teach you to be rich, and I am 
giving you what you asked for. So what have you learned 
so far?" 
Sitting at the desk next to my rich dad's side in the 
room now empty and without people applying for jobs, I 
sat and pondered his question. "I don't know," I replied. 
"I never thought of this as a lesson." 
Rich dad chuckled and said, "You're learning a very 
important lesson… if you want to be rich. Again, most 
people never get the opportunity to learn the lesson I 
want you to learn, because most people only see the world 
from the other side of the table." Rich dad pointed to the 
empty seat in front of us. "Very few people see it from this 
side of the table. You're seeing the real world—the world 
people see once they leave school. But you have an 
opportunity to see it from this side of the table before you 
leave school." 
"So if I want to be rich, I need to sit on this side of the 
table?" I asked. 
Rich dad shook his head. Slowly and deliberately he 
began, "More than just sit on this side of the table, you 
have to study and learn what it takes to sit on this side of 
the table… and most of the time, those subjects are not 
taught in school. School teaches you to sit on that side of 
the table." 
"It does?" I replied, a little bewildered. "How does it do 
that?" 
"Well, for what reason does your dad say to go to 
school?" rich dad asked. 
"So I can go look for a job," I replied quietly. "And that 
is what these people are looking for. Isn't it?" 
Rich dad nodded and said, "And that is why they sit on 
that side of the table. I'm not saying one side is better Page 100 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthan the other. All I want to point out to you is that 
there is a difference. Most people fail to see the difference. 
That is my lesson for you. All I want to offer you is a 
choice of which side of the table you eventually sit on. If 
you want to be rich at a young age, this side of the table 
gives you a better chance of attaining that goal. If you are 
serious about being rich and not having to work hard all 
your life, I will teach you how to do that. If you want to sit 
on the other side of the table, then follow your dad's 
advice." 
Lessons Learned  
That was an important life-directing lesson. Rich dad 
did not tell me which side to sit on. He offered me a 
choice. I made my own decisions. I chose what I wanted 
to study rather than fight against what I was being 
required to study. And that is how my rich dad taught me 
over the years. It was actions first, mistakes second, 
lessons third. After the lesson, he would give me a choice 
of what I was to do with the lesson I learned. 
You Often Cannot See What Is Right in Front of 
You  
"The other side of the table" lesson included other life-
changing lessons. Intelligence is the ability to make finer 
distinctions, or to multiply by dividing. By sitting at the 
table, I began to make more distinctions, or learn new 
lessons, of watching and learning from what was 
happening in front of me. I sat there for long hours, just 
watching but learning nothing. Once rich dad pointed out 
to me that there were two sides of the table, I could see 
the different worlds that each side came from. I could 
sense a difference in self-perceptions each side required. 
Over the years I realized that the people sitting across the 
table from me were doing only what they were told to do, 
which was go out and look for a job. They were taught in 
school to "get the skills employers are looking for." 
They were not taught to get the skills so they could sit 
on the other side of the table. Because of those early 
instructions, most people spend their lives sitting on the 
other side of the table. How would their lives have been 
different if they had been told, "Get the financial skills so 
you can own the table"? 
People Find What They Are Programmed to 
Look For  
I also learned that people look for different things. Page 101 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comRich dad said to me, "Most people leave school looking 
for a job, and that is why they find a job." He explained to 
me that what you look for in your mind is what you find in 
the real world. He said, "People who go looking for work 
often find work. I don't look for work. I don't look for a 
job. I've trained my mind to look for business 
opportunities and investments. I learned long ago that 
you find only what you train your mind to look for. If you 
want to be rich, you need to educate your brain to look for 
things that make you rich… and a job will not make you 
rich, so don't go looking for one." 
When I say to people that our Western system of 
education came from Prussia, many people just let that 
remark go past them. But when I state that the purpose of 
the Prussian system was to create employees and soldiers, 
many of them take notice and return my words with 
stares of cynical, sometimes hostile, skepticism. The 
people who get the angriest often did the best in that same 
system. When challenged as to the validity of my 
comment, I often ask them this question: "What is one of 
the first things students leave school looking for?" And 
the answer is, "A job." They look for a job because that is 
what they have been programmed to do, and they respond 
like good little soldiers. I say this because Prussia is no 
longer around, but its centuries-old ideas remain. 
We are now in the Information Age, and it's time to 
teach people to look beyond looking for a safe, secure job. 
In the Information Age, we need to be educated beyond 
Just getting the skills employers are looking for . In the 
Information Age, the chances are your children will be 
technically obsolete by age thirty. If that is possible, why 
not give them the financial skills so they can retire before 
they turn thirty? 
You Cannot Change What You Cannot See  
I am not saying that being an employee or being a 
soldier is good or bad, right or wrong. I have been both. I 
simply state that when my schoolteacher dad realized that 
something was wrong with the system, he began to 
change the system. He wanted to find ways to better 
prepare students for the real world. The problem was, he 
was educated by the very system he wanted to change, 
and he could not see what he could not see. My rich dad 
could see with different eyes simply because he was not a 
product of the system. He dropped out of school at the age 
of thirteen because his father died and he had to take over Page 102 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthe family business. At the age of thirteen he learned 
the skills required to sit on the other side of the table. 
I Needed to Learn More to Sit on One Side of 
the Table  
Once I realized that there were two sides to the table, I 
became more interested in educating myself as to what it 
would take to sit on my rich dad's side of the table. It was 
not long before I realized how much I had to study. I 
realized that not only did I have to study subjects in 
school, I also needed to study subjects not taught in 
school. I became much more committed to my education. 
I would need to learn much more than what was taught in 
school if I was to earn the right to sit across from the table 
from those who only went to school. I knew I had to be 
smarter than the smart kids in school if I wanted to sit on 
the other side of the table. I needed to learn more than 
just job skills that employers were looking for. 
Finally I had found something that challenged me, 
gave me a reason to study, something I was interested in 
studying. Between the ages of nine and fifteen, I began my 
real education. I became a lifelong student who knew that 
my education would continue on long after I left school. I 
had also found what my real dad was looking for, that 
which was missing from the educational system—a system 
that was designed to keep a steady flow of workers looking 
for a safe, secure job, but that never taught them what the 
rich, the people who sat on the other side of the table, 
really knew. 
The Learning Pyramid  
Mental  Page 103 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
Spiritual  
Emotional  
When I speak about education and learning, I often use 
this diagram I call "the learning pyramid." It is a synthesis 
of Gardner's seven different geniuses and some of my 
personal experiences as a teacher of entrepreneur-ship 
and investing. Although the pyramid is not based on an 
accurate science, it does provide some useful references 
for discussion. 
I personally learned so much playing the game of 
Monopoly because the game involved me mentally, 
emotionally, and physically. Playing the game caused me 
to think mentally, my emotional state was excitement, 
and I had to do something physically. The game held my 
attention because it involved a lot of me, especially since I 
am a competitive person. 
When I am in a classroom, required to sit still and 
listen to someone speak on a subject I have no interest in 
or understanding of in terms of personal relevance, my 
emotions segue from anger to boredom. Physically I begin 
to squirm, or I try to go to sleep just to escape my mental 
and emotional pain. I don't do well just sitting still, trying 
to take in information mentally, especially if I am not 
interested or the speaker is boring. Could this be the 
reason parents and schools are using more and more 
drugs to keep hyperactive kids still and sitting in their 
seats? The kids are probably physical learners and not 
Page 104 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.cominterested in what they are being asked to learn. So 
when they rebel, is the system drugging them? 
Where spiritual learning comes in, is not necessarily in 
the formal religious sense, although it can come from 
there also. What I mean by spiritual is the feeling we get 
when we go to something like the Special Olympics and 
we see physically challenged kids running or pushing 
their wheelchairs with all their body, mind, and soul. I 
went to a special program a year ago, and the spirit of 
these young people touched the entire audience. I too got 
to my feet and cheered as I watched these young people 
pushing their physically challenged bodies, harder than I 
push my physically able body. Their spirits reached out 
and touched all of our spirits. Those young spirits 
reminded all of us of who we really are and what we are 
really made of. That is the kind of spiritual learning I am 
talking about. 
When I was in Vietnam, I saw young men fight on even 
when they knew they were dying. It was their spirit that 
carried them, giving their lives so their team could live. I 
also witnessed in Vietnam things that I dare not write 
about for fear of sounding too off-the-wall. Nonetheless, 
there were times I witnessed young men do things that 
cannot possibly be explained from the mental, emotional, 
or physical perspective. That is the kind of spiritual power 
I am talking about. 
When you go to a wedding and see two people getting 
married, in my mind it is two physical beings joining 
together before God, spiritually. It is a commitment of two 
souls joining together and going forward into the world. 
Unfortunately, with the divorce rate so high, it seems 
that many people are getting together mentally, 
emotionally, physically, and not spiritually. That is why 
when things get tough they split apart. Anyway, in an 
ideal sense, that is the kind of spiritual education I am 
talking about. I mean no personal offense, nor do I wish 
to impose my personal views on anyone's particular 
religious or spiritual views. I simply speak of a power that 
is beyond our mental, emotional, and physical limits. 
A Change of Perception  
Between the ages of nine and twelve, I remember going 
through a fundamental change with my personal learning 
pyramid. I know I changed my perception of myself 
mentally, emotionally, physically, and spiritually. When I 
saw my rich dad sign the papers, hand over the check, and Page 105 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtake possession of the keys, something inside of me 
changed. When that happened, the relationship between 
the game of Monopoly and real life became real. After 
years of feeling bad about myself because I was not smart, 
at least not as smart as my smart dad and Andy the Ant, I 
changed. I felt good about myself. I knew I could make it 
in life, and I knew I could survive. I knew I would be 
successful in my own way. I knew that I did not need a 
high-paying job or even money to do well financially. I 
had finally seen something that I wanted to be good at, 
and I knew I could do it well. I had found what I wanted 
to study. As I said, something changed spiritually, and I 
felt confident, excited, and good about myself. I had not 
felt this good in school or at home seeing my mom cry as 
she looked at the stack of unpaid bills on the kitchen 
table. A warm feeling filled my heart and then the rest of 
me. I was certain about who I was and who I was going to 
become. I knew I was going to be a rich man. I knew I 
would find a way to help my mom and my dad. I did not 
know how I was going to make it, but I knew I would 
make it. I knew I could be successful at something I really 
wanted to be successful at, rather than try to be successful 
at what someone else said I should be successful at. I had 
found my new identity. 
The Nine-Year Change  
I recently talked to Doug and Heather, a couple who sit 
on the board of a Waldorf school in Alaska. They were the 
friends who introduced me to Rudolph Steiner's work. 
They were the ones who told me of his theories and 
writing on "the nine-year change." When I heard what 
they said, more pieces of the puzzle on learning came 
together. 
When Doug started telling me what the school was 
teaching their child, and why they were teaching what 
they taught, things began to make more sense to me. 
Doug explained that the reason the school had the 
children using hammers, saws, and nails to build little 
shelters was that they wanted them to know they could 
survive in the real world. That is the same reason they 
teach them to garden and grow vegetables, cook, and 
bake. It is physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual 
education. It involves the whole child at this critical 
period of life that Steiner identified as the nine-year 
change. It is the time of life when the child no longer 
wants to be a part of his or her parents' identity and wants Page 106 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comto seek his or her own identity. It is a lonely and often 
frightening time of life. It is a period of uncertainty. The 
child is stepping into the unknown to find out who he or 
she really is, not what his or her parents want him or her 
to be. Learning mentally, physically, emotionally, and 
spiritually that they can survive on their own is vital for 
children's self-perception. 
Now I know that many educators do not agree with 
Steiner's work on the nine-year change, and I am not here 
to change their minds. All I can faithfully relate to you is 
my own experience. I know that at the age of nine I began 
to look for something different. I knew that what my mom 
and dad were doing was not working, and I did not want 
to follow their lead. I still have memories of the fear in our 
house every time money was discussed. I still remember 
my mom and dad arguing about money, and my dad 
saying, "I'm not interested in money. I'm working as hard 
as I can. I don't know what else to do." I wanted to find 
out what else I could do so I did not wind up like my 
parents, financially at least. I know in my heart, more 
than anything else, I wanted to help my mom. It broke my 
heart to see her crying over something as silly as a stack of 
bills. I knew that every time I heard my dad say, "You 
need to study hard so you can get a good job," something 
inside of me rejected his advice. I knew that something 
was missing… and that was why I went looking for new 
answers and my own reality. 
By learning the lessons from my rich dad, and 
physically playing Monopoly over and over again, 
probably fifty times a year, I was changing the way my 
mind worked. I felt I was going through the looking glass 
and beginning to see a world my mom and dad could not 
see, although it was right in front of them. In retrospect, I 
believe they could not see the world my rich dad saw 
because mentally  they were taught to look for a job, 
emotionally  they were taught to look for security, and 
physically  they were taught to work hard. I believe that 
because they had no winning financial formula, spiritually 
their financial self-perception got weaker instead of 
stronger, and the bills just piled up. My dad worked 
harder and harder, got pay raise after pay raise, but never 
really got ahead financially. When his career peaked at 
age fifty, and he was not able to recover from his 
professional downslide and stagnation, I believe his spirit 
was finally broken.  Page 107 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comStudents Leave School Unprepared  
Schools do not teach the survival skills needed for 
today's world. Most students leave school financially 
needy and looking for security… security that cannot be 
found outside. Security is found on the inside. Many 
students leave school unprepared, mentally, emotionally, 
physically, and spiritually. The school system has 
performed its duty by providing a steady stream of 
employees and soldiers, looking for a job, a job in big 
business and in the military. Both my dads were aware of 
this, but each dad saw it from a different perspective. One 
dad saw it from one side of the table, and one dad saw it 
from the other side. 
When I say to people, "Don't depend upon job security. 
Don't depend upon the company to take care of you 
financially: Don't expect the government to take care of 
your needs when you retire," people often flinch or 
squirm. Instead of fire and excitement, I see more fear. 
People cling to job security rather than trust in their 
personal abilities. Part of this need for security happens 
because people never found their new identity and do not 
trust in their ability to survive on their own. They follow 
in their parents' footsteps, doing what their parents did 
and following their parents' advice of "Go to school so you 
can get the job skills employers are looking for." Most will 
find a job, but only a few will find the security they truly 
look for. It is hard to find true security when your survival 
is dependent upon someone else, someone who happens 
to be sitting on the other side of the table. 
In July of the year 2000, Alan Greenspan, chairman of 
the Federal Reserve Board, spoke about inflation. He said 
that the reason inflation was not as high as it could be, 
given this period of extremely low unemployment, was 
that people wanted a secure job rather than ask for a 
raise. He went on to explain that most people, fearing the 
march of technology and the possibility of a computer 
taking their job, as it has in many industries, would rather 
lay low and work for less. That, he said, was why the rich 
were getting richer but most people were not sharing in 
the new wealth. He said it was because they were afraid of 
losing their job. I think it was because many people did 
not learn that they could survive financially on their 
own… so they followed their parents' advice and in their 
footsteps. 
A reporter got very angry at what I had to say about Page 108 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comeducation during a recent interview. He had done well 
in school, and he had a good, secure job. Angrily he said 
to me, "Are you saying that people should not be 
employees? What would happen if there were no workers? 
The world would come to a halt." 
I agreed with him, took a breath, and began my reply. 
"I agree the world needs workers. And I believe that every 
worker performs a valuable task. The president of the 
company could not do his or her job if the janitors did not 
do theirs. So I hold no grudge against workers. I too am a 
worker." 
"So what is wrong with the school system teaching 
people to be employees or soldiers?" asked the reporter. 
"The world needs workers." 
Again I agreed and said, "Yes, the world needs 
educated workers. The world does not need educated 
slaves. I think it is time that all students, not just the 
smart ones wanted by big business and the military, be 
given the education that will set them free." 
Don't Ask for a Raise  
If I thought asking for a raise would solve the problem, 
I would tell all my employees to ask for a raise. But what 
Greenspan says is true. If a worker wants too much 
money, relative to the service he or she provides the 
company, the guy on the other side of the table must look 
for a new worker. If expenses are too high, the company's 
future can be threatened. Many companies are not around 
today because they could not contain the cost of labor. 
Businesses move offshore because they are searching for 
lower labor costs. And technology is replacing many 
jobs—jobs such as travel agents, stockbrokers, and more. 
So Alan Greenspan is correct in saying people are afraid of 
losing their jobs if their demand for wages gets too high. 
But the main reason I say "Don't ask for a raise" is that 
in most instances, more money does not solve the 
problem. When people get raises, the government gets a 
raise also, and then the people usually get further in debt. 
My books and educational games were written and 
created to shift a person's self-perception. If a person 
really wants to find financial security, there needs to be a 
change mentally, emotionally, physically, and then maybe 
spiritually. Once people begin mentally to learn the 
appropriate financial education, they begin to change 
emotionally, physically, and spiritually. Once their self-
perceptions improve, they should begin to find that they Page 109 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comneed their job less and will then begin to do their 
homework… for as rich dad said, "You don't get rich at 
work, you get rich at home." I have also found that when 
your self-perception changes and your self-confidence 
goes up, employers are often more willing to give you a 
raise. That is why homework is so important. 
Your Homework  
I tell parents that what they teach their kids at home is 
as important as what the schools teach them. One thing I 
suggest parents do is begin to encourage their child to 
find a way to retire by thirty. Not that retiring at thirty is 
so important, but at least it begins to make them think a 
little differently. If they realize that they have only a few 
years to work and retire, they may ask questions such as 
"How can I retire at thirty?" The moment they ask that 
question, they begin to go through the looking glass. 
Instead of leaving school and looking for a world of job 
security, they will look for a world of financial freedom. 
And who knows? They might even find it, if they do their 
homework. 
The End Results  
The value of a person's education is not found in his or 
her report card. Most of us know that there are many 
people who were A students in school and F students at 
the end of their lives. 
There are many ways to evaluate how good a person's 
education was, and one of the best measurements is how 
they fared financially after leaving school. An interesting 
piece of data I keep to show people why they need to 
supplement their formal education comes from the U.S. 
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, referenced 
earlier in the book. The report states that out of one 
hundred people studied, at the age of sixty-five, one is 
rich, four are comfortable, five are still working, fifty-six 
are needing government support or family support, and 
the rest are dead. 
In my opinion, this is not a very good report card, 
considering the billions of dollars and hours we spend 
educating people. That means, from my graduating class 
of 700 students, 7 will be wealthy and 392 will need 
support from the government or their families. Not good. 
And there is one more distinction on these numbers: Of 
the 7 who are wealthy, approximately 2 will achieve the 
top position by inheritance rather than through their own 
efforts.  Page 110 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comOn August 16,2000, USA Today  ran an article titled 
"Not-So-Easy Money," in which analyst Danny Sheridan 
calculated the odds against making $1 million seven 
different ways: 
Owning a small business 1,000 to 1 
Working for a dot.com that goes public 10,000 to 1 
Saving $800 a month for 30 years 1,500,000 to 1 
Winning a game show 4,000,000 to 1 
Playing the slots in a casino 6,000,000 to 1 
Winning the lottery 12,000,000 to 1 
Inheriting $ 1 million 12,000,000 to 1 
These stats would show that even fewer people become 
millionaires through inheritance. By far, your child's best 
chance at becoming a millionaire is through owning his or 
her own business and building it to success. 
If you can teach your children that they can survive 
and thrive financially on their own, knowing how to 
manage their finances, not being trapped by consumer 
debt, never needing a job, you will be preparing them for 
the world that is coming. 
A system of education that leaves people dependent at 
the end of their lives is not preparing them for today's real 
world. The idea of a company or the government taking 
care of you at the end of your life is an idea whose time 
has passed. Your children need your help if they are going 
to be able to develop the financial skills they need for the 
future. 
In Conclusion of Part I  
Part I of this book was about money simply being an 
idea. The same can be said about education. Children's 
self-perceptions or ideas of themselves academically and 
financially will often dictate how they operate for the rest 
of their lives. That is why a parent's most important job is 
to monitor, guide, and protect a child's self-perception. 
PART II: M ONEY  DOES NOT MAKE  
YOU RICH 
My rich dad said, "Money does not make you rich." 
He would go on to say that money has the power to make 
you both rich or poor… and for most people, the more 
money they make, the poorer they become. Later in life, 
after he saw the popularity of lotteries, he said, "If Page 111 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commoney made you rich, why do so many lottery 
winners go broke ?" 
My smart dad said much the same about grades.  
If a child leaves school with good grades, does it mean 
the child will be successful in real life? Does success in the 
academic world insure your child's success in the real 
world? Part I of this book was dedicated to preparing 
your child mentally for school and for changes that occur 
early in life. Part II is dedicated to preparing your child 
for success in the real world.  
Chapter 8: My Banker Has Never 
Asked Me for My Report Card 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
At the age of fifteen, I did not pass the subject of 
English. I received a failing mark because I could not 
write, or I should say my English teacher did not like what 
I wrote about, and my spelling was horrible. That meant I 
would have to repeat my sophomore year. The emotional 
pain and embarrassment came from many fronts. First of 
all, my dad was the head of education. He was the 
superintendent of education for the island of Hawaii and 
in charge of over forty schools. There was much 
snickering and laughter throughout the halls of education 
as word spread that the boss's son was an academic 
failure. Second, failing meant I would have to join my 
younger sister's class. In other words, she was moving 
forward and I was moving backward. And third, it meant I 
would not receive my athletic letter for playing varsity 
football, the sport I had played my heart out for. The day I 
received my report card and saw the F for English, I went 
behind the building that housed the chemistry lab to be 
alone. I sat on the cold concrete slab, pulled my knees up 
to my chest, pushed my back up against the wooden 
building, and began to cry deeply. I had been expecting 
this F for a few months now, but seeing it on paper 
brought out all the emotions suddenly and uncontrollably. 
I sat alone behind the lab building for over an hour. 
My best friend, Mike, rich dad's son, had also received 
an F. It was not good that he had also failed, but it was 
good that at least I had some company in this time of 
misery. I waved to him as he headed across the campus to 
catch his ride home, but all he did was shake his head as 
he kept walking to the waiting car.  Page 112 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comAfter the other children had gone to bed that evening, I 
told my mom and dad that I had failed English as well as 
my sophomore year of high school. The educational 
system had a policy requiring a student failing either 
English or social studies to repeat the entire year. My dad 
was very familiar with the policy, for he was the one who 
enforced it. While they had expected the news, the 
confirmation of my failing was still a difficult reality. My 
dad sat quietly and nodded, his face expressionless. My 
mom, on the other hand, was having a much harder time 
with the news. I could see the emotions showing on her 
face, emotions that went from sadness to anger. Turning 
to my dad, she said, "What is going to happen now? Will 
he be held back a year?" All my dad said was, "That is the 
policy. But before I make any decision, I will look into the 
matter." 
For the next few days my dad, the man I refer to as my 
poor dad, did look into the matter. He discovered that out 
of my class of thirty-two students, the teacher had failed 
fifteen students. He had given Ds to eight students. One 
student had an A, four had Bs, and the rest had Cs. Seeing 
such a high failure rate, my dad stepped in, and stepped 
in not as my father, but as the superintendent of 
education. His first step was to order the principal of the 
school to open a formal investigation. The investigation 
began by interviewing many of the students in the class. 
The investigation ended with the teacher being 
transferred to another school and a special summer 
school class being offered to students who wanted an 
opportunity to improve their grades. I spent three weeks 
of my summer working my way up to a D so I would be 
able to move on to the eleventh grade with the rest of my 
class. 
Ultimately, my dad decided that there was right and 
wrong on both sides, the students' as well as the teacher's. 
What disturbed my dad was that most of the students who 
failed were the top students in the sophomore class and 
were headed to college. So rather than take a side, he 
came home and said to me, "Take this academic failure as 
a very important lesson in your life. You can learn a lot or 
you can learn a little from this incident. You can be angry, 
blame the teacher, and hold a grudge. Or you can look at 
your own behavior and learn more about yourself and 
grow from the experience. I don't think the teacher should 
have awarded so many failing marks. But I do think you Page 113 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comand your friends need to become better students. I 
hope both the students and the teacher grow from this 
experience." 
I must admit I did hold a grudge. I still do not like the 
teacher, and I did hate going to school after that. I never 
did like studying subjects I was not interested in or knew I 
would never use once school was over. Although the 
emotional scars were deep, I buckled down a little more, 
my attitude changed, my study habits improved, and I 
graduated from high school on schedule. 
Most important, I took my dad's advice and made the 
best out of a bad situation. Upon reflection, I can see how 
failing the tenth grade was a blessing in disguise. The 
incident caused me to make corrections in my attitude 
and study habits. I realize that if I had not made those 
corrections in the tenth grade, I would surely have 
flunked out in college. 
My Mom Was Very Concerned  
During this period, my mom was very upset. She kept 
saying, "Your grades are so important. If you don't have 
good grades, you won't get into a good college, and then 
you won't get a good job. Good grades are so important in 
your life." She had said the same thing many times. But 
during this traumatic and trying period, she was repeating 
herself with much more fear and anxiety in her voice. 
This period was also traumatic for me. Not only did I 
have a failing grade, I had to attend summer school in 
order to make up the failing grade so I could go on with 
the rest of my peers. It was the summer school my dad 
had set up for all the kids who had failed this one 
teacher's class. I hated summer school. The subject was 
boring, the room hot and humid. It was hard to keep my 
attention on the subject of English. My mind often drifted 
as I gazed out the window, past the coconut trees and out 
to the ocean where my friends were surfing. To make 
things worse, many of my surfing friends would snicker, 
laugh, and call us "the dummies" whenever we ran into 
them. 
When the four-hour class was over, Mike and I would 
go across town to his dad's office and do whatever he 
wanted us to do for a few hours. One day while waiting for 
rich dad, Mike and I were discussing the impact poor 
grades would have on our futures. Failing and being 
called "dummies" was very traumatic for us.  Page 114 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Our friends are laughing because they have better 
grades than we have and they will get into better colleges 
than we can," said Mike. 
"I've heard that, too," I replied. "Do you think we've 
failed and messed up our lives?" 
Having just turned fifteen and knowing little of the real 
world, we found that being labeled "dummies" and 
"failures" was taking its toll on our psyche. Emotionally 
we were hurt, mentally we doubted our academic abilities, 
and our future seemed pretty bleak. And my mom tended 
to agree with us. 
Rich Dad's Comments  
Rich dad was very aware of our academic failure. His 
son's F in English disturbed him. He was grateful that my 
dad intervened and set up a summer school program for 
us to make up our failing grades. Both dads were looking 
on the bright side of things, and both had lessons that we 
could gain from this experience, although their lessons 
were different. Up to this point, rich dad had not said very 
much. I believe he was just watching the two of us to see 
how we would respond to our situation. Now that he had 
overheard what we were thinking and feeling about our 
academic setback, it was time for him to comment. Taking 
a seat in the room, rich dad said, "Good grades are 
important. How well you do in school is important. How 
much you learn and how smart you are is also important. 
But once you leave school, good grades aren't that 
important." 
When I heard him say that, I pushed back in my seat. 
In my family, a family where almost everyone was 
employed by the school system, from my dad to his 
brothers and sisters, to say that grades were not 
important was nearly sacrilegious. "But what about our 
grades? Those grades will go with us for the rest of our 
lives," I added with shock and a slight whine. 
Rich dad shook his head and then leaned over, saying 
sternly, "Look, Mike and Robert. I will tell you both a big 
secret." Rich dad paused to make! sure we were listening 
attentively to his communication. Then he said, "My 
banker has never asked me for my report card." 
That comment startled me. For months now Mike and 
I had been worrying about our grades. In school grades 
are everything. My parents, my relatives, and our friends 
thought good grades were everything. Now rich dad's Page 115 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwords were jolting me out of my chain of thinking … the 
chain of thought that was saying my life was ruined 
because of bad grades. "What are you saying?" I 
responded, not fully understanding where he was going 
with this statement. 
"You heard me," rich dad said, also rocking back in his 
chair. He knew we had heard him, and he was now letting 
his statement set in. 
"Your banker has never asked you for your report 
card?" I repeated quietly. "Are you saying grades aren't 
important?" 
"Did I say that?" rich dad asked sarcastically. "Did I say 
grades aren't  important?" 
"No," I replied sheepishly. "You did not say that." 
"So what did I say?" he asked. 
"You said, 'My banker has never asked me for my 
report card,'" I replied. It was a difficult thing for me to 
say because in my family of educators, good grades, test 
scores, and a good report card meant everything. 
"When I go to see my banker," rich dad began again, 
"he does not say, 'Show me your grades.'" Rich dad asked 
again: "Does my banker ask, 'Were you a straight A 
student?' Does he ask me to show him my report card? 
Does he say, 'Oh, you had good grades. Let me lend you a 
million dollars.' Does he say things like that?" 
"I don't think so," said Mike. "At least he has never 
asked you for your report card when I was with you in his 
office. And I know he does not lend you money based on 
your grade-point average." 
"So what does he ask for?" asked rich dad. 
"He asks you for your financial statements," Mike 
replied quietly. "He always asks for your updated financial 
statements. He wants to see your profit and loss 
statements and balance sheets." 
Your Report Card After You Leave School  
Nodding, rich dad continued. "Bankers always ask for a 
financial statement. Bankers ask everyone for their 
financial statements. Bankers don't care if you are rich or 
poor, educated or uneducated. Regardless of what you 
are, they want to see your financial statement. Why do 
you think bankers do that?" 
Mike and I shook our heads silently and waited for the 
answer. "I've never really thought about it," Mike said Page 116 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfinally. "Will you tell us?"  
"Because your financial statement is your report card 
once you leave school," rich dad said in a strong, low 
voice. "The problem is, most people leave school and have 
no idea what a financial statement is." 
"My financial statement is my report card when I leave 
school?" I asked suspiciously. "You mean it's the report 
card for grown-ups?" 
Rich dad nodded. "It is a report card for grown-ups. 
Again, the problem is, most grown-ups do not really know 
what a financial statement is." 
"Is it the only report card adults have?" I asked. " Are 
there other report cards?" 
"Yes, there are other report cards. Your financial 
statement is a very important report card, but it's not your 
only report card. Other report cards are your annual 
health checkup, which through blood tests and other 
important procedures tells you how well you're doing and 
what you might need to improve on. Another report card 
is the scorecard on your golf game or bowling game. In 
life there are many different types of report cards, and a 
person's personal financial statement is an important 
one." 
"So a person could have straight As on their report 
card in school and have Fs on their financial statement in 
life?" I asked. "Is that what you are saying?" 
Rich dad nodded. "Happens all the time." 
Good Grades Count in School, Financial 
Statements Count in Life  
Receiving a failing grade at age fifteen in English 
turned out to be a very valuable experience for me, 
because I came to realize that I had developed a bad 
attitude toward school and my studies. That failing grade 
was a wake-up call for me to make corrections in my 
attitude and in my study habits. I also realized early in life 
that while grades are important in school, financial 
statements would be my report card once I left school. 
Rich dad said to me, "In school, students are given 
report cards once a quarter. If a child is in trouble, the 
child at least has time to make the proper corrections, if 
he or she chooses to. In real life, most adults never receive 
a quarterly financial report card , which is why so many 
people struggle financially. Many adults do not really look 
at their financial situation until they lose their job, have Page 117 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.coman accident, think about retirement, or until it's too 
late. Because most adults do not have a quarterly financial 
report card, many adults fail to make the financial 
corrections necessary to lead a financially secure life. They 
may have a high-paying job, a big home, a nice car, and be 
doing well at work, yet have failing financial grades. Many 
smart students who had good grades in school could 
spend their life scoring failing financial grades. That is the 
price of not having a financial report card, at least once a 
quarter. I want to look at my financial statement so I 
know where I am doing well, where I am doing poorly, 
and what I need to improve on." 
Report Cards Indicate Where Improvement Is 
Needed  
That failing grade turned out to be a good thing in the 
long run because both Mike and I buckled down a little 
more in school, although we were never great students. I 
received congressional nominations from my state 
senator to the U.S. Naval Academy at Annapolis, 
Maryland, and the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy at 
Kings Point, New York. Mike decided to stay in Hawaii to 
continue his apprenticeship with his dad, so he attended 
the University of Hawaii, where he graduated in 1969, the 
same year I graduated from Kings Point. In the long run, 
that failing grade proved to be priceless, for it caused both 
Mike and me to change our attitude toward school. 
At the academy I overcame my fear of writing and 
actually learned to enjoy it, although I am still a 
technically poor writer. I thank Dr. A. A. Norton, my 
English teacher for two years at the academy, for helping 
me overcome my lack of self-confidence, my past fears, 
and my grudges. If not for Dr. Norton and Sharon 
Lechter, my coauthor, I doubt I would have become a 
New York Times  and Wall Street Journal  best-selling 
author today. I sometimes think that if I had not received 
a failing grade at age fifteen and had the support of my 
family during this tough period, I would not have made 
changes in my life and become a best-selling author. That 
is why report cards are so important, especially if they are 
bad ones. 
In the end I realized that report cards measure not 
what we know, but what we need to improve upon in our 
lives. The same is true with your personal financial 
statement. It is your report card on how well you are 
doing financially. It is your report card for life.  Page 118 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comYour Child Needs a Financial Report Card Now  
I received a financial head start at the age of nine. That 
was the year rich dad introduced me to my financial 
report card. Those of you who read Rich Dad Poor Dad  
will recall that lesson number two of rich dad's lessons is 
the importance of financial literacy, or the ability to read 
financial statements once you leave school. 
I did not realize that rich dad was preparing his son 
and me for the real world, the world we enter once we 
leave school. He was preparing us by teaching us the 
basics of financial literacy, a subject generally not taught 
to preteens in school, or to adults, for that matter. 
Understanding a basic financial statement gave me 
tremendous financial confidence and maturity around 
money. I understood the difference between assets and 
liabilities, and between income and expenses, and I 
learned the importance of cash flow. Many adults do not 
know the subtle differences, and that lack of education 
causes them to work hard and make lots of money yet not 
get ahead financially. 
But there was something more than confidence I 
gained by understanding how a financial statement 
works. Rich dad often referred to "the three Cs," which 
stand for confidence, control, and correction. 
He would say to his son and me, "If you understand 
how financial statements really work, you will have more 
confidence over your finances, you will have more control 
over your finances, and most important, you will be able 
to make corrections when things are not going your way 
financially. People who lack financial literacy simply have 
less financial confidence, so they lose control and rarely 
make corrections until it is too late in life." 
At an early age I began learning mentally, emotionally, 
physically, and then spiritually the ins and outs of the 
three Cs. I did not fully understand it then, and I still do 
not fully understand it today. Yet that basic financial 
education was the foundation for constant, lifelong 
financial learning. This basic financial education gave me 
a financial head start in life… and it all began with 
understanding the financial statement. 
My First Drawings  
Rich dad began with simple drawings. 
Once we had the simple drawings down, he wanted us 
to understand the words, the definitions, and Page 119 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comrelationships. I learned how the words and diagrams 
were related. When I talk to people who are financially 
trained, they say that although they took accounting in 
school, they did not truly understand the relationships 
among the words—and as rich dad said, "It is the 
relationships that are most important." 
 
Where Financial Problems Begin  
My poor dad often said, "Our house is an asset." And 
that is where most of his financial problems began. It is 
this simple misunderstanding, or lack of a finer 
distinction in the definition, that caused my dad and most 
people their financial troubles. When you throw a pebble 
in a pond, ripples radiate out from the spot where the 
pebble hit. When a person begins life not understanding 
the difference between an asset and a liability, the ripples 
can cause financial problems for the rest of his or her life. 
And that is why rich dad said, "It is the relationship that is 
important." 
Although I have covered this subject in my other 
books, it is important to go over it one more time. It is an 
important first step for giving your child a financial head 
start in life. 
What Defines an Asset or Liability?  
What defines an asset and what defines a liability? 
When I look up the definitions in a dictionary, I become 
Page 120 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comonly more confused. That is the problem with learning 
things only mentally and not including physical learning 
in the definition. The simple diagram of a financial 
statement gives some physical learning to the definition, 
even if it is only some lines on a piece of paper. To 
illustrate my point, here is the definition of the word 
asset , from one of my dictionaries: 
As-set a: the property of a deceased person, b: the 
entire property of all sorts of a person, association, 
corporation, c: the items on a balance sheet showing the 
book value of property owned. 
For people who are of the verbal-linguist genius and 
high IQ, a definition like this may be adequate. Maybe 
they can read into the words and gain insight into what an 
asset really is. But for a nine-year-old boy, the words 
alone would not make much sense. For a nine-year-old 
boy who was learning to be rich, the dictionary definition 
is inadequate and misleading. If intelligence is a function 
of making finer distinctions, to be rich I needed much 
finer distinctions than those provided by the dictionary, 
and I needed them in more than word form. 
My rich dad added the distinctions by adding physical 
mass and motion to the definition, so that I could make a 
life-changing finer distinction. He did so by using a piece 
of paper and showing me the relationship between the 
income statement and the balance sheet. He said, "What 
determines if something is really an asset, and not just a 
piece of junk you list on your balance sheet, is cash flow. 
Cash flow could be the most important word in the world 
of money, yet it is often the least understood word. You 
can see cash, but most people do not see the flow. Hence 
it is cash flow that determines if something is really an 
asset, or a liability, or a piece of junk." 
The Relationship  
"It is the cash flowing between the income statement 
and the balance sheet that truly defines what is an asset or 
liability," rich dad said over and over. 
If you want to give your child a financial head start in 
life, memorize this line and repeat it over and over to your 
child. Your child must understand this statement and 
repeat it often if it is to sink in. If your children do not 
understand that statement, the chances are they will go 
out, buy golf clubs, stick them in the garage, and list them 
as an asset when they fill out a financial statement for the 
bank and apply for a loan. In my dad's world, a set of golf Page 121 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comclubs sitting in your garage is not an asset. But on 
many credit applications, you can count those golf clubs—
aka a bag of junk—as assets. They are listed under the 
asset column in a section called "Personal Effects." That is 
where you can list your shoes, your purses, your ties, your 
furniture, your dishes, and your old tennis rackets as 
assets in the asset column—and this is why most people 
do not become rich. They do not know the relationship 
between the income statement and the balance sheet. 
So this is the cash flow pattern of an asset. 
 
In other words, the asset is cash flowing money into  
the income column. On the following page we see the cash 
flow pattern of a liability:  
Page 122 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
In other words, the liability is cash flowing money out 
of the expense column. 
You do not need to be a rocket scientist to know that 
there is a difference between money going in and money 
going out. To reinforce this basic idea to Mike and me, 
rich dad would often say, "Assets put money into your 
pocket, and liabilities take money from your pocket." As a 
nine-year-old kid, I understood this. Many adults do not. 
As I got older and understood that many adults were 
clinging to job security, rich dad would upgrade his 
definition. He would say, "If you lose your job, assets will 
feed you and liabilities will eat you." He would also say, 
"Most of my employees cannot stop working because they 
are buying liabilities they think are assets, and they are 
being eaten alive every month paying bills to feed those 
liabilities they think are assets." Again, it was a little more 
sophisticated definition, but sitting across the table as 
people applied for jobs, or cried when they were fired, I 
understood why knowing the difference between assets 
and liabilities was so important. I understood the 
importance of knowing the definitions before I was fifteen 
years old. That was a huge financial head start in life for 
me. 
The Next Steps  
So step one started with simple drawings and a little 
Page 123 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comrepetitive reinforcement over a number of years. Today 
people still argue that their house is an asset. And again, 
at one level of financial sophistication, that can be true. 
But if intelligence is the ability to make finer distinctions, 
then for anyone who wants to be rich, knowing the more 
precise distinctions based upon financial statements and 
actually seeing how cash flows is vitally important. I think 
one of the reasons only one out of one hundred people is 
rich at age sixty-five is that most people do not know the 
difference between an asset and a liability. People work 
hard for job security and collect liabilities they think are 
assets. 
If your children buy liabilities they think are assets, 
chances are they will not be able to retire before they are 
thirty. If they insist on buying liabilities they think are 
assets, chances are they will work hard all their lives, not 
getting ahead financially regardless of what school they 
graduate from, how good or poor their grades were, how 
hard they work, or how much money they make. That is 
why the basics of financial literacy are so important. Just 
knowing something as simple as the difference between 
an asset and a liability is like a pebble hitting the water of 
a pond. The ripple effect will go on for the rest of your 
child's life. 
I am not saying do not buy a house, and I am not 
saying pay off your mortgage. All I am saying is that for 
people to be rich, they need greater financial intelligence, 
which is the ability to make finer distinctions than the 
average person does. If you want further distinctions for 
yourself, review my other books, which spend quite a bit 
of time on the subject of financial literacy: 
Rich Dad Poor Dad  
Rich Dad's CASHFLOW Quadrant  
Rich Dad's Guide to Investing  
Rich Dad's Guide to Getting Rich  (an electronic book) 
Each book goes into different aspects or offers greater 
distinctions on this subject of financial literacy, which 
helps increase your financial intelligence. If you are better 
informed, you have a better chance of influencing your 
child's financial future. After all, one of the reasons the 
rich get richer, the poor get poorer, and the middle class is 
mired in debt and paying more than their fair share of 
taxes is that money is a subject that is taught at home, not 
at school. Financial education is handed down from Page 124 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comparent to child.  
My Banker Wants to Know How Smart I Am  
The first step in preparing me for the real world was to 
acquaint me with the report card of the real world, which 
is the financial statement, a report that is made up of the 
income statement and the balance sheet. As my rich dad 
said, "My banker has never asked me for my report card. 
All my banker wants to see is my financial statement." He 
would go on to say, "My banker is not interested in how 
smart I was academically. My banker wants to know how 
smart I am financially." 
The next few chapters are on more specific ways of 
increasing your child's chances of becoming financially 
smarter before entering the real world. 
Chapter 9: Kids Learn by Playing 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
One day my dad and I were watching two kittens 
playing. They were biting each other's necks and ears, 
clawing, growling, and occasionally kicking each other. If 
we did not know they were playing, it could have looked 
as though they were fighting. 
My smart dad said, "The kittens are teaching each 
other survival skills that have been encoded into their 
genes. If we should ever throw these cats out in the wild, 
and did not feed them anymore, the survival skills they 
are learning now as kittens would keep them alive in the 
wild. They learn and maintain these skills by playing. 
Humans learn in the same way." 
Financial Survival Skills for the Real World  
One of the hardest things I have ever had to do was to 
shut down my factory and let go thirty-five faithful 
employees. I wrote about this personal ordeal during the 
1970s in another book. I had to shut my factory down 
because I could no longer afford to compete with Asia and 
Mexico. My labor costs and government compliance costs 
were too high. Instead of fighting them, I decided to join 
my competition, which led to moving my factory overseas. 
I won, but my employees lost. When people ask me why I 
write about money when I don't need to, I often think of 
saying good-bye to my employees that day… and that is all 
the reason I need. 
When I shut down the factory, I was paying my Page 125 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comworkers less than $3.50 an hour. Today, some twenty 
years later, those same workers would be making only a 
little more than $5 an hour, or minimum wage. They may 
even have gotten raises in pay, but I don't think the pay 
raises would do much good. The only survival skills they 
would have developed, even if they earned more money, 
would be to go from job to job, work hard, and try and 
make more money. As my rich dad taught me, "Money 
alone does not make you rich, just as a safe, secure job 
does not necessarily make you feel safe and secure." 
In order to survive financially and feel secure 
financially, people need to develop financial survival skills 
before they enter the real world. If they do not have these 
skills before entering the real world, the real world has 
other lessons about money that it wants to teach your 
child. And today that includes the school system. Not only 
are young people leaving school now with credit card 
debt, many are leaving school with debt from school 
loans. It is important to teach your child about money 
management as early as possible. The best way to teach 
those skills is by playing with your children, for it seems 
that play is how God or nature intended all young to 
learn… even little kittens. 
Have Fun Teaching Your Child to Be Rich  
I learned so much about money from my rich dad 
because he made learning fun. He always played games 
and did not try to cram information down my throat. If I 
did not want to learn something, he would let me move on 
to something I was interested in learning… or he made 
what he was trying to teach me more interesting. He 
usually had something tangible from the real world, 
something physical for me to see, touch, and feel as part 
of the lesson. And most important, he did not try to break 
my spirit. Instead he encouraged my spirit to get stronger 
rather than weaker. When I made a mistake, he 
challenged me to learn the lesson rather than give me the 
right  answer. He had the patience to teach with love. He 
did his best to draw out the smart kid in me rather than 
perceive me as incompetent, or slow, or label me as 
having a learning disability because I was taking a little 
longer to understand something. He taught according to 
my time schedule of learning and my desire to learn, not 
with a need for me to pass a test. He definitely was not 
concerned about my competing against other kids for the 
best grades, as many parents are. My smart dad taught in Page 126 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commuch the same way.  
Teachers Need a Hand  
The current system of education does not allow 
teachers to teach in this way or allow teachers the time to 
give each child the attention needed. The system wants 
the teachers to move the kids along to some kind of mass 
production schedule. The school system is a factory that 
moves to the factory's production schedule, not the child's 
learning schedule. Many teachers have tried to change the 
system, but as I said, the system of education is like an 
alligator, a creature designed to survive and not to 
change. That is why parent and child homework is so 
important, more important than the schoolwork your 
child brings home. 
I was listening to a professor from a major university 
say, "We know by age nine if a child will do well in our 
system or not. We know if the child has the qualities we 
want and is smart enough to handle the rigors of our 
system. Unfortunately, we do not have an alternative 
system for children who are not designed to run through 
our system." 
As a child, my house was filled with people who were 
from the world of education. Very good people. When I 
went to my rich dad's house, his house was filled with 
people from the world of business. They were also very 
good people. But I could tell they were not necessarily the 
same people. 
Give Yourself a Head Start Also  
When I was growing up, many people asked me if I was 
going to follow in my father's footsteps, to be a teacher. As 
a kid, I remember saying, "No way. I'm going into 
business." Years later I found out that I actually love 
teaching. In 19851 began teaching business and investing 
for entrepreneurs and loved it. I enjoyed teaching because 
I taught in the method in which I learn best. I learn best 
via games, cooperative competition, group discussions, 
and lessons. Instead of punishing mistakes, I encouraged 
mistakes. Instead of asking students to take the test on 
their own, participants were required to take tests as a 
team. Instead of silence, the room roared with discussion 
and rock-and-roll music in the background. In other 
words, actions first, mistakes second, lessons third, 
laughter fourth. 
In other words, I used an opposite method of teaching Page 127 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfrom the school system's. I taught in much the same 
way that my two dads taught me at home. I found out that 
many other people preferred learning in this manner, and 
I earned a lot of money as a teacher, often charging 
thousands of dollars per student to attend. I applied my 
two dads' teaching styles with my rich dad's lessons on 
money and investing. I found myself in a profession that I 
swore I would never enter. I may have been in the 
educational profession, but I catered to people who 
learned the way I did. As they say in business, "Find a 
niche and fill it." I found a very big niche, a niche of 
people who wanted education to be fun and exciting. 
In building this education company in the mid-1980s, 
my wife, Kim, and I sought out other instructors who 
loved teaching in the same manner. Our first requirement 
was to find instructors who were successful in the real 
world and who also loved to teach. Such individuals are 
often hard to find. In the real world, there are many 
people who love to teach, but many of them are not 
successful in business, money, and investing. There are 
also people who are good at money and business but are 
not good teachers. The key was to find people who were 
both. 
Student Geniuses  
I had the privilege of studying with a man named Dr. 
R. Buckminster Fuller. He is often referred to as the most 
accomplished American in our history, since no one has 
more patents. He is more often called "our planet's 
friendly genius." He is recognized as a great architect by 
the American Institute of Architects, although he was not 
an architect. Harvard University often refers to him as 
one of their more noted graduates, yet Fuller never 
graduated from Harvard. He was thrown out twice and 
never finished. During one of my weeks studying with 
him, Dr. Fuller said, "The students will be geniuses if the 
teacher knows what he is talking about." Our job was not 
to find a teacher. Our job was to find people who knew 
what they were talking about and encourage them to 
teach. 
Get Smart by Teaching  
Beyond enjoying teaching and making a lot of money 
at it, I found something even more beneficial than fun and 
money. I found out that I learned more by teaching. When 
I taught, I had to dig deep inside of myself to find the 
lessons the class needed to learn. I learned a lot from the Page 128 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.cominteraction among the participants as we all shared our 
personal insights and discoveries. Because of this 
phenomenon, I recommend that parents take the time to 
teach their children, because the parent often learns even 
more. And if a parent wants to improve his or her own 
personal financial situation, one way is to search for new 
financial ideas and pass them on to the child. Look for 
new financial ideas before teaching your kids your old 
ideas about money. Many people have financial problems 
because they are using old financial ideas, often handed 
down from their parents. They then teach those same 
ideas about money to their children. That may explain 
why the poor remain poor and the middle class works 
hard and gets deeply in debt soon after graduating from 
school. They are doing what they learned from their 
parents. 
Therefore, one of the best ways to learn something is to 
teach what you want to learn to others. As they teach in 
Sunday school, "Give and you shall receive." The more 
time you personally invest in teaching your kids about 
money, the smarter all of you will become. 
Three Steps to Learning  
My rich dad taught me three steps to learning about 
money: 
Step one: Simple drawings.  My education began 
with simple line drawings with an emphasis on 
understanding the definitions.  Page 129 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
Step two: Play.  As I said, I learn best by doing, so for 
a number of years rich dad would have us fill out play 
financial statements. Sometimes when we played 
Monopoly, he would have us use our four green houses 
and one red hotel and put them on our financial 
statements. 
Step three: Real life.  Real life started for Mike and 
me at around age fifteen, when we had to fill out financial 
statements and submit them to rich dad. Just as any good 
teacher would do, he would grade them, show us what we 
were doing well at and what we needed to improve. I have 
continued my education and my financial reports in real 
life for nearly forty years now. 
How to Begin Teaching Your Child About 
Money  
I recommend that most parents start at step two. 
Although my rich dad started me at step one, the line 
drawings, I would be careful talking to most kids about 
mental abstracts such as income statements and balance 
sheets. When I use these drawings with some adults, their 
eyes glaze over. In fact, I might not talk about step one 
until I was certain the child was interested or ready to 
learn such concepts. I was taught in the manner listed 
because I was curious, so that was the sequence rich dad 
chose for me.  
Page 130 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comI used to recommend beginning with the game of 
Monopoly. I have noticed that some kids really like the 
game, while other kids play the game but are not really 
that interested in the subject. Many of my friends who are 
investors or entrepreneurs tell me that they also played 
Monopoly by the hour, fascinated by it. Without that 
fascination, I would not force the subject of money, 
investing, and much less financial statements on young 
people. 
CASHFLOW for Kids  
In 1996, after I developed CASHFLOW 101, which is 
the board game that teaches the principles of the financial 
statement to adults, the market response indicated that a 
similar game was needed for children. In late 1999 we 
introduced CASHFLOW for Kids. Our board games are 
the only games that teach children the fundamentals of 
the financial statement, the child's report card after he or 
she leaves school, and cash flow management. 
Used in Schools  
A very innovative teacher in Indianapolis, Indiana, 
Dave Stephens, began using CASHFLOW 101 in his high 
school classes with tremendous success. He actually 
noticed the game changing the life attitudes of many of 
his students. One student in particular Dave told us about 
was about to fail out of school owing to bad grades and 
poor attendance. Playing CASHFLOW made a big 
difference in his life. In the student's own words: 
I went from being a party person, i.e. smoking 
marijuana, getting drunk, etc., to being a very focused and 
determined high school student, with ambitions of 
someday being as successful as the man whose game I was 
playing and learning from!… I don't remember much of 
the first few days, but I do remember playing CASHFLOW 
It was a wonderful game that brought the concepts of 
making money into a reality unbeknownst to me at the 
time, expressing ideas of simplicity and genius! The game 
has opened doors for me like no other thing within my life 
to this point. It gave me reason to go to school and a 
yearning to get involved! Since I played the game I have 
entered Student Council—where I tutor Junior High 
students (and tell them ideas expressed in CASHFLOW), I 
became President of the Marion County Youth Congress, 
have taken a leadership role within the Academy of 
Finance, placed first at State DECA competition, and 
competed nationally. I started a Japanese and BPA club at Page 131 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comour school and am currently, with the cooperation of 
other investors, working to build an East Side Community 
Center within my own community. As you can see, it has 
given me new light to my drive for success. As well, my 
grades, attitude, and lifestyle have changed considerably. 
I now look forward to the future with a yearning to learn 
and teach all who want to learn what I know. Sometimes 
you roll the dice and it changes everything! 
To Mr. Kiyosaki I give my thanks and praise—someday 
you will see the results of all that you do, and I hope to be 
one of the first to prove that your methods do work, and 
work well. This has become a cliche almost, but it sums up 
exactly my story: "Two roads diverged in a wood; I took 
the one less traveled by, and that has made all the 
difference." 
All I can say in response to this student is, "Wow! What 
an impressive young man." It gives me great honor to 
know that our products played a role in helping this 
young man change the direction of his life in such a 
positive way. 
Dave Stephens's support did not stop there. When he 
heard about the development of CASHFLOW for Kids, he 
came up with another innovative idea. Already having a 
group of sixteen- to eighteen-year-old kids well versed in 
101, he set up a program where the high school students 
went into elementary schools to teach seven- through 
nine-year-old kids CASHFLOW for Kids. The results were 
spectacular. 
First of all, the elementary school teacher was 
delighted to have approximately eight high school 
students come in to assist her for an afternoon. Each high 
school student would play CASHFLOW for Kids with four 
elementary school students. Instead of one teacher to 
thirty students, the ratio was one to four. And the results 
were spectacular. The elementary kids had a great time, 
and so did the high school kids. The learning was much 
more personal and specific. Both the high school students 
and the elementary school students learned a lot more in 
a short period of time. 
The teachers present were thrilled with the hum and 
activity of active learning. Instead of the drone of 
lecturing or the noise of chaos, there was instead the 
sound of fun and very focused learning. When the game 
was over, the kids all went, "Ahhhh, let's play again." 
An Added Bonus  Page 132 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comSomething else happened that I had not counted on, an 
added bonus. As the high school students were leaving, 
many of the younger kids ran up and either hugged their 
new teachers or shook their hands. These young 
elementary school children were gaining new role models. 
Instead of some of the more questionable students who 
get much of the publicity and attention today, Dave 
Stephens's students were well groomed, well mannered, 
very bright, and focused both on their education and on 
their future. 
As the high school students said good-bye to the 
elementary school students, I could sense that the 
younger kids were looking up to their new teachers… 
possibly saying to themselves, I want to be just like them. 
As I watched the young students wave good-bye, I recalled 
my preteen years and remembered some of the teenage 
kids who were very influential in guiding me. For two 
hours these elementary school children had the 
opportunity to interact with very positive role models 
rather than the more questionable role models they may 
come in contact with outside of school. 
High School Students' Comments  
When I asked the high school students what they had 
gained from the exercise, their comments included the 
following: 
• "I really found out I enjoy teaching. I may now 
consider teaching as a profession." 
• "I learned a lot more teaching the younger kids. 
When I had to teach, I learned a lot more." 
• "I was surprised at how fast the young kids can 
learn." 
• "I'm going home and treating my young brothers and 
sisters differently." 
I share these comments because I was amazed that 
high school students could be so mature. 
Curriculum on Our Web Site  
Dave Stephens is a director for one of the academies 
sponsored by the National Academy Foundation. He has 
also assisted us in writing a curriculum for use by teachers 
in playing CASHFLOW 101 within the classroom setting. 
Summary of Step Two  
So the key to step two is to have fun, play, and begin to 
spark the interest in learning about money, money Page 133 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commanagement, and financial statements. Looking at the 
learning pyramid in the diagram on the following page, 
you can see how learning can be more effective. 
Because a game is a tangible educational tool, it 
involves all four main points of the learning pyramid. 
Games give physical learners an equal chance to learn 
alongside kids who are good at learning mentally or 
abstractly. It involves the emotions because it is fun and 
exciting. Games use play money rather than real money, 
so the mistakes are less painful emotionally. Many adults 
leave school terrified of making mistakes, especially 
financial mistakes. Games allow students of all ages to 
make financial mistakes and learn from them without the 
pain of losing real money. If you subscribe to Rudolf 
Steiner's ideas on the nine-year change, then a child who 
knows he or she can survive financially will be more 
confident and less dependent on the idea of job security 
for financial security. The child may be less susceptible to 
getting deeply into consumer debt as an adult. Most 
important, learning how to manage money and how a 
financial statement works may boost a child's self-
confidence as he or she prepares to confront the real 
world. 
The Learning Pyramid  
Mental  
 
Games Have Been Used for Centuries  
Most of the games purchased in stores today are games 
Page 134 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comof entertainment. Yet for centuries games were used 
for education. Royalty used to teach their children the art 
of strategic thinking using the game of chess. The game 
was used to prepare sons for the possibility of leading an 
army into war. Backgammon was also used to teach 
strategic thinking. I once read that royalty recognized the 
need to exercise their bodies as well as their minds, and 
games were how they exercised their minds. They wanted 
their offspring to think rather than just memorize 
answers. Today, while we are not necessarily training our 
children to go off to war, we do need to teach our children 
to think strategically when it comes to money. The game 
of chess and the CASHFLOW games are similar in that 
they are games without answers. They are games designed 
to make you think strategically and plan into the future. 
They are games where each time you play, the outcome is 
different. With each move or change, the immediate 
strategy must change, in order to have the long-term plan 
work. 
Games Help Your Child See the Future  
One day while playing Monopoly, rich dad made an 
interesting comment that I never forgot. Pointing to one 
whole side of the game board, he said, "How long do you 
think it takes to buy all the properties on this side of the 
board and put red hotels on them?" 
Both Mike and I shrugged. We did not understand 
what he was getting at "You mean in the game?" 
"No, no, no," said rich dad. "I mean in real life. We've 
been playing now for about two hours. I finally own all the 
properties on this side of the board, and I have red hotels 
on them. My question is, how long do you think this 
would take in real life?" 
Again Mike and I shrugged. At eleven years old, we had 
little experience with how long things took in real life. We 
both looked at rich dad's side of the game board and could 
see six red hotels monopolizing his side. We knew that 
each time we approached his side of the board, the 
chances were that we were going to land on one of his 
properties and were going to pay dearly. "I don't know," 
Mike finally said. 
"I think about twenty years," said rich dad. 
"Twenty years!" Mike and I gasped. To a couple of 
teenagers, twenty years was unfathomable. 
"The years go quickly," said rich dad as he launched Page 135 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.cominto his next lesson. "Most people let those years slip 
by, and they never start. Suddenly they're over forty, often 
deeply in debt and with kids ready to go to college. So 
many never get started. They spend most of their lives 
working hard for money, getting deeply in debt, and 
paying bills." 
"Twenty years," I repeated. 
Rich dad nodded, letting the idea sink in. Finally he 
said, "Your future begins today." Looking at me, he said, 
"If you do what your dad is doing, which is working hard 
to pay bills, you will wind up twenty years from now 
where he is today." 
"But twenty years," I complained. "I want to get rich 
quickly." 
"And so do most people," said rich dad. "The problem 
is, most people simply do as they were taught, which is to 
go to school and then get a job. That becomes their future. 
Most will work for twenty years and have nothing to show 
after all those years of work." 
"Or we can play this game for twenty years," said Mike. 
Rich dad nodded. "Boys, it is your choice. This maybe a 
two-hour game, but it could also be your future for the 
next twenty years." 
"Our future is today," I said quietly, looking at rich 
dad's six red hotels. 
Rich dad nodded. "Is this only a game or is it your 
future?" 
A Five-Year Delay  
In Rich Dad's Guide to Investing , I begin with my 
return from Vietnam and finally being released from the 
Marine Corps in 1974.1 had planned on beginning my 
twenty-year plan in 1969, the year I graduated from the 
academy, but the Vietnam War had put a five-year delay 
in my plans to begin playing the game in real life. In 1994, 
exactly twenty years after beginning the game, my wife 
and I purchased one of our largest "red hotels" and 
retired. I was forty-seven and she was thirty-seven. The 
game of Monopoly allowed me to see into my future. The 
game had compressed twenty years of education into two 
hours. 
The Advantage I Had  
I believe the advantage I had over other kids who also 
play Monopoly was that I understood the income Page 136 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comstatement and the balance sheet —aka the financial 
statement. I knew the difference between assets and 
liabilities, businesses, stocks and bonds. In 19961 
developed my CASHFLOW board games to be a bridge 
between Monopoly and the real world. If you or your child 
likes the game of Monopoly, and are interested in building 
businesses or investing, then my games are the next step 
in the educational process. My educational games are a 
little bit more difficult to learn and may take a little longer 
to learn and master. But once you've learned them, you 
too may see your future in only a few hours. 
Your Financial Statement Is Your Real-Life 
Report Card  
As my rich dad often said, "My banker has never asked 
me for my report card." He also said, "One of the reasons 
people struggle financially is that they leave school not 
knowing what a financial statement is." 
Financial Statements Are Fundamental to 
Wealth  
A fundamental to creating and keeping great wealth is 
the financial statement. You have a financial statement 
whether you know it or not. A business has a financial 
statement. A piece of real estate has a financial statement. 
Before you buy a share of stock in a company, it is 
recommended that you look at the company's financial 
statement. Financial statements are fundamental to all 
matters dealing with money. Unfortunately, most people 
leave school not knowing what a financial statement is. 
That is why, for most people, Monopoly is only a game. I 
created my CASHFLOW games to teach interested people 
what a financial statement is, how it is used, and how they 
can take control of their future while having fun. My 
games are the bridge between Monopoly and the real 
world. 
In the next pages you will see examples of the financial 
statement used in CASHFLOW for Kids and the financial 
statement used in CASHFLOW 101 and 202, which are 
the games used to teach adults. You may notice that while 
both are financial statements, one is a little more 
appropriate for younger children's minds. 
In Conclusion  
Step two is a most important part of learning. It is 
important to learn while having fun. It is much better to 
learn while having fun than to learn about money via the Page 137 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfear of losing it. Instead of money being related to fun 
and excitement, I often hear parents reinforcing fear and 
negativity when it comes to money. The number one 
argument in houses today is about money. A child learns 
to associate fear and anger with money. In many 
households a child learns that money is scarce and hard to 
get and that you must work hard for it. That is what I 
often learned when I was at home with my parents. When 
I was with my rich dad, I learned that making money was 
just a game, and he had fun playing the game. I chose to 
have making money a game in my life and to have fun 
playing the game. 
In the next chapters I will go over step three, which 
includes the more real-life—or should I say more real-
money?—exercises you can use with your children to 
prepare them for the real world. 
Chapter 10: Why Savers Are 
Losers 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
I have a friend who recently asked me for financial 
advice. When I asked her what her problem was, she 
replied, "I have a lot of money, but I am afraid of investing 
it." She had worked hard all her life and had saved about 
$250,000. 
When I asked her why she was afraid of investing it, 
she replied, "Because I am afraid of losing it." She went on 
to say, "This is my hard-earned money. I have worked for 
years to save it, but now that I am ready to retire, I know 
that it will not be enough to support me for the rest of my 
life. I know I need to invest it to get a better return, but if I 
lose it all at my age, I won't be able to work to get it back. 
I'm out of time." 
An Old Winning Formula  
I was watching TV the other day, and a child 
psychologist turned money adviser came on the program, 
saying, "It is important to teach your child to save 
money." The interview continued with the usual banter 
about starting good financial habits early as well as the 
usual string of cliches such as "A penny saved is a penny 
earned" and "Save for a rainy day." 
My mom used to say to her four kids, "Neither a 
borrower nor a lender be." And my dad used to say, "I Page 138 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwish your mother would stop borrowing from the 
lenders so we could put some money into our savings." 
I hear many parents saying to their children, "Go to 
school, get good grades, get a good job, buy a house, and 
save money." It was a good winning formula for the 
Industrial Age, but that advice could be a losing formula 
for the Information Age. Why? Simply because in the 
Information Age, your child will need more sophisticated 
financial information, sophistication far beyond simply 
putting money in the bank or their retirement savings 
plans. 
Rich Dad's Lesson on Savings  
My rich dad would say, "Savers are losers." It was not 
that he was against savings. His reason for saying "Savers 
are losers" was that he wanted Mike and me to look 
beyond just being savers. In Rich Dad Poor Dad , rich 
dad's lesson number one was, "The rich don't work for 
money." Instead of us working for money, he wanted 
Mike and me to learn how to have money work hard for 
us. And while savings is a form of having money work for 
us, in his mind simply saving money and trying to live 
only off the interest was a game for losers—and he could 
prove it. 
Although this was covered in previous books, it is 
important enough to be repeated. It points out why rich 
dad said, "Savers are losers." It may also reinforce why 
teaching your child to understand financial statements 
early in life is so important. 
I Love My Banker  
First of all, I love my banker. I say this because after 
my previous lessons on the subject, many people thought 
I was against banks and bankers. Nothing could be 
further from the truth. The reality is that I love my banker 
because my banker is my money partner and helps me get 
rich… and I tend to like people who help me get richer. 
What I am against is financial ignorance, because it is 
financial ignorance that causes many people to use their 
banker as a partner in getting poorer. 
When a banker says to you that your house is an asset, 
the question is, Is your banker lying or telling you the 
truth? The answer is, Your banker is telling you the truth. 
He is just not saying whose asset your house really is. 
Your house is the bank's asset. If you can read a financial 
statement, it is easy to understand why this is true.  Page 139 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comOn the following page is a true picture of why, for most 
people, their house is the bank's asset. 
 
When you go across town to the bank and look at the 
bank's financial statement, you will begin to see and 
understand how financial statements really work. 
Your bank's financial statement: 
 
By inspecting your bank's financial statement, you 
soon notice that your mortgage, which is listed under your 
Page 140 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comliability column, is also listed under the bank's asset 
column. At this point you are beginning to understand 
how financial statements really work. 
The Complete Picture  
When people tell me that this proves nothing and insist 
that their house is an asset, I go to the litmus test of cash 
flow, possibly the most important word in business and 
investing. As by definition, if money flows into your 
pocket, then what you have is an asset; and if money flows 
out of your pocket, then what you have is a liability. 
Look at the complete cycle of cash flow-. That picture is 
worth a thousand words. 
 
So What About Savings?  
The next question is, What does this have to do with 
savings being for losers? Again the answer is found by 
reading the financial statement. Your financial statement:  
Page 141 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
Yes, your savings are an asset. But to get a true picture, 
we need to follow the trail left by cash flow to improve our 
financial intelligence. Your bank's financial statement: 
 
Again applying the litmus test of which way the cash is 
flowing, you can see that the test for what defines an asset 
and what defines a liability holds true.  
Page 142 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
Tax Incentives for You to Be in Debt and Tax 
Punishment for You Saving  
As the year 2000 began, many economists were 
alarmed at the negative savings rate in America. A 
negative savings rate means that as a nation we had more 
debt than cash in the banks. The economists began to say 
that we needed to encourage people to save more money. 
They began to sound the alarm bells that as a nation we 
had borrowed too much money from Asian and European 
banks and that our nation was on the brink of economic 
disaster. In one article I read, a noted economist said, 
"Americans have lost the work and savings ethic of our 
forefathers." The economist went on to blame the people  
for this problem rather than the system  we created long 
after our forefathers were gone. 
All one has to do is look at our tax laws, and the reason 
for this low savings and high debt problem becomes 
obvious. My rich dad said, "Savers are losers," not because 
he was against saving money. All rich dad was doing was 
pointing out the obvious. In many Western nations people 
receive tax breaks for being in debt. In other words, 
people are offered incentives to get further in debt. That is 
why so many people take their credit card debt and roll it 
into their home equity loans. 
On top of that, you are not offered a tax break for 
savings. The exact opposite is true. People who save are 
taxed, and people who are in debt are offered tax breaks. 
Page 143 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comNot only that. It is the people who work the hardest 
and are paid the least that pay the highest percentages in 
taxes, not the rich. It seems obvious to me that the system 
is designed to punish those who work and save and 
reward those who borrow and spend. And the more the 
educational system fails to teach kids about financial 
statements, the more we have a nation that cannot read 
the numbers to figure out what is really going on. 
The Reward for Saving  
My rich dad once said, "You are paid 4 percent for your 
savings, but inflation is growing by 4 percent, so you're 
not getting ahead. Then the government taxes you on your 
interest, so the net result is that you are losing money on 
your savings. That is why savers are losers." 
Rich dad rarely spoke about saving money after that 
statement. Instead he began teaching us to have money 
work hard for us… and that was by acquiring assets or 
what he called "converting money into wealth." My mom 
and dad converted their money into debt, thinking it an 
asset, and they had nothing left to save. And although 
they worked hard and had no money to save, they kept 
saying to their kids, "Get a job, work hard, and save 
money." That may have been good advice for the 
Industrial Age, but it is bad advice for the Information 
Age. 
How Fast Is Your Money Moving?  
Rich dad was not against saving money. But instead of 
mindlessly advising us to save  money, rich dad often 
talked about the velocity  of money. Instead of advising us 
to put money away and "save for retirement," he often 
spoke about "return on investment" and "internal rates of 
return," which was another way of saying, "How fast does 
my money come back?" 
Here's an oversimplified example: 
Let's say I buy a $100,000 rental house and use 
$10,000 from my savings as a down payment. After a 
year, the rental income minus the mortgage payment, 
taxes, and other expenses is a net $10,000. In other 
words, I have got my $10,000 in savings back and I still 
have the house, an asset, paying me an additional 
$10,000 a year. I can now take that $10,000 and go buy 
another property, or stock, or business. 
This is what some people refer to as "the velocity of 
money," or as my rich dad said, "How fast does my money Page 144 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comcome back?" Or "What is my return on investment?" 
The financially sophisticated want their money back so 
they can go forward and invest in another asset. Which is 
another reason why the rich get richer and everyone else 
is trying to save for a rainy day or saving pennies or saving 
for retirement. 
Playing with Real Money  
At the beginning of this chapter, I related the story of 
an old friend of mine who was nearing retirement age, 
had about $250,000 in savings, and was wondering what 
to do next. She knew that she needed about $35,000 a 
year to live on, and the interest on her $250,000 would 
not provide that level of income. I used the same simple 
example of taking $10,000 from savings and buying a 
$100,000 house to explain how investing could help solve 
her financial problems. Of course, she would need to learn 
how to invest in property and find such an investment 
first. When I explained to her what "the velocity of 
money" and "return on investment" meant, she froze 
mentally ; and emotionally. Although it made sense to 
her, the fear of losing her hard- | earned money closed her 
mind to the possibility of a new winning formula. • All she 
had known was how to work hard and save money. Today 
her money still sits in the bank, and when I recently saw 
her again she said, "I love my! work, so I think I will work 
for a few more years. It will keep me active." As she 
walked away, I could hear my rich dad say, "One of the 
main reasons people work so hard is that they never 
learned how to have their money work hard. So they work 
hard all their lives, and their money takes it easy." 
Teaching Your Children to Have Their Money 
Work Hard  
The following are some ideas that you may want to use 
to teach your children to have their money work hard for 
them. Again, I caution parents not to force children to 
learn this if they do not want to learn. The trick of 
parenting is to find ways to make a child want to learn 
rather than forcing the child to learn. 
THE THREE PIGGY BANK SYSTEM  
When  I was a little boy, my rich dad asked me to buy 
three different piggy banks. They were labeled as follows: 
Tithing : Rich dad believed in giving to churches and 
charities. He took 10 percent of his gross income and 
tithed it. He often said, "God does not need to receive, but Page 145 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comhumans need to give." Over the years I have found that 
many of the richest people in the world began their lives 
with the habit of tithing. 
Rich dad was certain that he owed much of his good 
financial fortune to tithing. He would also say, "God is my 
partner. If you don't pay your partner, your partner stops 
working and you have to work ten times harder." 
Savings : Bank number two was for savings. As a rule 
of thumb, rich dad believed in having enough savings to 
cover one year's worth of expenses. For example, if his 
total expenses per year were $35,000, he thought it 
important to have 135,000 in savings. After he had that 
amount in savings, he would tithe the rest. If his expenses 
went up, then the amount he had in savings had to go up 
accordingly. 
Investing : In my opinion, it is this bank that gave me a 
very big head start in life. This is the bank that provided 
the money via which I would learn to take risks. 
My friend who had the $250,000 in savings should 
have had this bank at the age of nine. As stated earlier, 
when a child is nine years old, the child begins to seek his 
or her own identity. I think for me, learning to not need 
money, not need a job, and to invest at that age helped 
forge my identity. I learned financial confidence instead 
of the need for financial security. 
In other words, it was from this third bank that I got 
the real money to begin taking risks, making mistakes, 
learning lessons, and gaining the experience that would 
stand me in good stead the rest of my life. 
One of the first things I began to invest in were rare 
coins, a collection I still have today. After coins I invested 
in stocks and then real estate. But more than what assets I 
was investing in, I was investing in my education. Today 
when I speak about velocity of money and returns on 
investment, I speak from over forty years of experience. 
My friend with $250,000 in savings and approaching 
retirement age has yet to begin gaining her experience. 
And it is this lack of experience that causes her to be so 
afraid of losing her hard-earned money. It is my years of 
experience that give me a head start in this subject. 
By getting your children three piggy banks, you can 
give them the seed capital to begin gaining this priceless 
experience while they are young. Once they have the three 
banks and are developing good habits, you may want to Page 146 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtake your children down to a brokerage house and have 
them open an account, buying mutual funds or stocks 
with the money emptied from their piggy bank labeled 
"savings." I recommend letting the children do it so they 
gain the mental, emotional, and physical experience of the 
process. I know too many parents who perform this 
service for their child. Although you're helping your 
children gain a small portfolio, it robs them of the 
experience—and in the real world experience is as 
important as education. 
PAY YOURSELF FIRST  
Recently I was on the Oprah Winfrey show, and one of 
the main questions the audience had was "How do you 
pay yourself first?" I was shocked to realize that for many 
adults, the idea of paying yourself first was new and 
difficult. The reason it was difficult was that so many 
adults were so deeply in debt, they could not afford to pay 
themselves first. After leaving the show, I realized that by 
starting my life with the three piggy bank system, my rich 
dad was teaching me how to pay myself first. Today, as an 
adult, my wife and I still have three piggy banks sitting on 
our dresser, and we still tithe, save, and invest. 
When I study the lives of very rich people, I see that 
this idea of pay yourself first is paramount in their minds. 
It is fundamental to their lives. Recently I was listening to 
investment guru and fund manager Sir John Templeton, 
who was saying that he does his best to live on 20 percent 
of his gross and save, tithe, and invest 80 percent of his 
gross. Many people are living on 105 percent of their gross 
and have nothing left over with which to pay themselves. 
Instead of paying themselves first, they pay everyone else 
first. 
THE PAPERWORK  
Rich dad took the idea of the three piggy banks one 
step further. He wanted to make sure that Mike and I 
could then relate our piggy banks to our financial 
statements. As we continued to fill our piggy banks, he 
would also have us account for our banks on crude 
financial statements. This is how he would have us 
account for our piggy banks:  Page 147 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
If we moved some money out of our account or bank, 
we had to account for it. For example, if I moved $25 out 
of my tithing account and gave it to charity or for a church 
offering, I had to account for it on my monthly financial 
statement. 
My financials would look like this for the month: 
 
By having three piggy banks and being held 
accountable for my money on my financial statement, I 
Page 148 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comgained years of financial education and experience that 
most adults, much less kids, never receive. My rich dad 
would say, "The word accounting  comes from the word 
accountability . If you are going to be rich, you need to be 
accountable for your money." 
I cannot tell you how important the idea of 
accountability and accounting is for me in my life today. 
And it's important for everyone. When a bank politely 
turns you down for a loan, in many ways the bank is 
saying they are concerned with your lack of accountability 
for your money. When the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) says that a country is not "transparent" enough, in 
many ways it is asking that the country show them clearer 
financial statements. Transparency means clarity, such 
that any interested party can easily see where the cash is 
flowing and to whom it is flowing. In other words, the 
IMF will hold an entire nation accountable just as my rich 
dad held Mike and me accountable. 
So whether you're a small child, a family, a business, a 
church, or a large nation, the ability to manage your 
money and be accountable for it is an important life skill 
worth learning. 
This Is the Beginning  
This simple idea of using board games, three piggy 
banks, and simple financial statements is how my rich 
dad got his son and me started into the real world of 
money. Although simple in concept, it was not necessarily 
easy to keep up. One of the most important lessons I 
learned from this process was the value of financial 
discipline. Once a month I knew I had to report my 
finances to my rich dad. Once a month I knew I had to be 
accountable for all my money. There were definitely 
months I wanted to run and hide, yet in retrospect, the 
worst months were often the months I learned the most… 
because I learned the most about myself. I also know that 
this discipline helped me in school, because it was my lack 
of discipline, not my lack of intelligence, that got me in 
the most academic trouble. 
This is how my rich dad taught his son and me to 
handle money in the real world. In the next chapters I will 
go into some more advanced exercises you can try and 
other lessons that can be learned along the way. The 
following lessons are important to learn because today, 
just saving your money for a rainy day is a sure way of 
falling behind financially. In the Industrial Age, saving Page 149 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commoney may have been an okay idea. But in the 
Information Age, saving money is an idea that will not 
keep up with the speed of change caused by the changes 
in information. In the Information Age, you want to know 
how fast your money is moving and how hard it is 
working for you. 
Chapter 11: The Difference 
Between Good and Bad Debt 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
My mom and dad spent most of their lives doing their 
best to get out of debt. 
My rich dad, on the other hand, spent most of his life 
trying to get into more and more debt. Instead of advising 
Mike and me to avoid debt and pay off bills, he would 
often say, "If you want to be rich, you must know the 
difference between good debt and bad debt." It was not so 
much the subject of debt that rich dad was so interested 
in. He wanted us to know the difference between financial 
good and bad. Rich dad was more interested in bringing 
out our financial genius. 
Do You Know the Difference Between Good 
and Bad?  
In school, teachers focus most of their time looking for 
right answers and wrong answers. In church, much of the 
discussion is about the battle between good and evil. 
When it comes to money, rich dad also taught his son and 
me to know the difference between good and bad. 
The Poor and Banks  
When I was a kid I knew of many poor families that did 
not trust banks and bankers. Many poor people feel 
uncomfortable talking to a banker in a suit. 
So rather than go into a bank, many of them simply 
hide their money under a mattress or some other place of 
safekeeping… as long as it's not in a bank. If someone 
needs money, the people group together, pool their 
money, and lend their combined money to the group 
member in need. If they cannot find some friend or family 
member to lend them money, the poor often use 
pawnshops as their bank. Instead of putting up their 
house as collateral, they will put up their chain saw or TV 
and be charged very high interest rates. Today the poor 
can be charged interest rates over 400 percent on short -Page 150 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comterm money in some states in the United States. They 
are often called "payday loans." Many states do regulate 
the maximum amount of interest that can be charged, but 
it is still a very high price for borrowing money. When I 
realized how badly these types of financial institutions 
treat the poor, I knew why so many poor people distrusted 
the men in suits… and I also know that trust is a two-way 
street. To them, all banks and bankers were bad and out 
to exploit them, and banks and bankers often had a 
similar view of them. 
The Middle Class and Banks  
My parents, on the other hand, like much of the middle 
class, viewed the bank as a safe place to keep money. They 
often said to the kids, "It's as safe as money in the bank." 
So they viewed the banks as a good place to keep their 
money, but they also viewed borrowing too much money 
as bad. That is why my mom and dad were always trying 
to pay off their bills early. One of their goals was to pay off 
their house and own it free and clear. To summarize their 
view, they thought banks were good, savings were good, 
and borrowing was bad. That was why my mom said 
repeatedly, "Neither a borrower nor a lender be." 
The Rich and Banks  
My rich dad, on the other hand, taught Mike and me to 
be more financially intelligent. As stated earlier in this 
book, one of the definitions of intelligence is the ability to 
make finer distinctions, or multiply by dividing. More 
specifically, rich dad did not just blindly think that saving 
money was good or that debt was bad. Instead he spent a 
lot of time teaching us the difference between good 
savings and bad savings, good expenses and bad 
expenses, good debt and bad debt, good losses and bad 
losses, good income and bad income, good taxes and bad 
taxes, good investments and bad investments. 
Rich dad taught us to think and raise our financial 
intelligence by making finer distinctions. In other words, 
the more you can tell the difference between good debt 
and bad debt, good savings and bad savings, the higher 
your financial IQ. If you see something such as debt as 
only good or only bad, then that means your financial IQ 
could be higher. 
This book will not go into the specific differences 
between the goods and the bads. But if you are interested 
in finding out more, book number three, Rich Dad's 
Guide to Investing , will explain further some of the Page 151 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdifferences between good and bad debt, expenses, 
losses, taxes, and so on. 
The point of this book is to caution parents about 
saying such things as 
• "Get out of debt." 
• "Save money." 
• "Pay off your bills." 
• "Cut up your credit cards." 
• "Don't borrow money." 
Repeating what was said earlier, the poor tend to think 
banks are bad and avoid them; the middle class think of 
certain services of banks as good and certain services of 
banks as bad; and my rich dad taught us to see the good 
and bad in everything. By encouraging us to see both the 
good and the bad in most financial matters, he increased 
our ability to make finer distinctions, and hence we raised 
our financial intelligence. 
Developing Your Child's Financial Genius  
One of the most important lessons rich dad taught us 
was the lesson he called "think like a banker." He also 
called it "the alchemy of money… how to turn lead into 
gold." Or "how to make money with nothing." 
Those of you who read Rich Dad Poor Dad  will recall 
the comic book story. That was a story about me learning 
to think like a banker or like an alchemist, which is a 
person who can turn lead into gold. 
Instead of viewing the bank as bad, as many of the 
poor do, or that parts of the bank are good and some parts 
of the bank are bad, as many of the middle class do, rich 
dad wanted Mike and me to understand how banks work. 
During this period of our development, he would 
occasionally take us to his bank and have us sit in the 
lobby, watching people come and go. Finally, after we had 
done this exercise a number of times, he asked us, "Well, 
what do you boys see?" 
Being about fourteen years old, we did not see too 
much. Mike and I shrugged and looked bored, as most 
teenagers do when they are asked a question. "People 
coming in and going out," said Mike. 
"Yeah," I replied. "That's all I see." 
"Okay," said rich dad as he guided us to the teller's 
counter. There he had us watch a woman make a deposit. 
"See that?" he said.  Page 152 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWe nodded. 
"Good," he said as he then led us to a desk where one 
of the officers of the bank sat. "What do you see here?" 
Mike and I watched as a man in a suit was sitting there 
filling out a financial statement and talking to the banker. 
"I don't really know," I replied. "But if I were to guess, I 
would say that he is borrowing some money." 
"Good," said rich dad, indicating that it was time for us 
to leave. "You finally saw what I wanted you to see." 
Climbing into his car, which was very hot from the 
Hawaiian sun, Mike asked, "What did we see?" 
"Good question," rich dad replied. "What did you see?" 
"I saw people going in and putting money in the bank," 
I said. "And then I saw other people going into the bank 
and borrowing the money out. That is all I saw." 
"Very good," said rich dad. "And whose money was it? 
Was it the bank's money?" 
"No," said Mike. "It was the people's money. The bank 
is making money with other people's money. They take 
money in and lend money out, but it is not their money." 
"Good," rich dad said again. Then, turning to me, he 
said, "And what are your parents trying to do every time 
they go to the bank?" 
After thinking for a moment, I replied, "They try their 
best to save money. And if they borrow money, they then 
try their best to pay off the debt from the money they 
borrowed. They think that savings are good and debt is 
bad." 
"Very good," said rich dad. "You are very observant." 
Pushing my baseball hat back, I just shrugged, saying 
to myself, big deal, as we rode back to rich dad's office. 
Sitting at his desk, rich dad took out his yellow legal 
tablet and drew the following diagram, the diagram of a 
financial statement:  Page 153 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
"Do you understand this financial picture?" rich dad 
asked as he pushed the legal tablet in front of us. 
Mike and I studied it for a moment. "Yes, I understand 
it," said Mike as I nodded. By now we had run so many of 
these different financial scenarios that it was getting easy 
to understand how rich dad thought. "The bank borrows 
or holds the money and pays 3 percent to the saver and 
then lends it out at 6 percent to the borrower." 
Nodding, rich dad said, "And whose money is it?" 
"It's the saver's money," I replied quickly. "As soon as 
it comes in, the banker wants to lend it out." 
Rich dad nodded. After a long period of silence, letting 
us digest what he wanted us to understand, he said, 
"When I play Monopoly with you boys, I often say to you 
that you are looking at the formula for great wealth. Is 
that correct?" 
We nodded. "Four green houses, one red hotel," I 
replied quietly. 
"Good," rich dad said. "The one good thing about real 
estate is that you can see it. But now that you are older, I 
want you to see what the eyes cannot see." 
"What the eyes cannot see?" I repeated, now confused. 
Rich dad nodded. "You're older now. Your brain is 
more developed. I want to begin teaching you to see with 
Page 154 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comyour brain what the poor and middle class rarely see … 
and they often do not see it because they are not familiar 
with financial statements and how they work." 
Mike and I sat quietly, waiting. We knew that he was 
about to show us something simple yet profound—but it 
would be profound only if we could see beyond the 
simplicity. 
Rich dad then took back his legal tablet and drew the 
next diagram. 
Rich dad's financial statement: 
 
Mike and I just sat and stared at the diagram for a long 
time. As I said, it was a simple diagram, but it would be 
profound if we let the lesson come through in spite of its 
simplicity. Finally I said, "So you borrow the money and 
lend it back out, just like the bank does." 
"That is correct," said rich dad. "Do you know how 
your parents often say, 'Neither a borrower nor a lender 
be'?" 
I nodded. 
"That is why they struggle with money," said rich dad. 
"First they focus on saving money. If they do borrow 
money, they borrow money for liabilities they think are 
assets—things such as houses and cars—things where the 
cash flows out rather than in. Then they work hard to pay 
off that debt so they can say, 'I own this free and clear.'"  
Page 155 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Is it bad that they do that?" I asked. 
"No," said rich dad. "It is not a matter of good or bad. 
It is a matter of education." 
"Education?" I replied. "What does education have to 
do with this?" 
"Well," said rich dad, "since your parents are not well 
educated when it comes to money, it is best that they save 
money and do their best to pay off debt quickly. Given 
their level of financial education, or what I call 'financial 
sophistication,' that type of money management is best 
for them." 
"But if they want to do what you do," said Mike, "they 
must increase their financial education." 
Rich dad nodded. "And that is what I want to do with 
you two before you get out of school. If you do not learn 
what I am about to teach you before you leave school, the 
chances are you will never learn it. If you leave school 
without this education, the chances are the world will take 
unfair advantage of you simply because you do not know 
much about money." 
"You mean the real world will educate us?" I asked. 
Rich dad just nodded. 
"So you borrow money to make money," I said. 
"That is correct," said rich dad. 
"And my parents work for money and then try to save 
money and not borrow money." 
Rich dad nodded. "And that is why it is hard for them 
to get rich." 
"Because they work hard for money," I added, seeking 
more clarification. 
Nodding, rich dad said, "And you can work only so 
hard and you can get paid only so much for your hard 
work. For most people, there is a limit as to how much 
money hard work can produce." 
"So then there is a limit as to how much you can save," 
Mike added. "As you said, taxes take a large chunk from 
employees' wages before the employee even gets paid." 
Quietly rich dad leaned back in his chair. He could tell 
the lesson was coming through. 
Turning to the diagram on rich dad's legal tablet, I 
pointed to the asset and liability column.  Page 156 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
"So you do exactly as the bank does: borrow the money 
from the bank, then find a way to have that borrowed 
money make more money." 
Rich dad stared back at me and said, "Now let's look at 
your parents' financial statement." 
With that statement, I rocked back in my chair. I knew 
what he was getting at. It was clear as a bell. Using the 
legal tablet, he drew my parents' financial statement. 
 
Rich dad, Mike, and I sat there looking at the 
differences in the two financial statements. I really did not 
know how profound this simple lesson would be for me in 
my life, yet it did affect the way I looked at the world after 
Page 157 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthat day. There were so many lessons to be learned 
from this simple example, and I continue to learn the 
lessons today. 
Many of the lessons are hidden. I would suggest sitting 
down with friends and discussing the impact the subtle 
differences can have over a lifetime. I would suggest 
investing the time to discuss the following: 
• What happens to people if their financial mind allows 
assets to earn less than the cost of their liabilities over 
their lifetimes? 
• How much time does it take to save money instead of 
borrow money? For example, how long would it take you 
to save $100,000 versus borrow 1100,000 if you made 
only $50,000 a year and had a family to feed, clothe, and 
educate? 
• How much faster could you get ahead if you could 
borrow money and make money, versus work hard and 
save money and then try to make money with what you 
saved? 
• How did one dad take an asset, his savings, and turn 
it into a liability (savers are losers), while  the other dad 
took debt and turned it into an asset? 
• What financial skills would you need in order to be a 
person who could borrow money to make more money? 
• How would you learn to get those skills? 
• What are the long- and short-term risks of both types 
of financial statements? 
• What do we teach our children? 
• If you will invest the time to discuss these questions, I 
think you will see why a few people get rich and why most 
people struggle financially all their lives. Many of life's 
financial struggles and financial wins revolve around the 
subject of money, savings, and debt. 
A WORD OF CAUTIONSTART SMALL  
Rich dad always said, "Treat all debt the way you 
would treat a loaded gun." The reason rich dad often said 
that it was important to know the difference between 
good debt and bad debt was that debt had the power to 
make you both rich and poor. Just as a loaded gun can 
protect you or kill you, so it is with debt. In America 
today, credit card debt is choking the life out of many 
families, even well-educated ones. 
The main point of this chapter is to give you some time Page 158 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comto think about what you are teaching your children 
about debt. If you want your child to grow up and have 
the opportunity to become very rich in a short period of 
time, then you as a parent need to teach your child the 
basic skills of debt and debt management. That education 
begins with the financial statement. 
If you teach your children little to nothing about debt, 
the chances are that your children will struggle financially 
for most of their lives, doing their best to work hard, save 
money, and get out of debt. 
The next chapters are on how parents can begin to 
increase their child's financial IQ. A child with a high 
financial IQ will be better able to harness the awesome 
power found in debt. As rich dad said, "Always treat debt 
like a loaded gun." And, "You must know the difference 
between good debt and bad debt." 
When you begin to teach your child about good debt 
and bad debt, good expenses and bad expenses, you begin 
to bring out your child's financial genius. 
Chapter 12: Learning with Real 
Money 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
When my mom and dad announced that they did not 
have the money to send me to college, all I said was, 
"That's okay. I don't need your money to go to school. I 
will find my own way to pay for my education." I could say 
that with confidence because I had already been earning 
my own money. But it was not the money I earned that 
was going to put me through school. It was the lessons I 
learned earning the money that put me through school. It 
began with the lesson of my rich dad taking the ten cents 
an hour away. At the age of nine I was learning that I 
could survive on my own. 
I Stopped Helping My Son and Began Teaching 
Him  
A father came up to me recently and said, "I think my 
son could be the next Bill Gates. Brian is only fourteen 
years old, but he already has a strong interest in business 
and investing. I also realized after reading your books that 
I was spoiling him. By my wanting to help him, I was 
actually getting in his way. So when he came to me and 
said he wanted new golf clubs, I offered him a new Page 159 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comchallenge."  
"How were you getting in his way?" I asked. 
"I was teaching him to work for money," said the dad. 
"Normally, if he had come to me and asked for golf clubs, 
I would have told him to go earn the money and buy the 
clubs. After reading your books, I realized that I was 
programming him to be a hardworking consumer. He was 
being programmed to be a hardworking man instead of a 
rich man who knows how to have his money work hard 
for him." 
"So what did you do differently?" I asked. 
"Well, I told him to go around the neighborhood and 
look for jobs that needed to be done. Normally I would 
have given him the money via an allowance and told him 
to save enough to buy the golf clubs." 
"That's interesting," I replied. "Instead of teaching him 
that he automatically deserved money, you told him to go 
look for opportunities and earn the money." 
Nodding, the proud father said, "I thought he would be 
angry, but he was really excited about starting his own 
business, something on his own rather than asking me for 
the money. So he went out and mowed lawns for the 
summer and soon had $500, which would have more than 
paid for his clubs. But then I did something else that was 
different." 
"What did you do?" I asked. 
"I took him down to a stockbrokerage company, and he 
bought $100 worth of high-growth mutual funds. I told 
him this was money for his college education." 
"That's good," I said. "Then did you let him buy his golf 
clubs?" 
"Oh no," said the proud father, beaming with pride. "I 
then did something your rich dad would have done." 
"And what was that?" I asked cautiously. 
"I took his $400 and told him I would hold it until he 
found an asset that would buy the golf clubs for him." 
"What?" I asked. "You told him to go buy an asset? So 
you delayed his need for gratification even longer?" 
"Yeah," said the dad. "You said that delayed 
gratification was an important emotional intelligence to 
develop. So I took his money and delayed his 
gratification." 
"What happened then?" I asked.  Page 160 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Well, he got angry for about half an hour, but then he 
realized what I was doing. Once he realized that I was 
trying to teach him something, he began to think. And 
once he understood what I was doing, he got the lesson," 
said the dad. 
"And what was the lesson?" I asked. 
"He came back to me and said, 'You are trying to 
preserve my money, aren't you? You don't want me to 
blow it on a set of golf clubs. You want me to get the golf 
clubs and still hang on to my money. That is what you 
want me to learn, isn't it?'" said the dad, beaming. "He got 
the lesson. He understood that he could now keep his 
hard-earned money and get his golf clubs. I was so proud 
of him." 
"Wow," was all I could say. "At the age of fourteen he 
understood that he could keep his money and get his golf 
clubs?" 
"That's right," said the dad. "He understood he could 
have both." 
Again, all I could say was, "Wow." Then I said, "Most 
adults never learn that lesson. So how did he do it?" 
"He began reading the want ads in the newspapers. 
Then he went to the golf shop and talked to the pros to 
find out what they needed and wanted. Then one day he 
came home and told me he needed his money. He had 
found a way to keep his money and get his golf clubs." 
"So tell me," I pushed, waiting for the answer. 
"He found a person with candy vending machines for 
sale. He then went to the golf pro and asked if he could 
place two machines in the golf shop. The pro said yes, and 
he came home to me and asked for the money. We went 
back to the candy vendor, bought two machines and a 
supply of nuts and candy for about 1350, and set the 
machines up in the golf shop. Once a week he ran over to 
the golf shop and collected the money from the machine 
and restocked the machine. After two months he had 
made more than enough money to buy his golf clubs. So 
now he has his golf clubs, and he has steady income from 
his six machines, his assets." 
"Six machines," I said. "I thought he only bought two 
candy machines?" 
"He did," said the dad. "But as soon as he realized that 
his machines were assets, he went out and bought more Page 161 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comassets. So now his college fund is increasing steadily, 
his candy machines are increasing, and he has the time 
and money to play all the golf he wants because he doesn't 
have to work for the money to pay for his golf games. He 
plans on being the next Tiger Woods, and I don't have to 
pay for it. Most important, he is learning much more than 
if I had just given him the money." 
"Sounds like you have a cross between Tiger Woods 
and Bill Gates coming up." 
The proud father laughed. "You know, it doesn't really 
matter. What does matter is that he now knows that he 
can grow up to become anyone he wants to be." 
He Can Become Whoever He Wants to Become  
We discussed at length the importance of his son 
knowing that he can grow up to become whoever he wants 
to become. "My dad said, 'Success is becoming whoever 
you want to become'… and it sounds like your son is 
already successful." 
"Well, he is happy," said the dad. "He is not in with the 
'in' crowd at school. He sort of follows the beat of a 
different drum, as they say. So now that he has his own 
business and his own money, he has his own identity… a 
sense of personal security. He is not trying to see how 
popular he can be with the rest of the 'in' crowd. I think 
having the security of his own identity gives him time to 
think more about what he wants to become rather than 
try to be what his friends think is cool. He has gained a lot 
of self-confidence in the process." 
I nodded, reflecting back to my high school days. I 
painfully remember being an outsider , not an insider. I  
remember not being in with the "in" crowd and how 
lonely it felt not to be recognized or accepted by the cool 
kids. Looking back, I realize that learning from rich dad 
did give me a sense of personal security and confidence in 
spite of a "not so cool" identity. I knew that even though I 
was not the smartest or coolest kid in school, I at least 
knew that someday I would be rich… and that was the 
identity I wanted the most. 
"Tell me," asked the dad, popping me out of my high 
school memories, "what else would you add to my son's 
education? He's come this far, he's doing well, but I know 
he can still learn more. What would you suggest?" 
"Oh, great question," I replied. "How is his 
paperwork?"  Page 162 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Paperwork?" the dad asked. 
"Yes, his records… his financial statements. Are they 
up-to-date?" 
"No. He just verbally reports in to me on a weekly 
basis, and he shows me what he collected from the 
machines and his receipts from his purchases of candy to 
fill the machines. But there are no formal financial 
statements. Isn't that too difficult?" 
"It doesn't have to be. It can be very simple. In fact, it 
is better if at first it is really simple." 
"You mean keep an actual financial statement the way 
he does while playing CASHFLOW?" asked the dad. 
"Yes," I said. "Not even that difficult. What is most 
important is that he sees the big picture of what financial 
statements do, and then he can slowly but surely add in 
more detail, finer distinctions. When he does that, his 
financial IQ will go up and up and his financial success 
will increase." 
"We can do that," said the dad. "I'll send you a copy of 
the first financial statement we do." 
We shook hands and went our own way. About a week 
later I received in the mail a copy of his son's financial 
statement. It looked like this: 
Brian's Business Financial Statement for the 
Month of June  
 
Page 163 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comI sent back my congratulations and comments. My 
comments were, "Where are his personal expenses?" His 
dad e-mailed back, "He now keeps his personal expenses 
on a separate financial statement. He does not want to 
confuse business expenses with personal expenses." 
I e-mailed back, "Great training. It is important to 
know the difference between personal finances and 
business finances. But what about taxes?" 
His dad replied, "I don't want to shock him just yet. 
We'll address that next year. I'm just letting him win for 
now. He will be learning about taxes soon enough." 
Eight Months Later  
About eight months later his dad sent me an e-mail 
and a copy of Brian's latest financial statement. "Just 
want to let you know about Brian's progress. The mutual 
fund he has his college fund in did very well, even in a bad 
market, and he now has almost $6,000 in it. He has nine 
candy machines and is now thinking about buying a 
business, a coin-operated automatic business… just like 
on game cards from CASHFLOW! He has hired a part-
time bookkeeper because his paperwork got too 
complicated. It is now time to talk to him about taxes and 
introduce him to an accountant. He just turned fifteen, 
and I think he is ready for the real world. His financial 
report card is in great shape, and so is his academic report 
card. As his self-confidence increased, so did his grades." 
At the bottom of the note was written, "P.S. Brian even 
has a girlfriend now, and he is teaching her what he has 
been learning. She says she likes him because he is not 
like all the other boys, and she thinks he has a future. 
Besides, I think she is more interested in business than he 
is. His self-esteem and his self-confidence are now sky-
high. The most important thing is that he is learning to 
become who he wants to become… rather than trying to 
become what the other kids think he should become. 
Thanks. Brian's dad." 
The Most Satisfying Part of My Work  
Most of the mail we receive, electronic or on paper, is 
very positive and uplifting. I thank all of you who send 
your words of kindness to us. It inspires us as a company 
to keep on going. While 99 percent of our letters are 
positive, there are those that are negative. We receive 
comments such as "You're wrong. I don't agree with you" 
or "You offended my beliefs." As I said, a vast majority of Page 164 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comour incoming correspondence is positive, and we thank 
you, because it is the positive support that gives us the 
energy to keep going. Not that we don't appreciate people 
pointing out our mistakes for correction. So keep those 
comments coming in, positive and negative. We do 
appreciate them. 
Another repeated response I receive is, "I wish I had 
read your books and played your games twenty years 
ago." And to these people I say, "It is never too late, and I 
commend you for admitting that you could have done a 
few things differently." Some people will defend what they 
did in the past, accuse me of insulting their beliefs, and 
then continue on with what they did in the past, even 
though what they did in the past is no longer working. 
These people often had a winning formula that worked for 
them in the past but is not working today… and to 
continue on with an old winning formula that is not 
working anymore is a loser's way of living life. 
The most satisfying part of my work is to hear from 
parents whose children are learning to be financially 
secure, financially independent, and financially confident. 
The children who are not waiting twenty years to begin 
their financial education make this work especially 
worthwhile. Children given the opportunity to gain some 
degree of financial security and financial confidence early 
in life have a great opportunity to create a life exactly the 
way they want it to be. 
A strong financial foundation does not give your child 
the answers to life. A foundation is just that, a foundation. 
Yet if the foundation is strong, the children can grow and 
find the answers they need to find so they will have the 
freedom to live life exactly the way they want to live it. 
Young Future Millionaires  
Ever since Rich Dad Poor Dad  was released, more and 
more proud parents come up to me and tell stories such 
as the three that follow. Each story, illustrating the 
initiative and creativity of a particular child, amazes me. 
One sixteen-year-old boy from Adelaide, Australia, 
came up to me and said, "After reading your book and 
playing your CASHFLOW game, I bought my first piece of 
real estate, sold part of it, and put $100,000 in my 
pocket." He went on to say that with the help of his father, 
an attorney, he made the deal on his cell phone while in 
study hall at school. "My mom is worried that I might let 
this money go to my head, but it won't. I know the Page 165 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdifference between assets and liabilities, and I plan on 
using the $100,000 to buy more assets…not liabilities." 
A young woman just nineteen years of age, from Perth, 
Australia, after reading my book, went out and began 
purchasing rental properties with her mom as her 
partner. She said to me, "I already make more from my 
rental income than I could make as a shop clerk in a retail 
store. I don't plan on stop ping. While most of my friends 
are drinking in pubs, I am out looking for more 
investments." 
A twenty-six-year-old single mom came to one of my 
book signings in Auckland, New Zealand, and said, "I was 
on welfare until a friend who is a medical doctor gave me 
your book and said, 'Read this.' After reading it, I went 
back to my friend and said, 'Let's do something together.' 
And we did. She and I purchased the medical clinic she 
was an employee of for only $1,000 down, and we 
financed the rest out of the cash flow from the medical 
clinic. In one transaction I went from a single welfare 
mom to a mom who was financially free. Today I watch 
the doctors who work for my medical clinic go to work, 
while I stay at home with my child. My friend and I are 
now looking for other investments, because we now have 
the time to look." 
Encourage and Protect Your Child's Creativity  
You may also notice that most of these young people 
were not afraid of using debt to make them rich. They did 
not say, "Play it safe and don't take risks." They did not 
learn to fear making mistakes or fear failing. Instead they 
were encouraged to take risks and to learn. When a child 
is taught to fear making mistakes, the child's creativity is 
crippled, even crushed. The same thing happens when 
parents say, "Do it my way." And when encouraged to 
think for themselves, take risks, and seek their own 
answers, the children's geniuses kick in, and their 
creativity is encouraged and protected. 
I am always amazed at how creative young people are. 
The previous stories are examples of that creativity. 
Encourage a child's financial creativity when they're 
young. Rather than tell kids what to do, allow them to use 
their natural creativity, and let them find their own ways 
of solving financial problems and creating exactly the life 
they want. 
The Greatest Risk of All  Page 166 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comOne of the most frequent comments I receive from 
parents who play my board game CASHFLOW with their 
kids is, "The kids always beat me. They learn so much 
quicker than the adults." There are many reasons why this 
may happen. One reason is that the children have not yet 
been conditioned by fear. They are young, and they know 
that if they fall, they will bounce back up. It seems that for 
many of us, the older we get, the more we seem to fear 
falling down. 
Since the way we learn is by making mistakes, the 
greatest risk of all is to wait too long to begin making 
those mistakes. I have friends who have been doing the 
same old thing for over twenty years, and many of those 
friends are in financial trouble. The reason they are in 
trouble is that they failed to make enough mistakes when 
they were younger. Now many are out of time and out of 
money, and of the two, time is much more important. So 
please encourage your children to begin playing with real 
money and learning financial habits that will increase 
their financial well-being as they grow older. Because the 
greatest risk of all is to not take risks and learn from your 
mistakes when you're young. The older you get, the bigger 
the mistakes. 
Chapter 13: Other Ways to 
Increase Your Child's Financial 
IQ 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
In June of 2000, a local Phoenix, Arizona, reporter was 
interviewing me. He was a nice but rather skeptical, 
bordering on cynical, individual. We were of the same age 
and of similar backgrounds. His dad was a respected 
judge in Boston, where he had grown up. Although we 
were of the same age and socioeconomic and academic 
backgrounds, there was a tremendous difference in our 
financial stations in life. At fifty-three years old he had 
very little to retire on. He said to me, "I had planned to 
write my great novel once I retired, but it seems now that 
I will always need to work as a freelance journalist just to 
pay the mortgage and keep food on the table." 
I then asked him, "Why don't you begin to invest? Why 
not buy a few pieces of rental property here in Phoenix 
and then take your time to write that great novel that lies Page 167 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.cominside of you?"  
His reply was, "You can't find good deals here in 
Phoenix anymore. You could do it ten years ago, but good 
deals just don't exist anymore. The market is way too hot. 
So when the stock market crashes, the real estate market 
will probably crash, too. I think that it is too risky to 
invest." 
With that comment I knew that he would wind up 
working all his life. I could sense that he would probably 
continue on with his winning formula for the rest of his 
life. I could tell just by the words he was using. If he did 
not change his words, he would not change his life. 
A Rich Vocabulary  
By having two dads, I could compare the similarities 
and differences between them. I was about fourteen years 
old when I began to realize that although both my dads 
spoke English, they did not speak the same language. One 
spoke the language of a schoolteacher, and the other 
spoke the language of a businessman and investor. Both 
spoke English, but what they said was very different. 
I am acutely aware of a person's vocabulary. Just by 
listening to their words, I can learn a great deal about 
people. For example, I have a friend who really likes 
sports. He and I can have a great conversation as long as 
we speak about sports. However, if I should ask him, 
"What is the debt to equity ratio of your house?" his eyes 
would glaze over, even though the question is a simple 
one. If I asked the same question differently, he would 
understand me better. Instead of asking about the debt to 
equity ratio, I could ask, "How much do you owe on your 
house, and how much do you think your house is worth?" 
By asking him with those words, I am asking almost the 
same question and seeking much the same answer. The 
difference is, he can understand me when I use one set of 
words but not when I use different words. And that is 
what this chapter is about: the power of words. 
Nothing Is Complicated If You Use Simple 
Words  
Both dads taught me not to ever let a word go past that 
I did not understand. Both dads encouraged me to stop 
someone in midsentence and ask him or her to explain a 
word or words I did not understand. For example, I was in 
my rich dad's attorney's office when the attorney used 
some words rich dad did not understand. Rich dad said Page 168 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comcalmly, "Hold it, I did not understand what you just 
said. Please explain that word to me in my language." 
Rich dad carried this practice to an extreme, especially 
with his attorney, who liked to use flashy words. When his 
attorney said, "the party of the first…" rich dad stopped 
him and asked, "What kind of  party  are you talking 
about? A formal black-tie party or a casual party at my 
house?"  
My smart dad said, "Many people believe that if they 
use big words that' no one understands, they sound more 
intelligent. The problem is, they may sound intelligent, 
but they fail to communicate." 
Whenever I was having trouble with some financial 
terms, rich dad said, "Nothing is complicated if you use 
simple words." 
Many people are in financial trouble simply because 
they are using words they do not understand. Two classic 
examples are the definitions of the words assets  and 
liabilities . Instead of giving me only the definition from 
the dictionary, which is very confusing, rich dad gave me a 
definition I could use and understand. He simply said, 
'Assets put money in your pocket, and liabilities take 
money from your pocket." For added emphasis, he also 
said, "If you stop working, assets will feed you and 
liabilities will eat you." 
Examining rich dad's definitions a little closer, you 
may notice that he uses a physical activity to define his 
definition instead of stating only a mental or verbal 
definition, such as the definition of "asset" from Webster's  
dictionary: "items on a balance sheet showing the book 
value of property owned." 
When you look at the dictionary definition, it is small 
wonder that so many people think their house is an asset. 
First of all, most people have never bothered to look up 
the word. Second, most people tend to just blindly accept 
a definition when they hear someone they perceive to be 
an authority, someone such as their banker or accountant, 
tell them, "Your house is an asset." As I said, when your 
banker says your house is an asset, he or she is not lying. 
Your banker just is not saying whose asset it is. I also said 
that intelligence is the ability to make finer distinctions. 
So having multiple definitions is another way of making 
finer distinctions. Third, if you have a personal or physical 
experience of a word, you tend to have a better 
understanding of it.  Page 169 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWhen you look at the learning pyramid on the 
following page, you can begin to understand why so many 
people blindly accept only mental definitions of words. 
Much of the current educational system, after the third 
grade or approximately by the time a child is nine, tends 
to be pure mental learning. The blocks and toys are taken 
away and students begin to study mentally. To expedite 
the learning process, children are asked to almost blindly 
accept as fact what they read or hear from an authority 
figure such as a teacher. The system, at this point, is 
focused on almost pure mental learning. Emotionally the 
child learns to fear making mistakes and fear questioning 
or challenging what is being said. Physical learning, 
except for art and physical education in the gym or on the 
athletic field, is almost nonexistent. Children who are 
verbal-linguistic students do well, and students who learn 
physically or are more artistically inclined begin to drop 
back. Children at this stage are often asked to accept 
mental concepts as facts without any physical proof. This 
may be why when a banker says, "Your house is an asset," 
most people just nod and accept that as a statement of 
fact without any physical proof. After all, it is how we are 
taught to learn after the age of nine. 
The Learning Pyramid  
 
The Power of Nouns and Verbs  
My rich dad did his best to have us associate physically 
Page 170 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comwith each new word or concept. That is why his 
definition of assets and liabilities always had some 
physical references such as "money" and "pocket" and 
some type of activity, such as "puts money in your 
pocket." He used nouns  such as "money" and "pocket" 
and verbs  such as "put" in his description—nouns and 
verbs that Mike and I understood. When investing the 
time to teach your children about money, please be very 
careful to use words they understand. And if they are 
physical learners, please be especially careful about using 
definitions that your children can see, touch, and feel 
regardless of how old they are. Games are great teachers 
because they provide a physical aspect to the new 
financial vocabulary your child is learning. 
The Power of Words  
At the start of this chapter I mentioned my 
conversation with the reporter. He was a very bright man, 
we were about the same age, and I enjoyed my time with 
him. We shared many of the same interests in life, but 
when it came to money, we approached the subject from 
very different points of view. Two issues immediately 
tipped me off that I should be careful about what I said 
around him, for he could misunderstand what I was 
saying about money. The first issue was that money is a 
very emotional subject, and the second was that I have 
tremendous respect for the power of the press. The press 
has the power to make you and the power to break you… 
so I was especially careful of what I said to him when it 
came to my views on money. An example from the 
interview went like this: 
Reporter: "Why do you invest in real estate instead of 
mutual funds?" 
RTK: "Well, I do invest in both, but it is true that I have 
more money in real estate. First of all, each type of 
investment has different strengths and different 
weaknesses. One of the strengths I like about real estate is 
that real estate gives me the greatest control over when I 
pay my taxes and how much I pay in taxes." 
Reporter: "Are you saying that people should avoid  
paying taxes? Isn't that a little risky?" 
RTK: "I did not say avoid , I said real estate gave me 
greater control  over my taxes." 
Just the difference between the definitions and 
understanding of the words avoid taxes  and control over Page 171 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtaxes  is vast. It took me a good twenty minutes to 
explain the differences between the words avoid  and 
control . In order for me to explain the differences, I 
needed to explain differences between the tax laws for an 
employee and the tax laws for an investor. I also had to 
explain the differences between tax laws of mutual funds 
and the tax laws of real estate. At the core of the problem 
in communication was the fact that as an employee, he 
had very little control over his taxes. Since he had little 
control, the word avoid  sounded like evade  to him, and 
most of us know that tax evasion is illegal. So when I said 
"control over taxes," he heard "tax evasion," and all of his 
red flags went up and he went on the defensive. As stated 
earlier, 'An ounce of perception often takes a ton of 
education to change." In this case, it did not take a ton of 
education, but it did take about twenty minutes of hard 
explaining to calm the situation down. I definitely did not 
want the awesome power of the press wielded against me 
simply over a misunderstanding between the definitions 
of two words. After that, the interview got back on track: 
Reporter: "The problem with your message is that you 
can't buy real estate anymore. The prices here in Phoenix 
are simply too high. Besides, how can I find a property, 
buy it cheap, fix it up, and sell it? I don't have that kind of 
time." 
RTK: "Well, I don't trade real estate. I invest in real 
estate." 
Reporter: "Are you saying that fixing up a property and 
selling it for a profit isn't investing?" 
RTK: "Well, in the broad term definition of investing, I 
guess you could call buying and selling real estate 
investing. But in the world of investing, people who buy 
something they don't plan on using or owning are more 
often called 'traders.' They buy to sell. An investor usually 
buys to hold and uses the asset for cash flow and capital 
gains. It is just a finer distinction." 
Reporter: "But don't you have to sell your property to 
get your capital gains?" 
RTK: "No. A true investor will do their best to get their 
capital gains out without selling or trading their property. 
You see, the first objective of an investor is to buy and 
hold, buy and hold, buy and hold. A true investor's 
primary objective is to increase their assets, not sell them. 
They may sell, but it is not their primary objective. In a 
true investor's mind, it takes too much time to find a good Page 172 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.cominvestment, so they would rather buy and hold. A 
trader buys and sells, buys and sells, hopefully increasing 
their cash basis each time. An investor buys to hold, and a 
trader buys to sell." 
The reporter sat for a while, shaking his head. Finally 
he said," It sounds like a lot of mumbo-jumbo to me." 
Then he got back on track and asked me his next 
question. 
I was feeling bad because I was getting into areas of 
discussion I should have avoided. I was doing my best to 
use simple language, but I could tell it was not going well. 
In my attempt to make finer distinctions, I could tell I was 
only making things more confusing: 
Reporter: "Are you saying that you do not look for run-
down pieces of property you can fix up and sell for a 
profit?" 
RTK: "I might look for such properties, especially if I 
can buy and hold them. But the answer is 'No.' I am not 
necessarily looking for properties that are run-down and 
need repair." 
Reporter: "So what are you looking for?" 
RTK: "First of all, I am usually looking for a motivated 
seller. People often need to sell quickly, so they are willing 
to negotiate a good price. Or I look to banks for properties 
that are in foreclosure." 
Reporter: "It sounds like you are picking on people 
who are in trouble. That doesn't sound fair." 
RTK: "Well, first of all, the person needs to sell. He or 
she is delighted to have an interested buyer. And second, 
haven't you ever just wanted to get rid of something you 
no longer needed and were happy to get some money for 
it?" 
Reporter: "Well, it still sounds to me like you look for 
people to take advantage of. If you didn't, why would you 
buy a foreclosure? Isn't the reason someone is in 
foreclosure because they ran upon tough economic 
times?" 
RTK: "Well, I can see how you can see it that way, and 
from that point of view, you have a point. But the other 
side of the coin is that the bank foreclosed on the person 
because the person did not keep their agreements with 
the bank. I did not foreclose on them, the bank did." 
Reporter: "Okay, I understand what you are saying, but Page 173 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comI still think it is just another case of the rich picking on 
the poor and the weak. So after finding a motivated seller 
or a bank foreclosure, what else do you look for?" 
RTK: "Well, the next thing I do is run my numbers and 
see if the IRR, or internal rate of return, makes sense." 
Reporter: "IRR? Why is that important?" 
Immediately after saying "IRR," I knew I was in 
trouble again. Maybe I should have said "ROI" or "cash on 
cash return." Nonetheless, I could feel I was not winning 
many points with this reporter. I needed to scramble out 
quickly. I needed to use the simple definitions that my 
rich dad used so I could get back into communication: 
RTK: "As I said earlier, my objective as an investor is to 
buy and hold. IRR, or internal rate of return, is important 
because it measures how fast I can get my initial capital 
back, often called my 'down payment.' I want my initial 
capital back quickly because I want to go back out and buy 
another asset with it." 
Reporter: "What about the debt? Aren't you interested 
in paying off the debt?" 
At this point I sort of knew the interview was lost. I 
gave up trying to be a teacher and simply stated the 
investment formula I had in my head and let him decide 
what he was going to do with the newspaper article: 
RTK: "No. My objective is not to pay off my debt. My 
objective is to increase my debt." 
Reporter: "Increase your debt? Why would you want to 
increase your debt?" 
As I said, by this point I knew the interview was lost. It 
went downhill even further when I explained the tax risk 
involved with mutual fund losses. He did not like what I 
said about mutual funds simply because all of his 
retirement account was in mutual funds. The gap in our 
communication was expanding instead of getting closer. I 
could tell that when it came to the subject of investing, we 
not only used different words, we were on opposite sides 
of the fence. 
In the end, nevertheless, he wrote a surprisingly 
accurate account of my investment ideas, even if he did 
not necessarily agree with them. He even sent me a copy 
of the article for my approval before it was to go to press. I 
sent him a letter of thanks for his objectivity along with 
my approval of the article. The article was so well written, 
I had no changes to make. However, he called later to tell Page 174 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comme that his editor would not print the article for 
reasons the editor would not explain. 
Why It Does Not Take Money to Make Money  
I am often asked, "Doesn't it take money to make 
money?" And my standard reply is, "No. Money is just an 
idea… and ideas are defined by words. So the more 
carefully you choose the vocabulary you use, the better 
chance you have of improving your financial situation." 
I recall listening to Dr. R. Buckminster Fuller back in 
the 1980s. During one of the lectures I attended, Bucky 
began talking about the power of words. He said, "Words 
are the most powerful tools ever invented by human 
beings." Being a student who failed English in high 
school, I had a dismal point of view on the subject of 
words until I listened to this great man speak on their 
power. It was his talk that helped me realize that the 
difference between my rich dad and my poor dad began 
with the difference in their words. As stated earlier, my 
real dad had the vocabulary of a schoolteacher, and my 
rich dad had the vocabulary of a person in business and 
investing. 
The First Step to Getting Rich  
When people ask me what they can do to begin 
improving their financial position in life, I say, "The first 
step to getting rich is to add financial words to your 
vocabulary. In other words, if you want to be rich, start 
with enriching your vocabulary." I also inform them that 
the English language is made up of two million words, 
and the average person has command of only five 
thousand words. I then say, "If you are truly serious about 
becoming rich, set a goal to learn one thousand financial 
words and you will be far richer than people who don't 
use the same words." I then caution them by adding, "But 
go beyond simply knowing the mental definition of the 
words. Push your understanding to include knowing each 
word mentally, emotionally, physically, and then 
spiritually. If you have command over your financial 
words, your self-confidence is bound to improve." I end 
by saying, "And the best thing about this investment of 
your time is that words are free." 
Words Allow the Mind to See What Your Eyes 
Cannot  
Intelligence  is the ability to make finer distinctions. 
Words allow your mind to make those finer distinctions. Page 175 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWords allow your mind to see what your eyes cannot. 
For example, there is a world of difference between an 
asset  and a liability … but most people are not aware of 
the differences. And simply knowing that difference can 
greatly influence the financial outcome of a person's life. 
In previous books I wrote about the differences in the 
three different types of income: earned, passive, and 
portfolio . Again, they all fall under the umbrella of the 
word income , but there is a tremendous difference 
between each of the three incomes. When you say to your 
child, "Go to school, get good grades, and get a job," you 
are advising your child to work for earned income. One 
big problem with earned income is that it is the highest 
taxed of the three incomes, and it also gives you the least 
control over taxes. My rich dad advised me to work hard 
for passive income, which is primarily income from real 
estate. It is the least taxed of the three incomes and offers 
you the most control over taxes. Portfolio income is 
typically income from paper assets and is in most cases 
the second-best type of income to receive. As you may be 
able to tell, the difference in words is not great, yet the 
difference in outcome to a person's financial report card is 
staggering. 
The Income of the Rich  
When you look at a person's financial statement, it is 
easy to see what type of income that person thinks is 
important. The following is the financial statement from 
CASHFLOW 101: 
Game Sheet from CASHFLOW®101  
© 2000 CASHFLOW* Technologies, Inc. AH rights 
reserved.  Page 176 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comIt is difficult to get rich working from earned income, 
regardless of how much money you make. If you want to 
be rich, you must learn how to convert earned income 
into passive income or portfolio income. That is what the 
rich teach their kids to do. 
Numbers Further Define the Distinction  
When accurate numbers are added to words, the mind 
becomes supercharged. As most stock investors know, 
there is a significant difference between a stock with a P/E 
(price-earnings ratio) of 10 and stock with a P/E of 15. 
Also, most sophisticated investors would not buy a stock 
on P/E alone, regardless if it is high or low. A 
sophisticated investor would need further words and 
further numbers. 
There is also a tremendous difference in useful 
knowledge between someone who says, "Our business 
made a lot of money last month," and someone who says, 
"Our business grossed $500,000 last month, with a 26 
Page 177 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.compercent net profit margin, which was achieved by 
increasing sales by 12 percent over the previous month 
and at the same time reducing operating expenses by 6 
percent." This information would give me much more 
insight into whether or not I would invest in this 
company. This added information, combined with the 
company's P/E, would reduce my investment risk and 
increase my chances of making money as an investor. 
The Power of Communication  
The power of a strong financial vocabulary coupled 
with an appreciation for numbers can give your child a 
tremendous financial head start in life. One of the reasons 
I personally found school so boring was that I learned 
words without numbers. I learned how to use words in 
English class and how to use numbers in math class. 
Separated as subjects, both became boring and unrelated 
to my real life. 
When rich dad began teaching me how to invest 
playing Monopoly, I gained a whole new vocabulary, and I 
found a love of doing math. All I had to do was put a 
dollar sign in front of the numbers and my interest soared 
in both words and numbers. When children play the 
CASHFLOW games, they learn a whole new financial 
vocabulary, and they learn to enjoy mathematics at the 
same time without realizing it. 
My smart dad called the combining of words and 
numbers "the power of communication." Being an 
academic scholar, he was always interested in how and 
what caused people to communicate. He found that when 
people shared the same words and were excited about 
measuring the distinctions found in each word, 
communication between them flourished. He said to me, 
"The word communication  finds its base in the word 
community . When people enjoy the same words, a 
community is formed. People who do not share the same 
words, or are not interested in their measurement, are 
people who are excluded from that closed community." 
Today we find people who speak computer talk with 
words such as "megabyte" and "gigabyte." People who 
love and appreciate the bytes and the differences between 
mega and giga are all part of the same community. If you 
do not like those words or do not appreciate the 
differences, you are not part of that community. And that 
is the power of words and numbers. They can include you 
or exclude you.  Page 178 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comOne way to give your children a financial head start is 
to begin teaching them the words of money and an 
appreciation for measuring the differences. If you do, they 
have a better chance of being included in the community 
of the financially sophisticated. If they do not possess the 
words and appreciation for measuring the words, they 
may be excluded from that same community. 
Remember my rich dad's words: "There is a very big 
difference between an asset and a liability, even though 
they are simply two words. If you see no difference 
between these two words, the difference will show up on 
your financial statement and in how hard you will work all 
your life." I say, "Make sure your child knows the 
difference between an asset and a liability, and your child 
will be given a very big head start in life." 
Chapter 14: What Is an 
Allowance For? 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
The other day, I watched one of my friends give his 
child $100. The child took it, put it in his pocket, turned, 
and walked away without saying anything. 
My friend then said, "Aren't you going to say anything? 
Aren't you even going to say, 'Thank you?'" 
The sixteen-year-old boy turned and said, "Thank you 
for what?" 
"The $100 just gave you," said the father. 
"This is my allowance," said the boy. "I deserve it. 
Besides, other kids in school get much more than this. But 
if you think I have to say, 'Thank you,' then I'll say it. 
'Thank you.'" The boy stuffed the money in his pocket and 
walked out the door. 
This is a prime example of the "entitlement" mentality 
that many of today's youth have developed. Unfortunately 
I see this happen all too often. Sharon Lechter refers to it 
as "Parents have become ATM machines for their 
children." 
Money Is a Teaching Tool  
"Money is a teaching tool," said rich dad. "I can train 
people to do many things. All I have to do is wave a few 
dollars in the air and people respond. 
Just as an animal trainer uses treats to teach his Page 179 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comanimals, money is used in much the same way for 
humans." 
"Isn't that a cruel way of looking at money and 
education?" I asked. "You make it sound so crude and 
dehumanizing." 
"I'm glad to hear you say that," said rich dad. "I wanted 
to sound crude and dehumanizing." 
"Why?" I asked. 
"Because I wanted to make you aware of the other side 
of money. I wanted to show you the power that money can 
have. I want you to know the power, and I want you to 
have respect for that power. If you have respect for the 
power, hopefully you will not abuse the power of money 
when you have it." 
"What do you mean, the other side of money?" I asked. 
I was now seventeen years of age and entering my senior 
year of high school. Up to this point, rich dad had been 
teaching me how to acquire, keep, and invest money. Now 
he was beginning to teach me something new about 
money. 
Rich dad pulled a coin from out of his pocket. Holding 
it up, he said, "Each coin has two sides. Remember that." 
Putting the coin back in his pocket, he said, "Let's take a 
drive downtown." 
Ten minutes later rich dad found a parking spot and 
put some money in the parking meter. "It's nearly five 
o'clock," he said. "We have to hurry." 
"Hurry for what?" I said. 
"Come on. You'll see," rich dad said as he looked both 
ways and then dashed across the street. 
Once across the street, he and I just stood and looked 
down the sidewalk at all the retail shops in a row. 
Suddenly, just at five o'clock, the stores began to close. 
Customers hurried to make their last purchases, and 
employees began to walk out the door, saying, "Good 
night," and, "See you in the morning," to the store's 
owner. 
"See what I mean by well trained?" said rich dad. 
I did not respond. I was seeing the lesson rich dad 
wanted me to get. And I did not like the lesson. 
"Now do you understand what I mean when I say, 
'Money is a teaching tool'?" asked rich dad as he and I 
began walking past the shops that were closed. The quiet, Page 180 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdeserted streets gave off a cold, empty feeling as rich 
dad stopped occasionally and peered into shop windows 
he found interesting. 
I remained silent. 
Riding back in the car, rich dad repeated his question. 
"Do you understand?" 
"I understand," I replied. "Are you saying that getting 
up every day to go to work is bad?" 
"No. I am not saying anything is good or bad. I just 
want you to understand the tremendous power that 
money has and why money is a teaching tool." 
"Explain teaching tool," I said. 
Rich dad thought for a while. Finally he began with, 
"Before there was money, humans roamed as hunter-
gatherers, living off the land and the sea. Basically God or 
nature provided everything we needed to survive. But as 
we got more civilized and it became too troublesome to 
barter goods and services, money became more and more 
important. Today, those who control the money have 
more power than people who still trade in goods and 
services. In other words, money has taken over the game." 
"What do you mean by 'money has taken over the 
game'?" I asked. 
"Well, up until just a few hundred years ago, humans 
really did not need money to survive. Nature provided for 
you. You could grow vegetables if you wanted to eat or 
roam the woods and hunt if you needed meat. Today 
money gives you life. Today it is difficult to survive by 
growing only vegetables in a one-bedroom apartment in 
the city or in your backyard in suburbia. You can't pay 
your electric bill with tomatoes, and the government 
won't accept venison from the deer you shot as payment 
for taxes." 
"So because people need money to exchange for goods 
and services essential for life, you say that money has 
taken over the game. Money and life now go hand in 
hand." 
Rich dad nodded. "It is hard to survive without money 
in today's world. Money and personal survival now go 
hand in hand." 
"And that is why you say that money is a teaching 
tool," I said quietly. "Because money is linked with 
personal survival; if you have money, you can teach Page 181 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.compeople to do things they may not necessarily want to 
do. Things such as get up and go to work every day." 
"Or study hard so you can get a good job," added rich 
dad with a smirk. 
"But aren't well-trained and educated workers 
important to our society?" I asked. 
"Very important," said rich dad. "Schools provide the 
doctors, engineers, policemen, firemen, secretaries, 
beauticians, pilots, soldiers, and many of the professions 
required to keep our civilized society civilized. I am not 
saying that school is not important… and that is why I 
want you to go on to college, even if you do not want to. I 
simply want you to understand how money can be a 
powerful teaching tool." 
"I understand that now," I said. 
"Someday you will be a very rich man," said rich dad. 
"And I want you to be aware of the power and 
responsibility you will have when you acquire your 
money. Instead of using your wealth to keep people 
enslaved to money, I ask that you use your wealth to teach 
people to be the masters of money." 
"Just as you are teaching me," I said. 
Rich dad nodded. "The more our civilized society 
becomes dependent upon money for life itself, the more 
power money has over our souls. Just as you can teach a 
dog to obey with dog biscuits, you can teach a human 
being to obey and work hard all their life with money. Too 
many people work for money just to survive rather than 
focusing on providing goods or services that make our 
civilized society better. That is the power money has as a 
teaching tool. There is both a good and a bad side to that 
power." 
What Do You Teach Your Child with Money?  
I am surprised at how many young people have the 
idea that they deserve money or that they are "entitled" to 
it. I know it is not all kids, but I have noticed more young 
people with that type of attitude. I have noticed that many 
parents use money as a way of relieving guilt. Since so 
many parents are so busy working, some of them tend to 
use money as a substitute for love and personal attention. 
I have noticed that parents who can afford a full-time 
nanny will usually have one. A growing number of single 
moms who own their own businesses take their children 
to work, especially during the summer months. But there Page 182 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comare still too many kids left alone at home, the so -called 
latchkey kids. They come home from school and are 
unsupervised for hours because both Mom and Dad are at 
work… working hard to put food on the table. As my rich 
dad said, "Money is a teaching tool." 
The Importance of Exchange  
Parents can teach their child an important lesson about 
money if they teach them about the concept of exchange . 
The word exchange  was a very important word to rich 
dad. He would say, "You can have anything you want as 
long as you are willing to exchange something of value for 
what you want." In other words, the more you give, the 
more you get. 
I receive many requests to be a mentor to people. A 
little over a year ago a young man called and asked if he 
could take me to lunch. I declined, but the young man was 
persistent, so I finally agreed. Over lunch the young man 
asked, "I would like you to be my mentor." I turned him 
down, but he persisted even harder than he'd persisted in 
asking me out to lunch. 
Finally I asked him, "If I was to agree, what do you 
want me to do as your mentor?" 
He replied, "Well, I want you to take me along to sit in 
on your meetings, spend at least four hours a week with 
me, and show me how you invest in real estate. I simply 
want you to teach me what you know." 
I thought about his request for a while and then said, 
"And what will you give me in exchange?" 
The young man flinched with that question, sat up a 
little straighter, smiled his charming smile, and said, 
"Well, nothing. I don't have anything. That is why I want 
you to teach me, just as your rich dad taught you. You 
didn't pay him, did you?" 
I rocked back in my chair, gazing back at the young 
man. "So you want me to spend time teaching you what I 
know for free. Is that what you want?" 
"Well, of course," said the young man. "What do you 
expect me to do? Pay you money I don't have? If I had 
money, I wouldn't be asking. All I am asking is that you 
teach me something. Teach me to be rich." 
A smile came over my face, and old memories of sitting 
across the table from rich dad came flooding back. This 
time I was in rich dad's seat, and I had the opportunity to 
teach in the same way rich dad taught me. Standing, I Page 183 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comsaid, "Thank you for the lunch. My answer is 'No.' I am 
not interested in being your mentor. But I am teaching 
you a very important lesson. And if you get the lesson you 
need to get, you will become the rich man you wish to 
become. Get the lesson and you will find the answer you 
look for." The waiter came with the check, and I pointed 
to the young man. "It's his check." 
"But what is the answer?" asked the young man. "Tell 
me. Just give me the answer." 
Ten Requests a Week  
I am often asked to be someone's mentor. One of the 
common things I notice is how few of these requests come 
with one of the most important words in business. And 
that word is exchange . In other words, if you are asking 
for something, what is that you are willing to give in 
exchange? 
If you read Rich Dad Poor Dad , you may recall the 
story of rich dad taking away my ten cents an hour and 
having me work for free. As I said, for a boy of nine, 
working for free was a powerful lesson, one that affected 
my life permanently. Rich dad did not take away the ten 
cents an hour to be cruel. He took away the money to 
teach me one of the most important lessons to being rich, 
and that is the lesson of exchange. As rich dad said, 
"Money is a teaching tool." He also meant that the lack of 
money could be just as powerful a teaching tool. 
Years after my lesson on working for free, I asked rich 
dad if he would have continued to teach me if I had not 
worked for free. His answer was, "No, absolutely not. 
When you asked me to teach you, I wanted to see if you 
were willing to give something in exchange for my 
lessons. If you were not willing to give something in 
exchange, then that was the first lesson for you to figure 
out—after I turned you down. People who learn to expect 
something for nothing usually get nothing in real life." 
In Rich Dad's Guide to Investing , I share the story of 
when I asked Peter to be my mentor. When he finally 
agreed, the first thing he asked me to do was go to South 
America at my own expense to study a gold mine for him. 
This is another perfect example of exchange. If I had not 
agreed to go to South America, or asked for my expenses 
to be paid, I am sure that Peter would never have agreed 
to become my mentor. It also proved my strong 
commitment to wanting to learn from him.  Page 184 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comThe Lesson Behind the Lesson  
While this lesson of exchange is obvious to most of you 
reading this book, there is another lesson, a lesson behind 
the lesson of exchange that rich dad taught me when he 
took away the ten cents an hour. It is a lesson that most 
people do not get, and it is a lesson that is important for 
anyone who wants to become rich. It is important to begin 
teaching your child at a young age. 
Many rich people understand the lesson, especially if 
they earned their wealth, but many hardworking people 
never understand it. 
Rich dad said to me, "The reason most people do not 
become rich is that they are taught to look for a job. It is 
almost impossible to become rich if you look and find a 
job." Rich dad went on to explain that most people come 
to him and say, "How much will you pay me if I do this job 
for you?" He went on to say, "People who think and speak 
such words will probably never get rich. You cannot 
expect to get rich if you go around looking for people to 
pay you for what you do." 
The story after taking the ten cents an hour away from 
me in Rich Dad poor Dad  was the story of the comic 
books. It is in the story of the comic books that rich dad's 
true lesson behind the lesson of exchange came forth. 
After working for free, I began to see things differently. I 
began to look for a business or investment opportunity 
rather than just a job. My brain was being trained to see 
what most people do not see. Once I asked for the comic 
books that were being thrown away from rich dad's store, 
the store where I was working for free, I began to learn 
one of rich dad's greatest secrets to being rich. And that 
secret was not to work hard for money, expecting to be 
paid for doing a job. As rich dad said to me later, "The 
reason most people fail to get rich is that they have been 
trained to think in terms of being paid for the job they do. 
If you want to be rich, you need to think in terms of how 
many people you can serve." When I stopped working for 
ten cents an hour, I stopped thinking in terms of being 
paid for what I did for rich dad and began to look for ways 
to serve as many people as possible. Once I began to think 
that way, I began to think like my rich dad. 
There Are Only So Many Hours in a Day  
Most young people today go to school to learn a 
profession and then go looking for a job. We all know Page 185 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthere are only so many hours in a day. If we sell our 
labor by the hour or in some other measurement of time, 
there is a finite amount of time we have in a day. And it is 
that finite amount of time that puts a ceiling on how much 
money we can earn. For example, if a person charges $50 
an hour for his or her time, and puts in an eight-hour day, 
that person's maximum earning potential is $400 per day, 
$2,000 a week, for a five-day week, and $8,000 a month. 
The only way this person can increase that 
RICH DAD'S RICH KID SMART KID 
amount is to work more hours—and that is one of the 
reasons why, according to U.S. Government statistics, 
only one out of one hundred Americans become rich by 
age sixty-five. Most people are trained to think in terms of 
being paid for a job they do rather than think in terms of 
how many people they can serve. Rich dad often said, 
"The more people you serve, the richer you become." 
Most people are trained to serve only one employer or 
a select number of clients. Rich dad would say, "The 
reason I became a businessman was that I wanted to serve 
as many people as possible." He would occasionally draw 
the following diagram of the CASHFLOW Quadrant to 
emphasize his point. (From Rich Dad's CASHFLOW 
Quadrant.)  
 
Pointing to the left side of the Quadrant, he would say, 
"This side is dependent upon physical labor for success." 
Pointing to the right side of the Quadrant, he would say, 
"This side requires fiscal labor for success." He would go 
on to say, "There is a big difference between physical 
labor and fiscal labor." In other words, there is a 
tremendous difference between you working physically  
Page 186 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comor your money or your system working fiscally . Rich 
dad would also say, "The less I have to physically work, 
the more people I can serve, and then in exchange, the 
more money I can make." 
My primary intention for writing Rich Dad Poor Dad  
was to find a way to serve as many people as possible, 
knowing that if I did so, I would make more money. Prior 
to writing the book, I was teaching the same subject in 
person, or physically, and charging thousands of dollars. 
Although I was making money, I was serving only a few 
people and becoming very tired and burned out in the 
process. Once I realized that I needed to serve more 
people, I realized that I needed to write instead of talk. 
Today the same lessons cost less than $20. I serve 
millions of people, and I make more money while working 
less. So that lesson of taking the ten cents an hour away 
from me years ago continues to pay off. It pays off because 
rich dad's lesson behind the lesson to getting rich was to 
serve as many people as possible. As he said, "Most people 
leave school looking for a high-paying job instead of 
looking for ways to serve as many people as possible." 
(For those interested in learning what rich dad taught 
me about how to serve as many people as possible, that 
lesson is found in book number three, Rich Dad's Guide 
to Investing . That lesson is taught in the B-I Triangle, 
which is the structure that guides people on how to take 
their ideas and turn those ideas into multimillion-dollar 
businesses that serve as many people as possible. Many 
people have great ideas that could help make our world a 
better place to live; but the problem is, most people leave 
school without the skills necessary to turn those ideas into 
businesses. Instead of looking for a job, rich dad taught 
his son, Mike, and me to build businesses that served as 
many people as possible. He said, "If you build a business 
that truly serves millions of people, in exchange  for your 
efforts, you will become a millionaire. If you serve a 
billion people, you become a billionaire. It's simply a 
matter of exchange." That is what book number three is 
about. It is about building a business that has the 
potential to serve millions, maybe billions, of people 
rather than one employer or just a few clients. As rich dad 
said, "You can get rich by marrying someone for their 
money; by being cheap; by being greedy; or by being a 
crook. But the best way to get rich is by being generous, 
and some of the richest people I have met have been very Page 187 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comgenerous people. Instead of thinking about how much 
they could be paid, they thought about how many people 
they could serve.") 
How Much Should I Pay My Child?  
I am often asked questions such as the following: 
• "How much allowance should I give my child?" 
• "Should I stop paying my children for anything they 
do?" 
• "I pay my child for good grades. Do you recommend 
that?" 
• "Should I tell my child not to get a job at the mall?" 
My standard answer to questions such as those is, 
"How you compensate your child is up to you. Every child 
is different, and every family is different." I simply remind 
you of my rich dad's lessons and ask that you remember 
that money is a very powerful teaching tool. If your 
children learn to expect money for nothing, then that may  
be how their lives wind up—a life of nothing. If your child 
studies only because he or she gets paid to study, then 
what happens when you are not there to pay your child to 
study? The point is to be careful about how you use 
money as a teaching tool. Because even though money is a 
powerful teaching tool, there are far more important 
lessons for your child to learn. It is the lessons behind the 
lessons that are most important. And one of those is the 
lesson on service. 
Charity Begins at Home  
My mom and dad were very generous people. But they 
were not generous in the same ways as my rich dad was. 
As the head of education for the island of Hawaii, my dad 
would come home, eat dinner with the kids, and go off to 
PTA meetings two to three times a week. I remember, as a 
boy, waving out the kitchen window as my dad backed his 
car down the driveway after dinner as he went on his way 
to serve as many families as possible. There were many 
times he would drive over one hundred miles to the 
meeting and return that night just to see and greet his 
own kids in the morning. 
My mom often had us kids work with her at the church 
bake sales or rummage sales. She believed strongly in 
volunteering her time and asked her children to do the 
same. As a registered nurse, she also volunteered 
regularly for the American Red Cross. I remember during 
disasters such as a tidal wave or a volcano, she and my Page 188 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdad would be gone for days on end, serving those in 
need. When the opportunity to join President Kennedy's 
Peace Corps was offered to them, they jumped at it even 
though it meant a severe cut in pay. 
Rich dad and his wife came from much the same point 
of view as did my mom and dad. His wife was active in a 
women's group that was constantly raising money for 
worthy causes. Rich dad donated money regularly to his 
church and various charities as well as serving on the 
boards of two nonprofit organizations. 
WHAT Is AN ALLOWANCE FOR? 797 
The lesson I learned from both sets of parents was that 
whether you are a socialist or a capitalist, charity begins at 
home. And if you want your children to be rich, teaching 
them to serve as many people as possible is a priceless 
lesson for them to learn. As my rich dad said, "The more 
people you serve, the richer you become." 
PART III: F INDING  YOUR  CHILD 'S 
GENIUS  
My rich dad strongly encouraged his son and me to 
become rich by serving as many people as possible. He 
would say, "When you focus your mind on making 
money only for yourself, you will find it difficult to 
become rich. If you are dishonest, greedy, and give 
people less than they pay for, you will also find it difficult 
to become rich. You can acquire wealth in those ways, 
but that wealth will come at a very high price. If you 
focus your business first on serving as many people as 
possible… think only of making their lives a little easier, 
you will find tremendous wealth and happiness ." 
My smart dad truly believed that there was a genius 
in each and every child, even if the child did not do well 
in school. He did not believe that a  genius was someone 
who sat in a classroom and knew all the right answers. 
He did not believe that a genius was someone who was 
smarter than anyone else. He truly believed that each of 
us had a gift… and that a genius was simply a per son 
who was fortunate enough to find his or her gift and then 
find a way of giving that gift . 
To make his lesson on genius interesting, he would tell 
us a story. He would say, "Before each of you were born, 
you were given a gift to give. The trouble is, no one told 
you that you were given this gift. No one told you what Page 189 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comto do with your gift after you found it. After you were 
born, your job was to find your gift and give it… give it 
to everyone. If you gave your gift, your life would be 
filled with magic."  
My smart dad also wrote the word  genius in this way . 
GENI-IN-US 
Continuing with his story, he would say, "A genius is 
someone who finds the geni inside of him- or herself. Just 
as Aladdin found the geni inside the bottle, each of us is 
to find the geni inside of ourselves. That is where the 
word  genius comes from. A genius is someone who found 
the magical person inside of him- or herself. A genius is 
someone who found the gift he or she was given ." 
My smart dad would then add his word of caution: 
"When you find your geni, your geni will grant you three 
wishes. Your geni will say, 'Wish number one is "Do you 
wish to give your gift to yourself?" Wish number two is 
"Do you wish to give your gift only to those you love and 
those close to you?" Or wish number three, "Do you wish 
to give your gift away?"'  
Obviously, the lesson was for us kids to choose choice 
number three. My smart dad's lesson always ended with 
him saying, "The world is filled with geniuses. Each of us 
is a genius. The problem is, most of us keep our genius 
locked tightly away in our bottle. Too many of us choose 
to use our genius only for ourselves or just for those we 
love. The geni comes out of the bottle only when we 
choose choice number three. The magic happens only 
when we choose to give our gifts away."  
Both my dads believed in the magic of giving. One dad 
believed in building a business that served as many 
people as possible. The other dad believed in finding the 
gift we were given, finding the geni-in-us, and letting the 
gent's magic come out of the bottle.  
Both dads' lessons worked for me as a little kid. Both 
stories gave me a reason to live, a reason to learn, and a 
reason to give. As silly as it sounded, as a nine-year-old 
kid, I believed in the possibility of there being a geni in 
me, and I believed in magic… and I still do. How else 
could a boy who flunked out of school because he could 
not write, write an international best-selling book?  
The last part of this book is dedicated to your child's 
genius.  Page 190 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comChapter 15: How Do You Find 
Your Child's Natural Genius? 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
Most of us have been asked, "What sign are you?" And 
if you are a Libra, you would say, "I'm a Libra. What are 
you?" Most of us know what sign we are, just as most of us 
know there are four main groups of signs: earth, air, 
water, and fire. Most of us also know that there are twelve 
signs: Virgo, Scorpio, Cancer, Capricorn, Aquarius, Aries, 
Gemini, Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius, Pisces, and Libra. 
Unless we are astrological experts, most of us do not know 
the personality traits of all twelve signs. We are generally 
aware of the personality traits of our own astrological sign 
and maybe a few others. For example, I am an Aries, and I 
would say that for the most part what the charts say about 
Aries behavior applies to me. My wife is an Aquarius, and 
she also follows those general tendencies. Knowing the 
differences helps our relationship because we are better 
able to understand each other. 
Few of us realize that just as there are different 
personality traits, there are also different learning traits. 
One of the reasons our current educational system is so 
painful for many people is that our school system is 
designed for only a few of the different learning traits. 
That would be like having a school system designed only 
for the fire signs and wondering why the water, air, and 
earth signs don't like school. 
This chapter may shed further light on the different 
learning styles and also assist you in finding the learning 
styles of your children and even you, if you want to find 
out your unique learning style and maybe your genius. 
This chapter may also explain why some people who do 
well in school do not do well in the real world, and vice 
versa. 
Different Strokes for Different Folks  
Most of us have heard the saying "Different strokes for 
different folks." And I would agree. 
When I was about five years old, my family went to a 
popular beach with a neighboring family. Suddenly I 
looked up and saw my friend Willy struggling in the 
water. He had fallen into a hole and was drowning 
because he could not swim. Yelling and screaming, I Page 191 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfinally attracted the attention of a high school boy, and 
he jumped in to save Willy. 
After that near fatal accident, both families decided it 
was time all the children take formal swimming lessons. 
Soon I was at the public pool learning to swim, and I 
hated it. It was not long before I was out of the pool and 
hiding in the locker room, terrified of being yelled at 
because I could not swim properly. From that moment on 
I learned to hate the smell of the chlorine in a freshwater 
swimming pool. 
Over the years I learned to swim in the ocean, because 
I loved spear fishing and catching lobsters. At twelve 
years of age I began body surfing and then surfing on 
surfboards, but I still could not swim the proper strokes. 
Willy, on the other hand, took to swimming like a fish 
and was soon swimming competitively throughout 
Hawaii. In high school he went on to swim in the state 
championships. Although he did not win, the story shows 
how he took a near death accident and turned it into his 
passion. His accident caused my family to force me into 
swimming lessons, and I learned to hate swimming pools 
and never learned to swim properly. 
When I went to school in New York, we were required 
to take a swimming test in a pool. I failed. Although I had 
been spear fishing, scuba diving, and surfing in very large 
winter surf, I failed my swimming test because I did not 
know the proper swimming strokes. I remember writing 
home and trying to explain to my friends that I was taking 
swimming lessons because I had failed my swim test. 
These were the friends I'd spent years swimming with in 
some of the most dangerous surf in Hawaii. 
The good news is that I finally learned to swim a 
proper dog paddle and proper freestyle stroke in a 
freshwater pool. Up to then I swam with a combination 
breaststroke and sidestroke with a scissor kick, which was 
not very attractive and made no sense to the swim 
instructors. 
The point here is that although I could not swim a 
proper stroke in a freshwater pool, I was very comfortable 
swimming in the ocean, even the very rough open ocean. I 
am still not a good swimmer, but I feel very much at home 
in the ocean. I know people who can swim perfect strokes 
in a pool but are terrified of rough seas, riptides, currents, 
undertows, and pounding waves. As the saying goes, 
"Different strokes for different folks."  Page 192 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comDifferent Learning Styles  
The point of this is not to discuss my lack of swimming 
ability, but to illustrate that we all learn differently and we 
all do things differently. Although I can now do a proper 
swim stroke, I find it much more practical to swim with 
my own strokes. I will never swim competitively like my 
friend Willy, and I will never get awards for my graceful 
style, but doing things in my own way works for me—and 
I think most of us are that way. We know what we should 
be doing, but we would rather do things the way we like to 
do things. Your kids are the same way about learning. 
How to Find Your Child's Genius  
To discover your children's genius you must first find 
out how they like to learn and why they will learn 
something. For example, I did not learn to swim because I 
did not want to learn to swim. I learned to swim because I 
wanted to surf. If not for surfing, I had no interest in 
learning to swim, and forcing me to learn only made me 
hate swimming even more. Instead of starting me in the 
shallow end with all the kids, I was much happier jumping 
in the deep end and learning to survive. The same is true 
with learning to read financial statements. I did not learn 
accounting because I wanted to be an accountant. I 
learned basic accounting because I wanted to be rich. If 
you think my swim strokes are ugly, you should see my 
accounting. 
My smart dad realized that I was not an academic star, 
and that was why he encouraged me to seek my own 
learning style. Instead of forcing me to conform and 
follow the traditional ways of learning, he encouraged me 
to "Jump in the deep end and swim for my life." He was 
not being cruel. He realized that my learning style was my 
learning style, and he wanted me to learn in the way I 
learn best. And just as my swim stroke is not pretty, the 
way I learn is not pretty. 
Other people learn in more traditional ways. Many 
people go to school, enjoy the classroom, and enjoy 
following a prearranged curriculum. Many like knowing 
that at the end of the curriculum they will get a reward. 
They like the idea of knowing that they will get a passing 
grade or a degree for their efforts. As I said, they like the 
certainty of the reward at the end of the program. Just as 
my friend Willy did well at swimming because he loved 
swimming, many people do well in school because they 
like school.  Page 193 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comA key to people's success in life is finding out how they 
learn best and ensuring that they are in an environment 
that allows them to continue learning in the ways they 
learn best. The problem is, finding out exactly how we 
learn and what our natural gifts are is often a hit-and-
miss process. Many people never find out their gifts. Once 
they leave school, they get jobs, and then they cannot 
continue the personal discovery process owing to financial 
or family reasons. How to find one's learning style and 
one's unique genius have not been clearly defined until 
recently. • 
The Kolbe Index  
I was talking to a friend of mine and explaining to her 
that I hated having an office. I explained to her that I have 
owned several office buildings, but I have never had a 
formal office. "I just hate being locked in a room," I said. 
My friend smiled and said, "Have you taken the Kolbe 
index?" 
"No," I replied. "What is that?" 
"It is an instrument that measures your natural 
learning style or MO [modus operandi]. It measures your 
instincts, or your natural genius." 
"I've never heard of that particular index, but I have 
done many of those types of assessments," I said. "I've 
found them useful, but isn't this just one more of the same 
type of instrument? Isn't it like finding out more about my 
astrological sign?" 
"Well, yes, there are similarities," my friend said. "Yet 
there are some distinctions the Kolbe index can give you 
that other evaluations do not." 
"Like what?" I asked. 
"Well, as I said, it will point out your genius and your 
natural learning style. It will also tell you what you will do  
and what you won't do  rather than what you can do or 
can't do," my friend replied. "The Kolbe will measure your 
natural instincts, not your intelligence or your 
personality. The Kolbe index tells you some very unique 
things about yourself that no other test can tell you—
because it measures who you are, not who you think you 
are." 
"Instincts," I said. "So how does that help me?" I was 
trying to squirm out of taking another test. 
"Just take the profile and then let's talk about it. In Page 194 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfact, Kathy Kolbe, the creator of the index, lives right 
here in Phoenix. After you take it, I'll arrange a meeting 
between the two of you. See for yourself if her instrument 
does everything I say it does." 
"How do I take this test?" I asked. 
"Just go to the Web site and take the test. I think it 
costs about $50 and should only take you a few minutes 
to answer the thirty-six questions," she replied. 
"When will I get the results?" 
"Almost immediately," my friend replied. "After you 
take it, you can evaluate it, and I will also arrange a 
meeting with you and Kathy. She doesn't meet with too 
many people, but she is a friend of mine and I will tell her 
that you are my friend." 
I agreed, and a few minutes later I had taken the Kolbe 
index. The results are on page 208. 
I found the results interesting, but knowing that I was 
going to have lunch with the creator of the index, I 
decided to wait and hear what she said. 
Three days later Kathy met me for lunch. Looking at 
my index, she said, "You're energized by taking physical 
risks, aren't you?" 
I chuckled. Kathy has such a lovely, kind voice, and she 
speaks with such understanding and empathy. I could tell 
she knew who I was even though we had just met. "How 
can you tell?" I asked. 
"Your strengths lie in your instincts, and this tells me 
your MO, or mode of operation. For you it's the Quick 
Start and Implementor energy that drive your actions," 
she said with a smile. "The lines of the graph show me 
that instinctively you seek out physical risks. You are 
naturally drawn to them. Right?" 
I nodded. 
"Have you ever been in grave danger?" Kathy asked. 
"Yes, many times, especially when I was in Vietnam. 
Why do you ask?" 
"Did you actually thrive in that situation?" she asked. 
"Were your instincts fully engaged and your energy 
riveted by the danger you were in?"  Page 195 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com 
"Well, I loved flying in combat," I replied. "It was 
exciting as well as tragic at times. But I did love flying in 
combat, and I missed it once I returned to peacetime 
flying." 
"That would make sense," she said. "Was the transition 
back to the ordinary military routine difficult when you 
returned home?" she asked. "Did that get you into trouble 
when you got home?" 
"Yes," I said. "How did you know?" 
"I know because your Follow Thru talent is for keeping 
lots of balls in the air at one time," she said gently. "It tells 
me that you do not follow procedures. Your Quick Start 
and Implementor results indicate that you take physical 
risk and thrive on a sense of urgency, so you probably did 
well in Vietnam. But you found the peacetime military too 
structured, too confining  
Page 196 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comHow Do You Find Your Child's Natural Genius?  
You need excitement. If you don't have enough 
excitement, you'll create it. It's called getting into trouble, 
often fighting with the authority figures who try to keep 
you in line, following the rules." 
"Do you read palms also?" I asked. I then asked her if 
my friend had told her about me. I was becoming 
suspicious because Kathy knew a lot about me and we had 
just met. 
She said, "No. I do not know anything about you. I 
would rather not when I interpret a person's results. I 
trust the accuracy of my indexes, and I would rather trust 
them than someone else's description of a person—or my 
memory of what they said." Kathy went on to say that she 
was meeting with me just because her friend asked her to 
and because she finds great joy in sharing her work with 
people who genuinely want to know more about it. After 
getting to know more about each other over lunch, Kathy 
began sharing with me more in depth what my Kolbe 
index explained about me. Pointing again to my chart, she 
said, "If you were in school today, you would be labeled 
with ADD, attention deficit disorder, and you might well 
be given drugs to calm you down." 
"Do you agree with that type of treatment?" I asked 
her. 
"No. Not for most kids," she said. "I think that 
drugging children and labeling them with this double 
negative is often a terrible injustice to their natural 
ability—and self-esteem. It robs them of their rightful 
pride in who they are. If you had been drugged when you 
were young, you might never have found your path in life. 
You might never have written best-selling books. You 
might never have found the success you have found. 
"On the other hand, maybe nothing could ever hold 
you down," Kathy continued. "The point is, in today's 
school system you would be labeled a problem student, a 
student with a disorder. It's not that you can't learn; it's 
just that you won't learn in the manner our schools 
usually teach. You were fortunate that your dad 
understood this," she said. "I know you call your 
schoolteacher dad your 'poor dad,' but in many ways he 
really enriched your life. In many ways you are successful 
because of your poor dad. He was smart enough to let you 
study with your rich dad and encouraged you to learn in Page 197 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comthe way you learn best, which is, as even you admit, not 
very pretty." 
Nodding, I said, "It definitely has not been pretty." 
After a moment's pause I asked, "So how do you define 
success?" 
Kathy smiled and said, "I define success as the freedom 
to be yourself. And that is what your dad did for you. He 
respected you and granted you the freedom to be yourself. 
"Many people are trapped trying to be what their 
parents or society wants them to be, and I don't think that 
is true success… regardless of how wealthy or powerful 
people become. As human beings we naturally seek the 
freedom to be who we are. If we don't fight against anyone 
or anything that forces us to act against our grain, we will 
lose our self-respect and deny our genius." 
"Well," I said, "I would not have found success if I had 
followed in my dad's footsteps. In high school I was an 
outsider. I did not fit in with the students or the teachers." 
"But I'll bet you loved kindergarten," Kathy said with a 
grin. 
"Yes, I did," I replied. "How can you tell?" 
Pointing to my chart, Kathy said, "For people with as 
long an Implementor line as you have, kindergarten 
would have been terrific. Implementors naturally touch 
things and build things. Your Quick Start got to 
experiment with a whole bunch of new things. Your 
Follow Thru wasn't forced into too much structure. And 
you weren't yet being tested on a whole bunch of facts. 
Suited you perfectly, didn't it?" 
Nodding, I said, "Yes, it did. Today I still love building 
things such as new products. I love investing in real estate 
because I can see, touch, and feel my investments. I 
always say to people that I never stopped playing 
Monopoly.' I love playing." 
Kathy grinned and pointed to the Follow Thru section 
of the chart. "But then came the first grade to third grade; 
kids with a different type of Follow Thru from yours did 
well then."  
"Why did they do well?" I asked. "Why would grades 
one to three be good for a person with a different Follow 
Thru pattern?" I was now becoming very interested in this 
woman's knowledge. 
"Because during those years, the blocks and toys begin Page 198 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comto disappear and order and neatness come into the 
curriculum, and people with long lined Follow Thru 
patterns fit in well with the demand for order and neat-j 
ness. And by third grade all remnants of Implementor are 
gone from the classroom." 
"Order and neatness?" I said. "What do order and 
neatness have to do with education?"  
Kathy again smiled and said, "I can tell by your Follow 
Thru pattern that following orders and being neat are not 
your strong suits." 
"No, they are not. But would that affect my 
performance in school?" I asked. 
"Oh, definitely," said Kathy. "I'll bet you did not thrive 
in first grade as much as you did in preschool and 
kindergarten." 
"That is correct," I said. "In the first grade I began to 
get into fights, whereas in kindergarten I had played a lot 
with my toys and on the jungle gym. It was when I went to 
the first grade that teachers began to call me a 'problem 
child' because of my fighting." 
"Well, that is what can happen when they take the toys 
and blocks away," she replied. "Boys without toys often 
pick on other boys." 
"I would say that was true in my school," I said. "But 
why do people with strong Follow Thru patterns do well 
during this period?" 
"Because at this stage of development, neatness and 
order are required. You now sit in straight rows instead of 
on the floor or in groups around a table. Instead of 
encouraging you to smear finger paints, the teacher 
begins to emphasize neat penmanship and handwriting. 
They now want you to begin to write between the lines 
instead of all over the page. Teachers like little girls who 
dress neatly and frilly and little boys who toe the line and 
don't get mussed up. I don't think you were one of the 
boys who dressed to impress the teacher, were you?" 
asked Kathy with a grin. 
"No, I wasn't. It was a good thing that I lived right 
across the street from the school because I was often sent 
home covered in mud. I always found a way to slip and 
fall in the mud." 
"Did you begin to feel different about school about that 
time?" Kathy asked.  Page 199 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"Not in the first grade, but I do remember beginning to 
notice some differences by the third grade," I replied. "I 
began to notice that there were kids who were the 
teachers' pets. There was one girl and one boy in my third 
grade class who eventually became leaders in high school. 
Today they are married. Everyone knew by the third grade 
that these two were the stars. They were good-looking, 
smart, well dressed, popular, and good students." 
"Sounds like school was tailor-made for them. And 
how did they turn out?" asked Kathy. "Did they find the 
success they wanted?" 
"I don't really know. I guess they did. They never left 
the town where we grew up. They are well respected in the 
community and are as popular as ever. So I guess they 
found success." 
"For them, that sounds ideal. It seems they had the 
freedom throughout their lives, and their marriage, to be 
themselves," Kathy said. 
"What happens after the third grade?" I asked. "Just 
about the magic age of nine?" 
"From the fourth grade on, anyone who has a long Fact 
Finder line fits the mold. Our fourth- through twelfth-
grade educational system was designed for Fact Finders. 
Some kids instinctively zero in on the name, place, and 
date. This Fact Finder approach is well rewarded. The 
classroom works well for such kids," said Kathy. 
Kathy went on to explain that from the age of nine on, 
students are measured by a series of "blunder hunts." You 
take spelling tests, memorize multiplication tables, and 
count the number of books you read and prove it by 
recalling the facts in them. 
I told her about Rudolph Steiner's theory of the nine-
year change and how many teachers know if a child will 
be successful or not in the school system. I said, "By the 
age of nine, I knew I was not going to be a shining star in 
the system. They took the blocks away forever." 
Kathy laughed. "Yes, a person like you with your 
Implementor needs would miss the blocks. With Fact 
Finder talent that simplifies rather than memorizes 
complex facts and figures, you would get frustrated. So 
your Quick Start would kick in and try all sorts of unique 
ways to get around what you would consider the stupidity 
of school." 
"And  teachers know it," I said. "That is why so many Page 200 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comkids get labeled either smart, stupid, or troublemakers 
so early in their school career." 
Kathy nodded sadly. "Most schoolteachers have strong 
Fact Finder and/or Follow Thru instincts. People tend to 
label others whose instincts are similar to theirs as 
'smart.' Of course, intelligence has nothing to do with it. 
But educators have a blind spot about the value of your 
instincts. Their abilities work in a school environment, so 
they stick with it. The educational system is their natural 
home. They love it there. 
"So the educational system continues to focus on only 
one learning style and continues to make finer 
distinctions on why kids cannot learn. This is why we may 
have identified so many different learning disabilities," 
Kathy summarized. 
"That's not too intelligent," I said. "We don't have 
learning disabilities, we have an antiquated school system 
with teaching disabilities! And I hated it there," I added 
bitterly. 
"But you love learning, don't you?" asked Kathy. 
"I love learning. I attend seminars, read books, and 
listen to tapes constantly. I get really excited when I find 
something new and exciting to learn. I enjoy learning 
about what you have been researching," I said. "But for 
some reason, I just hated school. But how can you tell I 
love learning if I hated school?" 
Kathy then pointed to my Kolbe result. "Do you see 
this?" she asked. 
Under a section entitled "Possible Career Paths" was 
this list:  Page 201 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comACTOR 
PROTOTYPE BUILDER 
HANDCRAFTER OF ORIGINAL ART 
PROPERTY DEVELOPER 
ENVIRONMENTAL ADVOCATE 
TRAUMA MEDIC 
PHYSICAL SCIENTIST 
INVENTOR 
RESTAURATEUR 
NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPER 
STUNT PERSON 
AV SPECIAL EFFECTS 
WILDLIFE EXPLORER 
TELEVISION PRODUCER 
SPORTS PROMOTER 
DISPLAY ADVERTISING 
ALTERNATIVE EDUCATOR 
TEACHER — PHYSICALLY, CHALLENGED 
Kathy was pointing to the career entitled "Alternative 
Educator."  
Page 202 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"The people I have met with this career path are 
generally very active learners. They just do not thrive in 
the structure of traditional education." 
"That is true," I replied. "I attend seminars regularly. I 
attend seminars rather than a regular college because I do 
not need the degree or certificate at the completion of the 
course. I just want the information." 
"How many of these possible career paths would you 
consider?" asked Kathy. 
After looking over the list for a while, I said, "I'd like 
them all except trauma medic and restaurateur." 
"Any reason why?" Kathy asked. 
"I've already had too much experience in those areas. I 
saw enough blood and trauma in Vietnam, and my rich 
dad owned restaurants. But I could easily be a strong 
environmental advocate, and I did have an alternative 
education company for nearly ten years. I love teaching. 
Today I still build prototypes, I develop property, and I 
have invented and patented things. In fact, I love new 
product development. I really enjoy the subject of 
advertising and producing television ads. So I would say 
your list is filled with things I am interested in or have 
already done." 
I sat silently for a while, considering all that Kathy and 
I had covered. I was excited because I do love learning, 
and I enjoyed finding out why I did not fit in school. 
Looking at my Kolbe index results again, I asked, "So 
people who do well in school after the third grade, at 
approximately the age of nine, are people who are strong 
in Fact Finder and Follow Thru?" I asked. 
"Yes," Kathy said. "And that is why you began to have 
trouble in school, because they took the toys and blocks 
away and you could no longer learn by playing. You may 
have been physically in class, but your mind was far away, 
drifting out the window." 
"It was," I said. "I was bored and did just enough to get 
by and pass. I could not wait until I graduated from 
school so I could get out into the real world." 
"That is the Quick Start in you," said Kathy. "Because 
of your energy in Implementor and Quick Start, you have 
a knack for building tangible things very quickly, such as 
your games, your books, and your business. That is why 
manufacturing nylon wallets, as you told me, and your 
many other projects have led to your success. You are a Page 203 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich K id, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comnatural entrepreneur with a pioneering spirit."  
 
"Why do you say pioneering spirit?" I asked. 
"Well, that is what your index results tell me. Your 
Implementor is a literal hands-on talent, and your Quick 
Start thrives on adventure. You are not a natural 
entrepreneur in the traditional sense of developing a 
business and products. Your drive is to be first to the 
frontier." 
"So that is why it is often difficult to explain what I am 
doing, because I am often a number of years ahead of 
time," I added. "I'm creating products for a market that 
does not yet exist." 
"Yes," said Kathy, pointing to the chart.* "The Quick 
Start's perspective is the future. The Fact Finder's 
perspective is the past. The Implementor is in the 
*Author's Note-  If you study this one chart (on page 
216), you begin to notice the differences among possible 
Page 204 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comKolbe index results. In her Bottom Lines  booklet, 
Kathy Kolbe offers thirty pages of such charts and 
information that further define the differences. 
Comparing the Kolbe Action Modes  
Key concepts applicable to those who initiate in each 
Action Mode  
present, and the Follow Thru perspective is to integrate 
past, present, and future. You are always focused on the 
future and building businesses and products in the 
present for the future. You will always be ahead of your 
time." 
"And that is why I often argue with people who are 
Fact Finders," I said. "Fact Finders want the facts and 
figures, and I don't have anything to show them yet 
because the future is not yet here." 
Kathy nodded and smiled. "Yes, I would say that 
someone with your MO would definitely clash with 
Page 205 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comsomeone who seeks Fact Finder details and/or Follow 
Thru structure. As I said, you probably had trouble in 
school because most teachers insist on those Fact Finder 
explanations and Follow Thru orderliness, both which you 
naturally resist." 
"You know, this makes more and more sense to me. I 
really did respect most of my teachers, but I always knew 
we were not on the same page of the book," I said. "I now 
know we weren't even in the same book." 
Kathy laughed and said, "There is a joke I heard 
recently at one of my classes. The question is, 'What do 
you call an organization filled with Fact Finders?' And the 
answer is, 'A university.'" 
I chuckled and then added, "And what do you call an 
organization filled with Quick Starts and Implementors? 
The answer: 'A kindergarten.'" 
Kathy smiled and said, "Or a dot.com company." 
With that I roared with laughter. "And that is why so 
many dotcoms will fail," I said. "Most dot.com companies 
are headed by a Quick Start operating without any 
fundamentals, facts, profits, or real-world experience, and 
they have very little Follow Thru. I know because that is 
how I was when I first started out in the real world. That 
is why my first businesses failed. We had a good business, 
but the three of us were all Quick Start and no Follow 
Thru. When I built my earlier businesses, they were full of 
energy, went up quickly, and crashed quickly. We had no 
facts, figures, or Follow Thru." 
"Which is why I decided to work with businesses," 
Kathy said. "Now that you are older and wiser, how do 
you feel about people who lead in Fact Finder and Follow 
Thru?" 
"I love them," I said. "I now know that I could not 
survive without them." 
"And that is my point," said Kathy. "We need to respect 
the gifts and genius each of us brings to the table and to 
the world. In order for any team to survive, it needs the 
differing perspectives in all four modes. Instead of 
labeling and discriminating against one or the other, we 
need to learn to blend our gifts and complement our 
geniuses. I'll bet you hated it when the teachers labeled 
the Fact Finder kids smart and Quick Start kids like you 
less smart?" 
"Disliked it? I found it insulting and humiliating."  Page 206 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"So what did you do with that anger?" Kathy asked. 
"I went out and did things my way anyway. I wanted to 
prove I was smart," I said. "I hated being labeled stupid 
and less likely to succeed. I hated when the teachers said, 
'Robert has so much potential… but he just does not apply 
himself. If he would just buckle down and study.'" 
"And the more they tried to buckle you down, the more 
determined you became to succeed?" asked Kathy. "Did 
you use that anger to accomplish what you wanted to 
accomplish with your life?" 
"Well, I have done pretty well," I replied a little smugly. 
"I did write a best-selling book, and the kids who got an A 
in English still have not written one. And I do make more 
money than most of the kids who got the good grades." I 
was fairly strutting now, like the NBC peacock with its tail 
fanned out in an array of colors. I was venting after years 
of holding my anger and frustration back. 
"So did you use your anger to find your own way of 
doing things? Did you find your own freedom to be who 
you are?" asked Kathy with a gentle smile. 
"Yes, I did," I said, beaming. "I did it my way and I 
found the life I wanted and I live my life the way I want to 
live it. And I did not want a job, I did not want to have 
anyone tell me how much money I could make, and I did 
not want to be stuck in an office." 
"Congratulations," Kathy said. "You have achieved 
success. You are successful because you have the freedom 
to be who you are." 
I rocked back and let her congratulations sink in as my 
years of pent-up frustration from school dissipated. "I 
never really thought of success in those terms," I said. "I 
mean, I did not realize how much success my anger and 
frustration has brought me." 
"Good," said Kathy. 'And can you understand that 
there are other people who define success much 
differently from the ways you define success? Can you 
understand that there are people who need to research, 
seek job security, and thrive in a calm, stable 
environment? Can you understand that for some people 
just a simple car is enough and a simple house is 
enough?" 
"Yes, I can," I replied. "My mom and dad were very 
happy with all those things. They were successful on their 
own terms. I just knew their way wouldn't work for me. So Page 207 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comyes, I can understand that life is truly 'Different strokes 
for different folks.'" 
"And now that you are older and wiser, do you 
appreciate the different types of people more? I mean, do 
you appreciate the people in your office who are strong in 
the Follow Thru or Fact Finder categories?" 
"Now more than ever," I replied. "I love those guys. I 
could not do what I do without them. Without them I 
would not be successful." 
Kathy smiled and said, "I'm glad to hear that." Pausing 
for a moment, she collected her thoughts, then asked 
cautiously, "And do you think you could get along better 
today with your schoolteachers, even the ones who failed 
you or with whom you argued?" 
"Well, I don't know if I could go that far," I replied 
without thinking. 
"You do know that it is the system of education, not the 
teachers, that is to blame for what happened to you?" 
Kathy inquired. 
I nodded. "Yes, I understand it, but I still do not like it. 
I do realize that they were doing the best they could with 
what they had." 
"So let me show you why you may have gotten so 
angry," said Kathy. "I think you got very angry because 
the system tried to crush your genius and force you to 
become a type of genius you did not want to become." 
"You mean my genius in Quick Start? You mean 
because I was so active?" 
"Well, in that area, too. But the genius I am talking 
about is your genius in the Fact Finder column." 
"Fact Finder?" I replied with surprise. "The Fact Finder 
column is my weakest column. How can I have a genius in 
Fact Finder?" 
"You have a genius hidden in every category, even Fact 
Finder," said Kathy, again pointing to a page out of her 
booklet. 
Kolbe Impact Factors  
Positive strengths in each Action Mode   Page 208 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comPointing to the word simplify  under Fact Finder, she 
said, "In the Fact Finder category, this is your genius. 
Your genius is the ability to take facts and simplify them. I 
think the reason your books do so well is that you took a 
complex subject, such as the subject of money, and you 
simplified it." 
Beginning to understand, I said, "Well, that is the way 
my rich dad was. He liked to keep things simple." 
Then Kathy pointed to the word justify  under the Fact 
Finder mode and said, "And this is probably your smart 
dad's genius. Being good in school and achieving the 
academic environment, he had a genius for digging for the 
facts and figures. I would bet your smart dad was 
energized by collecting data, doing research, seeking 
specificity, and defining objectives. So his was a different 
kind of genius in the Fact Finder mode from yours, which 
explains why he did well in school and you did not."  
Page 209 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"We all have a genius in all of the four columns," I said 
softly as I began to understand Kathy's work more. 
Kathy nodded. "I have defined twelve different types of 
genius. Each of us has four different geniuses, one for 
each column." 
"Twelve different types of genius… and each of us has 
four. That is why it is best to operate on a team, because 
each of you comes with a different perspective on how to 
solve problems. Is that what your work has found?" I 
asked. 
Again Kathy nodded. "The more you understand these 
charts, the better distinctions you can make about who 
you are and who the people around you are. By 
understanding each other better, we can respect our 
differences and work and live more harmoniously. 
Working on a team can solve more problems more 
efficiently than if you work just on your own. That's why I 
love working to build more effective teams. Find joy in the 
differences— whether in the workplace or home 
environment." 
"And that is your genius or your gift," I said. "You want 
people to work together with greater respect for each 
other's gifts and genius. And what categories are you 
strongest in?" 
"I am most efficient in Quick Start and Follow Thru. 
That is why I explain with charts and graphs. I needed to 
fit the entire repertoire of human behavior into my system 
before I could be satisfied that it was valid. Then I needed 
the Fact Finders on the team to do what they did best. I 
greatly value their abilities, which complement my talent 
to simplify. Like you, I drive to the bottom line. Unlike 
you, I put my work into a software system with algorithms 
that produce the bottom lines in chart and graph formats. 
It is most gratifying when I can use my natural creative 
talents to help other people find greater career and 
personal satisfaction. But I could not do all this on my 
own. It does take a team and all twelve geniuses to have a 
successful business, especially in this competitive world. I 
really do not know how an autocratic business leader can 
succeed. He or she has, at best, only four geniuses. So I do 
my work to make people and businesses more effective 
but also to insure a sense of personal dignity to everyone 
on the team. On a team everyone is important." 
"Congratulations," I said. "You have found success in Page 210 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comyour life. You truly have found the freedom to be who 
you really are." 
Kathy nodded and smiled. "Now let's look more closely 
at your genius in Quick Start." 
"In Quick Start, your genius is found in the word 
improvise . That means your instinct is to take risks, 
initiate change, promote experimentation, seek 
challenges, seek innovation, defy the odds, ad-lib, act on 
intuition." 
I winced when I heard Kathy describe many of my 
tendencies. "You call that my genius? I always thought it 
was my insanity." 
"Never underestimate this ability. A team—or any 
organization, for that matter—needs your genius. You get 
things started quickly when other people sit around and 
talk for hours, forming committees and doing nothing. So 
being a person who gets things moving, takes risks, and 
defies the odds is an important part of your genius." 
"I wish you could tell my schoolteachers that," I said 
quietly. "They did not see it as genius. They called it 
something else." 
Kathy chuckled and continued. "And your smart dad 
was probably a person who would not go off half-cocked. 
He had to know the facts first. He apparently was not 
impulsive like you, and he was not ambiguous. He 
gathered the facts. He would not create chaos and would 
not operate in a crisis environment. He would calculate 
the odds and then not go against them." 
"That sounds like him," I said. "And that is why he did 
well in school and eventually became head of the entire 
state school system." 
Kathy nodded. "So your genius is that you get an idea 
and, as Nike says, "Just do it.' Your Quick Start and 
Implementor can take an idea and turn it into a product, 
company, or money pretty quickly. You have the touch of 
the alchemist. I'll bet you can make money from nothing. 
Of course, a long Quick Start line can make rags to riches 
a round trip." 
I nodded. "That I can do. I can take an idea and go to 
action pretty quickly. Yet I do go off half-cocked many 
times, but that is how I learn. I jump in the deep end and 
drown for a while. But after I survive, I am a lot smarter 
because I have learned physically. I learn in exactly the 
same manner we all learn to ride a bicycle. And since I Page 211 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comlearn physically, when people ask me how I did what I 
did, I can't tell them. I can't tell them because I learned it 
with my body rather than my mind. It would be like you 
trying to tell someone how to ride a bicycle without letting 
him or her ride it. I have found that people who need the 
facts and are afraid of taking risks often do not get much 
done because they fail to learn physically. They spend 
their time just studying it rather than just doing it." 
"And someone like your dad, a man who leads in Fact 
Finder, might get bogged down in what we commonly call 
'analysis paralysis,'" said Kathy. "You would go to a 
strange city and wander around for days, while your dad 
would buy a map and read a travel book on the city first. 
Can you understand how different you are?" 
"Yes, I can. My smart dad needed to research the facts 
forever before he did anything. I don't like to do research, 
so I just jump in and after I get into trouble, then I start 
doing the research I should have done." 
"And that is how you learn. That is how you get smart, 
and your dad was smart enough to recognize this." 
"He and I played golf together only a few times because 
of this," I said. "My dad would measure every shot. He 
would take forever calculating the wind and the distance 
to the cup. He would measure the slopes of the green and 
even the direction the grass was bent. I would just walk up 
and hit the ball and then figure out what I did wrong after 
I hit the ball." 
"So you prefer team sports?" Kathy asked. 
"Yes. How did you know? I love rugby, and I captained 
my rowing team at the academy. But I don't like sports 
where I have to do everything on my own." 
"I can tell, because for you to be successful, you need a 
team around you. That is a desire or preference that 
reflects your respect for diverse talents. Sometimes people 
with a long line in both Fact Finder and Quick Start 
actually believe that they can do it all. (See the diagram on 
page 224.) They set the appropriate priorities and then 
jump in and try to pull it off. They are good at the start-up 
but require more explanation to recognize as readily as 
you do that they need more than that over the long term." 
"Oh, that makes sense," I replied. "Many of my friends 
who are successful think they have the ability to be pretty 
self-contained. So they would have longer Quick Start and 
Fact Finder. I create a team to give me a hand."  Page 212 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com"And that's a great part of your wisdom. It is also why 
you prefer a team sport to playing golf," Kathy continued. 
"Recognizing your need for a team around you has helped 
you build a larger business than someone who tries to be 
more self-contained. Also, a person who adds Quick Start 
with Fact Finder would tend to take more calculated risks, 
while you tend to make more physical risks. Which 
doesn't place you inside your office very often." 
"That makes sense," I said. "I am hopeless on my own. 
I like having a lot of people helping me do things." 
"And that may be why you did not do well on tests in 
school. You needed | the team for brainstorming the 
answers—but the teachers would call that cheating." 
Laughing, I asked, " Are you sure you weren't sitting 
behind me in class?" J 
"I didn't have to. My classes were filled with people like 
you. You may not have done well in the classroom, but 
you did well in team sports or anything that required a 
team to get things done. You make sure you don't take the 
tests of life on your own." 
"That is why I always sat next to the smart kids in 
school and why I still want them on my team when I 
work. My rich dad always said, 'Business is a team sport.' 
And that is why he always had a team of very smart 
people around him to help him with his finances." 
"You are just as smart, but their smarts were in Fact 
Finding. When that is added to your talent, you cover 
more of the bases, you help each other complete the 
puzzle. The twelve geniuses working together will always 
come out on top," she said. "Of course, it also helps to 
have the right genius in the right place to solve a 
particular problem." 
"So my dad struggled financially because he operated 
on his own, while my rich dad operated on a team. My 
dad did what he learned in school, which was to take tests 
on his own, and my rich dad took his financial tests with 
his team. And that made a world of difference in the real 
world." 
Kathy just nodded. "With the right combination of 
instincts, you will win, and no one person covers them 
all." Our time for lunch was up, and we agreed to meet 
again, this time with the entire company. As we parted I 
asked her: 
"Do you have the Kolbe index for children?"  Page 213 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comBeaming, she said, "I'm glad you asked. Yes, we do 
have instruments for children starting at a fifth-grade 
reading level. In fact, I have a youth index similar to the 
Index A you took, as well as other products I call Think-
ercises. They help kids learn to trust their instincts and 
use their genius." 
"It would be great for children to know what their 
learning strengths are and find out where their geniuses 
lie," I said. "And the sooner the better. It would save years 
of trying to find out by trial and error." 
"That is why I do this work," said Kathy as she climbed 
into her car and waved good-bye. 
WHO KATHY KOLBE IS  
In 1985 Kathy Kolbe was selected by Time  magazine as 
one of seven American "new pioneers… with imagination, 
boldness, energy, and an iron determination" 
representative of the "Man of the Year." She has also been 
honored as one of the outstanding Small Business People 
of America and chosen by the White House as one of the 
fifty Americans with the "can do" spirit. She conducts 
seminars and lectures worldwide. Her best-selling books 
include Conative Connection  and Pure Instinct . Kathy 
was greatly influenced by her father, E. F. Wonderlic, 
creator of the Wonderlic Personnel Test. She speaks of 
him lovingly but found that her contribution was to learn 
how she had to do things differently from him. He was the 
founder of personnel testing, with his cognitive 
instrument. She never believed this IQ-type approach got 
at true genius or natural ability. With his encouragement, 
she used the expertise in test development she had 
learned from him to search for the next generation in 
testing. 
If you would like to find out more about Kathy Kolbe 
and her products, go to wwwrichdad.com/kolbe and find 
out more information. Kathy's organization is a joy to deal 
with. Personally I feel I have met a kindred spirit in this 
work, the work of bringing more dignity and respect for 
the student, to the world of education. She is one of the 
few people who agree with me that each of us has gifts 
and geniuses often not recognized by the educational 
system. In today's Information Age, her information is 
refreshing and enlightening. 
We have included the Kolbe index for adults as well as 
for children on our Web site at wwwrichdad.com/kolbe if Page 214 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comyou would like to take the profile or have your children 
take her youth profile. The youth index is called the 
"Kolbe Y index." As part of the children's profile, it will 
analyze the following three areas: 
How You Can Do Your Best School Work How You Can 
Do Your Best Recreationally How You Can Communicate 
Better 
I found great validation in who I am instinctively when 
I reviewed my Kolbe results. It immediately showed me 
why I was labeled a misfit or stupid by my teachers in 
school. If I had taken the Kolbe index at a young age, I 
might have been able to avoid, or at least better 
understand, many of the problems I encountered in 
school. I hope that you will find the same validation. 
FREE AUDIO DOWNLOAD 
In each of our books we like to provide an audio 
interview as a bonus with additional insights As a thank-
you to you for reading this book, you may go to the Web 
site www.richdad.com/richkid  and download an audio of 
my discussion with Kathy Kolbe called "Find Out How 
Your Child Learns Best… Because All Children Learn 
Differently." 
Thank you for your interest in your child's financial 
education. 
Chapter 16: Success Is the 
Freedom to Be Who You Are 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
When I was a kid, my teachers often said, "You need a 
good education so you can get a good job." 
My rich dad, on the other hand, would draw the 
CASHFLOW Quadrant. Instead of telling me to get a job, 
which would have limited me to the E, employee 
quadrant, he offered me a choice of quadrants. 
When I was having trouble in school, my smart dad 
offered me the choice of finding my own learning style. 
More Choices Give You More Opportunities to 
Succeed  
The point of this chapter is that in today's world we 
have more choices. Each time we add a new industry, 
such as the airline industry or computer industry, we 
expand our choices of careers and interests. One of the Page 215 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comproblems with raising kids today results from having 
too many choices, aka distractions. Nonetheless, the more 
choices we have, the greater chance we have for success. 
If parents begin to take choices away from their 
children, it can create discord in the home. If, as a parent, 
you say, "Don't do this," or, "Don't do that," the chances 
are your children will do what you don't want them to do, 
or they may have already done it. 
One of the things that worked for me as a child was 
that my parents did not limit my choices but instead 
simply offered me more choices. It does not mean I was 
not disciplined when I stepped out of line, but one of the 
things both my dads did was to offer me choices rather 
than limit me to what I could or could not do. 
So the hope of this chapter is to give parents more 
choices to offer their children so that the children will 
ultimately find their own way of becoming successful. And 
as Kathy Kolbe says, "Success is the freedom to be who 
you are." 
What Do You Want to Be When You Grow Up?  
Instead of simply telling me, "Go to school to get a 
job," my rich dad offered me these choices. It is the 
CASHFLOW Quadrant, which book number two in this 
series is about. 
 
For those who may not have read the book: 
The E stands for employee. 
The S stands for self-employed or small business. 
The B stands for business owner. 
The I stands for investor.  
Page 216 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comBy being offered a choice, I felt I had more control over 
my destiny and what I wanted to study. Along the way I 
also found out that the tax laws were different for each of 
the Quadrants, and that fact also helped me chart my path 
into the future. As most of us know as adults, taxes are 
our single largest lifetime expense. And unfortunately, it 
is the E and S Quadrants that pay more than their fair 
share of taxes. 
When talking to your child, you may want to offer a 
choice of Quadrants rather than simply say, "Go to school 
so you can get a job." 
By having a choice, I knew that the course of study that 
best suited me was the course of study that would lead to 
the B and I Quadrants. I knew that was what I wanted to 
be when I grew up. Today, whether we are in the E, S, or B 
Quadrant, we all need to be investors, or in the I 
Quadrant. Hopefully you no longer expect the 
government or your employer's company to be 
responsible for you after retirement. 
Choices and Consequences  
A tremendous financial head start that my rich dad 
gave me was the understanding of the choices and 
consequences found on a financial statement. When you 
look at the entire financial statement, you can understand 
how this education can be important. 
 
By doing our financial homework, Mike and I soon 
Page 217 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comrealized that with each dollar we received we had a 
choice, and that choice was found in the expense column. 
We soon realized that each time we earned or spent a 
dollar there was a ripple effect, or a consequence to that 
action. By taking a dollar and buying a liability like a car, 
we knew that the long-term consequence was that we 
became poorer, not richer. 
By making spending decisions, or choices that looked 
like the following, the long-term consequences were 
different. 
 
As little boys we could see that making a spending 
choice  to invest in assets had this long-term consequence . 
Both Mike and I knew by the age of nine that j only we 
had the power over our financial destiny, not anyone else. 
We knew if I we made lifelong financial choices that 
looked like the second financial statement, we would be 
rich whether or not we had a good job or good education. 
I We knew that our financial success was not a function of 
our academic success. 
In his latest book, The Millionaire Mind , Thomas 
Stanley, author of The Millionaire Next Door , discusses 
the point that his research finds no correlation between 
financial success and academic success. The two are not 
related. And that is easy to understand. All we need to 
review is what was discussed earlier, which is the fact that 
our school system focuses primarily on academic skills 
and professional skills. What is missing from our school 
system is the instruction of the skills my rich dad taught 
Page 218 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comme, which are financial skills.  
As stated at the beginning of this book, "In the 
Information Age, education is more important than ever 
before. And to best prepare your child for the future, 
sound financial skills are vitally important." 
By teaching your children the fundamentals of 
financial education, which is the financial statement, you 
give them the power to take control over their financial 
destiny. They will have that power regardless of what 
career they choose, how much money they make, or how 
well they did in school. As my rich dad often said, "Money 
does not necessarily make you rich. The biggest mistake 
that most people make is that they think that making 
more money will make them richer. In most cases, when 
people make more money, they get deeper in debt. That is 
why money alone does not make you rich." And that was 
why he taught Mike and me that with each dollar we 
spent, we had a choice, and with each choice, there was a 
long-term consequence. 
The Power of Four  
Most of us have heard the saying "No man is an 
island." Or "Two minds are better than one." 
While I personally agree with these statements, our 
educational system tends to disagree with some of the 
wisdom found behind them. In Rich Dad's Guide to 
Investing  I discussed the power of a tetrahedron. The 
following is a tetrahedron, aka a pyramid: 
 
In my study of solid geometry, I found out that the 
Page 219 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtetrahedron is the minimum solid structure and the 
most stable of al! structures, which is why the pyramids 
have lasted so long. The key is the magic found in the 
number 4. 
When you look at astrology, you see that there are four 
main signs: earth, air, water, and fire. If you were to put 
the four basic groups into a shape, it would look like the 
tetrahedron: 
 
Earth  
Water  
Fire  
The four basic elements make up the world we know. 
Looking at the world of money and business, we find 
the CASHFLOW Quadrant. Again, the magic number is 4. 
The four sides are (E) employee, (S) self-employed or 
small-business owner, (B) big-business owner, and (I) 
investor. And again, a tetrahedron could be made. 
The ancient Greek physician Hippocrates (460-377 
B.C.), often called the father of medicine, also used four 
different personality types to describe different people. 
He used the terms choleric, sanguine, phlegmatic , and 
melancholy . 
In the twentieth century Dr. Carl Jung also categorized 
the four personality types, using the terms thinker, feeler, 
intuitor , and sensor . 
In the 1950s, Isabel Myers and her mother developed 
the Myers -Briggs type indicator (MBTI). The MBTI 
Page 220 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdefines sixteen different types of people, which, 
interestingly enough, is then narrowed down to four main 
categories: D for dominance; I for influence; S for 
support; and C for compliance. 
Today, many of these personality-type instruments are 
available, and many companies use these instruments to 
insure that they place the right person in the right type of 
job. The point I want to make is the importance of the 
number 4. 
There are several things I found interesting with Kathy 
Kolbe's work that add further distinctions to this search to 
discover more about ourselves and what makes us unique. 
One of the things that Kathy's work distinguishes is why 
certain children do well in school and why some do not. 
When you look at the tetrahedron, it is easy to see why so 
many young people have trouble in school. 
 
It is easy to see that the current system of education is 
designed primarily for students who are strong in Fact 
Finder. The other three categories often struggle through 
the process. In other words, the world is made up of four 
different learning types, but the school system recognizes 
only one. 
And the Power of Twelve  
Most of us know that there are twelve months in a year 
and twelve signs of the zodiac. Throughout humanity's 
Page 221 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comdevelopment, the numbers 4 and 12 have reappeared 
constantly as numbers of significance. When you study 
solid geometry, you can understand why this relationship 
would occur repeatedly. It is unfortunate that our current 
educational system recognizes only one learning style and 
one type of genius. The point being made by this book is 
how important it is for parents to be aware of the four 
learning styles and the possibility of twelve different 
geniuses in their child. In other words, you now have 
more choices in raising your child and ways of developing 
your child's genius. As stated earlier in this book, the 
word intelligence  means the ability to make finer 
distinctions, and the word education  is derived from the 
same root as the word educe , which means "to draw out," 
not "to put in." 
When you look in your young child's eyes, always 
remember that in your child there lives a little "geni." It 
may not be the same one that the school system looks for, 
but your child's genius is there nonetheless. And although 
the school system may not look for it, it is important for 
you the parent or the teacher to look for it. For whenever 
you look inside a child's eyes and see his or her genius, 
this child's genius is there to remind us all that we too 
have a geni-in-us. It is this geni in all of us that brings the 
magic of life to life. 
Conclusion: The Most Important 
Job in the World 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
My smart dad used to say, "There are two kinds of kids. 
There are kids who succeed by following the path, and 
there are kids who hate following the path and feel they 
must blaze their own trail. Inside each of us lives these 
two kids." 
Don't Touch the Stove  
That was my smart dad's way of letting me know that it 
was okay for me to seek my own path in life as long as I 
was honorable and used integrity in my search. And there 
were times I was off the path for a long time. Regardless 
of how long I was off the path, however, my dad kept the 
light on and always welcomed me home. 
He often did not approve of what I did, and he let me 
know that he did not approve, but he did not stop me 
from doing things. He would say, "The only way a child Page 222 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comknows what the words hot stove  mean is by touching a 
hot stove." 
I remember watching him address a PTA meeting one 
evening, telling his hot stove story. There were about 150 
parents in the audience as he said, "The only way we as 
adults know what a hot stove is, is because we have all 
touched the stove. We all touched the stove even though 
we were told not to touch it. And if any of you haven't 
touched a hot stove yet, I advise you to touch one soon. 
You haven't lived till you've touched one." 
The parents and teachers laughed with that remark. A 
parent then raised his hand and asked, "Are you saying 
that we should not discipline our children?" 
"No. I did not say that. I am saying that your child will 
learn by life's experiences. I am saying that the only way a 
child will know what the words hot stove  mean is by 
touching one. If we tell them to not touch the stove, we 
are being ridiculous. The kid is going to touch the stove. 
That is how God designed the child to learn. The child 
learns by doing, making mistakes, and then learning. We 
as adults, in our attempt to educate our children, tell them 
not to make mistakes and then punish them for making 
mistakes. That is a mistake." 
I was only about fourteen years old, but I could tell 
many of the parents and teachers did not like my dad's 
message. For many of them, avoiding mistakes was a way 
of life. Another parent raised her hand and said, "So 
you're trying to say that making mistakes is natural. That 
making mistakes is how we learn." 
"That is what I am saying," my dad said. 
"But the school system punishes our children for 
making mistakes," said the same parent, who had 
remained standing. 
"And that is why I am here tonight," my dad said. "I am 
here because we as teachers have gotten away from 
correcting, and we have been too focused on looking for 
and punishing students for making mistakes. I am afraid 
the more we punish mistakes rather than teach our kids to 
correct and learn from their mistakes, the more we miss 
the point of education. Instead of punishing kids for 
making mistakes, we need to encourage them to make 
more. The more mistakes they make and learn from, the 
smarter they become." 
"But you teachers punish as well as fail students who Page 223 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commake too many mistakes," said the parent.  
"Yes, we do. And that is a flaw in our system, and I am 
part of that system, and that is why I am here tonight." 
My dad went on to explain that a child's natural 
curiosity is what drives a child to learn. But just as 
curiosity can kill a cat, so can too much curiosity be 
destructive to a child. My dad's message that night was 
that the job of a parent and a teacher was to correct 
without damaging the child's natural curiosity. 
He was then asked, "How do you correct without 
damaging the child's natural curiosity?" 
My dad replied, "I don't have the answer. I believe it is 
an art as well as a situation-by-situation process, so there 
may be no one answer." He went on, saying, "I am just 
here to remind you as parents that we all learned what a 
hot stove was by touching one. We touched it even though 
we were told not to touch it. We touched it because we 
were curious and we wanted to learn something new. I am 
here representing your child's natural curiosity and desire 
to learn. All children are born curious, and our job is to 
protect that curiosity, at the same time doing our best to 
protect the child. It is important to protect that curiosity 
because that is how we learn. Destroy that curiosity and 
we destroy the child's future." 
Another parent raised her hand and said, "I am a single 
parent. My child is out of control right now. He stays out 
late and refuses to listen to me. He is running with the 
wrong crowd. What do I do? Do I encourage his curiosity 
or do I wait for him to go to jail?" 
My dad then asked, "How old is your boy?" 
"He just turned sixteen," the single mother replied. 
My dad shook his head. "As I said, I don't have the 
answer. When it comes to raising children, there is no 
'one answer fits all.'" Gently he said, "Maybe the police 
will have the answer your son is looking for. For your 
son's sake, I hope they don't." 
My dad then went on to tell his story about the two 
types of kids, the one kid who follows the straight-and-
narrow path and the other who needs to create his or her 
own path. My dad went on to say that all a parent can do 
is keep the light on and hope the child comes back to the 
path. He also reminded the parents that many of them 
had themselves gone off the path. He reminded them that 
inside each of us is a person who sometimes just wants to Page 224 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comfind his or her own way. He explained further, saying, 
"We all believe there is a right way and a wrong way. But 
sometimes, our own way is the best way for a while." He 
ended by saying, 'And sometimes our path is not our 
child's path." 
Not satisfied with the answer, the young mother again 
came to her feet and said, "But what if he wanders off in 
the darkness and never comes back? What do I do then?" 
My dad paused and, with eyes that said he understood 
her concern, quietly said, "Just keep the light on." He then 
collected his notes and stepped off the stage. Stopping 
before exiting the silent room, my dad turned and said, 'A 
parent's and teacher's job is to keep the light on. It is the 
most important job in the world." 
You cannot teach a person anything, you can only help 
him find it within himself. 
—GALILEO 
Appendix A: Allowance or No 
Allowance: The Age-Old Battle 
: Contents  - Prev  / Next  
by Sharon Lechter, Mom 
To pay an allowance or not to pay an allowance, the 
never-ending question. What is a parent to do? There just 
doesn't seem to be a definitive answer. 
Many parents get so lost in determining the 
"allowance" issue, they forget to teach their children what 
to do with the money they receive. Whether it is money 
from an allowance or payment for specific tasks, your 
children need to learn fiscal responsibility. 
Whether or not your child receives an allowance is not 
the magic formula for his or her future financial success. 
Whether or not your child learns fiscal responsibility is 
the magic formula to his or her future financial success. 
As we describe in chapter 14, rich dad taught Robert that 
the right side of the CASHFLOW Quadrant is where fiscal 
responsibility is found. Great business owners and 
successful investors have mastered fiscal responsibility 
and demonstrate it with their continued success. 
Allowance  
The definition of allowance is "a sum regularly 
provided for personal or household expenses." While an Page 225 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comallowance may be appropriate in many cases, how it is 
determined and communicated to the children is vitally 
important. Will the children view the allowance as an 
"entitlement" or earned compensation for completion of 
agreed-upon tasks or responsibilities? In a world where 
the entitlement mentality is an ever-increasing problem 
with adults, we believe it is very important that parents 
not train their children to think they are entitled to a 
certain amount of allowance every week. For instance, 
consider the difference between these two statements: 
"John, since you are twelve now, you are old enough 
for an allowance. Every Friday I will give you an 
allowance of $10 to spend however you would like." 
"John, you are busy with homework and sports 
activities every night, and we want to acknowledge your 
efforts and encourage you with those activities. While you 
are busy with these activities, you will receive an 
allowance of $10 per week for spending money." 
Pay for Specific Tasks  
The debate of paying an allowance versus paying for 
specific jobs has many facets. We do not want to dictate 
parenting philosophy but hope to provide alternatives 
that parents may choose from to fit their own personal 
parenting style. While paying an allowance can develop 
the "entitlement" mind-set, "paying for specific jobs" can 
also have a negative inference in that it creates an 
employee mentality. "You do this and I will pay you $10." 
While earning compensation for completion of specific 
jobs or tasks is an important issue, it is only a component 
of teaching overall fiscal responsibility. 
When All Else Fails, Resort to Bribery  
Children need to understand that they need to 
contribute to the greater good of their family or social 
group without the expectation of financial reward. Too 
often parents resort to "bribery" in an attempt to get their 
children to perform tasks that should be performed by the 
children for no financial reward at all. I can speak about 
this with great personal knowledge. When you find 
yourself resorting to bribery, hear it as a wake-up call. 
You are giving control over to your child when you try to 
bribe him or her. You are transferring your parental 
power into the hands of your child. Many parents 
whitewash this "bribery" form of parenting by calling it a 
"reward" system.  Page 226 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comA Parental Strategy  
Without dictating parenting philosophy, we have 
developed a parental strategy that may be helpful to you 
in determining the allowance policy for your family. We 
suggest that you develop a four-phase program with your 
children. Most important, we recommend that you 
communicate this policy openly and consistently with 
your children. 
Phase 1, Personal Responsibility—determine certain 
duties or tasks that your children need to perform for 
their own personal health and development. (For example 
brushing their teeth every morning and night should be 
expected and communicated as a personal responsibility. 
Some parents may include making the bed or taking the 
dinner plate to the sink after dinner.) There should be no 
financial reward for personal responsibility. 
Phase 2, Family or Social Responsibility—determine 
certain duties or tasks that contribute to the family or 
social environment that do not result in financial reward. 
These are acts that contribute to the greater good of your 
child's environment. (Setting the table for dinner, reading 
to a younger sibling, or helping an elderly woman with 
her groceries are examples of family or social 
responsibility.) There should be no financial reward for 
family or social responsibility. 
Phase 3, Establishing an Allowance or Payment for 
Specific Tasks—optional, based on a parent's individual 
beliefs. Determine guidelines that include what general 
tasks or duties are expected that will result in the 
"earning" of the allowance. 
Endeavor to prevent an "entitlement" attitude from 
developing in your children. Have the children participate 
in the determination of tasks expected. You may want 
your children to "bill" you for their allowance, thus 
making them more accountable for the underlying 
expectations. (Washing and cleaning the car once a week 
could be an expectation that is outside phase 2 for some 
parents and could be part of a consideration for an 
allowance each week.) Some children are so busy with 
athletics and schoolwork that their parents provide them 
with an allowance to acknowledge their efforts. The 
important issue here is to openly communicate your 
expectation of your child's responsibility. 
Phase 4, Encouraging Your Child's Entrepreneurial Page 227 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comSpirit —encouraging your child to think of ways to earn 
money. Have them suggest tasks or share stories of how 
other children have earned money to open their minds to 
opportunities that present themselves. Encourage them to 
identify specific "tasks" that need to be done, and 
establish a set payment for completion of each task. Have 
them bill you for their work upon completion. 
This is where rich dad's philosophy of your job versus 
your business needs to be communicated. The amount of 
pay determined for each task is the definition of your 
child's "job." What your children do with their money is 
their "business." The earlier in life your children 
understand the difference between working for others and 
working for themselves, the better their chances for 
financial success. Explain to them that what you do 
during the day (eight to five) is your profession, or your 
job, but what you do with the money (your paycheck) is 
your business. 
Fiscal Responsibility  
Many parents get so lost in determining the 
"allowance" issue, they forget to teach their children what 
to do with the money after they receive it. Whether it is 
money from an allowance, gifts, or payment for specific 
tasks, your children need to learn fiscal responsibility. 
Fiscal responsibility is developed only after your child 
understands financial literacy. Furthermore, we need to 
battle today's entitlement trend by educating our children 
about delayed gratification and credit card debt. 
Financial Literacy  
Teach your children the concepts of assets versus 
liabilities; the difference between earned, passive, and 
portfolio income; the importance of passive and portfolio 
income; and the definition of doodads. Refer to the simple 
drawings in Rich Kid Smart Kid  and Rich Dad Poor Dad  
and use them to teach your children. Armed with this type 
of financial education, your children will be better 
prepared to develop sound fiscal responsibility. 
Delayed Gratification  
Fiscal responsibility demonstrates financial literacy as 
well as an understanding of "delayed gratification," which 
is discussed in greater detail in Rich Dad Poor Dad . One 
of the benefits of establishing a savings program for your 
children is that it teaches them the power of this concept 
of delayed gratification. By setting financial goals with Page 228 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comyour children and helping them determine a financial 
plan to achieve those goals, you instill the formula for 
success. The self-esteem that is built when they achieve 
those goals is priceless. In today's world of instant 
gratification, we are robbing our children of the powerful 
feeling of success that results from achieving a goal. How? 
By being given something instead of earning it on their 
own. 
For example, your child wants a new bike. Start with 
the philosophy introduced in Rich Dad Poor Dad , where 
poor dad said, "I can't afford it," but rich dad said, "How 
can I afford it?" Teach your child to say, "How can I?" 
instead of, "I can't." Help him or her develop a plan on 
how to earn the money to buy the bike. Encourage your 
child to think of ways to earn money. Help assess his or 
her progress along the way, and make adjustments to the 
goal as needed. Have your child purchase the bike as the 
ultimate reward for completion of the plan. Acknowledge 
your child's effort and ultimate success. 
Debt and Credit Cards  
Credit cards today are the tools of instant gratification. 
Unfortunately the end result is delayed trauma, when the 
bills arrive. A much better message is delivered with a 
financial goal-setting and delayed gratification exercise 
similar to the bike story just described. 
No matter how we feel about credit cards, they are 
ever-present in our society today. Our children are 
bombarded with "Just charge it" messages every day 
through television, radio, or peers. Parents need to 
complete the picture for their children by exposing them 
to the other side of credit cards. Have them watch you pay 
bills. Explain the multiplying impact of the interest 
charged on the balance due on the credit cards. Show 
them that credit limits do exist for each card. 
Explain that there are also benefits from using credit 
cards. Credit cards can greatly assist in record keeping 
and tracking how you are spending your money. Many 
people use credit cards wisely, paying off the balance each 
month so no interest charges are incurred. 
Many parents have difficulty with their own credit card 
debt and are concerned about creating fear in their 
children if they share too much of their financial 
situation. The realities of "real life" credit card debt may 
also be beyond your child's level of comprehension. We 
have created CASHFLOW for Kids, a patented financial Page 229 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comboard game, to help parents teach their children 
financial literacy. The game deals specifically with the 
"pay cash or charge it" decision-making process. Your 
children will learn both sides of the credit card world 
(instant gratification and delayed trauma when the bills 
arrive) while having fun and using play money. They will 
be much better prepared to face, and avoid, the perils of 
credit cards when they become adults. 
Part-Time Jobs  
Once your child is old enough, it is important for him 
or her to learn about the responsibility of a job. Let your 
children take on part-time jobs, if their schoolwork and 
sports activities allow it. Review their first paycheck with 
them so they understand that the government takes out 
its share of income taxes before they get their check. 
When I was in high school, my parents required me to 
save or invest 50 percent of everything I made at my part-
time job. It became a habit to immediately deposit 50 
percent of my paycheck. I was allowed to spend the other 
50 percent any way I pleased. This instilled in me the "pay 
yourself first" concept at a very early age. By the time I 
graduated from college I had accumulated over $20,000 
in investment assets just from saving 50 percent of my 
income from part-time jobs as a student. 
As a parent I used the same rule with my children 
when they started part-time jobs. They saw the "pay 
yourself first" concept in action and came to recognize the 
long-term benefit it can create. Unfortunately, my oldest 
son was bombarded by credit cards when he went to 
college. Unbeknownst to his father and me, he was in 
deep credit card debt before he knew it. 
This is where you see hindsight is twenty-twenty. I felt 
that the best way to teach my children was through 
example. My husband and I have several credit cards, 
which we use regularly, including ones that count toward 
frequent flyer mileage. Our credit cards serve as great 
bookkeeping tools for us and help us track where we 
spend our money. We pay the total amount due each 
month so we never have to pay any interest on the credit 
card. Our son, however, was swayed by the lure of low 
monthly payments. He got instant 1 gratification but 
found delayed trauma when his credit limit was hit. It 
took him four years to clean up his credit from that 
mistake, but he learned a very valuable lesson in the 
process. Today he pays off his credit cards on a monthly Page 230 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combasis. Today he has also learned to pay himself first. 
Today he is fiscally responsible. 
Financial Success  
In summary, the age-old question of whether or not to 
pay your child an allowance can be decided only by you. 
But ask yourself what the policy you establish related to 
the allowance is teaching your child. Are you training your 
child to have: 
• an entitlement mind-set? 
• an employee mind-set? 
• an entrepreneur's mind-set? 
Fiscal responsibility combined with entrepreneurial 
spirit can be a mighty powerful force. Help your children 
develop both and then sit back and watch them achieve 
one financial success after another. 
Robert's Comment  
I agree with Sharon and would like to add one subtle 
distinction that may further clarify the lesson. 
My poor dad focused on how much money he made. 
That was why he always said, "Get a good education so 
you can get a high-paying job." 
My rich dad focused not on how much money he made. 
Instead he focused on how much money he kept. That was 
why he said, "How much money you keep is much more 
important than how much money you make." He also 
said, "People who focus only on how much money they 
make always  work for people who focus on how much 
money they keep." 
Regarding the subject of allowance, it's more 
important to teach your child to focus on keeping  money 
than making  money. My rich dad would say that each 
dollar in his asset column was like an employee of his: It 
worked for him. Once a dollar was in the asset column, it 
never left the asset column. If he sold an asset, he would 
use the proceeds to buy another asset. The assets he 
bought can now be handed down to the next generation. 
By developing this philosophy and teaching it to your 
children, you can help them learn the path to financial 
independence. 
Appendix B: Financial Field 
Trips: Money Exercises for Page 231 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comParents to Do with Their 
Children 
Sharon Lechter, C.P.A. and Mom 
These exercises may assist you in teaching your 
children about money. By using real-life experiences in 
teaching your children, you automatically show the 
practical application of the lessons. For instance, we have 
an exercise called "Financial Field Trip to a Bank." After 
completing that field trip, your child will remember the 
lessons learned during the visit every time he or she 
passes the bank. It is often referred to as "experiential 
learning," and it can be a powerful tool in teaching your 
children about money. 
The financial field trips were developed as dialogues or 
scripts for you to use to teach basic financial concepts. 
There are no right or wrong answers. These are simple 
exercises and observations intended to help you create a 
dialogue with your child about specific financial issues 
and broaden your child's awareness of the financial world 
we live in. But it is also an opportunity to have fun with 
your children. 
Financial Field Trip to the Dining Room Table  
A. PAY YOUR MONTHLY BILLS  
Have your children sit with you while you pay your 
monthly bills. Let them look at each bill and explain what 
each covers. This will give them a better understanding of 
life. You do not need to provide total disclosure of your 
finances to your children, but start with a simple 
awareness of the basics. 
1. Pay Yourself First  
Start by paying yourself first, even if it is only a few 
dollars. After watching you pay yourself first over and 
over, your child will most likely follow your example when 
he or she starts receiving money. 
2. Pay Household Expenses  
Explain the utilities bills and let your child review the 
bills. It will give your child a better appreciation of how 
your money is spent. Understanding that you pay 
separately for lights, water, gas, trash pickup, and other 
household maintenance expenses will open your child's 
mind to the idea of how many businesses are needed to 
support your lifestyle. (You may discover an additional Page 232 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combenefit from this exercise —we have heard from parents 
that their children actually start turning off lights more 
often and taking shorter showers after this lesson.) 
3. Pay Your Mortgage Payment  
Explain your mortgage payment to your child in very 
simple terms. Explain how the bank helps you buy your 
house by loaning you most of the money and then you 
agree to pay the bank back over time. In order to be able 
to do this, you agree to pay the bank a certain fee, or 
interest, until the total amount is paid back to the bank. 
Show your child your mortgage payment and how each 
payment includes payment for interest and payment 
against the principal amount due on your home. 
4. Pay Your Credit Card Bills  
Explain your credit card bill to your child. This may be 
a difficult exercise for you if you have a large amount of 
credit card debt. Nevertheless, it is important for your 
child to understand the negative as well as the positive 
side of credit card use. Here are some simple definitions. 
Credit Cards— "Credit cards are issued by banks or 
other financial institutions or stores to you so you can buy 
goods or services. You receive the goods or services 
immediately, and the bank or store pays for the goods or 
services for you." 
Statement— "Each month they will send you a 
statement that shows how much you spent that month 
(how much they paid for you) and the date you must pay 
the total amount due in order to avoid interest charges 
and late payment fees." 
Interest on Credit Cards—"If  the amount due on your 
statement is not paid by the due date, interest will be 
charged on the outstanding balance, and at a much higher 
rate than other types of borrowing." 
FINANCIAL FIELD TRIPS- MONEY EXERCISES FOR 
PARENTS TO Do WITH THEIR CHILDREN 251 
Minimum Payment Due —Many banks and stores allow 
you to pay a "minimum payment" instead of the total 
amount due. Interest is then charged on the balance still 
due. In fact, they discourage you from paying off your 
entire bank card bill at once. They feel that since they 
went to all the trouble to establish this credit for you, you 
should stretch out your payments so they can earn a lot 
more interest. 
Important;  It is this single feature of credit cards that Page 233 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comhas created the tremendous debt many people face 
today. How does this happen? 
• One month you are a little short of cash, so you pay 
the minimum payment due on your credit card. The card 
balance continues to grow as you continue to charge new 
items. 
• Paying the minimum payment was so easy that you 
do it again the next month and the next. But you also keep 
charging. 
• Since you are paying the minimum payments, your 
credit rating is still good, and other companies send you 
new credit cards. Soon you have five different credit cards 
in your wallet (according to CardWeb most households in 
America have between five and six different bank credit 
cards). 
• You continue to pay the minimum payments on the 
five cards, therefore keeping a good credit rating, but now 
you have a total balance due on all the cards that is 
staggering. 
• One day you realize that you are paying out a lot of 
money in minimum payments but your total balance due 
keeps increasing every month. 
• It is only when you find you cannot make even the 
minimum monthly payments that your credit rating 
suffers. 
• Then you find that you have spent the maximum on 
the credit limits of your cards, you cannot get any new 
cards because your credit is not so good anymore since 
you have missed a few payments, and you can still barely 
pay the minimums due on your current cards. 
This is unfortunately the vicious circle many people 
find themselves in today. While this may sound 
depressing and not something you want to burden your 
child with, it is best to start understanding this issue at an 
early age. How can you explain this complex subject to 
children? We have developed the game CASHFLOW for 
Kids and included this very issue in the game. Your 
children will learn they have a choice—pay cash or charge 
it— and that each choice has a consequence. Initially they 
usually choose to charge an item, since that is what they 
are accustomed to hearing at home. The consequence of 
charging is that they must increase the expenses they have 
to pay each and every payday. They soon learn that it is 
better to pay a little more cash up front than to increase Page 234 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtheir expenses indefinitely.  
In our book Rich Dad's CASHFLOW Quadrant  we 
include a section on how to get out of debt. It shares a 
formula for paying off debt in five to seven years. 
5. Encourage Your Child's Curiosity  
Encourage your child to ask questions, and answer the 
questions as honestly as you can. If your child asks a 
question that you cannot answer, seek someone who can 
answer the question, and learn with your child. 
6. Record Keeping  
Have your child help you file your bills after they are 
paid. Good record keeping is a learned habit. 
B. DEVELOP A BUDGET FOR A WEEK OF 
MEALS  
Now that your child has a better understanding of 
paying the bills, it is time to introduce the concept of 
budgeting. Rather than disclosing your full financial 
picture to your child, start small. For the sake of this 
exercise, let's say that you have your child plan your 
menus for a week. The task will be to feed your family for 
a week within a set budget. Your child needs to make the 
family happy as well as meet the financial budget. It is 
important that you allow your child to develop the menu 
as well as purchase the food. You may assist in the 
preparation, since cooking is not part of the lesson. 
1. Set a Budget  
Determine how much you usually spend for a week of 
food for the family. For convenience, you may want to 
include only breakfast and dinner. For the purposes of 
this exercise, we will use $200 for a family of four for 
seven breakfasts and seven dinners. 
2. Have Your Children Plan the Meals on a 
Chart  
For each meal have your children record what the 
menu will be. You may want to visit the grocery store to 
help them understand the costs of certain items. 
3. Have Your Children Prepare a Shopping List  
After they have completed the menus for the week, 
have your children prepare a shopping list so that they 
will know what food needs to be purchased. 
4. Have Your Child Shop for the Food  
At the grocery store watch your children as they review 
items for purchase. You may want to suggest that they Page 235 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comtake a calculator along to keep a total of the amount 
that is being spent. It is important that they keep within 
the budget set. 
5. Have Your Children Record What They 
Spent for Each Meal on the Chart  
You may want your children to record the amounts on 
the chart as they shop. But they also need to fill in the 
chart at home from the receipt, as there may be taxes that 
need to be included in the meal costs. 
6. Prepare the Meals  
Depending on your children, you may need to assist in 
the preparation of the meals. 
7. Analyze Results  
First, check to make sure that the family was satisfied 
with their meals. This is a very important part of the 
exercise, as feedback comes with everything you do in life. 
Next, have your children compare their budgeted 
amounts to the actual amounts spent for each meal. For 
each meal determine the amount spent over- or 
underbudget, then determine the total over- or 
underbudget spent for the entire week. 
8. Review the Process  
This is the most important part of the exercise. Allow 
your children to share their experiences with you. What 
did they learn? Listen to their observations. You may find 
a growing appreciation from your children for the role you 
play as a parent. 
9. Apply the Process  
Now discuss with your children how you need to 
budget for all expenses. If you prefer not to disclose your 
specific financial information, create a sample budget. 
Discuss the need to budget what income is coming into 
the household and how it will be spent for all the expenses 
that need to be paid. 
If they have completed the "Pay Your Bills" exercise, 
your children will have a greater understanding of what 
items need to be planned for. 
Just as they had to plan the menus within a budget, 
you must learn to plan your life within a budget. 
INCOME 
Paychecks 
Rent from rental properties Interest or dividends Page 236 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comOther income  
Less  
INVESTMENTS 
Budget a regular amount to be invested. This is the 
"pay yourself first" category. 
Less  
EXPENSES Taxes 
Mortgage payment or rent Food Clothing Insurance 
Gas 
Utilities Entertainment Interest on credit cards or 
other debt 
AMOUNT LEFT AFTER ALL INVESTMENTS AND 
EXPENSES 
Now, calculate the percentage of your income that you 
invest (keep as assets) and the percentage of your income 
that you spend. Are there ways for you to increase the 
percentage of income that you invest (keep as assets) and 
reduce the percentage of income that you spend? 
If you can increase your assets and therefore increase 
your income from assets, more of your money will work 
for you. Your paycheck represents you working for money. 
10. Follow-Up  
After a week or so has gone by, discuss the exercise 
with your children again. What do they remember from 
the experience? Would they like to repeat the exercise? Do 
they understand the long-term impact of investing, 
buying assets, or paying yourself first? 
Financial Field Trip to the Bank  
Initial exercise: Take your child to the bank. Point out 
the tellers and the customer assistance people sitting at 
the desks. If the bank is not busy, ask the teller and 
customer assistance people to explain what they do. Have 
your child ask how much interest the bank pays on money 
deposited in the bank. Include savings accounts, 
certificates of deposit, and other bank instruments 
available through the bank. Have your child take notes. 
Then have your child ask how much interest the bank 
would charge for a car loan, house loan, or consumer 
credit loan. If the bank issues its own credit card, have 
your child ask for the interest rate on the card's 
outstanding balances. 
Then leave the bank and go somewhere quiet to Page 237 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comcomplete the following table:  
Bank pays interest to you at: 
You pay interest to the bank at: 
Savings Account__________% 
Car Loan__________% 
Money Market Account__________% 
Consumer Loan__________% 
CD__________% 
Credit Card__________% 
Mortgage__________% 
____________________ __________% 
____________________ __________% 
____________________ __________% 
Ask your child to review the table and then ask the 
following questions: 
1. Which column shows the higher rates? _______ 
2. Complete the following sentence: 
"So the bank pays me interest of (savings account rate)  
on my savings account, but when I want to borrow money 
for a car I will have to pay the bank Tear loan rate)  for the 
money I borrow. I will be paying (car loan rate minus 
savings account rate)  more than I am receiving." 
3. Now review chapter 10, "Why Savers Are Losers," 
with your child. Explain that it is always wise to have 
some money in a savings account and that is how we start 
learning good money habits. In fact, it is recommended 
that people keep enough cash in an account to cover from 
three to twelve months' worth of expenses in case of an 
emergency. We are not recommending that you rush out 
and withdraw the money you have in savings accounts. 
We are saying that savings accounts are not good 
investment vehicles. 
4. In summary, ask your child, "If you had the 
following situation, would you be making money or losing 
money?" 
You have $10,000 in a savings account earning 4% 
interest. How much interest would you be earning per 
year? 
($10,000x4%) = ______(A) 
and 
You have a $10,000 consumer loan on which you make Page 238 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comonly interest payments for the first year at a rate of 9%.  
How much interest would you be paying? 
($10,000x9%) = ______(B) 
now  
After one year, are you making money or losing 
money? 
.(Q 
(A) minus (B) = ______ 
After ten years, how much money have you made or 
lost? 
(C) x 10 years = ______(D) 
ANSWER KEY: 
A = $400; the bank will have paid you $400 interest 
on your savings. 
B = $900; you will have paid the bank $900 interest 
on your loan. 
C = losing $500 (or -$500), you will have lost $500. 
D = losing $5,000; after ten years you will have lost 
$5,000. You will still have $10,000 in savings and you 
will still have a consumer loan of $10,000, but you will 
have paid $5,000 more in interest than you received over 
the ten years. 
ADVANCED EXERCISE  
Review the facts above, but let's add the impact of 
income taxes to the situation. The government taxes you 
on interest income but does not allow you a deduction for 
the interest you pay. 
Start with the net amount you calculated for (C) above; 
remember, it may be a negative number. 
(C) = _________ 
Take the amount of your interest earnings from (A) 
(A) = __________  
Multiply it by an income tax of 50% (tax rate will vary 
based on your total income). 
(A) x 50% = _________ (E) 
Now subtract (E) from (C) to determine the amount of 
money you made or lost after taxes. 
(C) minus (E) = _________ (F) 
After ten years, how much money have you made or 
lost?  Page 239 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com(F)x 10 years = _________ (G) 
ANSWER KEY: 
E = $200; you will pay $200 in income tax on the 
interest you earned from the bank, assuming a tax rate of 
50%. 
F = losing $700 (or —$700); after the income tax 
effect, you will be losing $700 per year, or paying $700 
more in interest on your consumer loan than you receive 
on your savings, after taxes. 
G = losing $7,000; after ten years you will have lost 
$7,000. You will still have $10,000 in savings and you 
will still have a consumer loan of $10,000, but you will 
have paid $7,000 more in interest and taxes than you 
received over the ten years in interest on your savings. 
IN REVIEW:  
A quick review would show that the example above 
would not be a wise investment plan. Unfortunately, 
many people follow this exact plan without realizing it. 
Here are some ideas to improve this investment plan. 
Easy.  Use your $10,000 savings to pay off your 
$10,000 consumer loan. This way you won't lose any 
more money. You will earn no interest and pay no 
interest. 
Average.  Find an asset to buy with the $10,000 in 
your savings account that will generate enough cash flow 
to pay for your consumer loan. You will need to find an 
investment that generates a cash flow of $900 per year. 
Another way to look at this is that your cash ($900) on 
cash ($10,000) return is 9 percent ($900 divided by 
$10,000). Understanding cash on cash return is essential 
for any investor. This way your asset pays for your 
liability, the consumer loan. (The impact of income taxes 
is not included in this example since the income tax 
applicable to the asset you buy may vary.) 
Complex.  Buy the asset with the cash on cash return 
of at least 9 percent. Then determine how you can convert 
the $10,000 consumer loan into a business loan. This 
would make the $900 of interest paid on the loan 
deductible for income tax purposes. This idea is covered 
in more depth in Rich Dad's Guide to Investing . 
Please remember that this exercise is intended to 
demonstrate the difference between saving and borrowing 
as well as the difference between saving and investing. Page 240 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comAdditional components have been added to introduce 
higher levels of complexity. Start explaining the initial 
example to your child and continue only if your child is 
interested and shows a true understanding of the initial 
concepts. 
Financial Field Trip to the Grocery Store  
The best way for your children to learn is through 
experience. From a very early age, you can start talking to 
your children about money. This exercise can be done 
prior to the budgeting exercise to assist your children in 
their shopping efforts when planning their family's meals 
for a week. 
When you go to the grocery store, you are constantly 
making decisions related to quality and pricing. Instead of 
talking to yourself silently, talk to your kids about the 
process. I often see people shove a toy or electronic game 
in their children's faces to keep them quiet. Engage them 
in the process. Show them how the stores provide price 
per unit comparisons, and let them tell you which can of 
beans is the better bargain. 
It may be equally important for you to explain why 
even though one can is less expensive you choose to buy a 
more expensive can. The quality of the beans may justify 
the difference in price. You may want to buy both cans so 
you can show the difference to your child at home. 
Let your children pay and count out the money and the 
change they receive. The concept of value and exchange is 
very important for your children to learn. 
Financial Field Trip to the Car or Appliance 
Dealer  
If you are going to buy a car or major appliance, take 
your child with you. 
Discuss the decision of paying cash or financing the 
purchase. If you finance the purchase, make sure you tell 
your child that you must now include the new payment in 
your monthly budget. 
By sitting through the financing process, your child can 
learn about borrowing and the need for good credit at an 
early age. Have the loan officer explain to your child what 
good credit is and how important it is. Generally the loan 
officer will be happy to share stories about potential 
customers who have failed to qualify for credit as well as 
other customers who have had stellar credit ratings. 
It is through this process that your child will start to Page 241 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comunderstand how your personal financial statement and 
good credit are your report cards in real life. 
This can be a brief visit, but just the exposure to the 
situation broadens your child's mind and awareness about 
money and borrowing. 
Financial Field Trip to a Stockbrokerage Firm  
After you have visited the bank, take your child to a 
Stockbrokerage firm. Ask the stockbroker to explain his or 
her job to your child. (You may want to prearrange this 
visit so that you find a willing broker.) 
If your child is a teenager, you may want to open an 
account at the firm. Have your child assist in the 
paperwork process. With your and the stockbroker's 
assistance, allow your child to select the investments to 
fund his or her account. 
Have the broker explain the different types of 
investments and their relative rates of return to your 
child. Most adults do not understand the differences 
among corporate stocks or how mutual funds operate. 
Your child will have a terrific financial head start by 
understanding the basics of these investment tools. 
Unless your child is grasping every concept the 
stockbroker is presenting, it may be premature to discuss 
concepts like P/E ratios and other aspects of fundamental 
and technical analysis. Further discussion on these topics 
can be found in Rich Dad's Guide to Investing . 
Some parents have opened accounts for their children 
with the on-line trading firms. The choice is yours. In the 
earlier stages, however, it may be beneficial to have a 
stockbroker your child can meet with face-to-face. Your 
child will establish a relationship and be more at ease 
asking questions about what he or she may not 
understand. 
Teach your child how to read the financial pages of 
your local paper. If you are not comfortable with this 
either, have the stockbroker teach both of you. 
Always start small. Do not allow your child to have 
investing authority over large amounts of money. This 
process is suggested for educating your child about the 
world of money and the power of money. Access to too 
much money could allow the power of money to take 
control of your child and create a monster. It is better to 
start small and learn by doing. It is much easier to recover 
from a small mistake than a big one when it involves Page 242 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.commoney.  
Financial Field Trip to McDonald's  
It shouldn't be too difficult to take your child to 
McDonald's. This time, however, plan enough time to 
include the following exercise: 
As you drive up to McDonald's, point out the following 
to your child: 
• "Someone owns the land underneath the McDonald's, 
and they get paid rent for letting the McDonald's be on 
their land. The owner of the land doesn't even need to be 
here. They just get paid rent every month." 
• "The same person may also own the building and get 
paid rent for it." 
• "Someone owns the company that makes the golden 
arches for McDonald's. Can you imagine a factory filled 
with golden arches? Maybe that's how McDonald's knows 
that all the arches will be the same color and look the 
same." 
After you order your food and have eaten, point out the 
following to your child: 
• "See the clerk behind the counter? She is an employee 
of McDonald's. She gets paid so much per hour to show 
up and do that job. As long as she shows up when she is 
supposed to and does the job she is trained for, she will 
get paid. When she gets her paycheck, she will be paid 
only for the time she has physically been here working." 
• Then ask:  "What other employees do you see?" 
• Then summarize:  "So it takes quite a few 
employees to make this McDonald's operate so it can 
serve its customers well." 
Look around the restaurant and point out some of the 
following observations: 
• "See the cups they use and the paper they wrap the 
hamburgers in? Those are made specifically for 
McDonald's by other companies. Those companies have 
to make sure the cups and papers look exactly how 
McDonald's ordered them, or they may not get paid for 
them. Someone, also an employee, probably at a 
corporate office for McDonald's located somewhere else, 
is responsible for ordering those items and making sure 
they are delivered to each McDonald's before they run out 
of their current supplies." 
• Then ask:  "What other items do you see that might Page 243 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combe made for McDonald's by other companies?"  
• Then summarize:  "So it takes a lot of different 
companies with different areas of manufacturing 
expertise to supply products to McDonald's to make sure 
it operates efficiently." 
• "See the man working on the soda machine (or fixing 
the lights, or washing the windows)? He is probably self-
employed or owns his own small business. The manager 
of this McDonald's hires him to do a specific task, like fix 
the machine or wash the windows. It would be too 
expensive for the store manager to hire an employee with 
those skills full-time, since he needs his help only when 
something breaks or the windows get dirty." 
• Then ask:  "What other jobs or tasks do you see that 
the manager might hire an outside company to do instead 
of hiring an employee?" 
• Then summarize:  "So it takes a lot of different 
types of services from outside companies to make sure 
this restaurant operates efficiently. It is an opportunity for 
small businesses and self-employed people with particular 
areas of expertise to work for McDonald's and help it 
support its operations." 
• "Have you ever noticed that every McDonald's is 
similar? The food is always the same. The employees are 
different but usually say the same things. The ketchup is 
always the same. The reason this happens is that 
McDonald's has developed something called 'systems.' 
Every store has policies and procedures that it must 
follow if it wants to continue being a McDonald's. These 
policies and procedures describe the systems that must be 
followed. They have systems that cover all aspects of their 
operations. There is a system for how they fill or clean the 
milk shake machine or the French fry fryer." 
• Then ask:  "What other systems can you identify?" 
• Then summarize:  "The systems in place in this 
McDonald's and every other McDonald's in the world are 
what make it such a successful franchise. Wouldn't it be 
great to own these systems or help create systems for your 
own business that could be this successful?" 
• "Have you noticed that I have never talked about the 
owner of McDonald's being here? The owner has hired a 
manager. The manager is responsible for the day-to-day 
operations of the restaurant. ^ The manager hires and 
fires the employees, makes sure sufficient supplies have Page 244 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.combeen ordered, makes sure the customers are happy, 
and makes sure everything is running smoothly. The 
manager contacts the owner only to report the 
restaurant's progress on a regular basis, maybe on a 
weekly phone call or at a monthly meeting (held at the 
owner's office or home). The owner wants these phone 
calls or meetings so he or she will know how much money 
the McDonald's is making for him or her. The McDonald's 
is an asset owned by the owner. He or she owns the 
systems that make the restaurant work. In fact, the owner 
could be over on that golf course right now, playing golf." 
• Then ask:  "How much time do you think the owner 
spends at this McDonald's?" 
• Then summarize:  "So the owner has his or her 
asset working for him or her instead of the owner working 
for money! Because this as set is generating cash flow for 
the owner, the owner is free to spend his or her time on 
building more assets, or on the golf course." 
Financial Field Trip to an Apartment Building  
Find an apartment house near where you live, 
preferably one that your child will recognize or may see 
often in your travels. Park your car in front of the 
apartment building and make the following observations: 
• "This is an apartment building. The people who live 
here are called 'tenants,' and they pay something called 
'rent.' The rent allows them to live in one of the 
apartments, but they don't own the apartment. It is as if 
they are paying to borrow the apartment. Usually their 
rent also allows them to use the common areas like the 
pool, laundry room, or front yard." 
• Then ask:  "How many units do you think there are 
in this complex?" 
• Then summarize:  "So all of these tenants are 
paying rent to use these apartments to the owner of the 
apartment building." 
• "So the owner of the apartment building owns all of 
the units. Usually the owner has also borrowed money, 
called a 'mortgage,' to buy the building and has to pay the 
bank each month an amount of interest and an amount of 
the borrowed money." 
• Then ask:  "If there are__units and each tenant is 
paying $ 1,000 rent per month, then the owner of the 
apartment building is making a lot of money from these 
units."  Page 245 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com• Then summarize:  "So if the owner collects more 
rent each month than the amount he has to pay to the 
bank, he will have a positive cash flow." 
• "But there are other expenses, like yardwork, 
maintaining the pool, or painting the building, that the 
owner also has to pay to keep the apartments in good 
shape for the tenants." 
• Then ask: "Can you think of some other expenses the 
owner might have to pay?" 
• Then summarize:  "So the owner needs to collect 
enough rent each month to make sure the income (rent) 
from the apartments is more than the expenses to own the 
building and keep it maintained." 
• "In most cases the owner of the apartment building 
does not live in one of the apartments in the building. So 
the owner needs a system of how to charge and collect 
rent, and also a system to notify the tenants of any 
changes to the property." 
• Then ask:  "What other systems do you think the 
owner needs to make the apartments successful?" (For 
example, a way for the tenants to notify the owner of 
problems with their apartments and a way to deposit 
money and pay the bills related to the apartment.) 
• Then summarize:  "So this is similar to McDonald's 
in that it needs systems to make it run efficiently and 
successfully. This apartment complex is really just 
another business." 
• "You may not ever see the owner of the apartment 
building around here since he or she does not live here. 
There may be a property manager who handles all the 
rent, maintenance, and tenant issues. Sometimes the 
property manager may live on the property, but not all the 
time." 
• Then ask:  "So if the owner is never around and the 
property owner coordinates everything, is this similar to 
the owner of McDonald's?" 
• Then summarize:  "Once again, the owner of the 
apartment building owns an asset. He or she also owns 
the system, usually coordinated by the property manager, 
who makes sure the apartments are run efficiently and 
smoothly. The property manager reports to the owner on 
a regular basis so the owner knows how much money the 
asset is putting into his or her pocket. The owner has his 
or her asset working for him or her, rather than the owner Page 246 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comworking for money."  
In summary, your child will see the apartment building 
in an entirely new light after this visit. Also, if you have 
chosen an apartment building near your home, every time 
your child passes it, he or she will be reminded of the 
business of owning an apartment complex. 
You can also explain that there are many people who 
own rental single-family homes and office buildings as 
investments to which this analysis can also apply. The 
apartment complex example was used because of its 
simplicity and familiarity to children. The important 
concept to be learned is the power of money. You want 
your money working for you instead of you working for 
money. 
About the Authors  
Robert T. Kiyosaki  
Born and raised in Hawaii, Robert Kiyosaki is a fourth-
generation Japanese-American. After graduating from 
college in New York, Robert joined the Marine Corps and 
went to Vietnam as an officer and helicopter gunship 
pilot. 
Returning from war, Robert went to work for the Xerox 
Corporation and in 1977 started a company that brought 
the first nylon Velcro surfer wallets to market. In 1985 he 
founded an international education company that taught 
business and investing to tens of thousands of students 
throughout the world. 
In 1994 Robert sold his business and retired at the age 
of 47. During his short-lived retirement, Robert wrote 
Rich Dad Poor Dad . Soon afterward he wrote Rich Dad's 
Cashflow Quadrant  and Rich Dad's Guide to Investing . 
All three books are currently on the best-seller lists of the 
Wall Street Journal, Business Week, New York Times, E-
Trade.com , and other distinguished lists. Robert also 
created his educational board game CASHFLOW to teach 
individuals the same financial strategies his rich dad 
spent years teaching him… the same financial strategies 
that allowed Robert to retire at the age of 47. 
Robert is often heard saying, "We go to school to learn 
to work hard for money. I write books and create products 
that teach people how to have money work hard for 
them… so they can enjoy the luxuries of this great world 
we live in." 
Sharon L Lechter  Page 247 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comWife and mother of three, C.P.A. and business owner, 
Sharon Lechter has dedicated her professional efforts to 
the field of education. 
She graduated with honors from Florida State 
University with a degree in accounting. She joined the 
ranks of what was then one of the big eight accounting 
firms and went on to hold management positions with 
companies in the computer, insurance, and publishing 
industries, all while maintaining her professional 
credentials as a C.P.A. 
As her own children grew, she was keenly involved in 
their education. She became a vocal activist in the areas of 
mathematics, computers, reading, and writing education. 
So she was delighted to join forces with the inventor of 
the first electronic "talking book" and help expand the 
electronic book industry to a multimillion-dollar 
international market. Today she remains a pioneer in 
developing new technologies to bring education back into 
children's lives. 
"Our current educational system has not been able to 
keep pace with the global and technological changes in 
the world today. We must teach our young people the 
skills, both scholastic and financial, that they will need to 
not only survive but to flourish in the world they face." 
How To Give Your Child A Financial Head Start 
In Life For Less Than $100.00  
I recently received this letter from a fellow accountant. 
It best states why I think our educational game is 
important for your child's future. 
Sharon Lechter, C.P.A. and Mom 
"I don't want my child to make the same mistakes I've 
made. I want my child to learn to responsibly manage his 
money early in life…before he develops the bad habits I 
developed…even though I am an accountant. I don't want 
my child to be 40 years old and deeply in debt. I want my 
child to be financially literate before he enters high 
school. I want him to know the differences between assets 
and liabilities before financially unsophisticated 
salespeople try to teach him what they think assets and 
liabilities are. That is why I love your CASHFLOW for 
Kids game. My son loves the game so we play it regularly. 
We have fun and my son is getting a financial head start 
in life. Thank you for developing such a fabulous teaching 
tool. Every parent should know about CASHFLOW for Page 248 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comKids."  
Chuck Kinsley Tax Accountant Scottsdale, AZ 
To order your own CASHFLOW for Kids game, or for 
more information, visit our Web site at www.richdad.com . 
For less than $100, you can give your child a priceless 
financial head start in life. Of course if you are not 
satisfied or your child does not find the game fun to play, 
there is a 90-day money back guarantee. 
CASHFLOW® TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 
480.998.6971 • 800.3083585 • f : 480.348.1349 
4330 N CIVIC CENTER PLAZA, SUITE 101 • 
SCOTTSDALE, ARIZONA • USA 85251 
From an Expert  
As a mathematics professor in the College of Education 
at Arizona State University West and as the principal 
investigator for a $2 million grant from the National 
Science Foundation to promote mathematics learning in 
the primary grades, I send this letter in support of the 
game CASHFLOW for Kids. 
This game was beneficial for my children because I 
could immediately see an improvement in their 
mathematics knowledge and their understanding of 
money. The game is self-rewarding and my children 
(brothers) wanted to play it again after they finished 
playing the very first time. In their second game they 
made their decisions faster and their decisions were more 
strategically planned than in the first round. 
As a parent, I was pleased to observe the money 
attitudes of my children as they played the game. They 
learned from the choices they made, accelerating their 
understanding in future games. CASHFLOW for Kids is a 
great learning tool for all children. I thank you for a game 
that simplifies the complex subjects of mathematics and 
money so that all children can participate in the game and 
grow in knowledge as they play. — Yolanda De La Cruz 
Ph. D , University of California at Berkeley Professor of 
Mathematics, College of Education Arizona State 
University West 
As an educational psychologist with over 3 decades of 
experience in teaching, and researching methods of 
effective teaching and learning, I have become 
increasingly alarmed at the failure of our public schools. I 
share Robert Kiyosaki's and Sharon Lechter's concerns 
about the new demands that the Information Age places Page 249 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comon all of us, especially our children. Because schools 
cannot teach our children everything, it becomes even 
more important for the family and community to be 
aware of meaningful and beneficial methods that 
encourage our children to learn. 
The ideas presented in this book and the game 
CASHFLOW for Kids are based on tried-and-true 
principles of learning that have been shown to accelerate 
and stimulate children's learning. CASHFLOW for Kids 
teaches not only vital financial skills but also vital human 
interaction skills. 
—Ann NevIN Ph. D in Educational Psychology 
Hello, my name is Tim. I am 15 years old and I am a 
great fan of Robert. I play CASHFLOW 101 every day. (I 
have gotten to the point where I can get out of the rat race 
be-fore I go around the board.) I have read Rich Dad Poor 
Dad, CASHFLOW Quadrant , and am in the middle of 
Rich Dad's Guide to Investing  All of my friends think I am 
wasting my time, but I believe these years of my life will 
be the turning point of my life. I used to be into drugs, 
and getting in trouble with the law, and I was just a bad 
kid, until I met my uncle. He introduced me to Robert's 
books and in 5 months I am now helping him start his 
business and buying houses for him to invest in real 
estate. I am no longer into anything illegal and I am 
passing school now. I owe it all to Robert. So let him know 
he has helped me when no one else could—he gave me a 
will to live and made me believe I can be something in life. 
May be hard to understand, but it's true. Thank you. —
Tim, age 15 
CASHFLOW for Kids has allowed us to sit around the 
table with our children and discuss money matters and 
teach them lessons they can use for the rest of their lives. 
—Stacy and Michelle Tetschner 
Please visit our Web site,  
www.richdad.com  
to review:  
• Additional Information About Our Financial 
Education Products 
• Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) About Our 
Products 
• Cashflow Technologies, Inc.'s Events and Robert 
Kiyosaki's Appearances and Interviews  Page 250 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.comThank You  
To Order Books Visit: www.twbookmark.com  
North America/South America/Europe/Africa:  
CASHFLOW" Technologies, Inc. 
4330 N. Civic Center Plaza, Suite 101 
Scottsdale, Arizona 85251 
USA 
(800) 308-3585 or (480) 998-6971 
Fax: (480) 348-1349 
e-mail: info@richdad.com  
Australia/New Zealand:  
CASHFLOW" Education Australia 
Reply Paid AAA401 (no stamp required)  
PO Box 1126 
Crows Nest, NSW 1585, Australia 
Tel: 1 (800) 308 358 or (61) 2 9923 1699 
Fax: 1 (800) 676 992 or (6l) 2 9923 1799 
e-mail: info@cashfloweducation.com.au  
Let Robert Kiyosaki teach you how to profit in 
both good times and bad.  
- Robert Kiyosaki Live! 2001 -  
"My rich dad taught me the secrets to investing so that 
no matter what the market and economic cycles did, I 
would profit. 
"I would like to teach you these fundamentals of 
investing at my upcoming seminar tour." 
—Robert Kiyosaki, best-selling author, Rich Dad Poor 
Dad  
Now you can experience Robert Kiyosaki live during 
his 2001 seminar tours across North America. 
At these events Robert will share the secrets that his 
rich dad taught him about the fundamentals of investing. 
Robert Kiyosaki's message is clear: Take responsibility 
for your finances or take orders all your life. You're either 
a master of money or a slave to it. 
Find out when Robert will be in your area, by 
visiting:  
www.robert -kivosaki -live.com  Page 251 of 251 Rich Kid, Smart Kid
09.12.2005 file://D:\Downloads\Documents\Kinh te\Rich Dad's Rich Kid, Smart Kid - Giving Yo ...PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com