TheREAL Book 
of 
Real Estate9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page i9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page ii
This page intentionally left blank The REAL Book 
of 
REAL EXPERTS. REAL STORIES. REAL LIFE.
Robert Kiyosaki
Real Estate9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page iiiCopyright © 2009 by Robert T. Kiyosaki
Published by Vanguard PressAll rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed inthe United States of America. For information and inquiries, address Vanguard Books, 387 Park Avenue South, 12th Floor, New York, NY 10016, or call (800) 343-4499.
Designed by Anita Koury
Set in 10.5 point Mercury
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The real book of real estate : real experts, real advice, real success stories/Robert Kiyosaki.
p. cm.
Includes index.ISBN 978-1-59315-532-2
1. Real estate investment. 2.  Real estate business.  I. Kiyosaki, Robert T., 1947-HD1382.5.R33 2009333.33—dc22
2009008346
ISBN 13: 978-1-59315-532-2
Vanguard Press books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the United
States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, pleasecontact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street,Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, extension 5000, or e-mailspecial.markets@perseusbooks.com.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 19781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page iv"I'm not a genius. I'm just a tremendous bundle of experience."
—Dr. R. Buckminster “Bucky” Fuller
From left to right: Dr. R. Buckminster
“Bucky” Fuller at eighty-six years old with
Robert Kiyosaki in 1981. Buckminster Fuller
was an American architect, author, 
designer, futurist, inventor, and visionary.
Recognized as one of the most 
accomplished Americans in history, he 
dedicated his life to a world that worked 
for all things and all people.9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page v9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page vi
This page intentionally left blank Contents
Acknowledgments  ix
Introduction, Robert Kiyosaki 1
PART 1: The Business of Real Estate
1The Business of Real Estate, Tom Wheelwright 5
2A Real Estate Attorney’s View of Assembling and Managing Your
Team, Charles W . Lotzar 29
3The Way to Exotic Wealth, Wayne Palmer 53
4Proﬁts from the Ground Up, Ross McCallister 71
5Master Your Universe, Craig Coppola  89
610 Rules for Real Estate Asset Protection, Garrett Sutton 108
7Of Marbles and Capital, Wayne Palmer 133
8How to Avoid and Handle Real Estate Disputes, Bernie Bays  152
PART 2: Y our Real Estate Project
9Buy by the Acre, Sell by the Foot: Understanding Real Needs, Financial Logic, and Asking Questions, Mel Shultz 173
10 It’s All About Adding Value, Curtis Oakes 184
11Analyzing the Deal, or Adventures in Real Estate, John Finney 200
12Real Estate Due Diligence, Scott McPherson 222
13Creating Value from the Inside Out, Kim Dalton 233
14Financing for Real Estate Investors, Scott McPherson  251
15Lease It and Keep It Leased, Craig Coppola 262
16The Perils of Careless Property Management, Ken McElroy 2769781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page viiPART 3: Creative Ways to Make Money in Real Estate
17Getting from A to B Without Paying Taxes, Gary Gorman 293
18No Down Payment, Carleton Sheets 306
19Marketing: Your Ticket to Finding and Proﬁting from Foreclosures,
Dean Graziosi 326
20 Entitlements: The Sleeping Giant of Real Estate Proﬁtability, W . Scott Schirmer 341
21The Tax Lien Investment Strategy, Tom Wheelwright 371
22 Horse Trading: The Original Way to Wealth on the Great AmericanFrontier, Wayne Palmer 390
23 How to Create Retail Magic: A Tale of Two Centers, Marty De Rito 409
PART 4:
Lessons Learned
24 What One Property Can Teach You, Kim Kiyosaki 433
25 In the Beginning . . . , Donald Trump 451
26 What Is the Most Important Thing You’ve Learned From Your Father About Real Estate?, Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump 458
27 Overcoming the Fear of Failing, Robert Kiyosaki 466
Index 481
Credits 5019781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page viiiFor years I have been an advocate for ﬁnancial education. While many other
ﬁnancial advisors are telling people what they should invest in, I have been
telling people to invest in themselves—to invest in their own knowledge. That
is what I have done, and it has made me rich. I have also been telling people tosurround themselves with great teachers who are actively practicing what theypreach. The creation of this book was made possible because of the people Iconsider my teachers. Each one has a lifetime of experience and a lifetime ofknowledge. And each one knows the importance of continual learning.
The contributors to this book generously gave of their time and their talent
so that you could see the possibilities, avoid the pitfalls, and understand themethods of building wealth through real estate. They have recollected theirgreat achievements, and they have revealed their painful failures. I thank themfor their openness. The lessons we learn from our own mistakes and the mis-takes of others are the most powerful. 
These people are not only my advisors, but they are also my friends. Together
we have been through the ups and downs of the real estate cycle, ridden eachwave, and made money doing it. These are the friends I run my ideas and mydeals by. And because they are friends, I know that they will give me theirhonest opinions. I thank them for that, too.Acknowledgments
ix9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page ixI’d also like to thank Jan Ayres and Kathy Heasley of Heasley & Partners,
Inc., who took this book from ideas on a ﬂip chart to a ﬁnished manuscript.
Special thanks to Rhonda Shenkiryk of The Rich Dad Company and CharlesMcStravick of Artichoke Design for their work on the book’s cover. Finally,thank you to my wife, Kim, who more than twenty years ago said yes to a guywith no money and a lot of ideas. x ACKNOWLEDGMENTS9781593155322_FM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:52 PM  Page xThere are four reasons why I think a real book of real estate is important at
this time.
First, there will always be a real estate market. In a civilized world, a roof
over your head is as essential as food, clothing, energy, and water. Real estate
investors are essential to keeping this vital human need available at a reasonableprice. In countries where investing in real estate is limited or excessively con-trolled by the government, such as it was in former Communist Bloc countries,people suffer, and real estate deteriorates.
Second, there are many different ways a person can participate and prosper
with real estate. For most people, their only real estate investment is where theylive. Their home is their biggest investment. During the real estate boom from2000 to 2007 , many amateurs got involved with ﬂipping houses—buying lowand hoping to sell higher. As you know, many ﬂippers ﬂopped and lost every-thing. In true investor vocabulary, ﬂipping is known as speculating or trading.Some people call it gambling. While ﬂipping is one method of investing, there
are many, more sophisticated, less risky ways to do well with real estate. Thisbook is ﬁlled with the knowledge and experiences of real, real estate investors—real estate professionals who invest rather than ﬂip, speculate, trade, or gamble.
Third, real estate gives you control over your investments, that is, ifyou
have the skills. In the volatile times of early 2009, millions of people were losing
1Introduction: A Note from
Robert Kiyosaki
Why a Real Book of Real Estate9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 1trillions of dollars simply because they handed over control of their wealth to
other people. Even since the middle of 2008, the great Warren Buffett’s fund,Berkshire Hathaway, has lost 40 percent of its value! Millions of people havelost their jobs, which means they had no control over their own employmenteither. The real, real estate professionals in this book have control over boththeir businesses and investments. They will share their good times and the badtimes with you. They will share what they have learned while learning to control
their investments and their ﬁnancial destiny. The learning process is continual.
And, ﬁnally, here’s my real reason for this book. I am sick and tired of ﬁnan-
cial experts giving advice on real estate, especially when they do not actuallyinvest in real estate. After my book Rich Dad Poor Dad came out, I was on a tel-
evision program with a ﬁnancial author and television personality. At the time,in 1999, the stock market was red hot with the dot-com boom. This ﬁnancialexpert, who was a former stockbroker and ﬁnancial planner, was singing thepraises of stocks and mutual funds. After the stock market crashed in 2001, thisman suddenly resurfaced with a new book on real estate, portraying himself asa real estate expert. His real estate advice was beyond bad. It was dangerous.Then the real estate market crashed and he dropped out of sight again. The lasttime I saw him, he had written a book on investing in solar energy and wasclaiming to be a green entrepreneur. If he were to write a book about what hereally does, his new book would be about raising bulls . . . and selling BS.
There are other ﬁnancial “experts” who know nothing about real estate, yet
they speak badly about real estate and say it is risky. The only reason real estateis risky for them is because they know nothing about investing in it. Instead,they recommend saving money and investing in a well-diversiﬁed portfolio ofmutual funds—investments which I believe are the riskiest investments in theworld, especially in this market. Why do they recommend investing in savingsand mutual funds? The answer is obvious: Many of these professionals are en-dorsed by banks, mutual fund companies, and the media. It’s good business toplug your sponsors’ businesses and products.
Commissioning this book gives the public its ﬁrst chance to learn from real,
real estate investors, friends, and advisors—people who have been through theups and the downs and who walk their talk. This book gives them the opportu-nity to share the spotlight with the many media ﬁnancial “experts” and speakthe truth. These real estate experts are true pros, and you’re about to move be-yond the media hype. I hope you are ready. The Real Book of Real Estate is the
real deal.2 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 2PART 1
The Business 
of Real Estate•TOM WHEELWRIGHT
•CHARLES LOTZAR
•WAYNE PALMER
•ROSS MCCALLISTER
•CRAIG COPPOLA
•GARRETT SUTTON
•BERNIE BAYS9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 39781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 4
This page intentionally left blank Tom Wheelwright is a rare combination of CPA, real estate investor, and
teacher. He has the ability to take the complex and often boring subject of
tax and tax law and make it into something that’s simple enough for a person like
me to understand. 
Tom understands the tax code. He actually enjoys reading the tax code, and be-
cause he is such a student of it, he understands this lengthy document better thananyone I know. Most CPAs focus on a very small part of the tax code. They focuson the part that lets you and most Americans defer taxes until retirement—thecode relating to IRAs, 401(k)s, and other so-called retirement plans. Tom also paysclose attention to the other, much lengthier part of the code that shows you how toreduce or eliminate your taxes permanently. The difference between Tom andother CPAs is that Tom understands the purpose of the tax code. It’s not just a setof rules. It’s a document that when followed is designed to reward certain behaviorsthrough lowering or eliminating taxes. Does your CPA see the tax code this way?
I consider Tom to be a very moral and ethical man. He is very religious, raised
in the Mormon faith. While I am not Mormon, I do share many of the values ofthe Mormon religion—values such as tithing, giving at least 10 percent to spiritualmatters, and dedicating a number of years as a missionary. While I have never1 T om WHEELWRIGHT
The Business of Real Estate
59781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 5been a religious missionary, I have spent nearly ten years as a military missionary:
a Marine Corps pilot in Vietnam, serving my country.
One important lesson I have learned from Tom and others of the Mormon faith
is the saying, “God does not need to receive, but humans need to give.” This remindsme of the importance of being generous. It is my opinion that greed rather thangenerosity has taken over the world. Every time I meet someone who is short ofmoney, or if I am short of money, I am reminded to be generous and to give what Iwould like to get. For example, if I want money, I need to give money. Havingbeen out of money a number of times in my life, I have had to remind myself togive money at times when I needed money the most. Today I make a point of do-nating regularly to charities and causes that are dear to my heart. My opinion is,if I cannot personally work at a cause near to my heart, then my money needs towork there for me. Going further, if I want kindness, then I need to give morekindness. If I want a smile, then I need to ﬁrst give a smile. And if I want a punchin the mouth, then all I have to do is throw the ﬁrst one.
I asked my friend Tom Wheelwright to be a part of this book not only because
he is a smart accountant—a team player that anyone who wants to be rich needsto add to his his team—but also because he comes from a generous and soundphilosophical background.
Tom is a smart CPA who is an advocate of investing in real estate. Why? Be-
cause he knows that tax laws reward real estate investors more than they rewardstock investors. He is a great teacher, a generous man, and, most importantly, afriend I respect.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Iwas one of the fortunate few growing up. Unlike much of the rest of the
world—people who have been told to save their pennies and invest in mutual
funds—my parents taught me to invest in real estate and business. My fatherhad a printing business, and my mother handled their real estate portfolio.
So, it was natural that once I had received my education, both formal and
work related, I opened my own business. (I had a lot of education before Iﬁnally opened my own business—a master’s degree in professional accounting,thirteen years of experience with international accounting ﬁrms, as well as ex-perience as the in-house tax advisor to a Fortune 1000 company. I was a littleslow to realize the power of business.) When I started my accounting ﬁrm, Idid it like most people: I worked all hours of the day and rarely took a vacation.6 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 6When I did take a vacation, I still took calls from clients and colleagues. After
all, business never rests, so why should I?
Several years into my business, we had experienced signiﬁcant growth, but I
was still working day and night and never taking a real vacation. And outside ofmy business, I had no substantial assets. That’s when I read Rich Dad Poor Dad
and ﬁrst met Robert Kiyosaki. He helped me realize that I was thinking aboutbusiness all wrong. It was not about how hard I worked, but rather about how
smart I worked.
Like many of you, my ﬁrst real experience with Robert was at a Rich Dad
seminar. There I was, sitting next to my business partner, Ann Mathis, and herhusband, Joe. Robert was talking about a subject near and dear to my heart—the tax beneﬁts of real estate. Out of the blue, Robert asked me to come up tothe front of the room to explain the tax beneﬁts of depreciation, introducingme as his “other accountant.”
I had come to learn about Robert Kiyosaki and Rich Dad only a few months
earlier. One of my good friends, George Duck, had become the chief ﬁnancialofﬁcer at Rich Dad and had introduced us. I’m not sure who was more nervousthat ﬁrst time I went on stage, Robert or me. Can you imagine putting an ac-countant on stage? Robert had no idea that I had spent my life teaching in onecapacity or another, but he took the chance and put me up there anyway. Thisbegan a long and inspiring relationship between us, and it really launched myjourney toward ﬁnancial freedom.
I remember one of the ﬁrst times Robert and I worked together. He used me
as “muscle.” That’s right, he used his accountant as his muscle. Robert had beenasked by a reporter to give an interview for the business section of the ArizonaRepublic . The primary topic was how Robert could claim that he routinely re-
ceived 40 percent returns on his investments.
I went as the authoritative backup to Robert’s ideas. After all, someone might
not believe a marketing genius (i.e., Robert) when he says he gets these levelsof returns, but who wouldn’t believe an accountant? When it comes to investing,numbers are everything, and who better to support the numbers than someonewho spends his life documenting, reviewing, and analyzing them?
That was one of the ﬁrst opportunities I had to explain the beneﬁts of lever-
age that comes from real estate. Not long before, I had started my own realestate investing. You would think that with parents who were real estate in-vestors, that I, too, would become a real estate investor. I had even spent my ca-reer helping real estate investors and developers reduce their tax burdens.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 79781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 7Not so. I didn’t actually begin investing in real estate until after the ﬁrst time
I played Robert’s game, CASHFLOW 101®. This game had a powerful impact
on me. I saw, with my own eyes, the power of leverage in real estate. The gamewas so powerful that the next day after playing the game, I called one of myclients who had been investing in real estate for several years and asked him tomeet with me to show me how I could begin my own real estate investing.
And then I began making serious changes to my business. My partner, Ann, a
systems genius, created the systems, policies, and procedures in our ﬁrm so wecould focus on running the business and not working in the business. It took a
few years, but eventually we were able to step away from working for hourlyprofessional fees and instead supervise and grow a business that worked withoutus.
Now, I can take three weeks off each year with no e-mail or phone access, as
I did just recently when I took my oldest son on a trip to the châteaux region ofnorthern France. I didn’t have to worry about my accounting ﬁrm or my realestate investments while I was gone because they were both running withoutmy daily attention.
Real estate investing is a business and should be run like a business.
Robert talks a lot about the CASHFLOW Quadrant, with each labeled as E,
S, B, and I. He emphasizes that we need to move out of the E (employee) and S(self employed) quadrants and into the B (business) and I (investor) quadrants.I have learned to take this one step further. That is, to move all I-quadrant in-vesting into the B quadrant.
Think about what you could do with the time you would have if you didn’t
have to worry about tenants, repairs, and cash ﬂow. How would it feel to elimi-nate the frustration that comes from constantly watching your real estate in-vestments and worrying about if a tenant might call you in the middle of thenight with a problem? You can eliminate all of this stress and free up hundredsof hours of your time simply by running your real estate investments as a B-quadrant business.TIP8 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
FIGURE 1.1 I’ve learned to take the quadrant a step further and 
free up hundreds of hours of my time simply by running my real 
estate investments lik e a B-quadrant busi ness.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 8It’s really not that difﬁcult. You simply have to start acting like a business
and apply fundamental business principles to your real estate investing.
Business Principle No. 1: Strategy
Every business has to have a plan. Your real estate investing business is no dif-
ferent. A strategy is simply a systematic plan of action designed to accomplishspeciﬁc goals. There are seven simple steps to creating a successful strategy.
Step 1: Imagine
Begin your strategy with goals. Imagine where you would like your real estateinvesting to take you. It may be a white sand beach in the Caribbean, unlimitedtime with your family, or working for your favorite charity. My favorite placesin the world are Hawai’i, France, Arizona, and Park City, Utah. So my dream isto own a house in each of these locations.
Don’t be afraid of being too aggressive. These are your dreams, after all, not
some number that is artiﬁcially imposed by a ﬁnancial advisor. Our clients fre-quently have dreams of ﬁnancial freedom in as few as ﬁve to ten years. Andwith a good strategy in place, anyone can be ﬁnancially free in less than tenyears if they just start by applying these few basic business principles to their
real estate investing. So far, after six years of investing, I now have houses inHawai’i, Arizona, and Park City. France is on the agenda for next year. Prettyaggressive goals, but I have been able to reach them in six short years by apply-ing basic business principles to my real estate and business.
Step 2: Financial Goals
Determine what it will take to realize these dreams in terms of wealth and cashﬂow. And commit to a date for accomplishing this goal. Then write down whatyou currently have available in terms of investable assets less the liabilities.This is your current wealth (also called net worth).
Step 3: Cash Flow Target
Of course, you will need to ﬁgure out the amount of wealth that it will take inorder to create your desired cash ﬂow. A simple rule of thumb for calculatingthis number is to multiply your desired cash ﬂow by twenty. For me, I needed$5 million in order to create an after-tax cash ﬂow of $250,000 each year.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 99781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 9Step 4: Current Wealth
Once you have your dream ﬁrmly in mind, the next step is to identify where
you are today. When considering where you are today, list only your real assets,that is, those that are available to invest. Don’t list your car or your jewelry. Butdo list the amount of equity in your home if it can be made available for investingthrough a home equity loan. Here is an example of what I mean:
These ﬁrst four steps are the essence of a process referred to as “dreamlin-
ing,” and I will use a simple illustration to show you what I mean. Here is whatmy dreamline looked like when I ﬁrst met Robert and started down my road toﬁnancial freedom.
Step 5: Vision, Mission, and Values
After you have your dreamline in place, you can make a plan to reach thosedreams. This plan should include your vision, mission and values, the type ofreal estate you will specialize in buying, and the criteria you use for choosingyour real estate investments.10 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
July 1, this year July 1, 5 years1 million investable
Net Worth$250,000 Cash Flow
$5,000,000 Net Worth
Wealth StrategyTABLE 1.1 
Liquid: Long-Term:
Savings Loans
Stocks & Bonds Real Estate
Mutual Funds Oil & Gas
CDs Business
Other Intellectual
Other Other
Sub-T otal: Sub-T otal:
FIGURE 1.2 T om’s “Dreamline” When He First Met Robert Kiyosaki9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 10At this point, you may be wondering if I have truly lost my mind. After all,
aren’t vision, mission, and value statements only for true businesses? Exactly!
And your real estate investments are a true business. At least they should be ifyou are going to reach your dreams in the shortest amount of time possible andwith the least amount of work.
When creating your vision, remember that this represents your focus for the
future, that is, what you want your life to look like when everything is in place.Your mission is simply a statement of how you are going to go about your in-vesting business. And your values are the values that you insist everyone youwork with in real estate share with you.
T om’s Personal 
Vision, Mission, and Values
Vision. My vision for financial freedom means having the time and resources to do
what I want, when I want. I know I have reached financial freedom when I can travel
anytime I desire, spend quality time with family and friends, and go on missions formy church.Mission. My mission to reach financial freedom is to invest in highly appreciating sin-
gle-family homes by researching foreclosures, borrowing from banks and sellers, hold-ing properties for five to ten years, and obtaining tax leverage through depreciation.Values. My values are these: abundance—recognizing that there are plenty of re-
sources and real estate deals to go around; caring—being kind and expressing grat-itude; learning—taking the time to grow and improve my real estate knowledge;and respect—treating others the way I want to be treated.
Step 6: Investment Niche
Once you have your vision, mission, and values in place, you can begin looking
at what type of real estate makes sense for you. Every successful business ownerknows that you are always most successful when you focus your attention onsomething you enjoy doing and for which you have a natural ability. At my com-pany, ProVision, we have a variety of tools we use to help people ﬁgure outwhich type of real estate they will enjoy the most—multifamily, commercial,industrial, raw land or single-family homes. My personal investment niche re-mains highly appreciating single-family homes.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 119781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 11Step 7: Criteria
The ﬁnal step in your strategy—determining your investment criteria—is some-
thing that few people take time to do. And yet, if you can determine your in-vestment criteria as part of your strategy, you can avoid a lot of headaches,stress, and wasted time. You can also avoid making costly mistakes. And youwill save a considerable amount of time and energy, enabling you to focus ononly those investments that meet your criteria. As an example, here are my per-sonal investment criteria:
You may be asking why you need to spend so much time and effort developing
a strategy. We teach our ProVision clients about the importance of strategy byplaying CASHFLOW 101® with them in a very speciﬁc way. If you have playedthe game, you realize that, on average, it will take two and a half hours. We in-struct our clients that their team (the players at their table) must spend theﬁrst thirty minutes developing a strategy to win the game. This strategy includesthe type of assets they will invest in and their criteria for investing. All membersof their team, though playing as individuals, must follow the strategy precisely.
The result is astonishing. Each player gets out of the Rat Race and wins the
game in less than two hours. So even though they have spent an enormous per-centage of their allotted time developing their strategy (roughly 20 percent),they ﬁnish substantially earlier than they would have without their strategy.This happens every time, so long as each team member adheres to the strategy.
Business Principle No. 2: Team
Just as every good business has a strategy, every successful business owner hasa very carefully chosen team of individuals and companies to help him/her12 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 1.2 T om’s Personal Investment Criteria
Criteria Decision
Minimum appreciation 10%
Minimum rate of return 50%
Cash flow or cash on cash return -0-
Price range $200,000-$600,000
Maximum amount of investment/deal $80,000
Maximum time commitment 5 hours per month
Location of investment Western U.S.
Price as a % of value 85%9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 12succeed. Your team will add considerable leverage to your investing. You can
take advantage of your team members’ time, talents, contacts, knowledge, andresources.
Tips for Building a Team
Plan. Think carefully about what skills you need on your team. For example,
you are going to need an attorney, an accountant, a banker, at least one propertymanager, and others. Decide on the skill sets you need before you decide onwhich people will ﬁll those roles.Referrals. The best team members almost always come as a referral from some-
one you trust. But make sure the person referring is also a real estate investorand is knowledgeable about your situation and needs. A trusted advisor, suchas an attorney, accountant, mentor or wealth coach, can be a good source of referrals.Agreements. Make sure you have good, clear agreements in place with each of
your team members so they know what is expected of them and what they canexpect from you.
Before we leave the concept of a team, let me give you my personal experi-
ence with developing a real estate team. Anyone who knows me realizes that Ispend most of my day growing my business. This doesn’t leave me much timefor real estate investing. But I love real estate investing and understand com-
pletely the importance of it in my wealth strategy.
I estimate the time I spend each week on real estate to be no more than one
hour. Yet, I make in excess of $100,000 per month through my real estate in-vesting, all because I have developed a great team and applied the other businessprinciples we are talking about in this chapter. This brings me to our next prin-ciple: accounting.
Business Principle No. 3: Accounting
You may wonder if I include accounting as a basic principle of business becauseof my accounting background. While I have to admit to a natural bias in favorof good accounting, I believe that if you were to ask one hundred successfulbusiness owners if good accounting (including good reporting) were critical totheir business, at least ninety-ﬁve of them would agree.
Why? Because good accounting leads to good reporting, and good reporting
leads to good decisions. If you don’t have the information you need, how areyou going to make good decisions, such as when you should sell a piece of realestate or how to know if your portfolio is producing the desired results?ROBERT KIYOSAKI 139781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 13Great entrepreneurs understand the purpose of accounting. Here are a few
of my personal keys to great accounting.
Key No. 1: Purposeful Accounting
Accounting should never be done solely (or even mainly) to satisfy the IRS or
other regulators. Accounting’s primary purpose should be to provide accurateand useful information so that you can make the best decisions. Poor investorsthink that the only reason to keep records is so their accountant can preparetheir tax return at the end of the year.
This is a huge mistake. Good accounting is critical to good decision making.
Without current, accurate numbers, how are you going to make the decision tobuy, sell, or reﬁnance your property? And how will you know which property isdoing well and which is doing poorly? You won’t even know if your propertymanager is doing a good job or not.
Several years ago, Ann and I purchased a group of fourplexes in Mesa, Ari-
zona. The price was good based on the information we had at the time. We kept14 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: My T eam T ook Care of It All
So how do I make time for real estate? Y ou guessed it—I have a terrific team.
They are so good, in fact, that the only time I have to spend is to quickly review
reports, make decisions (which are pretty easy, since I have very well-defined in-
vestment criteria), and sign documents. I remember one time recently when I wasspeaking to my team leader and he informed me that a tenant had vacated a houseunexpectedly and not turned off the water. My team leader, who is not the propertymanager, drops by all of my houses on a regular basis and noticed that the tenanthad left. He rushed into the house only to discover that the pipes had broken (thiswas in Utah in the dead of winter), and the house was flooded. The cost of repairwas in the neighborhood of $50,000.
My team leader immediately took action. After turning the water off, he called
the property manager and the insurance agent. He arranged for the repair companyto renovate the property, made sure the insurance accepted the claim (beforespending any money), and went after the property manager and tenant for anydamages not paid for by the insurance company. I did not have to worry about athing. And I probably spent only thirty minutes total dealing with this mess (signingauthorizations and talking to my team leader).9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 14ROBERT KIYOSAKI 15
very close track of the cash ﬂow and the income from these properties. But
after a year or so, it became clear to us that these properties were not going togenerate positive cash ﬂow in the near future. At the same time, we noticedthat cap rates (see Principle No. 4, p. 17) were going down. So, based on ournumbers, we sold the fourplexes. Because of the decrease in cap rates, we wereable to make a signiﬁcant proﬁt, and we stopped losing money each month.
Key No. 2: Accurate Bookkeeping
While good accounting should go far beyond mere bookkeeping, it begins withaccurate and appropriate bookkeeping entries. Accurate bookkeeping is the ba-sis for creating useful reports and analysis.
Bookkeeping is merely the process of entering the results of transactions
into a record that can be used for reporting and analysis. I suggest to most ofmy clients that they outsource their bookkeeping to their accountant or someother professional bookkeeping service. For those who want to do it themselves,I recommend using a very simple accounting software program, such as Quick-books.
Key No. 2a: Chart of Accounts
Begin by setting up a chart of accounts (this is just a list of the accounts you aregoing to use to classify your receipts and expenditures). The accounts you useshould be those that make the most sense to you. For example, one person maylist printer paper as an ofﬁce supply while another may list it in the more generalcategory of ofﬁce expense. It’s simply a matter of how detailed you want yourreporting to be. Just remember that if you did not create an account for it, youcannot create a report for it.
Here’s a little trick for you: Y ou don’t have to create a separate chart 
of accounts for every property. Instead, you can create a “class” for each 
property. This allows you to do all of the bookkeeping for your real estate business in one Quickbooks “company” while creating the detail and reportoptions that you need in order to understand what is happening with eachproperty.
If you need help setting up your chart of accounts, ask your accountant/
CPA—a critical member of your team—to lend you a hand. This person should
be happy to help, and can do this fairly quickly for you.TIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 15Key No. 2b: Detailed Data Entry
Once you have your chart of accounts set up, you are ready to begin entering
your data. Remember that you need to enter the details of every transaction.Most transactions will have some cash involved, so if you enter the details everytime you receive or spend money, you probably will catch 98 percent of yourtransactions. Some transactions don’t have cash involved, such as recording de-preciation expense. These are done through journal entries. Since you will likelyhave some journal entries to do, I will give you a brief explanation of how to dothese.
Understand that every transaction has two sides to it for accounting pur-
poses; a debit side and a credit side (think left and right so the total of the leftside always equals the total of the right side). Expenditures are always a debitto the expense, income, or asset account (left side), and a credit to cash (rightside). Receipts are always a credit to an income, expense, or liability account(left side), and a debit to cash (right side). To increase an expense or an asset,you debit that account, and to increase income or a liability, you credit that account.
Key No. 2c: Journal Entries
When you enter a receipt or an expenditure into Quickbooks, the software au-tomatically creates both the debit and the credit. But sometimes you will needto make a correction or adjustment to your books when there has not been acash transaction. You do this with a journal entry. When you make a journalentry, you simply enter both a credit and a debit. Let’s use our depreciationjournal entry as an example, since everyone has to make this journal entry atleast once a year:
Debit to Depreciation Expense in the amount of depreciation calculated for
the period (usually based on tables provided by the Internal Revenue Service oryour accountant). See page 26 for more details about the Magic of Depreciation.
Credit to Accumulated Depreciation in the same amount (this account is an
offset to the asset account for the asset you are depreciating, such as a building).
See? It’s simple.
Key No. 3: Consistency
Learn to use the correct accounts, and use the same accounts for all similar re-ceipts and expenditures. If you decide to put paper costs into ofﬁce supplies,always put purchases of paper into ofﬁce supplies. Don’t put them into the
ofﬁce supply account one month and the ofﬁce expense account the next month.16 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 16Key No. 4: Frequency
Do your bookkeeping no less than once a week. Two problems happen when
you get behind. First, it becomes overwhelming, and you will tend to continueputting it off until the end of the year when it becomes urgent for your tax re-turns. This creates the second problem: Not having up-to-date bookkeepingmeans you cannot get good reports to make good decisions.
Key No. 5: Online Banking
Personally, I do my bookkeeping every Friday morning. It takes me less thanone hour because I use the systems that are available to me, such as onlinebanking and automatic bill pay. Quickbooks will automatically classify all of myonline banking to the right accounts with a few clicks of the mouse. I actuallyﬁnd it quicker to do the bookkeeping myself using these systems than if I wereto use an outside bookkeeper (I tried that once and found it took me more timeto correct the bookkeeping than if I just did it myself using online banking).
The next principle I’m going to share with you is how to get good reports
from your bookkeeping software. If you review these reports each month, youwill be able to make good decisions about your real estate business quickly andeffectively.
Business Principle No. 4: Reporting
All successful entrepreneurs understand the importance of managing their busi-ness by metrics. Metrics is simply a measurement of the day-to-day results of thebusiness. Sometimes these measurements are raw numbers, such as cash ﬂow.Other times they take the form of ratios. And still other times these measurementsare comparisons, either to a previous period, to targets, or industry averages.
If you don’t know your numbers, you don’t know your business.
Report No. 1: Statement of Cash Flows
Let’s start with the king of all raw numbers: cash ﬂow. Unfortunately, it’s rarethat a real estate investor has a clear picture of his/her true cash ﬂow. You shouldknow the cash ﬂow from each property as well as the overall cash ﬂow for yourreal estate business.
There is a tendency among real estate investors to believe that all they need to
know about cash ﬂow is the difference in their bank account from the beginningof the month to the end of the month. But the real key to using cash ﬂow as a toolTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 179781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 17is to understand where the cash came from and where it went. A standard ac-
counting report that you can use to ﬁgure this out is the Statement of Cash Flows.This report, though rarely used among real estate investors, is the most importantreport of all.
It begins with operating income. Operating income includes rents minus nor-
mal cash expenses, including repairs, maintenance, and management fees. Itthen details nonoperating items such as ﬁnancing transactions and investingtransactions. Financing transactions include any money that ﬂows to or fromyour business because of loans. These include your mortgage payments as wellas any loans you take out or money you put it. Investing transactions include anymoney that ﬂows to or from your business because of investing activities. Theseinclude down payments on properties and cash from the sale of a property.
The end result is the increase or decrease in the amount of cash you have at
the end of the period (month, quarter, or year) compared to what you had atthe beginning of the period. This report makes it clear how much of your posi-tive or negative cash ﬂow is coming from operations versus other activities,such as ﬁnancing or investing. Wouldn’t it be great to know this and be able to18 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 1.3  T om’s Statement of Cash Flow
Property A Oct - Dec 
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
Net Income -6,706.40
Adjustments to reconcile Net Income 
to net cash provided by operations:
Escrow Accounts -174.40
Security Deposits 800.00
Net cash provided by Operating Activities -6,080.80
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
Accumulated depreciation 6,790.00
Accumulated amortization 18.00
Net cash provided by Investing Activities 6,808.00
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
Mortgage Payable -258.34
Net cash provided by Financing Activities -258.34
Net cash increase for period 468.869781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 18ROBERT KIYOSAKI 19
TABLE 1.4 Most Common Ratios Used to Analyze Property Results
Ratio Numerator Denominator Tells You
Cap rateNet Operating 
IncomeProperty 
ValueHow much the 
property is earning
ROIAnnual increase in value
plus incomeCash invested T otal return
Cash on Cash 
returnNet cash from 
investment after taxesCash invested Cash return
Current ratio Current assetsCurrent 
liabilitiesAbility to pay 
liabilities
Debt/equity ratio To t a l  d e b t Net Equity Leverage
Return on 
assetsNet operating 
incomeTo t a l  a s s e t s Profitability
Debt coverageNet operating 
incomeAnnual debt 
serviceAbility to service debt 
from cash flow
Loan to value (LTV) Debt Value of Property Leverage
Internal Rate 
of Return (IRR)Complex formulaAverage annual 
return on investmentﬁnd out this information at any time? Table 1.3 is an example of a statement of
cash ﬂows for one of my properties. I pulled this report directly from my Quick-books.
This report tells me several things about this property. First, it tells me there
was positive cash ﬂow. Second, it tells me that there was a loss for tax purposes(net income was negative), producing additional cash ﬂow for me through de-preciation. Third, it tells me that I paid down my mortgage by $258, which isan additional beneﬁt to me. If all I knew was that my cash had increased by$468 for the period, I would never have learned these other important beneﬁtsfrom this property and may have thought the property wasn’t doing too well.
Report No. 2: Ratio Analysis
While raw numbers are helpful to know, serious analysis of your real estatebusiness comes from ratios and comparisons. A list of the most common ratiosused to analyze your results is found in Table 1.4.
Two of the most important ratios are the cap rate on your properties
and your return on investment (ROI).TIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 19Ratio No. 1: Cap Rate
Your cap rate (or capitalization rate) is simply your net operating income di-
vided by the value of your property. Remember that this ﬁgure represents thevalue of the property, not the cost of the property. Let’s look at an example.Suppose your property produces $10,000 per month in rent, or $120,000 forthe year. And suppose your operating expenses (remember, this doesn’t includemortgage interest or principal payments, or depreciation) are $70,000. Thismeans that your net operating income (NOI) is $50,000. If your property isworth $500,000, then your cap rate is 10 percent.
Y ou can use this information to make decisions. Let’s suppose 
that you have a loan on the property with a 7 percent interest rate. If your 
cap rate goes below 7 percent, then you need to think about selling the property. Why? Because now you have what is called “negative leverage.” Negative leverage occurs when your return is less than you are paying on your loan. At this point, it is actually costing you money to borrow because the cap rate is lower than your borrowing rate.
When Ann and I sold our fourplexes in Mesa, the cap rate had dipped down
around 5 percent. The interest rate on our mortgage was 6.5 percent. So we
were now into negative leverage. On top of that, we had negative cash ﬂow. Soit was time to sell the properties. And we did so at a substantial proﬁt becausewe watched the cap rate. When we purchased the properties, the cap rate wasaround 10 percent. Though our net operating income never increased, our prop-erty value doubled simply because of the cap rate decreasing from 10 percentto 5 percent.
Ratio No. 2: ROI
Another ratio we review is Return on Investment, or ROI. This ratio tells ushow a property is doing overall. It’s critical to review this ratio on a regularbasis. I know several investors who calculate expected ROI when buying a prop-erty but never again. Like the cap rate, your ROI can tell you if you should beholding on to the property or if you need to do something different with theproperty.
For example, one of my criteria for investing is an after-tax return of at least
30 percent. This includes cash ﬂow from the property and the appreciation onthe property plus my tax beneﬁts from the property and principal reductionTIP20 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 20on my mortgage. A few years ago, I bought a property in Utah that looked like
it would have an ROI of 35 percent over a ﬁve-year period. But it turned outthat the property was very difﬁcult to rent, so the ROI was less than expected.Once it was clear the ROI was going to fall below my 30 percent requirement, Isold the property and found another property that better ﬁt my investment cri-teria. It should be obvious to you by now that a lot depends on coming up withthe appropriate investment criteria. Many of your decisions will be based onthese.
Working through your numbers and applying them to your criteria is where
another member of your team—your wealth coach—will be critical. Everyoneshould have a coach for his/her business. Your coach should be someone wellversed in real estate and in overall wealth strategies. Go to www.ProVisionWealth.com/wealthstrategies.asp for more information on wealth coaching.
Report No. 3: Comparison Reports
The third type of reporting is comparison reporting. Comparison reports takethe actual data from your real estate business and compare it to some otherdata, such as industry standards, past performance, or expected/budgeted per-formance. Let’s suppose that when you bought your property, you expectedthat it would appreciate 10 percent per year. Suppose the actual appreciation is15 percent.
Your appreciation report should show you not only your current apprecia-
tion, but also your expected appreciation and perhaps the average appreciationin the market. This gives you a good idea of how you are doing compared to themarket and to your own expectations and whether you might want to considerbuying more property in that market or selling what you have so you can buyother property that better meets your criteria.
Can you see how important it is to have good reports? It’s not just the raw
data you want; it’s also the ratios and the comparisons. One of my biggest com-plaints about many property managers is that they produce terrible reports. Typ-ically, they give you only the raw data, and frequently even that is impossible tounderstand. Let me show you the type of report my property manager gives me.
While it doesn’t give me any analysis, at least it gives me the data in a way I
can create my own analysis. I can see immediately that I have positive cashﬂow, which meets my criteria. I now need to take this information and put itinto my reporting system (Quickbooks or something similar), and from thatsystem I can create reports that give me cap rates, ROI, and other analyses.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 219781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 21Business Principle No. 5: Taxes
If you want to make an immediate impact on the return on your real estate, you
need to pay close attention to tax laws.
The fastest way to increase your ROI on a property is to take advantage
of the tax laws in place to encourage real estate investment.
The single biggest expense for most people is taxes. In the United States,
which is routinely considered to be a low-tax country, the average businessowner earning $100,000 pays more than 50 percent of his earnings to the gov-ernment in some form of taxes. These include income taxes, property taxes,transfer taxes, sales taxes, employment taxes, and excise taxes, not to mentionestate taxes.
Some ancient civilizations equated a 50 percent tax to being in bondage. Yet
here we are in the twenty-ﬁrst century paying more than 50 percent of our in-come in taxes and accepting this as okay. The good news is that if you are inbusiness, and particularly if that business is real estate investment, you can eas-ily lower this rate from 50 percent to 20 or 30 percent. In fact, many of ourclients at ProVision who are serious real estate investors legally pay no incometax at all.
Think about what you could do with the extra money you would have if you
reduced your income taxes by even 20 or 30 percent. How much more real es-tate could you buy? How much faster would your portfolio grow? I once calcu-lated that someone in the 30 percent tax bracket could double his investmentportfolio over seven years if he simply maximized his tax beneﬁts from real es-tate and reinvested these savings into his portfolio.TIP22 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 1.5 Real Life Example of 
a Good Property Report
Property Address Lease Rate: $1200/mo
Rent Collected: $1200.00
Less 8% Management Fee:      $96.00
Expenses-HOA Fee:                $105.00
Amount to Owner $999.00
Mortgage Payment: $987 .90
March 2009 Cashflow: $11.10 +
April 2009 Projection: $999.009781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 22When I tell people that they can legally reduce their income tax by 30 percent
or more, they are immediately skeptical. They think I must be getting my clients
into some tax shelter. They are correct. That tax shelter is real estate investing.And it doesn’t matter whether it is residential, commercial, or industrial prop-erty. In the United States and many other countries, real estate is a highly fa-vored investment under the tax laws.
In the United States and many other countries, real estate is a highly
favored investment under the tax laws.
So let’s talk about what you can do to receive the maximum tax beneﬁt from
your real estate. We will focus on the laws of the United States, but keep inmind that many other countries have similar laws. So even if you don’t invest inthe United States, these tax reduction principles may apply to your real estateinvestments in Canada, Europe, or other areas of the world. Here are ﬁve waysto reduce your income tax by 30 percent or more.
Tip No. 1: Tax Strategy
What? A tax strategy? Didn’t we just talk about creating a business strategy forour real estate earlier in this chapter? And now we are going to create a taxstrategy? That’s right. A tax strategy: a systematic plan of action for permanentlyreducing or eliminating income taxes.
A good tax strategy is like a good business strategy in many ways. You have
to look at the big picture, including not only your real estate but also any otherbusinesses and investments you own. And you have to look at it from a long-term perspective. My personal tax strategy includes aspects relating to my twosons. One of my sons, Sam, works in both of my businesses and wants to be in-volved for many years to come. My other son, Max, has no interest in businessand wants to write children’s books. So my tax strategy keeps my sons’ interestsin mind. They both own parts of my business, but I have to structure their own-ership differently, since one is actively involved and the other is not.
Many of our clients work together as a couple on their business. My wife, on
the other hand, has no interest in business per se and is interested in helpingme only with the speaking part of my business (she is a wonderful speaker andentertainer). So my tax strategy cannot, for example, include my wife as a realestate professional.
A good tax strategist could really help here. So, another team member
for you is a tax advisor who specializes in tax strategies.TIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 239781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 23Your tax strategy needs to be a plan that you can readily accomplish without
making life too complicated. Of course, a good tax strategist could really help
here. So, another team member for you is a tax advisor who specializes in taxstrategies.
Tip No. 2: Entity Structure
Which type of entity should you use? Should you use a limited liability company(LLC), a corporation, or a partnership? Or should you avoid using an entity atall? In some countries, where there is not a lot of litigation, you may not need aseparate entity for your real estate. But in the United States, where 95 percentof lawsuits worldwide are ﬁled, the proper entity is essential. Let’s look at aquick overview of the tax entities available in the United States.
While every person’s situation is different, let me give you a few pointers
about which entity you may want to consider for holding your real estate in-vestments. From an asset protection standpoint (discussed in detail in anotherchapter of this book), LLCs are frequently the best entity to use. One of thegreat things about LLCs is that they don’t have any tax consequence. You canelect to tax an LLC anyway you want. An LLC can be treated as a sole propri-etorship, a partnership, an S corporation, or a C corporation.
For most real estate rental properties, you will want to be taxed either as a
part nership or a sole proprietorship. Don’t make the mistake of putting your realestate rentals into an S corporation or a C corporation. This could spell disasterif you ever have to take the property out of the corporation to reﬁnance it; youwill be taxed as if the corporation sold the property to you at its fair marketvalue. I had someone in my ofﬁce recently who owned his investment propertyin an S corporation. We estimated the tax cost of reﬁnancing to be in the neigh-borhood of $250,000 simply because of the entity structure.24 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Business Structures
Partnership
General LimitedSole
ProprietorshipCorporation
SC
FIGURE 1.3 Overview of Entities9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 24Don’t make the mistake of putting your real estate rentals into an 
S corporation or a C corporation. This could spell disaster if you ever have to
take the property out of the corporation to refinance it; you will be taxed as if the corporation sold the property to you at its fair market value.
If you are a real estate dealer or developer, you may want to consider S cor-
poration taxation. This includes those of you who want to ﬁx and ﬂip properties.
The reason? You can signiﬁcantly lower your social security taxes by owningyour property in an S corporation. And since you probably won’t need to dis-tribute the property out of the company except when you sell it, you won’t havethe bad income tax consequences I spoke of earlier.
Tip No. 3: Travel, Meals, and Entertainment
Remember that the United States and most other countries tax only the net in-come from a business. So any expenses that you can treat as deductible expenseslower your income tax. The most overlooked deductions in the real estate busi-ness are travel, meals, and entertainment expenses. The rule in the United Statesfor meals and entertainment is that if you discuss business before, during, orafter the meal or entertainment and the discussion is necessary and ordinaryfor your business, then you get to deduct the cost of the meal or entertainment.
I’m not talking about going to dinner with your real estate agent or your ac-
countant (though I’m sure they would appreciate it). I’m talking about going todinner or a sporting event with your partner. For most of you, your businesspartner in real estate is your spouse. My experience with business owners isthat when they go to dinner with their spouses they almost always talk aboutbusiness. And if you and your spouse are working on the real estate businesstogether, I can virtually guarantee that you are talking about your real estateevery time you go out to eat.
My wife and I eat out once or twice a week on average. I cannot even re-
member the last time we had dinner out and did not discuss business. Thesediscussions are essential to our success as business owners, even though shedoes not maintain a very active role in any of our businesses. She has a perspec-tive, though, that I ﬁnd extremely useful as I make business decisions.
So stop paying for your meals out of your personal bank account, and start
paying for them from your real estate business bank account.
Travel is a little more difﬁcult to deduct, but not much. If you are traveling
within the United States, you simply have to p rove that your primary reason
for the trip was business. You p rove this by showing that you spent more thanTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 259781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 2550 percent of each eight-hour workday discussing or working on your real estate
investment business. This could include your annual meeting or you could sim-ply be investigating real estate opportunities in that location.
We had one client who applied these principles and ended up with a $1 mil-
lion deal. He really liked to travel to New Mexico. Knowing that he had to lookat real estate to deduct his travel expense, he set up a meeting with a local realestate agent to review land development opportunities in his vacation spot. Heended up ﬁnding a deal that netted him $1 million. And, of course, he got todeduct his travel expenses.
Tip No. 4: Depreciation
After Robert and I met with the Arizona Republic journalist to discuss 40 per-
cent returns, we walked across the street to have lunch at a local restaurant.Robert asked me what I thought about depreciation. I told him I thought it waslike magic. Where else can you get a tax deduction for something you didn’tpay for and that is appreciating in value? Yet that is exactly what happens withdepreciation in the United States, Canada, and many other countries. Here’show it works:
Say you pay $500,000 for a house that you are going to rent. You put $100,000
of your own money into the house, and the bank loans you $400,000. You get adeduction for a portion of the cost of the house each year—not just a portion ofyour $100,000, but of the entire purchase price. Let me show you the calculationfor U.S. tax purposes.
Let’s estimate that 20 percent (or $100,000) of the cost of the house was for
the land. Even the IRS recognizes that land does not wear out, so we don’t getto depreciate the land. But we do get to depreciate the remaining $400,000. Ata minimum for residential property, we should get a deduction of 3.636 percentor $14,545 each year. And that’s assuming that the entire $400,000 is allocatedto the building. You can increase this deduction by doing what’s called a costsegregation or chattel appraisal.
Brieﬂy, here is what happens in a cost segregation. Your accountant or his
engineer goes through your property and segregates (on paper) everything thatcould easily be removed from the building and is not necessary for its basic op-eration from the building itself. Those items that can be removed are calledpersonal property or chattels. Personal property can be depreciated at 20 per-cent or more per year.
In our case, let’s suppose that $100,000 of costs is segregated from the build-
ing. This would increase our annual depreciation deduction from $14,545 to26 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 26$30,900—more than double. So while our property appreciates, we still get a
tax deduction for depreciation of more than $30,000. This is the best of all de-ductions, since there is no cash outlay involved other than the down paymenton the property.
So if our cash ﬂow is $30,900 or less, we will not pay any income tax on our
monthly cash ﬂow. And if our cash ﬂow is less than our depreciation, then wecreate a tax loss from the property that we can use (with proper planning) tooffset income from other sources. This is the primary reason many real estateinvestors are able to reduce their income tax by 30 percent or more and whysome real estate investors pay no income tax at all. See how this can increaseyour return on investment?
Tip No. 5: Documentation
Last but not least, let’s talk brieﬂy about the importance of properly document-ing our real estate transactions and expenses. Without good documentation,the IRS has the right to disallow your deductions. What a waste of good deduc-tions! We have already discussed the most important form of documentation—good accounting.
In addition, there are other forms of documentation you must keep. For travel,
meals, and entertainment, you must keep receipts, and you must note who youwere with, where you went, what you discussed, the date of the event, and whyyou incurred the expense. For automobile deductions, you need to maintain alog of business versus personal miles driven. And for your entities, you need towrite down minutes that detail all of your meetings and major transactions.
Documentation is not the most fun part of real estate, but it’s not too difﬁcult
if you just take a few minutes a week to take care of it. Stay on top of it. If youdon’t know exactly what you need to document, consult with your tax preparer.Remember that if it isn’t documented, then you probably cannot prove to theIRS that it was a legitimate deduction.
So there you have it—ﬁve easy opportunities to reduce your income taxes
while making tons of money in your real estate business. Now you can see whysmart business owners include tax planning as one of their keys to success. Ap-plying these basic principles to your real estate business will enable you to buildenormous wealth in a very short time. Remember to begin with a strategy, adda team, maintain good accounting, regularly review your reports, and minimizeyour taxes by creating a long-term tax strategy. The sooner you begin treatingyour real estate investing as a real business, the sooner you can stop working sohard and start reaping the proﬁts that are there for all good real estate investors.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 279781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 27Ways to Learn More
ProVision Wealth Strategy U—a free resource at www.ProVisionWealth.com/
WealthStrategyU
ProVision Business Start-up Kit—a series of ﬁve training modules on starting
up your real estate business. Includes courses on bookkeeping, year-round taxplanning, entity structuring, and setting up a business.
ProVision School of Wealth Strategy—a monthly subscription to compre-
hensive training materials on building wealth. Includes courses on creatingyour wealth vision, building your wealth team, and designing your personalwealth strategy.
ProVision School of Tax Strategy—a monthly subscription to comprehensive
training materials on permanently reducing taxes. Includes courses on design-ing your family tax strategy, involving your children in your real estate business,and getting the greatest tax beneﬁts out of your real estate.
For more than twenty-ﬁve years, T om Wheelwright has strategically de-
veloped innovative tax, business, and wealth strategies for sophisticated
investors and business owners across the United States and around theworld, resulting in millions of dollars in proﬁts. His goal is to teach peoplehow to create a strategic and proactive approach to wealth that createslasting success. As the founder of ProVision, T om is the innovator of
proactive consulting services for ProVision’s premium clientele, who on average, pay muchless in taxes and earn much more on their investments. He coaches select clients on theirwealth, business, and tax strategies; lectures on wealth and tax strategies around the world;and is an adjunct professor at Arizona State University.
28 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 28Iﬁrst met Chuck Lotzar in 2001 or so when he was a senior partner in a national
law ﬁrm. At Chuck’s former law ﬁrm, I delivered a presentation to approxi-
mately ten attorneys that covered my rich dad’s philosophy on money, wealth cre-
ation, and wealth management. Chuck seemed to be the only one out of the tenwho understood or was interested in what I was saying.
In 2003, Kim and I used Chuck to ﬁnalize one of our biggest real estate invest-
ments. It was a zero-down deal that would put more than $30,000 a month netincome in our pockets. If not for Chuck, this deal could have been our biggestnightmare. He found irregularities that most people, including most lawyers,would have missed. On top of that, after the deal was closed, Chuck offered to giveus a discount on some of his ﬁrm’s legal fees since he felt his ﬁrm did not work aseffectively as it could have. Needless to say, we told him to bill us in full and keepthe money. He had more than earned it.
In 2007 , Chuck again came to our rescue, this time as our personal attorney
against our former business partner. The lawsuit was the worst, most vile event inKim’s and my life. If not for Chuck, I do not know where Kim and I would be today.
The good news is that Chuck Lotzar has turned out to be far more than our real
estate attorney. Through Chuck’s guidance, the Rich Dad Company has emergedstronger, better staffed, and much more proﬁtable. Personally, I have emerged more2 Charles W. LOTZAR
A Real Estate Attorney’s View
of Assembling and ManagingY our T eam
299781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 29mature, wiser, and less of a hothead, which is a miracle. Chuck has not only made
Kim and me vastly richer; we have become better entrepreneurs and investors.
The lesson again is this: It is often through our worst deals with the worst
people that the best people emerge.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Iknow attorneys see the world differently than most people. A working rela-
tionship isn’t just a working relationship; it ideally should be a contract be-
tween two parties with built-in protections, limitations, and provisions, just incase the relationship goes south. A piece of real estate isn’t just a piece of prop-erty; it’s an asset that brings with it the need for appropriate entity structure,identiﬁcation of risk, allocation of risk, mitigation of risk and liabilities, and ahost of other legal protections and caveats associated with its development,management, and eventual sale.
I know you’re thinking life is easier when you are not an attorney. You’re
probably right! But for me life as an attorney and particularly a real estate at-torney is full of the excitement, the challenges, and the accomplishments thatcan come only from working with people so that they sleep well at night, havetheir family fortunes protected, and bring their dreams to life. It’s a professionthat keeps me continually learning, which I love. Real estate is a dynamic ﬁeldthat keeps every day at the ofﬁce new and fresh.
The likelihood that you are reading the chapter written by an attorney ﬁrst
is slim, so I’ll assume you’ve read at least a few chapters before mine. If youhave, you’ve probably noticed that there are a number of references in them toteam members: the professionals it takes to make a real estate deal actuallyhappen. Many of the contributors list the types of team members that they needin the type of real estate work that they do and how they have helped.
Well, I will echo their beliefs. Team members are the deciding factors in
spelling success or disaster for a real estate project. In my practice, I have seenteams that operate seemingly effortlessly and others that are clumsy and doomedto failure. So how do you assemble one that works effortlessly, and avoid thekinds that are disasters waiting to happen? The answer is, you can’t. You canonly try to do your best and know that the reality of your team—particularly asyou are just starting out—will fall somewhere in the middle of those two ex-tremes. Your job will be to assemble and manage a group of pros that makes itsway progressively more efﬁcient to close every deal you do.
My perspective on teams and team members is different from the views of
many in this book because I am one of those team members. Many of the others30 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 30in this book are the investors who drive the team. They delegate to team mem-
bers who advise them. I’m the one they delegate to and who advises them onhow to lead the team. That gives me a slightly different perspective. Combinethat with my attorney’s perspective and you have a chapter with three primarypurposes:
1.To tell you who you need on your team and how to know you have a winner.
2.To identify known risks and make sure that they are properly allocated
among other writing parties, including the members of your team.
3.To establish performance measures and deadlines, and to follow up to make
sure that each of those performance measures and deadlines are met in atimely manner.
See, this is where my lawyer’s mentality comes into play. I know your team
will not be perfect, no matter how perfectly you follow this book’s directions,how well you interview potential team members, or how ironclad their refer-ences were. Life and real estate deals are not that cut and dried. So what do youdo? Well, quite simply, you do your best on the front end, and you attempt toprotect yourself on the back end.
Three Rules of the Game
Before you say to yourself, “This team thing seems like more trouble than it isworth. For my project, I’ll keep it simple and do most of the work I need alone.I’ll keep the team small—as small as possible—and that will minimize my prob-lems,” understand that it is very hard to do anything in real estate alone. It is ateam sport and as such, I have assembled my Three Rules of the Game.
Nowhere else will your team come into play more than when it is time to
perform your due diligence. It’s a necessary part of every real estate deal, andwith the right team it can be your best friend and actually a lot of fun becauseyou often ﬁnd the hidden gems that can signal great opportunity. On the otherhand, it can be the beginnings of a vivid nightmare you are living because youare the proud owner of a “problem-property,” thanks to a team that missedsomething big during due diligence. Again, the ﬁrst camp is the place to be.
You’ll recall that the due diligence period is usually not less than sixty days
in length. Its purpose is to discover any problems and opportunities with aproperty to determine whether you want to go through with the transaction,and if so with what speciﬁc stipulations. It’s also designed to allocate and alle-viate risk among various parties: the buyer, the seller, the lender, and the variousthird-party professionals on your team.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 319781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 31As I mention in rule number two, when it comes to due diligence, you want a
team that will be willing to learn the truth about the property and tell you the
brutal facts. If your baby is ugly, you need professionals and advisors who aren’tgoing to be afraid to tell you the truth to your face—before the acquisition takesplace. So let’s delve into the team members and their roles from a fellow teammember and a lawyer’s perspective.
Consider these your core team members, the ones you’ll need for virtually
every real estate deal you do. I believe that people generally fall into two cate-gories: those who are relationship oriented and those who are transaction ori-ented. Although I have a law practice based on the ability to successfullycomplete transactions, I am a relationship-oriented person who generally seeksout other teammates who are also relationship oriented. I am willing to workwith other teammates who are transaction oriented, but I do so recognizingthat their ability and willingness to step up to solve a problem is limited, espe-cially after the transaction closes.
Real Estate Attorney
Notice how I wrote real estate attorney , not just attorney . That’s the ﬁrst tip I
will give you right up front. Real estate transactions are signiﬁcantly differentfrom other transactions, so it is critical to hire an attorney who understands32 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Chuck’s Three Rules of the Game
Rule No. 1: T alent pays for itself. Accept that hiring a capable and talented real estate
team to complete your transaction is in your best interest. Although there will becosts up front, your investment should more than pay for itself over time.Rule No. 2: Y ou are hiring folks’ brains; let them use their brains to solve your prob-lems. Allow teammates to give you their honest and complete assessment of anytransaction given the circumstances presented—you want to know all of the prob-lems so that you can craft solutions and quantify the costs of obtaining those solu-tions. Unfortunately, in some instances you will learn that the cost of continuing withthe transaction outweighs the opportunity to be achieved, and you are forced tostop so as to prevent yourself from throwing good money after bad.Rule No. 3: It is better to hire someone with outstanding judgment and wisdomthan a person who has merely completed similar types of transactions.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 32and is experienced in real estate. Contract attorneys without real estate experi-
ence are not good enough.
The reason I am so emphatic here is because a good real estate attorney can
take a lot of the pressure off you by acting as the quarterback and taking re-sponsibility for coordinating the entire team. A good attorney is strong, experi-enced, and at the same time self-conﬁdent enough to know when he or sheneeds your input or help from a third party. There are times when a real estatetransaction will have nuances that your lead real estate attorney—no matterhow experienced—may not have ever encountered before. You don’t want yourattorney learning on your transaction; you want an attorney with a network ofpeople, inside or outside the ﬁrm, that he or she can call on to bridge any gaps.
Often a good real estate attorney can be the master of the due diligence
budget and calendar and keep all the other team members on track and on timewith their deliverables. That means you’ll want your attorney on board early,right at the very start, to handle the early documents, such as the term sheet orthe letter of intent, to make sure that the allocation and assignment of risks arethoughtfully documented for closing.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 33
Real Life Story
Every real estate opportunity is different, and it’s the truly unique ones that
sometimes cause your teams to expand beyond your expectations, even into
the realm of the unbelievable.
T oo often real estate investors become successful based on their ability to over-
come numerous problems, and they become insensitive to the weight of certain
problems that would otherwise thwart a transaction. I recall one group of clients whowere prolific real estate investors. Although they were astute business people whoaccomplished a number of successful transactions in sequence, their history of suc-cess impeded their ability to walk away from a bad deal, even when they knew thatthere would be insufficient equity in a transaction and visible and indivisible deferredmaintenance issues with the heating and cooling system for the apartment complex,which needed replacement and caused the buildings to settle in the ground by morethan one foot! No matter how successful you have been in the past, you need toreplicate good habits for the diligence and closing with each new transaction.
Most often, however, your team will be highly predictable and consist of several
core members. Y ou will find that the more you work with them, the better you willall work together, which will increase your efficiency.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 33A good real estate attorney can be your greatest ally. I frequently ﬁnd myself
providing ideas and advice that will enhance my clients’ transactions and their
businesses as a whole. At our ﬁrm, we approach projects from a business-owner’s perspective. Business owners want us to tell them the things that arestanding in their way, of course. But they also want us to come up with innova-tive ways to transcend the problems and get the deal done. If you have an attor-ney who seems to be pointing out all the problems without posing solutions,that’s a sign that you may need another attorney. If you have an attorney whoconducts himself or herself in a manner that makes you uncomfortable, e.g.,rudeness, or overly passive or overly aggressive under the circumstances, thenthat’s another sign that you may need another attorney.
Speciﬁcally, it’s our job to read and analyze all documentation, including
third-party reports, title and survey, purchase and sale agreements, and loandocuments. Sometimes, we may be requested to draft these documents alongwith corporate entity documents when dealing with equity investments andpartnerships.
Hiring a Real Estate Attorney? 
What to Look For, and What to Watch Out For
What to Look For
• Portability of past knowledge, wisdom, and judgment
• Availability of time to do the work• An understanding of professional limitations• Openness to engaging the assistance of other lawyers or law firms• A willingness and ability to work as a team player• Experience in various forms of real estate transactions• Experience with complex finance structure of real estate transactions• Demeanor and approach to the practice of law, e. g., that’s part gentleman, 
part pit bull
• The support of the law firm—how deep is the bench?
What to Watch Out For• Any past malpractice claims
• Any past Bar complaints
• Experience with contracts, business, and litigation, but not in relation to real estate
• A personality and/or demeanor incompatible with the client’s personality 
and/or demeanor34 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 34Your attorney can either bill you hourly for his or her work or provide a soft
estimate for the scope of work. Should the scope of work exceed the estimate,
the additional work is billed at the hourly rate. Another payment method ishourly against a hard estimate. These agreements generally have a large con-tingency built in for unforeseen events that is payable at closing. This type ofcontract can put the attorney and the client at odds. You want your attorney toﬁnd the unexpected—that can save you in a real estate transaction—but if youare worried that the work of searching for the unexpected will cost you moremoney, you may be thwarting your own success. In the best instances, the fruitsof the deal, or the savings in terms of money and/or risk, a contingent fee thatchanges which party is in control will more than pay for any attorney fees.Many of our clients feel we have more than earned our fees, and that’s ideallywhat both sides want.
Over the years I have focused a good portion of my law practice working on
contingent-fee matters related to large revenue bond ﬁnancings and tax creditprojects. Whenever I have a contingent fee, I want to be the person with themost control over the ability to advance and close the transaction. However, alawyer’s compass needs to be completely aligned with the interest of his client,regardless of his fee arrangement.
How to Construct an Effective 
Engagement Letter
Most members of your team will require an engagement letter before beginning
work. They may provide one, or you can. T o protect yourself, make sure the fol -
 lowing points are included:
• Spell out scope of work, particularly the roles of each party.•Specify the nature and timing of payment, including timing of service and 
due date.
• Define the particulars of termination for both the contractor and you.• Be specific on needs (software) and deliverables (eight copies of plans, etc.) 
due to cost and which party will bear the cost.
• Disclose conflicting relationships.• Identify and allocate known risks.• Dispute resolution.• Limit liability.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 359781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 3536 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Estate Brokers
Real estate brokers are important team members because they are the genera-
tors of opportunities. They can decide who sees a property that is coming on-line ﬁrst and can be the bearer of great opportunities. What it takes is a brokerwho understands the importance of relationships and working as part of a team.
On the other hand, many brokers are transactional, living and dying by their
fees, which naturally results in an eat-what-you-kill mentality. They will indis-criminately pose opportunities that are nothing more than distractions becausethey do not ﬁt your business goals. What you really want is a real estate brokerwho looks out for your best interest, understands your needs, and seeks out op-portunities that match them. That adds value.
Beyond this, the true role of a real estate broker is to bring a willing buyer
and willing seller together, not necessarily to ensure his or her client gets thebest deal. But the good ones do both. They work to execute the best possibletransaction for their client from start to ﬁnish.
Sometimes a real estate broker will perform what is known as dual repre-
sentation, which means the same broker will represent both the buyer and theseller. On the surface, this may seem like an opportunity to save some money incommissions; after all, typical transactions have two brokers who must share
Real Life Story: How to Know Y our Real Estate 
Broker Is Looking Out for Y ou
The dual brokerage relationship does not trouble me when I see sophisticated
parties on both sides of a transaction. The broker frequently has problems
when there is a mismatch of sophistication among the parties. I have had many
conversations with brokers who had dual agency relationships that they regrettedonce problems arose.
I have found that the best real estate brokers have the client’s interests at heart.
The best example I can give relates to my good friend and client, Craig Coppola,who was acting as my real estate broker in my attempt to buy an office building formy law firm. Although I had my heart set on buying a particular building, Craig wasa good friend and professional broker who looked me in the eye and told me that itwas not in my best interest to act and that I needed to be patient as the market wastrending downward. Clearly, Craig’s advice was in my best interest and not in hisshort-term interest since no commission would be paid.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 36the commissions. But dual representation can be tricky, and in the very least it
requires full disclosure of all known facts and circumstances to avoid conﬂictsof interests.
While most people in business recognize the need to adjust to market
changes, real estate brokers really need to moderate their styles as market con-ditions ﬂuctuate. During the boom times of the mid 2000s, many real estatebrokers, based on the volume of work, became more transactional as they triedto close as many deals as they could. But the best ones knew that booms alsocreate busts, and it’s the real pros who maintain relationships during the boomsthat have business during the down times. The best brokers also know that theheight of the market is not the time to buy and provide that level of counsel toinvestor clients. They are market advisors as well as salespeople who are in itfor the long term and know that no deal today is worth the loss of many dealstomorrow. That’s the kind of broker you want.
Accountant
I have found that almost all business is based on some form of mathematics,and it is important to have accountants who are well versed in the intricacies ofreal estate. In fact, much of the advice that I gave you with respect to establish-ing a relationship with a real estate attorney has equal weight to establishing arelationship with an accountant.
I have also found that one of the ﬁrst folks hired internally by real estate in-
vestors is an accountant who will be charged with working cooperatively withan outside accounting ﬁrm. Frequently, the internal accountant is charged witha substantial amount of responsibility beyond accounting and feels pressure tolimit the involvement of the outside accounting ﬁrm. If the internal accountantis strong enough, then there will not be problems. Unfortunately, problems fre-quently do arise based on lack of communication and sophistication.
A strong real estate accountant will understand the effect of changes in deal
structure on the various tax attributes such as amortization, depreciation, andlosses (which are inevitable during a construction phase since no money isbeing generated during the development and construction of the project). Ad-ditionally, a real estate accountant will know when it is in your best interest toobtain a cost segregation study to identify the component parts of thebuilding(s) so as to allow for an accurate and possibly accelerated applicationof amortization and depreciation.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 379781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 37Architect
First of all, special thanks to Greg Zimmerman and Chris Ilg for sharing their
knowledge on this subject. Architects are critical members of any real estateteam because they have the ability like no one else to provide creativity, innova-tion, and magic that can transform an ordinary property into a showpiece. Theyalso have the ability to create a lot of expense that sometimes isn’t needed at all.
Good architect partners understand that while they may have the ability to
turn a property into a project that provides accolades and acclaim, the projectobjectives may dictate otherwise. The project may require the architect makeminor modiﬁcations that deliver big results. They are not exciting modiﬁcations,and they are often not very dramatic. They may not even be all that rewardingto do, but sometimes that’s the nature of the project, and although the designwork might be mundane, it can deliver a big payoff for the investors. And thatis anything but mundane. While it’s more fun to redesign an apartment buildingto create exciting loft living environments, a proﬁtable, cash-ﬂow-positive proj-ect may require only that the architect ﬁgure out how to ﬁt a washer and dryerin each existing unit. This is actually one of the biggest challenges faced in theapartment industry. The trend is away from common area laundry rooms, andarchitects are challenged to make washers and dryers work in small spaces.
Design professionals are a lot like physicians or attorneys. They specialize.
While there are excellent neurosurgeons out there, you don’t want the neuro-surgeon performing your heart surgery. And the attorney who makes a living indivorce court isn’t the one you want handling the ﬁnancial complexities of areal estate transaction. Just the same, you don’t want the architect who designsmillion-dollar homes designing your mini-storage investment property. Youwant the architect who can design those structures in his or her sleep.
But the biggest reason why you want to work with experienced, specialized
architects is because they know the ins and outs. National and local codeschange almost daily. Only architects and their ﬁrms can keep up with it all.Even the slightest revision to any of the several codes could have a serious im-pact on a design. As an attorney, I have seen too many investors’ projects getcaught up in the complicated codes and laws of building, remodeling, and restor-ing a property. It wastes a lot of time and can get messy. It’s never easy to ﬁghtcity hall, and with the right architect who knows the laws and the regulations,you should not have to.
Let me elaborate on the word experience . Architecture is a lifelong endeavor,
and it is not unusual for an architect to require years of experience before truly38 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 38gaining the amount of competence required to guide the client through a highly
specialized project. It’s not necessarily just the design aspects that I am talkingabout. It’s the peripheral know-how that cannot be learned in school but cancome only from doing things like working through the political process. Work-ing positively and effectively with federal, state, and city employees is a honedskill that only comes over time. And let’s not forget the value of a keen sense foranticipating market trends. After all, the work you are hiring from an architectmay be happening today, but it needs to be valued by customers for years tocome.
Once you interview and select your architectural ﬁrm from these perspectives,
you can also look at other important requirements like working relationship andcosts. I won’t elaborate too much on the fact that regardless of how skilled thearchitect, if that person can’t work with the team or with you, you need to keeplooking. Relationships are everything, particularly when it comes to the architect.Too often the design side of the project can put off the trades side of the projectby being overly demanding about aesthetics and not being open to ﬁnding rea-sonable solutions that don’t compromise the look and function of the project.It’s extremely important to have a strong and collaborative working relationshipbetween an architect and the general contractor. Forcing the architect or thegeneral contractor to work with an architect or general contractor that theydon’t work well with leads only to trouble for the property owner.
When it comes to money, be prepared to fully spell out exactly what you are
hoping to achieve—your objectives—and how you would like to achieve them.Share your budget both for the design aspects of the project and for how muchyou plan to put into the building process. You must be concerned at this pointwith the architect’s fees, yes, but also the cost to build out the architect’s design.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 39
Experience Is Everything
When you work with an experienced, specialized architect partner, you reap the
advantages:• Design moves along quicker.• There is not a steep learning curve.• Y ou get a completed design that works with fewer surprises.• Plans, although custom, are somewhat field-tested.• Building is smoother because the plans have commonalities with past projects.• He knows the ins and outs of building codes.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 39Again, having been involved in many real estate projects, I have seen architects
create designs that are simply too costly to build under the predeﬁned budgetand proﬁtability constraints. Those are severe mistakes that can cost time andmoney. Architects and contractors must communicate to avoid these kinds ofproblems.
The better the information that you give the architect up front, the more ac-
curate his fee proposal should be. Understandably, it is difﬁcult to have a handleon every issue surrounding a project; things do come up that are unexpected.But there are ways to protect yourself a bit from costs getting out of control.First of all, you may want to begin your working relationship with an architectby putting together an agreement for the due diligence and preliminarydesign/consulting work. There is nothing wrong with doing this, and as long asboth you and the architect understand that further work is contingent on thesuccess and outcomes of the preliminary work, you may ﬁnd this is the bestarrangement.
You can implement this kind of arrangement with either a phased contract
or better yet, a time and materials contract with provisions for a subsequentcontract using the American Institute of Architects (AIA) form B181, which is astandard agreement between an owner and an architect. You can ﬁnd this formon the Internet when you search AIA B181. It may serve as a good reference foryou.
The beneﬁt of this arrangement is that you can move forward without a huge
commitment and no real idea of what can be done. That’s handy because mostlikely at this point, you won’t have much idea of what can be done. That’s whyyou need the architect. The beneﬁt to the architect is job security. It’s nice toknow that if the due diligence is favorable, all further work, including time, de-signs, and working drawings will be developed in his or her ofﬁce. That also isexcellent incentive for the architect to work harder to ﬁnd feasible design solu-tions that ﬁt into the budget for the project. If he or she wants more work, thenmake the project work.
I’ve seen this approach work well quite often. One minor, but important,
point is that the services you contract with the architect may require the servicesof other consultants. I recommend contracting with them directly to maintainknowledge and control over the outside service provider’s work and progress.
Assuming the project moves forward, and you and the architect have exe-
cuted the contracts, the next phase is all about communication. The best, mostefﬁcient projects I’ve been associated with have been ones where the designteam holds weekly meetings and provides progress plans and updates for re-view. With so many moving parts to any design project, keeping everyone in-40 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 40formed is always a top priority. When well executed, it speeds up the process
and delivers far better outcomes.
Once the design and development phase is complete, the construction docu-
ments get under way. At this point, it is the architect who should control theconsultants and keep the attorneys and lender informed of all progress. As aring leader for the design and construction side of the project, all informationneeds to funnel through the architect to maintain control and ensure that nodeviation to the schedule, scope, and of course, fees are made without his orher knowledge.
Civil Engineer
Civil engineers are frequently hired by your architect. They are responsible forlocating existing utilities and developing the plans to connect to them or deter-mine if and how to upsize the capacity. ALTA surveys are part of this process, asis obtaining a “will serve” letter from the utility provider, which legally obligesit to serve the particular project with utility service.
Civil engineers are also responsible for such things as drainage, grading re-
quirements, and in cases where canal irrigation is involved, that too. Your ar-chitect will inform you when and why a civil engineer is needed for a project.
Your architect will review all contracts for service from not only civil engi-
neers but all related design consultants. And I recommend you allow your realestate attorney to review these documents as well, solely from a legal perspec-tive. By contrast, the architect will review them to make sure the intent of thedesign is being met and to look for gaps and overlaps with the goal of a seamlessscope of service.
You will want to execute the contracts once your real estate attorney and ar-
chitect have reviewed them and given them the go ahead. Often these contractscontain contingencies or line items in them that are part of the contract, butwhich could be separately executed or deleted as needed. Your attorney andarchitect can point these out, but be aware that if these contingencies are exe-cuted in the course of work because of requirements in the ﬁeld, they can andoften will cost you more money.
In my experience, civil engineers are not known for adding on unneeded
services, but rather omitting services. And it is very difﬁcult as a property owner,particularly if you have not been doing this work for twenty years, to know whatthe civil engineer should have done until there’s a torrential rain and you ﬁndhalf your parking lot is submerged in a murky brown puddle. Then you knowmore work should have been done regarding drainage. These things happen.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 419781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 4142 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The challenges a civil engineer can solve go beyond the concrete world of
grading, utilities, and drainage. I always recommend to my clients that they
ﬁnd civil engineering ﬁrms with a lead engineer or representative who is notonly knowledgeable of civil engineering but knows how to walk the corridorsof city hall. Political savvy is a huge value-added advantage. Knowing the peoplewho matter and then presenting your case before city ofﬁcials and a crowd ofinterested citizens without acting and sounding like a civil engineer is a realace card to hold.
Three Most Common Pitfalls with Civil Engineers
1. Delivering  in a timely manner.
2. Plans that do not have sufficient detail to match the existing utilities.3. Plans that fail to adequately take into consideration the property’s topographyas it relates to water retention and drainage.
Overcome these problems by holding your civil engineers to incentivized timeta-
bles and have your engineer, architect, and your contractor review the drawingswith all those involved in advance.
Professional Surveyor
We’ve all seen surveyors standing in the middle of the street, gazing through
their transits and taking measurements of the ground. This information is pre-cisely what makes property owners and lenders sleep well at night, knowingthat the properties they are considering during the due diligence phase are allthat they have been stated to be. And best of all, they report this informationwith a very ofﬁcial document that bears all the appropriate seals and certiﬁca-tions. It’s the real deal, and it becomes a matter of public record.
So what exactly are surveyors looking for, and looking at, through those tiny
site scopes? When it comes to most projects, they are conﬁrming or establishingthe following:
• Easements. The surveyor is designating or verifying the access into and out
of the property.
• Dimension and Location of Property. The surveyor is looking at and marking
the property lines to determine the property’s exact size and location in re-spect to other properties.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 42• Encroachments. The surveyor is looking at the property lines and determin-
ing if any structures belonging to another party are within your property
line . . . or yours within theirs. This can affect the appraised value of a prop-erty and cost money to remediate.
• Location of All Buildings and Imp rovements. The surveyor is determining
the exact placement of all buildings and imp rovements w ithin the land parcel
to assert that they are placed as specified and that they are within the con-straints of local building codes.
• Nonvehicular Access. The surveyor is determining the exact placement of
any nonvehicular access easements like pedestrian walkways that may existon the property. These can impact building imp rovement  and building place-
ment plans.
• Trafﬁc Calming Measures. The surveyor is looking at and indicating or plan-
ning the location of trafﬁc-calming improvements such as speed humps, me-
dian plantings, etc., that slow trafﬁc and improve the environment for
residents, pedestrians, and bicyclists.
Of course, every project dictates what your surveyor will need to do, and ev -
ery piece of land brings its own unique needs, too. In the mountainous, boulder-ridden terrain of Arizona—a state with strict laws related to indigenous plantsand natural formations—surveyors indicate the location of every giant saguarocactus, every palo verde tree, and any rock outcroppings that are to be preservedas natural space.
Ultimately, your title company and the surveyors themselves do not want
there to be any gaps between adjacent properties. There are a lot of reasons forthis when you think about it. One is ownership. Who is responsible to care andmaintain the gap area? A second is liability. Are both owners, one or neither, re-sponsible for a mishap that may take place in between property lines?
Another is property value. It can be really expensive to buy a small piece of
land that your project may need in order to be compliant with development re-quirements related to setbacks, ingress, and egress, etc. Remember, just becauseyou may need additional land to complete your project does not mean that yourneighbor has to sell it to you.
Hazardous Substance Site Assessment Engineer
This is a professional you want to bring on very early in the due diligence processbecause if he or she ﬁnds there are hazardous substances on the property, youROBERT KIYOSAKI 439781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 43may want to rethink everything. Your lenders will strongly advise and may even
insist upon it. You simply must know the status of the property in terms of haz-ardous substances. There have been too many cases where—and these are theworst kind—entire housing developments have been built in areas that werelater found to be toxic. Love Canal in New York is one of them. Cases that are farless dramatic, but still incredibly expensive, are those where a hazard exists butcan be remediated. You never want to ﬁnd yourself responsible for the ﬁrst sce-nario; it is actually quite difﬁcult, given the law and requirements for develop-ment and redevelopment today. But in the event of the second case, which ismore likely to occur, at least know what kind of remediation costs you are in for.
When selecting an environmental engineer, begin by ﬁnding one who is fully
accredited in the ﬁeld. Having a trustworthy relationship with your mortgagebanking professional is also key. The mortgage banker will know which envi-ronmental engineers are responsive and familiar with the reporting require-ments of a broad spectrum of lenders. The lender may have a list of preferredproviders that may at times take selection out of the borrower’s hands. It is alsoimportant that while your environmental engineer is thorough so as to identifyactual existing recognized environmental conditions, he does not create un-necessary work by requiring more expensive Phase II reports.
During due diligence, you must contract what is called a Phase I hazardous
substance site contamination study. Among the many things the inspector looksat, he or she will perform a visual assessment of the site and surrounding prop-erties; interview the owner, neighbors, occupants; and take a look at the site’shistory. The goal is to determine if any hazardous materials were ever manu-factured, stored, or dumped there. At this stage the inspector doesn’t take anysamples.
Ideally, you will receive a clean Phase I report and not need any additional
testing or a Phase II study in which the inspector takes samples of the discov-ered hazardous materials. This process can be costly and time-consuming be-cause sometimes just getting the “samples” requires excavation and coredrillings.
Interestingly, certain entities in the chain of title may have remediation re-
sponsibility should hazardous materials be found. In addition, they have a dis-closure responsibility should they know of these hazards during the duediligence period. Lenders obviously are looking for a clean Phase I report sothat there is no drag on their ability to seize collateral and liquidate, should theneed arise. This action usually requires stepping into the chain of title, and it’sbest if there are no obstacles due to a history of hazardous materials liability.44 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 44Recently, engineers to prepare Phase I and II reports have sought to limit
the amount of their liability to property owners by having their engagement
letter or contract specify that damages are limited to the amount of fees paid tothe engineer. Obviously, limitations of this nature do not afford the propertyowner the beneﬁt intended when a professional engineer was hired to conductthe Phase I or II investigation and report.
Escrow Officer/Title Agent
The more real estate deals you do, the more you will get to know your escrowofﬁcer/title agent. This person acts as a neutral party who is attempting to carryout the express written instructions of the buyer, the seller, the lender(s), andin some cases the real estate brokers. They review and verify all documentsand pass the documents along with the funds between the appropriate partiesin the transaction. They are there at closing.
Again, my approach to this chapter is from a legal perspective. Where I have
seen issues relating to this area is in title insurance. It is the title agent who is-sues the title insurance policy. Title insurance is insurance covering the pastbecause it protects only against losses arising from events that occurred prior
to the date of the policy. Coverage ends on the day the policy is issued and ex-tends backward in time for an indeﬁnite period. This is in marked contrast toproperty or life insurance, which protect against losses resulting from eventsthat occur after the policy is issued, for a speciﬁed period into the future. A
Title policy protects property owners and lenders from monetary losses thatcould result from ownership of a property’s title, which may include fraud, liensagainst the property, or errors missed during the title search. Title insurancedoes not prevent loss of marketability due to a title claim, and that is importantto know if you are going to assume ownership of a property.
In other words, a title insurance policy does not obligate the title insurance
company to make corrections to your property’s title if a problem is discovered;rather it simply provides a basis to receive monetary compensation for yourloss at a maximum level speciﬁed by the title policy limits.
I am frequently surprised by a real estate investor’s willingness to accept a
title company’s offer to “insure over” a known risk because the title insurancedoes not cure the apparent defect in the title; which may come back to hauntthe property owner in the future.
The policy covers only the amount of the loan, so the policy’s cost is based on
this amount. It is best to obtain both a lender and owner’s policy. The coverageROBERT KIYOSAKI 459781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 45extended to the owner is usually referred to as the ALTA policy, which must be
based in part on a survey.
The talent associated with escrow and title ofﬁcers varies widely. For that
reason it is important to know who we are dealing with and their approach tosolving problems. An effective escrow agent anticipates the demand of thetransaction for all parties and is proactive. I am very loyal to escrow and titleofﬁcers who I know have the capacity to close complex transactions in a timelymanner. Unfortunately, I had to kiss a few toads in order to ﬁnd folks who arekeepers!
Mortgage Broker
Selecting your mortgage broker is one of the most important decisions you willmake. You want to ﬁnd a mortgage broker, who like the architect you choose,specializes in your area of investment. You may not know this, but the brokerageindustry is a specialty business, and few brokers possess the expertise neededto service all areas of the lending arena. I want a broker who is well versed innot only the execution of the loan but also very in touch with the local trends.If your proposed project is not well suited to the market, your mortgage brokershould tell you outright or will facilitate the market telling you. Either way,you’ll know because the process will be arduous and most likely not well re-ceived by lenders.
Almost anything can trigger lending difﬁculties. Perhaps the proposed proj-
ect isn’t right for the location. Or maybe the location is right, but the timingisn’t right for the project. Sometimes the lender will raise ﬂags because theplan and proposed product didn’t go through enough feasibility studies or asatisfactory amount of market research to ensure the project is on target. Anyinvestor who comes to a mortgage broker without having done his or her home-work and as a result made the proper adjustments to the plan and design willﬁnd the underwriting will stall, and a loan will be next to impossible to attain.That’s a failure by the investor.
A failure on the mortgage broker’s side can happen, too. A good mortgage
broker should guide you to the most appropriate lending vehicle and steer youclear of the ones that are not in your best interest. Too often I have seen orheard of mismatches between a product and the type of loan terms, even whenthe product has qualiﬁed for that kind of loan. A mismatch can impact a lot ofthings, not the least of which is the pro forma of the property. It can also con-tribute to reduced proﬁtability. And loan vehicles such as city, local, and federal46 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 46funding have stringent requirements so their cost-beneﬁt is questionable, unless
the ﬁt is just right. Your mortgage broker should be very clear about every loanterm so you can take full advantage of them and avoid the pitfalls. If there issomething you don’t understand, do whatever it takes to clarify it.
You also should ask your mortgage broker what they know about tax credit,
HUD ﬁnancing, and related agencies, and ask them to relate to you the advan-tages and disadvantages of these ﬁnancing vehicles. Experience with them inaddition to knowledge about them is a real advantage. The last thing you wantis a mortgage broker who is learning on the job with your project. Look for aseasoned veteran.
In the absence of a good mortgage broker partner, some real estate attorneys—
I am one of them—also specialize in obtaining the most favorable ﬁnancing ve-hicles available. It is a service we provide, and I am sure we are not alone. Giventhat your attorney is looking out for your best interest, he or she will analyze theloan for more than just interest rates and amortization schedules. He or she willread the ﬁne print and the ﬁner points to discover any possible ways a loan, be-cause of its terms, could come back to bite you years later.
Insurance Agent
I won’t go into big detail on this one except to make a few points. Have an in-surance agent who specializes in real estate and development early on in theprocess to avoid easily avoidable pitfalls. The lender generally has the speciﬁccoverage required for your transaction. You should be able to rely on your in-surance broker to easily interpret the requirements and deliver an insurancecertiﬁcate covering the same within twenty-four hours.
Over the years, as lending has become more oriented to packaging loans for
sale in the secondary market, lenders have dictated the types of insurance thatmust be obtained, as well as the limits that they believe to be appropriate. Yourinsurance agent should be able to provide you additional insight with respectto the suitability of the proposed forms of coverage applicability of the proposedlimits.
There are probably entire agencies in your city or town that offer mostly real
estate, construction, and development insurance. There are a number of things,based on your project, that will require insurance of one sort or another. Insur-ance is all about risk management and the question becomes how much riskyou want to assume versus if you should pay a premium to have someone elseassume it. If you know in advance the type of insurance you will need, you canROBERT KIYOSAKI 479781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 47factor it into your project budget and determine if the project is feasible and
will deliver a solid return with these added costs. If it won’t, then you may wantto reconsider the project entirely.
1031 Exchange Intermediary
Every time a client presents me with an opportunity to participate in an IRCSection 1031 transaction, I insist that he or she had his or her accountants runthe numbers to determine the effect of paying the taxes versus deferring thetax with an exchange. From my vantage point, the tax savings do not replacethe need for a strong real estate transaction for the replacement property. I be-lieve you make money buying real estate;  which is best demonstrated when you
sell real estate.
Many times, investors are working on a project that will be part of a 1031 Ex-
change. There’s an entire chapter in this book about exchanges, but in a nutshell,a 1031 Exchange occurs when you sell one property and purchase another prop-erty under the tax code 1031 and minimize or avoid paying taxes on the gain.Anytime a 1031 Exchange is involved, you should have a qualiﬁed intermediaryexecute it. The reason is simple. If there is any misstep with the procedures ofthe exchange, you will not qualify and you will end up paying the taxes youwere trying to avoid.
You want to know exactly how much the tax is and weigh the pros and cons
of the exchange. A good test in my opinion, is asking yourself whether or notyou would go forward with the transaction if an exchange was not involved. Inother words, would you still consider this opportunity a good investment? Evenif you answer yes to this question, I always make sure my client has discussedthe exchange with me and his or her tax advisor so the entire plan can be viewedin light of the investor’s bigger ﬁnancial picture.
There are also nontax reasons for exchanges. Here are a few that you may
not have considered:
• Exchange from fully depreciated property to a higher value property that
can be depreciated.
• Exchange from non-income-producing raw land to imp roved property to
create cash flow.
• Exchange to meet location requirements.• Exchange from a larger property to several smaller properties, used to divide
an estate among several heirs or for retirement reasons.48 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 48•  Exchange from a tenants-in-common interest in one property to a fee interest
in another property.
So what do you look for in a qualiﬁed intermediary? Exchangors must feel
conﬁdent that exchange funds will be safe and available for the successful con-
clusion of their exchange. It is best to hire a qualiﬁed intermediary that, ﬁrst,comes highly recommended by other real estate investors. You should also doyour own due diligence to determine how the intermediary is investing fundsit has on hand. Recently, a large intermediary was unable to fulﬁll its fundingobligations because it had invested the bulk of its funds in auction rate securi-ties, which became illiquid overnight! If you cannot understand the nature ofthe intermediary’s underlying investments, then you should not let the inter-mediary hold your money!
Second, be sure to obtain a written guarantee for the exchange of funds. And,
ﬁnally, verify that the qualiﬁed intermediary has ﬁdelity bond coverage, prefer-ably in the amount of $100 million professional liability insurance and employeetheft and dishonesty coverage.
General Contractors
Nearly all real estate projects involve some construction or renovation. And forthat reason, having a general contractor run the show is a good idea. Unlessyou are a general contractor yourself, you should never attempt to manage yourown construction, no matter how well you think you can do it. If you are an in-vestor, remain an investor.
It should almost go without saying that you want to be very careful which
contractor you choose. Your decision will greatly impact the quality of yourproject. You can get excellent referrals from your architect who may even rec-ommend one particular contractor. And if you have selected the right insuranceagency in your city or town, the one that specializes in construction and doesthe bond work for all the contractors in town, you will be able to get some solidreferrals from them as well. Other than that, you can ask your attorney, mortgagebrokers, lender, and look around town at the projects that are currently under-way. That will give you a good idea of which companies are the most reputable.
No matter how tempting it is to go cheap and hire a small-time player for
your “small job,” it is never a good idea to hire any contractor who isn’t licensedand insured. As an attorney, I will never allow my clients to assume the astro-nomical risks that they are assuming when working with a contractor or anytrades person who is not licensed and insured.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 499781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 49I think it is always a good idea to determine whether or not the general con-
tractor can obtain a performance and payment bond. If you learn that the gen-
eral contractor is unable to obtain a performance and payment bond, you shouldﬁnd out exactly why that is the case. If the general contractor is involved in itsown development activities, bonding companies will frequently shy away fromthe risk. However, if the general contractor is not involved in development,then bonding companies should be more inclined to underwrite the risk asso-ciated with the general contractor’s affairs. If a performance and payment bondis obtained, the general contractor will pass the cost on to the developer, whichmay be signiﬁcant.
Your general contractor is responsible for carrying out the design plans to
the letter, and for managing the trade contractors (subcontractors) who willactually do the work. General contractors seldom actually perform any of thetrades themselves; they are simply very experienced project managers whoknow the process of construction and know the people and the companies thatwill get the work done. Pick a good contractor and you elevate your chances ofhaving good trades people working on your project. You should look for generalcontractors who pay their subcontractors and material men in a timely mannerand have a systematized manner of obtaining all of the required lien releases.Too often, general contractors who are struggling look to use subcontractorsand material men as a form of working capital ﬁnancing, as a result of the gen-eral contractor’s failure to pay them in a timely manner. Ask for a list of refer-ences who are subcontractors from various trades and material men fromvarious product lines.
How do you know you have a good contractor? First of all, look at their pre-
vious projects. Walk through them. Is the quality up to your standards of excel-lence? You can tell by looking at ﬁnishes and details. If the details are shoddy,one can only assume what lies behind the walls hidden from view isn’t muchbetter. Second, and perhaps even more important, is ask the tradespeople. Doesthe contractor pay them on time, or is the company always running way behindon payment? This could be a sign of cash ﬂow problems. Stay as far clear of thatas you can. What you don’t want is to have construction loan draws that aremeant to be buying your building materials going to pay off an old debt on an-other project.
And speaking of money, building costs—like anything else—can start out in
one solar system and end up in a completely differently galaxy if not closelymanaged right from the time of the initial estimate. To set a price, you’ll need a50 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 50clearly deﬁned budget, a clearly deﬁned scope of work, and a clearly deﬁned
schedule.
From my vantage point, I believe that folks starting out in development
should look to work with established general contractors who have obtained aperformance or payment bond for the project. The additional costs associatedwith the performance and payment bond are substantially less than the poten-tial downside.
Construction Risks That Can 
Cost Y ou Money
As an attorney, I’m always concerned about risks, so here are a few that I have
encountered, which you’ll want to keep within your field of view. It will save you
money.
• Poorly defined separation of functions between architect, engineer, and contractor.• Scope creep that causes a small project to become a big one based on change 
orders.
• Project acceleration. This may be done as a way to provide an incentive for your
contractor to complete your project prior to the original date for purposes of in-terest savings, favorable material pricing, or changes and deadlines for laws orregulations.
• Poor working relationships between parties that cause a lack of collaboration and
inefficiencies.
Keeping your contractors happy is pretty easy. Mostly what they want is to
be paid on time. They, in turn, have subcontractors to pay and paying them on
time keeps their tradespeople happy. Pay on time and you have a happy worksite.Contractors also tend to take great pride in the work that they do and feel agreat sense of accomplishment bringing a building out of the ground. And, ﬁ-nally, they value their relationships with owners, designers, and subcontractors.Work as a team, keeping all these things in good standing, and you’ll have ageneral contractor who will become a valued asset to your real estate investmentbusiness.
You can learn more about contractors in Chapter 4, in which Ross McCallis-
ter talks about proﬁts from the ground up.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 519781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 5152 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
A Few Final Words
Any real estate project is all about minimizing ﬁnancial risk, time risk, design
risk, and quality risk. It’s about choosing the right people to help you achievethis and working collaboratively all along the way. If you are the type of personwho seems to foster adversarial relationships, this will be difﬁcult. That’s notto say that there won’t be times when being tough will be required. There mostdeﬁnitely will be.
You’ll ﬁnd as you go from simple projects to the more complex that your team
will have to function at a higher level with greater cooperation and problem-solving abilities. In all instances, and with every project—big or small—that youdo, have a good attorney looking out for your interests. Find the best one youcan, and let him or her do the job you deserve.
Charles W. Lotzar is founder of the Lotzar Law Firm, P .C., a diversiﬁed
practice with representation of clients in commercial and real estate
transactions, low-income housing, tax credit ﬁnancings, administrativeproceedings, and various forms of tax-exempt and taxable bond ﬁnanc-ings. A former senior partner in the national law ﬁrm, Kutak Rock LLP ,Lotzar is involved in all phases of real estate development, including debt
and equity ﬁnancing. He has extensive experience in dealing with public contracts and issuesrelated to public ofﬁcials, and he has been involved in bond ﬁnancings that have an aggregatevalue in excess of $5 billion.
9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 52Wayne Palmer is an artist and a creative genius. However, his creativity is
not seen in a painting or heard in the harmony of a song. Wayne’s creative
genius comes from seeing what cannot be seen: putting a deal together out of the
invisible and creating a ﬁnancial masterpiece.
Wayne is really an alchemist, taking different disciplines such law, taxes, mar-
keting, and design and transforming them into exceptional real estate investments.In other words, it is not the building or the raw land that is the investment. It isthe ability to create value out of the elements and forces that surround real estatethat gives Wayne his advantage.
Wayne’s mastery of creative ﬁnancing can’t be fully described; it must be expe-
rienced. As you study Wayne’s three chapters in this book, you’ll begin to see whatI mean by that. Y ou’ll begin to understand the difference between Wayne and therest of the world. Wayne can see a way to make a deal work in less time than ittakes most people to pick up a pen and sign their name. And his often simple solu-tions to ﬁnancing problems will leave you asking, “Why didn’t I think of that?” Hehas a rare gift that maybe he was born with, and that his lifetime of experience asa real estate developer, certiﬁed real estate note appraiser, certiﬁed cash ﬂow mas-ter broker, and licensed continuing education provider has certainly honed. Wayneis one of kind, and he presents to anyone reading this book an opportunity to seethe world of ﬁnance in a way that you’ve never seen it before.3 Wayne PALMER
The Way to Exotic Wealth
539781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 5354 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Wayne is a man I trust. If a person is going to be creative, it is imperative that
he or she holds him or herself to the highest of legal, ethical, and moral standards,
which is Wayne’s true strong suit. While he is always pleasant, enthusiastic, andspeaks with a smile, his graciousness does not interfere with his straightforwardcandor. He will tell you what he thinks, even if it means saying that he thinks thedeal stinks or that the person representing it is either incompetent or of shadycharacter.
The beauty and power of real estate investing is found in the scope of creativity
each property affords the investor. Whenever I am at a dead end, brain dead, andin need of a shot of creativity, Wayne is the person I call.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Isat staring at the envelope with the anticipation of a youngster on Christmas
morning. Seeing the title company logo, I had a pretty good idea of what
was inside. After months of patient teamwork, the escrow had ﬁnally closed. Ithad required our best collective skills to complete the transaction. I felt a vi-bration that I knew was part steel on paper and part the tingle of adrenaline asthe letter opener glided through the cotton bond. I carefully reached in and re-moved a single document and unfolded it. It was a proceeds check made payableto my company for $1,175,206.16.
As I paused to savor the victory, my mind wandered back over my thirty
years in real estate. How had we come so far? I remembered days in the distantpast when lunch money was hard to come by. What was so different about thencompared to now? Why was it so relatively easy today to make a million dollarson a single transaction while it had sometimes seemed so difﬁcult to make aliving years ago? As I breathed in the magnitude of the moment, one word cameto mind, and it wasn’t the economy or boom times or anything about havingmore money. It was simple: formulas.
The word “formula” is rarely used in the real estate industry. We hear about
formulas in math and chemistry, but not in real estate. What could a cluster ofnumerals and digits, strung together with mathematical operatives, possiblyhave to do with making money? I smiled at the thought, realizing how few peo-ple in real estate understand the power of one good formula. I noticed a waveof gratitude ﬂood over me. I felt so lucky to know the formula that had p roven
to be worth a million dollars.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 54What could a cluster of numerals and digits, strung together with math-
ematical operatives, possibly have to do with making money?
A Harvard friend once explained to me that certain truths are too big and
too powerful to express, except in the language of mathematics. Even Einstein
and his fellow physicist couldn’t explain the nature of our universe with merewords, only with equations. Formulas allow us to identify, condense, and usechunks of information that would otherwise be too big to manage.
As I held a $1 million check in my hand, I thought about all that had led up
to receiving it. If I were to write a formula to express how that had happened,what would it be? I put the check down on my desk where I could glance at it,and just for fun, I picked up a pad and pen to see if I could create a formula thatcaptured the key elements. Since I didn’t major in math, I didn’t intend to comeup with anything of cosmic signiﬁcance. I just wanted to know if there was away to boil it down to one simple and concise expression. After a few failed at-tempts, scratch-outs, and rearrangements, I looked at what I had scrawled onthe paper with a strange sense of satisfaction.
W = ( XO (T+E) ) / K
Yes! That was it! My entire career summarized in one inch or less. All of the
study, all of the acquired skills, all of the systems I had learned to operate withinthe “big system” we call real estate were included. I knew I was on to something.I could see that if I could put the essence of my formula in writing, others couldsave years of struggle by applying the same principles to build their own wealth.That is what I set out to do!
So what exactly does the formula mean?
[W] WEALTH equals [X] EXCHANGE multiplied by [O] OPPORTUNITY
multiplied by the sum of [T] TALENT plus [E] EQUITY divided by [K]
SPEED/TIME.
Let’s look at what each of these variables mean.
W “Wealth”
What is it? The word clearly has different meanings for different people.
Tabloids provide ample examples of the fabulously rich and famous who oftenappear to live miserable lives in spite of their money. On the other end of theTIPTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 559781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 55spectrum, I have seen those who barely survive economically but who seem
blissfully happy. True wealth, it would seem, is not only about cash in the bank,although most deﬁnitions of wealth do include a certain amount of money. Iknow my own deﬁnition of wealth has evolved over time to include freedom,good health, peace of mind, happy relationships, education, recreation, and theability to serve others. However, for purposes of this chapter and this book, myformula—W = (XO (T+E)) / K—focuses primarily on monetary wealth.
I deﬁne monetary wealth as assets that generate enough cash ﬂow to sustain
my chosen lifestyle indeﬁnitely, with minimal time and effort required on my partto manage them. In Rich Dad terms, it is getting out of the rat race . Wealth is an
end result, just like the million-dollar check was the end result of one transac-tion. Becoming wealthy is an overarching goal of the game of business.
I have concluded that one of the great gifts of living in a free society is that
everyone has the right to choose what works best for them and how muchwealth is enough.
X “EXchange”
Whenever an economic transaction occurs, there is an eXchange of value thattakes place. In ancient barter- or commodity-based economies, a cow may havebeen traded for several bushels of wheat. Milk was traded for eggs. Chickenswere traded for hogs, etc. In each of these transactions, it is easy to see the sym-metry of the exchange. In currency-based economies, we trade money for goodsand services. Regardless, if we look past the symbols of value, such as the ani-mals or the coins, we can see that something else is actually being exchanged.What is the “something else”?
It has been said that energy is everything and everything is energy. With
modern scientiﬁc tools, such as electron microscopes, we have learned thatthings are not what they appear to be. What appears to be solid is actually amass of atoms that each has electrons swirling around the nucleus at astonishingspeeds. Each atom that makes up any substance on earth is pure energy. Thereis relatively as much space between the nucleus and the electrons of the averageatom as there is between the earth and the sun. What we see as solid isn’t solidat all. We only perceive it as such.
Our perceptions about money are much the same. We have come to think of
it as real wealth, but is it real, or is it only the symbol of the energy that consti-tutes real wealth? I would suggest that the real wealth, or value, that is ex-changed in any economic transaction—the “something else”—is not the money56 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 56but the energy that the exchange of the money causes to move from one place
to another. If I use my money to buy oil, it is not the oil that I want but theenergy contained in the oil that has value to me. If I exchange my money forfood, the value isn’t in the food itself but in its ability to provide me with physicalenergy and perhaps some pleasure in the eating.
The X in our formula represents the eXchange of energy that takes place in
a transaction. There are elements of both quantity and quality to each of theseexchanges. The element of quantity is easy to see. I pay $2 for a loaf of bread,$3 for a gallon of milk, $4 for a gallon of gas, or $6 for a pound of ﬁsh. Theaspect of quality is a bit trickier.
Left to its own devices, nature always returns to balance. In the deserts of
the Western United States, we have lots of rabbits. From time to time, the pop-ulation of rabbits may increase to the point that they overrun their habitat. Inresponse, nature produces only enough food in the habitat for so many rabbits,and so the weakest starve and die. Or, the coyotes in surrounding areas discoverthat rabbits are plentiful and come to dine on the bounteous bunnies. As humanbeings, we have the opportunity to rise above the random and seemingly violentbalancing that’s found in nature, by committing ourselves to balancing the en-ergy of our transactions right up front. This is where the quality of the exchangecomes into play. If I make sure that I give full value, or in other words, a fullmeasure of energy, in each transaction to which I am a party, I harness thepower of nature in providing perpetual abundance. Nature is inherently abun-dant when balance is maintained.
So, for purposes of our formula, a fair exchange of energy is simply to con-
sciously give something equal to or greater in value than what one receives. Itis a living commitment to the principle of win/win. It is taking pride in thequality of one’s contribution. If I give at least as much as I want to receive, na-ture will balance the scales by seeing that I get full measure in return. If I giveextra, I create a vacuum and nature rushes to ﬁll a vacuum, so I set myself up toreceive a greater portion. Once this principle of energy eXhange is understoodand followed, there can no longer be any lack of any kind. Natural law will seeto that.
O “Opportunity”
Oh, say, can you see? “America is [still] the land of opportunity.” In my opinion,this statement is actually truer today than it has ever been. If anyone doubts itsvalidity, I invite them to observe the accomplishments of people immigratingROBERT KIYOSAKI 579781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 57to the United States. They typically come to America with little money, lacking
in language skills, and having no background about how Americans do things.Yet, many immigrants build successful businesses, buy nice homes, and end upsending their children to the best schools available, all within a ﬁfteen-totwenty-year period. They seize opportunities and acquire wealth that foreverchanges their economic standing.
“America is [still] the land of opportunity.” In my opinion, this 
statement is actually truer today than it has ever been. . . . However, 
I don’t believe America is the only land of opportunity.
However, I don’t believe America is the only land of opportunity. Through
my travels, studies, and friends, I see tremendous entrepreneurial possibilities
in every capitalist country in the world. It is a matter of clear vision and of train-ing ourselves to see things as they are, not as they once were, or as we hope theymight be.
I would ask this of anyone doubting the quality of today’s opportunities: Are
you willing to work as hard, study as long, and sacriﬁce as much as the immi-grants that come to this country do? I think it is an important question becausethose newcomers are today’s competitors, just as the ancestors of most Ameri-cans were the newcomers competing for opportunities when they passedthrough Boston Harbor or Ellis Island. I have no patience for those who standaround whining about things, instead of harvesting the opportunities that areeverywhere to be found. Some may cite economic downturns as evidence thatthe good days are gone. To the contrary, times of economic turbulence may ar-guably provide greater opportunities to build wealth even faster.
I trust in Buckminster Fuller’s concept of “ephemeralization,” which para-
phrased is to progressively do more with less, faster. The technological revolu-tion we are part of gives us incredible competitive capability and leaves uswithout excuse. Yes, many things are different now than they were generationsago and may be even more difﬁcult in some ways. However, given all of the ad-vantages we have that our ancestors lacked, I believe we still have the edge. Iknow I wouldn’t want to trade places with them.
Think about the leverage inherent in just a few of our modern conveniences:Air travel. More than once, I have left Europe in the morning and arrived home
in the Rocky Mountains by nightfall, traveling in the comfort of kings. It took myancestors months of sacriﬁce and peril to make the same journey by ship.TIP58 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 58Cell phones. I am able to talk to anyone from almost anywhere, at minimal ex-
pense. I remember the days when I had to get back to my ofﬁce before I could re-
turn calls, act on a thought, or solve a critical problem. Now I can make use ofdrive time, down time, and spare time as it occurs, with the greatest convenience.
Word-processing software. Decades ago, what constituted a workforce of
several secretaries in an ofﬁce of several hundred square feet is now the size ofa book and sits comfortably on my lap. My PC gives me word processing ca-pacity with instant correction, printing, graphics, and even video and sound, ifdesired. It even surpasses the capacity of entire publishing companies of an-other era.
Electronic document transfer. When I ﬁrst started in real estate (1976) there
were no fax machines. I put ﬁfty thousand miles a year on my car, just chasingdown signatures on documents and delivering them to mortgage companies,title companies, clients, etc. Now I can send a fully executed copy to everyonesimultaneously, without ever leaving my desk and without using a single sheetof paper or a thimbleful of gasoline.
The Internet. It is difﬁcult to begin to estimate the value of so much infor-
mation at one’s ﬁngertips. The physical equivalent of the electronic informationavailable on the Internet today would obviously ﬁll the world’s libraries andrequire a staff of several thousand to retrieve when needed. Even then, it wouldbe impossible to match the speeds at which such information is delivered tomy computer screen. It is as though all of the knowledge in the world is just aclick away. How could our forbearers compete with that?
Consider how only these few tools multiply a person’s time, especially when
you consider the time, effort, and knowledge it would take to physically repro-duce the results one can achieve by using these spectacular tools. We truly livein a time of marvelous opportunities.
As I see it, the biggest challenge in real estate today is to sort through the
hundreds of opportunities that are constantly available to determine whichones are the best and which ones truly warrant the allocation of precious time,talent, and capital. My only frustration with “opportunity” is that I cannot pos-sibly invest in all of the good deals I see.
Since opportunity is all around us and the challenge is to sort through the
many to ﬁnd the fabulous few, I believe the most important aspect of the “O” isto become skilled at analyzing opportunity. While this book is full of powerfulideas on how to do just that, here are my basic guidelines in the form of ten ques-tions. (Yes, we literally put every deal through the “Ten Questions” routine!)ROBERT KIYOSAKI 599781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 5960 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Wayne’s Opportunity Filter—T en Questions
1. Is the project in harmony with our major goals and purposes?
2. Are the people involved of good character, and will we likely enjoy working withthem?3. Does the project make sense as explained?4. Does it promise returns equal to, or better than, our target rates?5. Do we have, or can we hire, the skill required to successfully complete the project?6. Do we have, or can we get, the capital needed?7 . Do we have the time to successfully oversee the project?8. Does it provide at least three acceptable exit strategies?9. Can we live with the worst case scenario, and is it within our risk profile?10. Is it a win/win for everyone concerned?
We call this our Opportunity Filter. If we are satisﬁed with the answers to
these ten questions, we will go to the next step and do in-depth underwriting,
or “due diligence,” as it is called in our industry.
Let’s go back to the million-dollar check mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter and walk through the project that generated it. As background, theproject was a sixty-acre residential development that was only partway throughthe entitlement process and was in foreclosure. The owners had twenty-fourhours to cure the default or they would lose the property, their down paymentof nearly $200,000 cash, and more than $3 million in equity.
1.Was the project in harmony with our major goals and purposes? Yes. We are
real estate lenders and developers, and it ﬁt well within our portfolio.
2.Were the people involved of good character, and would we likely enjoy work-
ing with them? Although we had just met them, their references were positive,and we were willing to give it a go, knowing we could remain lenders only if wechose to do so.
3.Did the project make sense as explained? Y es, the proposed lots were in high
demand, and the views from the property were exceptional.
4.Did it promise returns equal to, or better than, our target rates? Ye s.  Th e
owners were willing to pay our standard hard-money rates.
5.Did we have, or could we hire, the skill to do the project? We saw the owners
to be a bit weak in their ability to complete the project, but they had plenty ofequity to insure their performance. We were content we had the skills on ourteam, even if it turned out that they didn’t.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 606.Did we have the capital required? Y es. We had the money on deposit to make
the loan and knew we could borrow to complete the improvements, if necessary.
7 .Did we have the time to successfully oversee the project? Y es. The project
was close to home and could be spread across our existing staff, without over-
loading anyone.
8.Did it provide at least three acceptable exit strategies? Y es: (a) get paid off as
agreed; (b) complete the project in partnership with the existing owners; or (c)foreclose on the property and sell it or complete the development ourselves.
9.Could we live with the worst case scenario, and was it within our risk proﬁle?
The answer turned out to be “No,” because we discovered the property did notyet have a deeded right of way for access. Although a contract was in placewith the neighbor to provide access, it contained no deadline for doing so. Thiswas a deal breaker for us. It threw us outside of our risk proﬁle because wecouldn’t get title insurance without deeded access to the property.
10.Is it a win/win for everyone concerned? No. Because of the problem with the
access, it was not a win for us.
So, how did we solve the problems identiﬁed in numbers nine and ten (above)?
We renegotiated the terms of our proposed loan agreement with the owners. Weknew that we had legal grounds for getting the access from the neighbor. If ittook a year longer under the worst case scenario to acquire the access by litigation,we simply needed a way to be compensated for our added exposure. Our so lutionwas this: In addition to our loan fees, and as an offset for our additional risk, theowners agreed to grant us a 35 percent ownership interest in the property.
It took us ten months to acquire the access, at which time we sold the prop-
erty for a $3.35 million gain. The check in the envelope was our 35 percentshare of the net proﬁt.
Sometimes opportunities must be massaged a bit to discover the real gems
lurking beneath the surface.
(T+E) “The Sum of Talent and Equity”
This is the mathematics of synergy. One plus one is greater than two. Talent iswasted without equity, and equity tends to dissipate without talent. However,properly combined, T+E equals pure power. While it may be true that it some-
times takes money to make money, my experience tells me that of the two, talentor equity, talent is somewhat more important in building and maintainingwealth. For example, who wouldn’t want to have the talent of Warren Buffettmanaging one’s equities? Of course, Mr. Buffett is not for hire. I understand it isROBERT KIYOSAKI 619781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 61often difﬁcult to acquire Berkshire Hathaway stock because Buffett’s talent has
proven so ex ceptional that the current owners rarely sell their shares. I see that
as an undeniable testament to talent. The stock market at large would throwbillions of dollars at Mr. Buffett to have him get the results his talent hasachieved for his investors.
There is an old adage that states, “When money meets experience, the expe-
rience gets the money, and the money gets the experience.” I have found thatmoney (or equity) will ﬂock to anyone who demonstrates an ability to protectit and cause it to grow. So, let’s consider the value of talent.
T “Talent”
The New Oxford American Dictionary deﬁnes talent as aptitude, gift, knack,
technique, ability, expertise, capacity, and faculty; strength, forte, genius, skill,and artistry .
It is easy to see that Mr. Buffett has all of these elements of talent on his
team. I refer to the Buffett team because in today’s business environment, thingsmove too fast and are too technical for any individual to successfully competeagainst a talented team. I must admit it took me a while to realize this glaringtruth. As a self-employed “S,” within Rich Dad’s CASHFLOW Quadrant
®, I took
pride in doing everything myself. I remember the day it ﬁnally dawned on methat others could actually do some things better than I could. An employee, towhom I had reluctantly delegated a task, not only completed it ahead of sched-ule, but did it better than I would have done and in a way I would not have con-sidered. I felt a huge weight lift off of my shoulders as I realized that it wasn’tall up to me anymore.
Since that glorious day of independence, I have devoted much of my time to
building project teams that consist of the best players I can ﬁnd. Team buildingbecame the key for my move from the “S” (self employed) to the “B” (businessowner) quadrant (see Robert Kiyosaki’s book, CASHFLOW Quadrant ). The re-
sults have been astounding. With an in-house staff of less than ten people andoutsourced “partners” of perhaps another dozen, I am now able to manage ﬁf-teen companies, nearly six hundred investor accounts, and as many as twentyprojects at a time. It sometimes takes my breath away to see how productiveour team has become. There are weeks when we close dozens of real estatetransactions of one kind or another. I am so proud of my people for the waythey produce and for the pride they take in the quality of their work.62 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 62Here is a snapshot of the team we assembled for the “million dollar” closing:
1.The previous owners, who became our partners.
2.My business partner, Reed, is our systems guy. I believe every team must
have Reed’s equivalent to truly excel. He takes care of all of the details re-
quired to run our businesses, such as communication systems, informationsystems, and personnel systems. The genius of his systems organizes ourstaff to handle every detail of every project and to respond to otherwise im-possible deadlines.
3.My support staff, including our receptionist, Lindsey, my administrative as-
sistant, Johanne, Renee who runs our document department, Lincoln, whooperates our real estate company, Julie, Dan and Victor in accounting andLila, our ﬁle clerk.
4.Our private investor clients, who, in part, provide the capital we use to fund
our loans and acquisitions.
5.Civil engineers to design the proposed subdivision, roads, and utility systems.
6.Lawyers to advise, to draft documents, and to litigate if necessary to secure
the needed right of way.
7 . Accountants to keep accurate records, establish budgets, and give tax guidance.
8.Title ofﬁcers to work through issues of boundary lines, easements, legal de-
scriptions, and in resolving the right-of-way issue.
9.City ofﬁcials, who worked with us to approve our proposed development
and who helped formalize the needed right of way.
Each potential investment requires unique talent. I encourage you to learn
what is needed for a given project and build a team made up of those who havespent their lives honing exceptional, fundamental skills that qualify them to bepart of your team. I don’t know who plays on Mr. Buffett’s team, but I wouldwager with conﬁdence that they are people of outrageous talent. After provingthe talent of your team, and with a few wins to your record, you, too, shouldﬁnd it relatively easy to attract all of the equity you need to become wealthy.
E “Equity”
Deﬁnition: value, worth; ownership, rights, and proprietorship ( New Oxford
American Dictionary )
Having said that equity is perishable without talent, let me now say that eq-
uity is everything when ﬁnancing real estate—once one has the talent to activateROBERT KIYOSAKI 639781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 63the equity. Equity leads to net worth on your balance sheet. Equity is the symbol
of entrepreneurial wealth. Equity is capital, and understanding the role of equityis a key to raising capital.
I also view equity as paper wealth. Currency is paper. Stock shares are paper.
In real estate, the difference between the value of the property and the debt onthe property is paper equity. Mortgages are paper assets for those who own thenotes and have the rights to receive the payments made by borrowers.
There are two segments of the real estate business where I have learned to
use equity in unique ways to achieve outstanding results.
The ﬁrst is using equity as a tool in the “equity marketing” arena covered in
Chapter 22 and the second is real estate paper, or private mortgages. In each ofthese realms, equity is applied in speciﬁc formulas to accelerate the accumula-tion of personal wealth.
Let’s look at the second part of equity—the private paper portion. Private
mortgage paper is created by converting the seller’s equity into ﬁnancing forthe buyer. A private note comes into existence when a seller “carries back,” orin other words, loans equity to a buyer in the form of seller ﬁnancing or whenan owner pledges equity as collateral for money loaned against the property.Since all seller equity is capital, under our deﬁnition, seller equity provides oneof the most convenient and effective sources of ﬁnancing for the purchase ofthe seller’s property. Think about it: all seller equity is part of a huge pool ofpotential ﬁnancing for the building of your portfolio. Once you know how touse seller ﬁnancing, it is like having a pre-app roved credit line for m illions of
dollars just waiting to be tapped.
When I purchase real estate, I have trained myself to look to the seller’s eq-
uity ﬁrst and foremost for ﬁnancing. In the overwhelming majority of the prop-erties we have bought over the years, seller ﬁnancing played some role. Even inthe best of markets, when bank ﬁnancing is plentiful, I prefer to use private ﬁ-nancing, for many reasons.
The Benefits of Private Financing—For the Buyer
1.Negotiable. Whereas banks and mortgage companies usually dictate the
terms of their loans, a private note can include any clause the buyer andseller might agree to, such as lower interest rates, alternative collateral, ir-regular payment schedules to match income ﬂuctuations, and payments tiedto the performance of the property or project, to name a few.
2.Always available. Lending goes in cycles, and supplies of mortgage money
sometimes dry up. Private ﬁnancing is always available because there is con-stant equity in certain properties in the marketplace.64 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 643.Not credit driven. Private ﬁnancing may be available, even if a credit score is
low, income is difﬁcult to verify, or debt ratios are high.
4.No aggregate limit. Once the average borrower has a few loans outstanding,
institutional lenders may restrict further borrowing. There is no set limit to
what a real estate investor can borrow privately.
5.Flexible loan-to-value ratios. Banks and mortgage companies have set limits
on loan-to-value ratios (LTVs), but it is possible to borrow 100 percent ofthe purchase price of the property from the owner with private ﬁnancing.
6.A ship for rough seas. In tough times, institutions have historically been rigid
in their default and foreclosure procedures. When making payments to a pri-vate party who doesn’t want the property back, it is possible to re-negotiateterms, extend deadlines, and in general, work together to get through thestorm. Equity is preserved for both parties, and in the process, creates an-other win/win.
These advantages of private ﬁnancing for the buyer are clear, but I am often
asked why sellers would carry back. What’s in it for the seller?
Benefits of Private Financing—For the Seller
1.Providing ﬁnancing for a buyer in a slow market might make the property
sell quicker.
2.By making it easier for the buyer to qualify for ﬁnancing, sellers often get a
higher price for the property.
3.A seller carry-back sale is usually considered an installment sale by the IRS,
and any gain on the sale is deferred until the principal portion of the loan isreceived. Properly structured, an installment sale can push the tax conse-quences of the sale many years into the future (See Internal Revenue CodeSection 453i).
4.The seller earns income from the interest portion of the payment. The rates
of interest paid by buyers on private mortgages are usually higher than therates paid by banks on certiﬁcates of deposit. This means that a seller canearn more money on a carry-back loan than he or she could by selling theproperty for cash and depositing the money in a CD at the bank. This is es-pecially a boon to sellers who are of retirement age. It is as though they con-vert their home equity into an annuity of sorts.
5.A private note, properly structured, is legal tender. The seller can borrow
against the note or use it for a down payment on his next property or evensell it for cash if desired. Selling a note for cash may result in the seller re-ceiving less than the full face amount of the note.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 659781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 6566 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: How Private Financing 
Can Work for Y ou
As an example, I purchased a condo from a private party who owned the unit
free and clear. They agreed to accept a $20,000 down payment and to carry a
note of $78,000 at 7 .5 percent for twenty years. The monthly principal and interest
payment was to be $628.36. I asked for a clause in the note that provided for allpayments made in the first year to be allocated to principal, such that the interestrate for the first year of the note was effectively 0 percent. The seller would still re-ceive the same monthly income, while I could prepay as much of the balance as Idesired, within twelve months, without interest. However, 7 .5 percent interest wouldbegin accruing against the unpaid balance on the first anniversary of the loan. Thatone simple clause, written into the private note, shortened the amortization of thenote from 240 months to 205.68 months, a savings of $21,565.76. Y ou might notethat the savings exceeded my down payment. In other words, the zero interestclause was, in essence, an agreement by the seller to rebate my down payment if Ipaid on the note to maturity.
I trust that now you can see how equity in exchanges and equity in paper,
combined with talent, can turbocharge your investment results. I believe this
is one of the most important beneﬁts of understanding and using wealth for-mulas. Unless you were born into money or win the lottery, learning how toharness various forms of equity that currently belongs to someone else, willlikely be your fastest road to riches.
Now, before we get to the last part of the formula, let’s consider what we
have learned so far:
Wealth is our goal—to be wealthy is to get out of the rat race
Xstands for the balanced exchange of value and for the context of the real
estate exchange marketplaceO is for opportunity that is all around us, all of the time, just waiting to be
multiplied by the synergy ofTalent plusEquity
Looking once again at the million-dollar deal, let’s take an inventory of
what we had when the borrowers walked into our office with their problem.The property owners were about to lose a chunk of Wealth in foreclosure. We9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 66were prepared to provide an eXchange of value using our cash and Equity
Marketing formulas. We were presented with an Opportunity to help someoneelse solve a problem and to profit by doing so. We had the Talent, and theyhad the Equity to provide safety for our capital. It would seem the stars wereall aligned, right? Wrong! There is one more critical element to the formulathat I am convinced makes all the difference in today’s business environment.I call it the “K” factor.
K “Speed/Time”
In mathematics, a factor is deﬁned as a number or algebraic expression bywhich another is exactly divisible (New Oxford American Dictionary ). You may
notice that in my wealth formula, the product of everything else is divided byK. K is the last operation that deﬁnes the ultimate sum of the wealth. So whatcould possibly be so important as to warrant this key spot? The K is critical tothe equation because to me it represents time multiplied and compressed, aswith the metric system K, which is the symbol for kilo, or one thousand. Howcan I do one thousand times more, a thousand times faster? In other words,SPEED! How much ground can be covered in the least amount of time?
We live in a world where transactional time frames are being condensed and
collapsed by the effects of technology. What once took months to accomplishnow takes seconds or no measurable time at all. When Benjamin Franklin livedin Paris as the U.S. ambassador to France, he communicated with his familyand government through letters. Those letters took up to six months to arrivein the United States by boat from Paris. Today telephone, e-mail, text messaging,and facsimile technologies make such communications instant. We can some-times do almost everything in almost no time at all. To compete and succeedtoday, we must prepare to accomplish ever more in ever shorter time frames inevery way possible.
Even though all of the stars seemed to be aligned in our million dollar deal,
there was one glaring exception. If we couldn’t salvage the owner’s Wealth byfunding the transaction within twenty-four hours, the Opportunity for eX-change of value would expire, and all of the owner’s Equity would be lost, re-gardless of how much Talent we had as a team. The key was the need for speed.Without speed, all else was of no value. Without the K factor, everything thatpreceded it in the formula was meaningless. Anything divided by zero is zero.What was the key to our speed?ROBERT KIYOSAKI 679781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 6768 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The Keys to Speed
1.Private capital—the money system. Because we control private capital, there
was no need to make a loan application to a bank, order a lengthy appraisal,
wait for a meeting of the loan committee, or wade through the rivers of redtape surrounding institutional transactions. In short, we were working in aniche market where their bureaucratic structures knock the banks out ofthe box. They simply could not compete with us on the basis of speed, andour client was indeed in need of speed.
2.Technology—the mechanical system. Under Reed’s direction, our ofﬁce is
wired with high-speed Internet, and we maintain accounts that connect usto all kinds of data sources. These allow us to rapidly download title infor-mation, zoning maps, tax rolls, market information, property histories, satel-lite photos, and demographic data pertinent to our decision-makingprocesses. We can access much of this information instantly or communicatevery quickly with others who may be in possession of electronic versions ofthe data that can be instantly forwarded to us. We can build a loan ﬁle in amatter of hours instead of weeks.
3.Talent—the training system. Our staff has a broad scope of talents and disci-
plines necessary to gather and process information, create documents, com-municate with vested parties, and support all others involved in the process.We work as a team. We function as a whole, slicing and dicing the workloadand delivering the intended results in dramatically condensed time frames.
4.Relationships—the people system. We consciously invest in people. We do
all we can on a day-to-day basis to treat others as we would like to be treated.We make every effort to accommodate others when called upon. We havean absolute rule in our businesses that requires telling the truth and keepingour word to everyone at all times. By making this investment in others, weﬁnd that they are there for us when we have a need for speed and they readilyrespond to our requests. We see these people as extensions of our team’s tal-ent and resources. Our network of connected people is one of our greatestassets. We also have an unbreakable rule: No matter what else is right with atransaction, if the people piece is wrong, we walk away. As Robert Kiyosakiso aptly teaches, “You can’t do a good deal with a bad partner.” The guidelineswe have set and hold to in our companies protect the integrity of our teams.Our people abide by such high standards that we rarely need to ﬁre anyone.If the bad guys slip under the radar to ﬁnd a way onto our team, they soonleave because they are made so uncomfortable by the culture that everyoneelse upholds. We have zero tolerance for lying, cheating, stealing, gossiping,9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 68petty politics, and sexual harassment. We intend for our business relation-
ships to last for a lifetime and create an environment that is mutually re-spectful, safe, clean, fun, and productive.
Time is the investor’s friend in an appreciating market. As we say, 
“Appreciation will cover a multitude of investor sins.” However in a down 
market, time is the enemy, and the need for speed, for precision, and for bullet proof decision making becomes even more critical. Speed is often the difference between success and failure, especially in a contracting real estate market.
Many modern tools allow us to cover more ground in less time. I encourage
you to use cell phones, computers, e-mail, text messaging, a paperless ofﬁce,
video conferencing, and anything else that gets more out of the time allotted.To illustrate how valuable this can be, one of my favorite tech tools is a digitalvoice recorder. I keep it in my pocket most of the time. When I have a creativeidea or think of something I need to do, I make a quick note of it on the microrecorder. Because I can talk faster than I write, this high tech tool consolidateswhat would be a scattered pile of sticky notes into one location. I use therecorded notes to compile my daily to-do list. This habit keeps important ideasand tasks from slipping through the cracks. It also reduces my stress levelsconsiderably because my mind is free of all of those details. In addition, I keepan audio journal of important thoughts, events, and new things I learn. It isamazing how valuable some of that information is at a later date, especiallywhen imbued with the emotion of the moment, as captured in my voice. It ac-celerates the learning process and the implementation of new ideas. Perhapsthe most important beneﬁt of all is that it saves so much of my time, which isirreplaceable.
So, there you have it! W = ( XO ( T+E ) ) / K. Wealth is XOTEK. To make it
easy to remember, say it phonetically. It sounds like “Wealth is exotic.” Nowyou have your ﬁrst formula for achieving exotic personal wealth.
On a bright spring morning in May, a few days after receiving the million
dollar check, I walked down the hall to my ofﬁce. It was my birthday. I noticeda document taped to the door at eye level. It was a copy of a deposit slip with aprintout of my discretionary business account balance. It had been posted thereby my accounting staff as a birthday surprise. It showed available funds of$1,217 ,674.44. All of the bills were paid. There were no strings attached to thatmoney.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 699781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 6970 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
It struck me that I had more than a million dollars in cash with which I could
do whatever I wanted. I sat down at my desk and again let the full impact of the
moment settle in on me. My thoughts were strangely drawn once more to thosetimes in the past when I struggled to learn the secrets of abundance. Of course,I felt joy, peace, gratitude, and a sense of well being, but most of all, I felt vindi-cated for every effort I had made through years of hard work, tireless study, andthe gathering of experiences that collectively prepared me to close million-dollar transactions. A sense of excitement welled up inside of me. I knew it wasonly the beginning because, now, I had the formula for replicating the samesuccess over and over again.
I glanced at the equation I had scratched on the pad of paper a few days ear-
lier. I felt so utterly blessed. I thought of thousands of other people who are outthere in the world, going through the same process I had been through; strug-gling to ﬁnd the right combination, the right recipe, the right formula for theirown success. I picked up the piece of paper and with a smile, folded it and care-fully tucked it in my pocket. I knew it would come in handy soon, when I wouldhave a chance to share it with someone else who was diligently searching forthe way to XOTEK Wealth.
Ways to Learn More
www.waynelpalmer.comwww.nce1031.comA soon-to-be-published book on real estate formulas, by Wayne Palmer
Wayne Palmer is widely regarded as a master of the creative structuring
of real estate acquisition and ﬁnancing, using notes and other forms of
real estate paper, together with 1031 Equity Marketing formulas. As theowner and manager of National Note of Utah, LC, and several other com-panies, Wayne is a Certiﬁed Real Estate Note Appraiser, Certiﬁed CashFlow Master Broker, a Licensed Continuing Education Provider, and holds
the Equity Marketing Specialist (EMS) designation with the National Council of Exchangors.He has been involved in real estate development since 1978 in Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Hawai’i,and Minnesota.
9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 70Ross is Ken McElroy’s partner in their business MC Properties. Kim and I are
often ﬁnancial partners with Ken and Ross in a number of their projects and
have done very well ﬁnancially, even in tough economic times.
There are three primary reasons why our investments with Ross do so well.
The ﬁrst reason is that he is a builder. He understands the ins and outs of the con-
struction industry. Second, he is a property manager. This is important becausethe key to long-term investing in real estate is professional property management.And third, Ross is exceptional at ﬁnance by managing the ratios between debt, eq-uity, and expenses. When it comes to real estate investing, he is the complete pack-age. On top of that, he is a great guy. He is fair and honest.
In 2002, when the Tucson apartment market was hot, Ross’s background al-
lowed us not only to do well buying existing apartment houses but also buildingnew apartment houses. One of our ﬁrst investments together was the purchase ofan existing apartment complex his company was managing. This gave us an ad-vantage because we knew the numbers were honest—which is important sincemost pro forma numbers provided by realtors are lies. Second, the property hadan additional ten acres of vacant land. Once we bought the existing apartmenthouse, our next step was to begin construction on an additional one hundred unitson the vacant land. Then with the increased rents a few years later, Ross reﬁnancedthe property, and Kim and I got all of our initial investment money back. This4 Ross MCCALLISTER
Profits from the Ground Up
719781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 71means each month we receive a check from the positive cash ﬂow, and Kim and I
have zero invested in the project. If you do the math, this means Kim and I havean inﬁnite return on our money. In layman’s terms, an inﬁnite return is trulymoney for nothing . . . every month.
This is why Kim and I love being partners with Ross McCallister and Ken 
McElroy.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Perhaps you’ve already read and maybe even re-read Rich Dad Poor Dad by
Robert Kiyosaki, as well as my partner Ken McElroy’s book, The Advanced
Guide to Real Estate Investing, and now you are ready to take the plunge and in-vest in real estate on your own. That’s probably why you bought this book writ-ten by real estate professionals, each of whom have been earning their livingsin real estate for decades.
There are pages in this book that are full of tremendous opportunities and
innovative ways to make money in real estate. But one avenue of investmentyou may not have thought of and may want to consider is to develop your ownproject from the ground up.
The proﬁts you have heard about from real estate development are mind
boggling, and if you are like most people, the numbers leave you frothing at themouth for a piece of the development pie. Yes, there is tremendous proﬁt to bemade from real estate development, but as with any high reward venture thereis also the possibility of tremendous ﬁnancial losses if you let your emotionsoverride good judgment, or if you don’t know what you are doing. 
In this chapter I will outline some of the steps you need to take to evaluate a
development opportunity, steps I’ve gleaned from my expertise in developingapartment communities during the past three decades and from some twenty-plus projects of about four thousand units. And because my experience is pri-marily in apartment development, that is what we will talk about. However,these fundamentals apply to any commercial development, such as ofﬁce or re-tail, and to any size apartment community, be it four or four hundred units.
For me, development from the ground up is the most exciting way to invest
in real estate. There are few professional accomplishments more rewardingthan to see a project go from conception to reality. And it’s even better whenthat project produces positive ﬁnancial results. Yet, with that said, nothing canbe more frustrating than working for years (yes, years!) to start your projectand battling through environmental and governmental regulations, market con-72 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 72ROBERT KIYOSAKI 73
ditions, ﬁnancial institutions, and your own continuous questioning about
whether all this frustration and risk is worth it. That side of the business is a re-ality, too, even for those of us who have many projects already under our belts.
I know you can see yourself as the owner of that “perfect” corner lot at Main
and Better Main, graced with a structure and a monument sign bearing thename you have been dreaming about for years. Maybe it’s (insert your dreamname here!) in large letters on the monument sign in the front. You can see allthe happy families living there, and you can hear the ka-ching of the cash regis-ter as the rents roll in every month. But before you build that sign or take thatcash to the bank, let’s talk about some of the decisions you must make ﬁrst be-fore you consider embarking upon this adventure. 
The main lesson I have learned in thirty years of apartment
development is that each project is unique and different. Each will 
bring its own set of opportunities and challenges. 
Before you call me when you are in the middle of your next development
and say, “But Ross, you didn’t tell me I would need an environmental impact
study on the duck-billed humpback pygmy ﬁeld mouse!” remember, I did tellyou that something always comes up to make your project harder than youthought it would be. 
A Clear Vision
From the beginning, for any project to be truly successful, you need to have aclear vision of what you want to build and how developing this property meetsyour own objectives. That means you also need to actually have objectives—orbetter said, you need a solid understanding what you want this project toachieve. One of the reasons MC Companies—the company Ken and I own—hasbeen successful in development is that we have an infrastructure in place withinour ﬁrm to develop, construct, manage, and proﬁtably operate multifamily com-munities. We are careful to select communities large enough to support an on-site staff, earn economies of scale, and that ﬁt within our investment model.We are careful to keep our egos in check and build for the market rather thanfor our own self esteem. 
When we take on a new development, we draw upon each and every one of
those disciplines—development, construction, and management—from inceptionto ensure that we make good decisions in the present because we know theyTIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 73will impact the future. This inclusive team approach is crucial to the successful
development and operation of our multifamily communities. If you do not haveexpertise in all these areas, then it’s in your best interest to create a team whosemembers do have the expertise in each of these ﬁelds before you venture intomultifamily investments, whether you are building a duplex or four hundredunits.
Develop for the Long Term
Without exception we build communities with the full intent of operating themonce they are done. If the market is strong and the right buyer knocks on ourdoor after the development is complete, we have an alternate option to makemoney on the investment, but we don’t enter a project with this end in mind. Ittakes many months, or years, from the time we create the vision of our ﬁnishedcommunity to the time when we collect even a dollar in rent from the ﬁrst ten-ant. To predict what the market will be like at the ﬁnish line is not always pos-sible. But if you plan to own and operate the project after it is built and usethose numbers in your pro forma, you begin with a more solid platform—abetter business premise—from which to launch your development, lease it up,and operate the community proﬁtably. 
Let’s look at the other scenario—from the point of view of building and selling
rather than building and operating. What if the market changes from the timethat you planned your development to the time it is built and ready for you tooperate? If you have not planned on operating it from the beginning, the likeli-hood of you recognizing the changes, knowing how they affect your project,and then making the necessary adjustments are slim. In the end, you may ﬁndyourself holding an obsolete project or one that would require some seriousadjustments to ﬁt the new market conditions. 
My examples are not entirely hypothetical. In the spring of 2006 the apart-
ment market was hot, and any project completed could be sold for a big proﬁt.Many developers began projects with the idea that they could cash in uponcompletion with an immediate sale. So, thousands of units were developed andbuilt over the next two years. In 2008, banks had changed their qualiﬁcationand ratios for loans, and their credit criteria changed dramatically, too. Investormoney was not readily available, either. Economic conditions had deteriorated,resulting in higher unemployment and a tight economy. The market for newapartments was, at best, weak. Investors were demanding lower purchase pricesto compensate for the slower economy.74 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 74ROBERT KIYOSAKI 75
Consequently, many developers found themselves sitting on their shiny new
properties in a down economy, with cautious investors, reluctant banks, and a
weak market for their product. All the assumptions they had made two yearsprior were based on factors that no longer applied. Because they didn’t developtheir projects with the idea that they were going to operate them, they createda scenario dependent on a sale and ripe for ﬁnancial disaster!
Ken and I have avoided this situation because we plan from the start to op-
erate the communities once they are completed, and we make sure all our ac-tions are consistent with our investment objectives. Consequently, we havebeen able to adjust to market changes and ride out the difﬁcult times, all thewhile building long-term value. 
I don’t believe that it is possible to hit a real estate cycle perfectly. 
If you do, it’s luck. Building value from real estate development over the long
term takes skill and expertise. It also takes an operator’s eye to recognize market shifts and a mind-set that is open to change.
Your Market Niche Focus
Just as you simply must have your objectives for a development in place, you
must decide which market niche your apartment project, or other project, willﬁll. Here are the basics I consider when looking for a market niche: 
• What are the demographics of the area you are considering? • What is the salary level of the area?• Is there a college population looking for more off-campus housing, and is
that the type of community I want to run? 
• Where are the major employment centers? • Are new businesses and employment being generated in the area? • What other communities are in the area that a prospective tenant will con-
sider, and are they the same class as the community you are developing, thatis, luxury, blue-collar, or subsidized housing? 
• What can I build, and how much rent can I charge? • Will I enjoy owning and managing the community?
In 1999, we took over the development of an eighty-unit townhome commu-
nity in a town with lots of retirees. Twenty-four units had been built, and onlytwo had sold in more than one year. When we inspected the project, it was ob-vious why the sales weren’t happening. Each unit had two bedrooms with aTIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 75detached garage. When homeowners came home, they would park in the garage
and would have to walk sometimes hundreds of feet through the property toenter their front doors. A review of other competing townhomes for sale in thearea revealed they all had attached garages. Homeowners park, get out of theircars, and take a few steps right into their homes. Is it any surprise why anelderly buyer would prefer the competition?
When we took the project over, we bought the two sold units back and con-
verted the entire community to an apartment project, offering it for rent, not toretirees, but to the people who worked in the town. We completed constructionof the eighty units, leased the property to full occupancy within six months,and operated the project at a proﬁt until we sold it four years later. That’s un-derstanding the niche and developing for it. The original developer of the town-homes clearly did not understand the market niche, which meant he did notunderstand the buyer.
The most beautiful project imaginable will not rent if it’s built in the wrong
place. A luxury apartment community may be your dream, but if you build it ina blue collar area, you won’t be able to lease the community or be able to chargeenough rent to make the economics work. Matching the needs of the commu-nity with the project you develop is crucial to your success. Research and knowyour demographics before you proceed. Only research will give you the per-spective that you need before you take another step forward.
Where to Build Your Community
You’ve most likely heard it before in this book and likely everywhere else: loca-tion, location, location. As you are standing on that dusty lot, ﬁlled with years ofaccumulated trash, a couple of homeless camps, and overgrown weeds, envisionwhere the main entrance to your community will be located. Pretend you aredriving in and driving out. Look around you. What do you see? If the view is ofan industrial complex across the street, a junkyard, or poorly maintained build-ings, don’t just brush it off. Signs like that generally mean the area isn’t going toentice many people to choose your community no matter how beautiful you makeit. On the other hand, sometimes negative factors like these can be minimized.
We developed an apartment project on a site where our due diligence revealed
that a processing plant was located just half a mile away. The plant took usedgrease from restaurants and processed it to be reused. When the plant was op-erating, it stunk to high heaven. But the site was an excellent inﬁll location in a76 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 76ROBERT KIYOSAKI 77
good school district. The clincher was when we discovered that the processing
plant was in the midst of implementing rigid pollution-control measures. Wewere able to pull off a really nice, affordable apartment community in an under-served area with conﬁdence. Research paid off.
While a panoramic view of the mountains or ocean may not be possible, or
even relevant to your community plans, don’t forget to envision what residentswill see and feel coming home. Is it welcoming? Does it feel safe? Would youwant to call that home after a long day at work? 
Before Beginning a Multifamily Development Project,
Ask Y ourself These Questions 
Lifestyle and Convenience
• Will your community have good exposure to drive-by traffic? Heavy drive-by traffic
is a plus when you are trying to attract potential tenants, but possibly a negativefor residents concerned about traffic noise. On the other hand, the cutest, mostaffordable community in town could suffer high vacancy rates if it is located on astreet no one can find, even with a blitz of advertising.
• How far from the major thoroughfares will your community be, and how easy is
the access to them? Is that important for the type of community you are planningto build?
• How easy will it be for residents to get to work, school, shopping, the movies, etc.?• Where are the schools in relation to your community? What is the reputation and
rating of those schools? What are the transportation options to and from thoseschools?
• What are the employment opportunities in the area? What mass transit is available
to help your residents get to work?
• Is the major downtown area easily accessible?Social Amenities• Are parks, movie complexes, theaters, arcades, and sports facilities an acceptable
distance from your proposed community?
• What is the “flavor” of the part of town you are considering? • How does your apartment community plan fit in with the area?Neighborhood Amenities• Is shopping in close proximity? • Is a major grocery store nearby? It matters for those 10 p.m. milk runs.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 77Development of Your Site
By this point, you understand that you must choose a site based on your demo-
graphic research. Now consider your site from the development perspective.How easy will bringing the project, literally, out of the ground actually be? Thisis perhaps the most critical analysis you will need to do, and it is the one thatwill have the biggest effect on your development costs. Is the site fairly ﬂat,with a minimum of site prep work required? Or does the site have some geo-graphical features that are interesting but challenging? 
Flat sites are wonderful, and they typically will allow for the highest density.
That is, they allow you to construct the most units per acre. Drainage becomesyour biggest concern with ﬂat sites because water will not ﬂow off them withouteffort. On the other hand, a lovely, hilly piece of land can make for an interestingproject. But on the downside, density will be a challenge, and the geography it-self can run up the site development and infrastructure costs very quickly. Foun-dational structures like retaining walls can take a huge chunk of yourdevelopment budget in the blink of an eye. The point is, each site provides itsown set of challenges and opportunities. You need to understand how they af-fect the number of units you can build and at what costs. 
When considering the location of your community, consult with your local
governing bodies regarding zoning and other development requirements assoon as you can. Your local government development department can help youdetermine the required process for gaining permission to develop your project.Be wary, though. I’ve found cities and counties are notorious for seeing newdevelopment as a signiﬁcant revenue source, and they look for opportunities tosolve their problems and budget overruns at your expense. For example, somewill make app roval of your pro ject contingent upon the city or the town getting
concessions from you. You need to understand the law and the regulations, soyou know what a government jurisdiction can and cannot legitimately require.Do not take their word as gospel without checking. And most of all, be preparedto do battle on every issue. 
Can you tell that I speak from experience? During the app roval pro cess for
one project we developed, the city initially required us to build a trafﬁc medianin the middle of a six lane street—the major highway through town—with theexcuse that the median was required to provide safe access to the proposedapartment community. Medians are not cheap! We were going to incur severalhundred thousand dollars in off-site expenses that threatened to jeopardizethe entire deal. However, after many sleepless nights, a great deal of contem-78 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 78plation, and consultation with our development team, we were able to deter-
mine that, although we were required to augment the street imp rovements to
provide safe access, we could do it by slightly redesigning the entrance to theproject and re-striping the street, at a cost of only $3,000. 
Just as important as knowing how to work with the city or town is knowing
how to work with the utility companies. On your to-do list should be checkingwith the utility companies that will serve your community for availability oftheir services, hook-up fees, development fees, and monthly service rates. I’veseen too many novices get surprised by utility access and hook-up issues. An-other often overlooked detail is checking on the possible future infrastructurerequirements of your site. For example, if your site is on a heavily traveled two-lane street, and the city decides to widen it to four or six lanes, you will be as-sessed for your portion of the cost, and you will lose part of your site for theright-of-way. Be prepared for these issues by knowing they can happen up front,then plan your development accordingly.
Oh, and let’s not forget the remote possibility, which in some parts of the
country isn’t that remote, that your site could have archeological or environ-mental signiﬁcance. Find out what rules are governing those discoveries in ad-vance of even buying the land. Remember, ﬁnding out that your site is the homeof those endangered duck-billed humpback pygmy ﬁeld mice, or the next MachuPicchu, could either kill your development entirely or put it on hold for an in-deﬁnite period of time while experts complete expensive studies and developmitigation plans. 
Another tip that every developer must know is the value of checking for any
riparian or wetland conditions on the property, as well as drainage, ﬂoodingpotential, and soil conditions. You don’t want your beautiful new communityto be in a lake when the summer rains come. And you don’t want to ﬁnd yourbuildings slowly—or not so slowly—sinking into the ground because of poorsoil conditions. When evaluating a site, you must consider all these factors. Iknow there are quite a number of them, and I can’t stress enough that each sitehas its own nuances. As a developer you must be prepared to spend the moneyto do a proper evaluation. It’s pretty easy to see the cost implications if youdon’t.
Your Development Team
In our company, Ken and I have worked out clear guidelines regarding who willhandle which areas of development and management, based on our respectiveROBERT KIYOSAKI 799781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 79professional backgrounds. At the same time, we constantly consult with each
other and make joint decisions. 
Y ou do not have the expertise to handle all the development, manage-
ment, and construction phases for the community you want to build. Y ou need
to start by putting together a development team with the strongest expertisein each area you can find. 
We’re always certain to clarify up front and in writing who will be the team
leader and who will make the ﬁnal decisions. That holds people accountable and
gives them ownership. It’s ﬁne to use people you know, but this is not the time togive your sister-in-law’s cousin his ﬁrst break in the development business!
Your Architectural Team
The next person on your team will be your architect. Ideally, this will be some-one you have worked with in the past and have traveled a lot of rocky roads to-gether. This person will have the experience and relationships with thegoverning jurisdiction to guide you through all the government requirements.He or she will also coordinate all the other design professions that you need,and will provide the site plan, design, and building elevations, unit plans, projectamenities, and construction drawings with speciﬁcations.
Other members of your development team that your architect will coordinate
include:
• Mechanical engineer who will design the plumbing and HVAC systems.• Structural engineer who will design the foundations, the framing require-
ments, and the roofing system. 
• Electrical engineer who will design both the underground electrical systems
and the building electrical requirements. 
• Civil engineer who will design the grading requirements for your site, in-
cluding drainage, parking lot, and zoning compliances.
Your Contractor
The contractor will be the guy or gal who is going to take all these drawings,plans, and speciﬁcations and construct your community. Think of him/her asTIP80 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 80ROBERT KIYOSAKI 81
translating the two-dimensional plans into three-dimensional buildings, from
overseeing the grading of the site all the way through handing over the keys ofthe ﬁnished units. You will want a general contractor licensed in the state inwhich you are building and who hires only licensed subcontractors in each tradequaliﬁed to do the work. Reputation and past performance of the general con-tractor will be your main guideline for this professional. Once chosen, you willwant to have a signed contract between you as the developer/owner and thegeneral contractor that will delineate the terms of the relationships includingcompensation.
Common Construction Contracts
• Lump Sum or Fixed Price Contract—In this type of contract, the contractor
agrees to provide specified services for a specific price and receives this sum
upon completion of the project or according to a negotiated payment schedule. Ifthe actual costs of labor and materials are higher than the contractor’s estimate,his profit will be reduced. If the actual costs are lower, the contractor will get moreprofit. Either way, the cost to the developer/owner is the same.
• Cost Plus a Fixed Fee Contract —In this contract, you as the owner/developer
will pay the contractor the actual costs of construction plus a fee to the generalcontractor. If the actual costs are higher than the estimate, the owner must pay theadditional amount. If the actual costs are lower, then the owner gets the savings.
• Guaranteed Maximum Price Contract—This contract states the owner/devel-
oper will pay for the costs like a Cost Plus contract, but the contractor will guar-antee that the costs will not exceed a maximum amount. In the event that actualcosts are lower than the estimates, the owner keeps the savings. As costs rise,the owner must pay for the additional costs up to the guaranteed maximum.Thereafter the contractor pays.
The Construction Team
For as important as the general contractor is to the success of any project, un-
derstand that the success or failure of your construction relies heavily on theexpertise of the entire construction team. I cannot stress enough the importanceof hiring a qualiﬁed, ﬁnancially stable contractor who employs a bright projectmanager, assigns experienced superintendents, and hires excellent tradespeople.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 81Carefully scrutinize each person who will be involved with the construction of
your project; not only is that your prerogative, it’s your job. In addition to yourgeneral contractor being licensed in the state of your project, he or she mustalso be fully insured and be bondable. Another tip, and I know, everyone needsto get their start somewhere, but give careful consideration before you agree toallow your general contractor to break in a new superintendent or project man-ager on your job. His limited experience in the ﬁeld may cost you money andmay even jeopardize the quality of your ﬁnished product. 
So just who constitutes a construction team? Your team should include a
strong project manager. It is this person’s responsibility, among other things, todecide which subcontractors will be awarded the contract for the project andto set the construction budget. The project manager studies the plans and spec-iﬁcations submitted by the architectural team and based on his or her experi-ence will often suggest adjustments or changes in the plans. A few choicesuggestions made by a perceptive and conﬁdent project manager can save youthousands of dollars in the construction budget without affecting the qualityor the appearance of the ﬁnished product. 
Each project has at least one on-site superintendent, based on the size and
scope of the project. The superintendent is responsible for the day-to-day op-erations of all the subcontracting trades who will be working on the project atany given time. Superintendents set the schedule for the trades to ensure theproper ﬂow of work. There is a sequential order to construction; for example,you don’t want the painters arriving before the drywallers have ﬁnished putting
up the walls. And you certainly want to make sure all the necessary site work—such as grading, compacting, etc.—is done before the concrete folks come topour the building pads. This right-on-time kind of scheduling takes a personwho has been around the block and knows how long things take to complete. Ittakes a person who knows what the demand is for the various trades and knowsthe appropriate lead times. It also takes someone who can forcefully, yet pro-fessionally, get you the best treatment from the subs.
Between the subcontractors, superintendents, and the project manager, this
construction team is responsible for continued communication with the archi-tect and engineers and for attending to construction methods and details thatdon’t always show up on the drawings, yet become obvious as construction is inprogress. They should also be in continual communication with the testing tech-nicians, building inspectors, ﬁnancial institution inspectors, and, of course, youthe owner/developer! Remember, this is your baby, and you cannot deny thefact that you are ultimately responsible for the design and construction pros.82 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 82The project manager also has another very vital role, one you will come to
appreciate. He or she is the person responsible for keeping a close eye on the
construction budget. That involves closely monitoring if or when a particulartrade is out of sync with the budget, and making adjustments before the closeof the project. This is the person who looks out for your ﬁnancial interests andcommunicates with you to discuss any overages. In construction, things oftentake longer and cost more than originally planned, so having a good projectmanager with good communication skills is a real plus.
Where does the general contractor make his money? When you get your ﬁrst
glimpse of a construction budget, you’ll notice a line item built in for a speciﬁedpercentage of the overall construction budget for the contractor’s overhead andproﬁt. Remember, construction costs are negotiated between you and the con-tractor, so you need to understand all the components of the constructionbudget, including direct costs for labor and materials, subcontractors, and gen-eral conditions, as well as proﬁt and overhead.
Finally, you are part of the construction team, too. It is up to you to use every
means available to make sure that the contractor builds the project correctlyand pays his bills.
This includes hiring third party quality-control inspectors; requiring proof
of payment for the materials and labor, such as lien waivers; and possibly re-quiring a payment and performance bond.
Your Title Company
Title companies have been mentioned several times in this book, and here theyare again. Just as they play a role in acquiring existing property, they play a rolein new development, too. Here it is their job to hold all monies involved in thetransaction of the land transfer in escrow. They also provide a title report andtitle insurance. The title company can help you by periodically checking tomake sure that the contractor is paying his bills and that no liens have beenﬁled against the project by a subcontractor. You don’t want to have your build-ings almost completed only to ﬁnd out that there is a lien on the property froman unpaid sub. It happens!
Your Property Management Company
Contrary to what you might think, you’ll need a property management company,even before your project breaks ground. It is the property management companyROBERT KIYOSAKI 839781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 83that will prepare the market analysis and determine the rents your community
can reasonably charge. From there they help you prepare a realistic operatingbudget. The way management companies make their money is usually basedon a percentage of anticipated gross annual rents. Having an experienced prop-erty management company has been a true key to our success. The marketknowledge and expertise it provides is something we would never dream ofdoing without.
Your Financing Partner
Unless you are related to Daddy Warbucks or recently won the lottery (if thatdescribes you, let’s talk!), you will need to obtain ﬁnancing for your project.You may qualify for various forms of ﬁnancing from governmentally controlledﬁnancing, to commercial banks, to private money. All are viable and all comewith certain requirements.
It is possible to qualify for governmental or commercial bank loans that offer
development and construction ﬁnancing. These lenders historically will lendfrom 65 percent to 85 percent of the total cost of the project. The credit crunchof 2008 has changed those lending percentages, and developers are required tohave more of their own cash in their deal, but regardless of the amount, thosecapital sources are options. However, governmental or commercial bank lenderswill have a ﬁrst mortgage priority, meaning that in the event of a default, theyget paid ﬁrst. Their interest rates are based on the current market.
Another ﬁnance option is securing money from private lenders, meaning in-
dividuals wanting to invest in a real estate project as opposed to stocks or bonds.If you have a successful track record and a convincing business plan/sales pack-age for your proposed community, they will lend you the money with the con-dition that they receive an interest payment as well as a percentage of the proﬁtsfrom the operations of the completed project and any sales proceeds. Althoughprivate lenders are typically more expensive than traditional lenders, they aremore ﬂexible and may lend you a higher percentage of the project costs. 
Given the scope of your project and your ﬁnancial contacts, your funding
may possibly come from a combination of these sources, depending on howyou structure the ﬁnancing. Most of the projects Ken and I work on are struc-tured to obtain a commercial bank loan for approximately 67 percent of thetotal amount needed for the project, with the remaining 33 percent contributedas the equity, which may come from investors, our own funds, or both.84 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 84Your Business Plan
Obtaining ﬁnancing isn’t as easy as strolling into a bank with a good idea. It
takes much more than that. In reality, to obtain ﬁnancing, you will need a busi-ness plan. Business plans come in many shapes and sizes, and you can ﬁnd nu-merous templates for them all over the Internet. But let me cut to the chaseand tell you exactly what banks want to see. This eliminates all the unnecessaryﬂuff that they don’t read anyway. Here’s what you need to include in your busi-ness plan:
• Executive Summary, which explains the purpose of the project and gives a
ﬁnancial summary. You actually can write this ﬁrst or last, but it’s always theﬁrst few pages of your plan.
• Property Overview, which includes a description of the site, unit mix, floor
plans, site plan, elevations, and pictures of the site.
• Market Overview, which presents neighborhood features, city economics,
and the local apartment market.
• Financial Pro Forma, which includes development costs, construction costs,
and projected operations income and expenses.
• Developer résumé which highlights your credentials.• Development team résumés, which highlight the credentials of your archi-
tect, engineers, and property managers.
Those are the components lenders care about and are the sections they read.
No amount of ﬂuff or page volume will make up for a poor job assembling thedetails in these sections of the plan. Complete analysis and a realistic businesscase surrounding that analysis have a better chance of receiving funding. Asketchy plan based on incomplete research and analysis with blue sky projec-tions won’t. Not only is this document obviously important in your getting theﬁnancing for your project, the exercise of doing it helps articulate and establishyour goals and objectives. It is the exercise that helps you determine if yourproject can ultimately be proﬁtable, and let’s face it, you should want to knowthat as much as the lender does.
Will You Qualify for a Loan?
Ken and I have spent our entire careers building our credit and ﬁnancial stand-ing, as well as building our network of contacts within banking and investingROBERT KIYOSAKI 859781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 85circles. These bankers and investors know our reputation and qualiﬁcations
and are willing to entertain a development proposal that we present to them.Our track record and ﬁnancial strength give banks and investors conﬁdencethat we can complete and operate a ﬁnancially viable project. When searchingfor ﬁnancing for your project, whatever your sources, you can count on themscrutinizing your background particularly in these areas:
• What is your ﬁnancial strength? If you are building the community under the
umbrella of a company, what is the ﬁnancial strength of the entire company? 
• What is your development experience? Have you successfully built numerous
projects before, or is this your first time at bat? If this is your first develop-ment, what attributes and strengths do you have that will put to rest concernsabout your experience?
• Have you had one or more previous projects fall through in some way? • What are the backgrounds, experiences, and strengths of your development
team? Are they all solid and strong, or are there any weak links that couldpotentially cause hesitation from the source of your loan? 
• What is the source of the equity you will be bringing to the table for this proj-
ect? How much of your own money are you willing to invest in the project?
The stronger your answers to each of these questions, the better the terms
and rate of loan you will be able to qualify for. A lender will ask these questionsregardless of the type of loan you are seeking—a construction loan or a perma-nent loan. And that leads us to our next subject. 
Short-Term Loan vs. 
Long-Term Loan
A construction loan is a short-term loan with a term length from six to thirty-
six months, depending on the size of your project and construction budget.Construction loans usually have variable interest rates and are interest-onlyloans. The lending institution holds your project as collateral during the courseof the loan. In the event of default, you will lose your property. Constructionloans are also typically personally guaranteed by the developer, meaning thebank has recourse to your personal assets in the event of default.
Unlike with other loans, with a short-term construction loan the lender will
not hand over to you the full amount of the loan all at once. Rather, you’ll receiveit in monthly payments based on the percent of completion of your project.This process is called a draw, and each month your construction team will sub-86 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 86mit an application to the lending institution. The lending institution will send
out an inspector to verify the work is completed as stated in a workmanlikefashion and that all local government inspections are complete and app roved.
Only with the inspector’s app roval w ill the lender issue that month’s draw. 
After construction is completed, then you, the developer, will need to obtain
a permanent loan. The permanent loan is long-term ﬁnancing that will requirea monthly payment for principal and interest. The proceeds of the permanentloan are used to pay off the short-term construction loan, and possibly repay aportion of your equity. Sometimes, a lender will provide a construction loanthat will convert to a permanent loan upon construction completion. This hasthe advantage of reducing your ﬁnancing risk. There’s always the outsidechance that you may have trouble getting long-term ﬁnancing once the projectis done. With a loan of this type, that ﬁnancing is already in place.
Financing terms can be very complicated. Our company never takes on a
loan without thoroughly reviewing the loan documents ourselves, as well ashaving the documents reviewed by an attorney who specializes in real estate ﬁ-nancing. Be sure you understand what you are obligating yourself to.
A Few Final Words
You, the developer, will put yourself on the line for the money to fulﬁll yourdream, but you won’t see your proﬁt until the project is completed and opera-tional. While the rewards of a well-thought-out and well-constructed projectare fantastic in the end, it is a long journey, and there is a lot of risk along theway. The processes I used for building my ﬁrst home in 1976 for $29,000, andthe communities we have built for more than $30 million are basically the same:lots of time, research, due diligence, expenses, and sleepless nights. 
By the time we identify a site, analyze the market, hire the professionals, ob-
tain ﬁnancing, and start construction, we have invested huge amounts of timeand money. Every day during the development process a new challenge presentsitself. It is a major commitment and ﬁnancial risk to take on an apartment de-velopment, with the prospect of ﬁnancial reward in the distant future. The de-velopment process is complicated and frustrating but also exciting and fun. Youcannot anticipate everything, but you can succeed if you approach your projectmethodically, get the best advice and help, don’t cut corners, and never give up!The personal and ﬁnancial rewards are unsurpassed.
Hang on for a challenging adventure. Watch out for the duck-billed hump-
back pygmy ﬁeld mice and all the other bumps in this ride. You are either goingROBERT KIYOSAKI 879781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 87to enjoy developing and building a new community as much as I do, or you will
ﬁnd that it isn’t your cup of tea. Either way, I wish you much success!
Ross McCallister is a thirty-year industry expert in real estate/develop-
ment and ﬁnance. He is a co-partner of MC Companies and oversees in-
vestment analysis, development, construction, ﬁnancing, businessdevelopment, and client relations. He is a licensed real estate broker anda licensed general contractor. Ross has developed and constructed morethan four thousand apartment units in Arizona and managed condo-
minium conversions in Oregon, Las Vegas, and Arizona valued in excess of $300 million.Prior to founding MC Companies with Ken McElroy, Ross was president of The McCallisterCompany, a real estate syndication ﬁrm and property management company. Ross believesin “giving back” and has served the real estate industry on various boards throughout hiscareer, including the Ofﬁce of the Governor’s Arizona Housing Finance Authority Board.
88 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 88Commercial real estate is very different from residential real estate. Craig Cop-
pola is recognized as one of the best commercial real estate brokers in the
United States. That is why he is my partner in commercial real estate investments,
and we have done extremely well ﬁnancially.
When Kim and I began our transition from residential to commercial real estate,
the ﬁrst thing we had to do was let go of a residential real estate investor’s mind-set. We had to see real estate investing through a different set of eyes. If not forCraig’s experience, Kim and I might have lost a lot of money paying for our com-mercial real estate education. Craig is great because he is a tremendous teacherand takes the time to explain what we fail to see. 
As an example, Craig’s education of Kim and me began with our interest in a
beautiful ofﬁce building in a great location. It was a cute structure, built in the1980s. The ﬁrst thing Craig said was that there was not enough parking. He didnot even look at the building. Since the 1980s, zoning laws had been passed requir-ing more parking spaces. If we wanted to improve the building, we would have totear it down completely and rebuild from the ground up to comply with the newzoning law. The second lesson from Craig on the same building was that “Cutebuildings attract cute businesses.” He went on to say, “Rent to well-run businesses,not cute people running cute businesses. Y ou’ll have fewer headaches and earnmore money.”5 Craig COPPOLA, CCIM , CRE, SIOR
Master Y our Universe: 
Get the Lay of the Land
899781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 8990 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Craig is the most well-organized person I know. He has his days planned to the
minute. He is constantly studying and investing in his personal development—his
business—yet time with his family takes the highest priority. Craig is a great familyman and natural teacher, and he is priceless as a real estate partner.
—Robert Kiyosaki
People who know me know that when I commit to doing something I gen-
erally jump in with both feet. And that is probably an understatement. It’s
not that I’m foolhardy about it; people would say I’m methodical and possiblyrelentless. I don’t make rash decisions, and I don’t give up. That’s the way I ap-proach my business goals, my personal goals, and my family goals. People wouldalso say I’m consistent.
One of my passions in life has been baseball. I was an all-state high school
and all-conference college player, and I was even drafted and played profes-sionally with the Minnesota Twins organization. But after baseball, I knew Ineeded something that I could throw myself into 100 percent, something that Iwould love just as much and that would help me achieve my life goals. 
Like so many people, my story of how I entered the real estate profession is a
classic friend-of-a-friend story. I won’t bore you with the details, but sufﬁce itto say I did my share of dues paying. I didn’t mind. My mentality then was nodifferent than it is now and no different than it was playing baseball: EverythingI do makes me stronger, smarter, and faster and gives me the only thing I everask for in life—an unfair advantage. 
Yes, I want an unfair advantage and I do what it takes to get it—ethically.
Getting the unfair advantage ethically usually means no shortcuts, lots of home-work, discipline, and sacriﬁce. At least that is how it has been for me. When itpays off, those long days and longer nights of poring over real estate offeringMemorandums, market comparables, and property ﬁnancial data become dis-tant memories that are replaced with cash, which ﬂows into my mailbox on amonthly basis. It’s a beautiful thing.
My career in real estate has afforded me spare time to do other things that I
love; that was part of my plan when I got into this business. I wanted to be ableto spend more time with my family, participate in my kids’ lives, and pursueother passions in life such as running, Tai Kwon Do, and of course, baseball.
Today my passion for baseball takes the form of coaching a youth club base-
ball team—the Arcadia Rat Pack—and I approached that in much the same wayI’ve approached everything else I’ve set out to do: with a startling amount of9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 90research, analysis, planning, and detail all in preparation for intense action. I’m
not coaching a pro sports team, but regardless, I had batting lineups (based onwho from the opposing team was pitching), training schedules, practice sched-ules, scouting reports, game strategies, substitution plans, even a plan for whowas going to coach ﬁrst base. Some of the parents, I’m sure, thought I was goinga little overboard. 
But to me “going overboard” was simply preparing the team to face every
challenge in practice so that when those same situations came up in a game,they weren’t new. I wanted to give those kids the unfair advantage, ethically. Inessence, my role was to put those kids in a position to win. 
That included mastering our universe and knowing the lay of the land. What
teams were we going to be up against? What were their strengths and theirweaknesses? How could we exploit those weaknesses and overcome theirstrengths? What do we do in a ﬁrst-and-third situation? What’s our bunt defense?How do we handle a “run down”? We studied, strategized, and practiced all thisand more. We made it all the way to the state ﬁnals and were state runner-ups—that was victory to us. Sixteen wins and three losses. The team played greatand came away with better and more conﬁdent kids. I want the same for youwhen it comes to commercial real estate investing. I want you to win! I wantyou to be the master of your universe before you even think about investing inproperty.
In real estate, mastering your universe takes the form of knowing 
intimately your chosen area of city or town, fully understanding and enjoying
your preferred type of real estate investment (also known as “asset class”),and being tuned in to the real estate cycle.
In real estate, mastering your universe takes the form of knowing intimately
your chosen area of city or town, fully understanding and enjoying your pre-
ferred type of real estate investment (also known as “asset class”), and beingtuned in to the real estate cycle. Once you’ve achieved all this, you are in a greatposition to begin considering properties. Here’s your ﬁrst pitch:
Let’s Take a Ride
Even if you have lived in the same city or town your whole life and feel youknow every road and every building, humor me, and still hop in your car andtake a ride. This won’t be a ride to simply look at buildings; it’s a ride to help youTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 919781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 91look at your town or city with what I like to call “real estate eyes.” Actually look-
ing at the buildings is a minor thing at this point. This drive will help you to un-derstand the lay of the land—the environment the buildings are sitting in—frommany different perspectives. The drive is about location, location, location.
Start your drive with the goal of trying to understand the overall city from a
real estate investment perspective. Be observant. What do you think is impact-ing real estate values in one neighborhood or another? Even if you think youknow the area in which you want to invest, it’s still a good idea to understandwhat’s going on in other areas of your city or town. Those things will play apart in the value of the area you like best. 
By now it is probably no surprise to you that I live by my schedule. My days,
weeks, months, and years are open to change, but they are highly planned.Whether you are a heavy scheduler or not, if you really look at your life, you’lllikely ﬁnd that we are all creatures of habit. We drive the same way to work andthe same way home, day in and day out. Not only do we miss the opportunitieson that drive, but we never see the changes that are taking place in the other 90percent of our community. So the ﬁrst thing I recommend in order to get thelay of the land and master your universe is to drive a different way to work. Ifyou normally take the highway, then take the residential streets. If you alwaysstop at the same Starbucks for coffee, then go to a different coffee shop. Take ina variety of scenery and people. 
Recommendation No. 1: Master your universe by driving a different way
at different times to work, and take in the world from a real estate perspective.
Y ou’ll be surprised by what you see.
Once you think you know an area, travel there at different times of the day.
How about evenings, weekends, and at night? Really take the time to see how
people live in this area, how it is trafﬁcked. You may be surprised. There areneighborhoods that not only have changed over time, but there are neighbor-hoods that change with the time of day. I’ve seen parts of town that are “hap-pening” spots during the week and during lunch, but they are absolute ghosttowns during the dinner hour and at night. If you’re looking for a great buildingfor a daytime business, this area of town could be the right place. But if you’relooking for a building for an evening business, look elsewhere. Your goal hereis to look at an area and “get it.” That means you get what it’s about, and youknow what is a ﬁt. Once you “get an area,” you will begin to be able to see thefuture. This is a gut response that may be helpful to write down. You’ll have anTIP92 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 92opportunity later to test how right you are when you talk to the experts who
will eventually be on your team—appraisers, inspectors, attorneys, brokers, andbuilders.
Look for “The Path of Growth”
When it comes to understanding the lay of the land, I look for what real estatepros call “the path of growth” in the market. Even in cities that as a whole arenot growing, there usually are areas that are. How do you recognize the path ofgrowth when it comes to commercial real estate? Look for the areas wherehome builders are buying land, where new homes are being constructed, andwhere elementary schools are being planned and built. City governments are agreat resource for this information because they tell you where they are plan-ning to build new facilities and where infrastructure is going in. You can alsoget good insight from the economic development ofﬁcials in your city ofﬁces.It’s always interesting to see which projects they are the most excited aboutand what they see developing down the road. 
Recommendation No. 2: Get to know your city officials and staff. 
Find out the projects that are underway that they are the most excited about.
The more you talk with them, the more you’ll come to know where the path of growth really is. 
City ofﬁcials often can be very excited about urban revitalization projects
that are underway and often help fund projects that jump-start the process.
How exciting it is to think about being part of the solution to violence, crime,and urban blight! But here’s my caution: These kinds of projects take time, lotsof time. Not only is there the obvious planning, zoning, designing, and entitle-ment process that must happen; sometimes votes are involved. Then there isthe intangible consumer acceptance variable that can take years. In my home-town of Phoenix, there were more than $800 million of revitalization projectsbuilt before I considered this area for investment, and the elapsed time to re-solve them took more than twelve years. So stay cautious for a very long timebecause even neighborhoods marked for revitalization may remain in declinefor years.
I should point out that some real estate investors make it their entire business
to seek out declining neighborhoods. People who specialize in urban revital-ization are just one example. That’s not my area of interest or expertise, so forTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 939781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 93my specialty—commercial ofﬁce space—I stay clear when I see a lot of grafﬁti
or closed businesses. That seems obvious, but you’ll be surprised how a quainthistoric home that may have been recently rezoned commercial in a troubledneighborhood can still be compelling to emotional investors. These buyers caneasily talk themselves into a bad decision by thinking that purchasing this build-ing will be good for the neighborhood, or by telling themselves they will livewith the location because the building is so perfect. None of these arguments isgood enough. Remember, it’s location ﬁrst, no matter how difﬁcult the dwellingis to pass up. 
It’s Tough to Grow Your Way 
out of a Downhill Slide
The reason I’m such a stickler on this point is that it’s really tough to grow your
way out of a downhill slide. There’s a difference between a declining area andan area that is going to be revitalized. When you get the feel that a neighborhoodis going downhill, stay away. If it’s on the upswing and that historic building isright in the center of it, don’t let your preconceived beliefs about the neighbor-hood hold you back. There may be an opportunity. Understand they call it real
estate for a reason. You’re looking at the real estate ﬁrst. That’s the key under-
lying truth to all of this. The building is second.
To me an absolute must is to fully understand where the market is going, not
just where it is today. It’s all about feel and not getting in too early. What I meanby that is unlike some businesses where speed is everything, there is no need tobe on the bleeding edge in real estate. You don’t have to be ﬁrst. You don’t wantto be ﬁrst; leave that to the biggest players who can afford the risk. There’splenty of opportunity and money to be made by being second, third, and eventwenty-third. Leave the bleeding edge to the big boys. In fact, if you’re a smallinvestor who is starting out, never be ﬁrst. 
Recommendation No. 3: Do the homework it takes to fully understand
where the market is going, not just where it is at this moment in time. Y ou’re
investing for the future, so see the future as best you can.
Even though time ﬂies, when it comes to real estate, I’ve been surprised by
how long it takes the future to actually arrive. And if you’re in a downhill slide,
the future can’t happen quick enough, believe me. You may ﬁnd out that yourgrand vision for the property isn’t two years away; it’s actually twenty. This hasTIP94 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 94happened to many real estate investors. The town of Fountain Hills, Arizona,
was started by a real estate speculator in the 1970s. He built the world’s highestfountain, which is powered by jet engines and shoots a huge plume of water560 feet into the air. His goal was to attract curious people to the new commu-nity that at the time was out in the middle of nowhere. People came and mar-veled at the fountain, but not enough bought real estate. It took decades for thereal estate in Fountain Hills to really take off. Today it is a thriving community,but it took almost thirty years for that to happen.
Is your view of the future too far ahead of the curve? My rule is to take my
time and be patient. There’s no need for excessive urgency at this point in theprocess. If there’s room for one person to make money in an area, then there’sroom for more. In fact, I’ve found there are very few properties that are so spe-cial that if you miss them, you miss the deal of the century or even the decade.While those properties do exist, their owners know it and they typically over-price the properties anyway, negating the value of the deal. A good example isthe Esplanade and Biltmore Fashion Park, both within the same city block inthe highly sought after Camelback Corridor in Phoenix. Those properties arethe types that are bought by huge institutions who want trophy propertieswhere the look and the location are more critical than the solidity of the realestate and the return. For example, General Electric bought Hayden Ferry Lake-side in a prestigious area of Tempe, Arizona. MetLife bought the Esplanade inPhoenix. These are called core plus properties and are named such becausethey create a portfolio of foundation projects that entice other investors whoare looking for glamorous investments. 
Recommendation No. 4: Real estate investing is about patience. There 
is no need to rush into an investment in any market.
Keep Your Real Estate Eyes Open
As you look at neighborhoods, don’t overlook the places that you think mightbe too expensive, too cheap, or that used to be blighted. Neighborhoods change.I know one investor who has made a ton of money improving the looks andperformance of less-than-stellar buildings and increasing the property values.It takes a big commitment to do that, but she’s doing it. Understand, too, thatthere are slum lords out there who have made big bucks owning very shabbyproperties. That’s not something I encourage; part of what we can do as in-vestors is create better spaces for all. But with that said, it’s a free country.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 959781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 95Everyone always asks this: What are the warning signs of a declining neigh-
borhood? That’s easy, and if you go with your feelings, you’ll know them in-
stinctively. True story, I was driving one morning, checking out a fewneighborhoods I hadn’t been through in a while and d rove right by a car on
blocks with the tires missing. That’s the classic bad sign, and there it was in allits glory. Other signs are multiple cars parked in the street at night and a tenantmix in a building that looks ﬂy-by-night or that are in shady businesses. Finally,take a look at the general upkeep. If the properties are unkempt, that’s not goodeither. You may even want to take a look at the police reports to see how muchcrime happens in the area.
The bottom line is you can modify your building, but you alone can’t modify
the neighborhood your building sits in. And about that quaint historic buildingin a seedy part of town: Sure it would make great ofﬁces for a trendy designstudio, but if your employees are too afraid to work there or stay after hours,how wise was your decision? Open your eyes and think through what you’reseeing, and listen to your gut. Write down what you feel—yes, what you feel—about every neighborhood. On the next page is a form that will not only helpyou know important considerations, but also will give you a place to record yourimpressions about the area. 
Recommendation No. 5: Look for the signs of a declining neighborhood,
and don’t be in denial about them. Unless you want to specialize in renewal
projects, those signs matter.
Let’s Talk Buildings . . . Sort of
As I mentioned, the actual buildings themselves are practically the last things I
look at when I’m getting familiar with a city and its neighborhoods. And evenwhen it comes to a building, I don’t initially see the vertical structure; I see theproperty it’s sitting on. Are there enough parking spaces? Is it easy to get intoand out of? In other words, does the property have good access? And looking atthe building and the site it is sitting on, does it feel right? And can visitors ﬁndthe location without getting lost? 
From there I take a closer look at who is occupying the building. What are
the tenants like? Are they quality, established companies or a little on the ﬂakeyside? A tenant doesn’t have to be The Home Depot or Taco Bell to be acceptable.A local plumbing outﬁt that’s been in a building for ten years is actually a goodtenant—I have one like that—particularly when compared to let’s say a start-upTIP96 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 96ROBERT KIYOSAKI 97
Drive Guide – The Neighborhood Environment
 
Below are the things you need to look for as you drive neighborhoods and look at environments. (Rating scale: 1 is poor, 2 is fair, 3 is average, 4 is good, 5 is very good.) Add comments to right.
Neighborhood Environment: __________________________________________________  (list area)
Border: N__________________ / S__________________ / E__________________ / W________________        
(comments)
Overall upkeep  1  2  3  4  5 _______________
General condition of buildings  1  2  3  4  5 _______________
Quality/condition of cars in area  1  2  3  4  5 _______________Quality of businesses in area   1  2  3  4  5 _______________T raffic patterns  1  2  3  4  5 ______________  
Area landscape  1  2  3  4  5 _______________
Overall visual interest   1  2  3  4  5 _______________
Perceived prestige  1  2  3  4  5 _______________
Would I buy here?        Y es        No
If yes, what product type? _________________________________________________________________On what street(s) would I own? ____________________________________________________________
Y our Feelings and Impressions
High points?  Morning  Noon  Night
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
Low points?  Morning  Noon  Night
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
Future Outlook
In 5 years: _______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
In 10 years: ______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Other impressions: ______________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Questions I need answered: _______________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
FIGURE 5.19781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 97technology company that no one has ever heard of with millions in venture
capital money and a burn rate of a million dollars per month with one customerand no proﬁts. I also consider the tenant’s position within their industry, thelevel of competition, and where the industry is going. 
Recommendation No. 6: Consider the building last and look at the 
location and property it’s on first. 
One afternoon, a friend called me from her car as she was traveling in a small
town some distance from her home. She said, “Hey Craig, I’m looking at a greatbuilding here that’s all set up for a call center. What do you think?” For me theanswer was easy. Call centers are declining in the United States with most com-panies shipping their operations overseas. I replied, “Unless you’re in Indiaright now, I’d pass.” Much of this is really common sense and having someknowledge of where the trends are, not just in real estate, but also in the areasof business and life that affect real estate. 
The tracking form on the next page is a tool you can use to record your ﬁrst-
glance view and impressions of a property. It’s also a great idea to bring along adigital camera so you can take photos of buildings and attach them to the Driv-ing Guide records. Pay special attention to these items and be sure to recordyour overall impressions as well. 
Commercial Asset Class Options
One of the most important decisions you as a real estate investor will have tomake is in which area of the business you want to specialize. If reading thisbook tells you anything, it should tell you that there are a lot of ways to makeand lose money in the world of real estate. Even within the commercial real es-tate sector, there are a number of different asset class options. You’ll soon dis-cover that they are each quite specialized with plenty of their own nuances andrequirements. I believe it’s important to see the commercial real estate sectorin its entirety so that you get an accurate picture of how it is all interconnectedbecause, even though the different asset classes are unique, they all do work to-gether to create an environment within an area of a city or town. Here are theasset classes complete with descriptions and the risks and the rewards.
Recommendation No. 7: No one can possibly be an expert in every 
commercial asset class. Choose the one you think you’ll enjoy most and 
specialize in it.TIP
TIP98 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 98ROBERT KIYOSAKI 99
Drive Guide – The Building
 
Below are the things you need to look for as you drive and look at buildings. Y ou’ll want one form for each building you view. (Rating scale: 1 is poor, 2 is fair, 3 is average, 4 is good, 5 is very good.)
Building Name: __________________________________________________________________________
Building Address: ________________________________________________________________________
        (comments)
Location within area  1  2  3  4  5 ____________________
Curb appeal    1  2  3  4  5 ____________________General condition  1  2  3  4  5 ____________________Parking   1  2  3  4  5 ____________________Lighting  1  2  3  4  5 ____________________Access/entrance and exit  1  2  3  4  5 ____________________T enants   1  2  3  4  5 ____________________Ease of finding  1  2  3  4  5 ____________________Landscaping   1  2  3  4  5 ____________________Fits with your needs/wants  1  2  3  4  5 ____________________
Y our Feelings and Impressions
High points?  Morning  Noon  Night
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
Low points?  Morning  Noon  Night
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
 ____________________  ____________________  ____________________
Future Outlook
In 5 years:  ______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
In 10 years:  _____________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
Other impressions: ______________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
FIGURE 5.29781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 99Multifamily
The multifamily asset class includes everything from small duplex apartment
buildings to entire apartment complexes with eight hundred units or more. Thebiggest risk in this asset class is oversupply because when people have lots ofchoices, rents can fall, affecting your property’s operating performance andcash ﬂow. Another risk with multifamily is that when interest rates are low,more people can afford to buy homes, so they don’t have to rent. That leavesmore apartment units vacant and competing for fewer residents. But on theplus side, when lending gets tighter and it becomes harder to qualify for a homemortgage, renting becomes the only option, and the demand for apartmenthomes increases. Investors have made a lot of money in this area of commercialreal estate by buying right and managing efﬁciently. Like all commercial realestate, the value of a multifamily property increases based on increased operat-ing performance. In other words, buying a property and then managing it andﬁlling up the vacant space better than the previous owner can create an auto-matic bump in value. 
Retail
Retail commercial space is something you know probably quite well: shoppingcenters, strip centers, malls, and stand-alone retailers. The beneﬁt with retailproperty is that construction costs are high—often tens to hundreds of millionsof dollars—making for a high barrier to entry by competitors. This keeps de-mand usually ahead of supply. As an investor, that’s generally a good positionto be in. But it’s not all blue sky. Economic factors such as reports of inﬂation,recession, and declining consumer spending trends can trigger retailers to goout of business, and as a building owner you could lose a retail tenant. Compe-tition can also turn a favored retail center into one that is second class. That’swhat I mean about knowing the lay of the land and seeing the future. You wantto know what is coming, not just what is. 
Commercial Office
Ofﬁce buildings and ofﬁce condos are one of the largest real estate asset classes.Just look around. We all work somewhere, and ofﬁces house many of us dailyfrom eight-to-ﬁve. Ofﬁces come in many shapes and sizes, so there is diversityand easy entry for new investors. Some ofﬁces are former residential buildingsconverted to ofﬁce space. Others are conventional ofﬁce buildings of all shapesand sizes. The beneﬁt of commercial ofﬁce space is that there is likely somethingin your town that will ﬁt your budget whether you are a ﬁrst-time or a seasoned100 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 100investor and give you plenty of room to grow as you increase your wealth and
your level of investment. 
Industrial
Just like commercial ofﬁce buildings, industrial spaces tend to have longerleases and lots of options when it comes to investing. There are giant ware-houses with upward of ﬁve hundred thousand square feet and smaller mixed-use spaces in the neighborhood of three thousand square feet, along witheverything in between. Because of the many options available, industrial spaceis a classic ﬁrst-time-investor property. One reason for industrial’s popularitywith ﬁrst-time investors is that many have their own businesses and need thiskind of space. 
Health Care
This asset class in commercial real estate includes not just hospitals, but alsonursing homes, medical buildings, and assisted living facilities. The beneﬁt ofthis class is that recessions and economic downturns don’t really affect it much.But it is prone to the ups and downs of the tenant. Medical practices are smallbusinesses. Hospitals are big businesses. And business can ﬂuctuate. Plus, themedical profession is one that is in a state of ﬂux, and it will be so for manyyears to come. Through my experience in this area I know that not only is itimportant to have the right tenants in your space, but it’s important to have theright mix of tenants in your space—the right practices and the right practition-
ers. Assisted living facilities, on the other hand, rely heavily on good manage-ment. Having a reputable management company that specializes in these kindsof communities is a must.
Self Storage
Self storage spaces are those mini-warehouse consumer and commercial facil-ities that you most likely have seen in your town. You may even have some ofyour things stored in one of them. They are seemingly recession resistant, andthat is a big advantage for you as an investor. Generally, the management is rel-atively easy. Believe it or not, corporations are actually the biggest users of stor-age facilities, and every year they pay billions to store excess ﬁles, records, andgeneral stuff. The downside is that building self storage facilities is a low-costproposition. That means it’s easy for competitors to break into the market,charge a lower price, and erode your margins. When it comes to self storage, Ialways make sure there are lots of rooftops nearby as well. ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1019781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 101Hospitality
This asset class includes hotels, motels, casinos, bed and breakfasts, resorts,
and vacation rentals. And like assisted care facilities, management is impor-tant. In general, it is the asset class most closely connected with the health ofthe economy. In periods of economic decline, travels for business or pleasureare early casualties of cost-cutting and penny-pinching. That affects the num-ber of room nights booked, which means per-night room rates can fall as prop-erties vie for fewer customers. This, in turn, erodes income and profitability,but in markets with a balanced supply-and-demand ratio, hospitality can bevery lucrative. 
Within each of these asset classes are subcategories. All these options may
at ﬁrst seem overwhelming, but in reality it’s this diversity that makes com-mercial real estate so lucrative and why smart investors specialize. It’s this spe-cialization that enables us to have an advantage over other types of investmentsand over other types of investors who are trying to do it all.
The ABCs of Commercial Space
Just as you need to know the various asset classes and some of the nuances ofeach, it’s a good idea to know the four classes of commercial space that refer tothe quality of the property. Too often I have seen novice investors duped intobelieving that an ofﬁce building is one class, when it is really a lesser class.Class matters because the better the class of building, the higher the rent persquare foot. Here are the ofﬁcial class guidelines: 
Class A+. Landmark quality, high-rise buildings with a central business dis-
trict location. These are the best of the Class A buildings.
Class A. Buildings that are one hundred square feet or larger with at least
ﬁve ﬂoors. The construction of these buildings is concrete and steel, and theywere built after 1980. Buildings include business/support amenities such ascafés and banks, and they have strong identiﬁable locations and accesses. 
Class B. Renovated buildings in good locations or newer buildings that are
smaller in size. These can be wood frame construction in nonprime locations.Most ﬁrst-time investors invest here.
Class C. Older buildings that are not renovated. They can be of any size, and
are in average to fair condition.
Keep these qualiﬁcations in mind as you look at properties. They will help
you know what you are looking at, and they will also help you recognize falseadvertising when you see it.102 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 102ROBERT KIYOSAKI 103
The Real Estate Cycle Revealed
Although you now know there are more kinds of commercial property than
you could have imagined, you may still be surprised to learn that their perform-ance over time is cyclical in whole and in part. What I mean by that is that eachasset class runs through a cycle. And each asset class’s cycle either ﬂows before,ﬂows with, or ﬂows after another asset class’s cycle. 
For example, you’ll ﬁnd that growth in residential housing will fuel a similar
but slightly lagging rise in retail. This pattern makes sense when you considerthat new homeowners will want shopping centers, grocery stores, and otherconveniences near where they live. The surge in retail then drives growth inthe industrial and distribution sectors, so that means warehouse and mixed-use property development grows. Home development also drives some growthin commercial ofﬁce space, but again commercial lags behind. That’s why whenhousing development slows, it takes a few years for commercial to slow down,too. You’ve probably noticed that. When the news is reporting real estate de-clines, new commercial projects are still getting underway. Now you know why. 
Real estate is about cycles and the inevitability of them. Once you know that
and know how to pay attention to the cycles, you’ll know the lay of the land inthis regard, too, and you’ll be in a position to make the best of the cycle by mak-ing the best decisions along the way.
Recommendation No. 8: Understand the real estate cycle and watch for
the indicators, and you will seldom be surprised.
Cycles are important, but in reality if you buy right, your real estate will do
well, regardless of where in the cycle you bought. But if you are just startingout, buying right may not be as intuitive to you, so understanding the real estatecycle becomes golden knowledge. The following diagram shows the typicalcommercial real estate cycle and how it affects new construction and vacancy. 
Let’s walk through each quadrant. In Phase 1, the lower left quadrant, the
market is in recovery phase. There is declining vacancy and no new construction.You know the market is in this phase when there is some growth in the marketindicated by properties being rented and properties being sold. This uptrendcan, and often does, last a long time, years in many cases. That’s why I neverfeel like I need to rush into an investment. I also don’t like surprises, so I gener-ally let the bigger guys make the ﬁrst leaps during this phase. Then I make mymoves with solid knowledge that we are solidly in Phase one—the buying phase. TIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 103Recommendation No. 9: Phase 1 in the real estate cycle is the time to
buy, and Phase 2 and 3 is the time to sell.
As you’ll see in a minute when we talk about Phase 3 and Phase 4, declining
markets aren’t the time to take vacations. Doing lots of homework during those
times will make you smarter and at the ready during a Phase 1 market when itistime to buy. When the other guys who bought poorly, or bought in the wrong
phase of the market, have thrown in the towel, that’s when I buy.
During Phase 2, you see the occupancy rates move below the Long Term Occu-
pancy (LT Occupancy line on the diagram) for your market. (Long Term Oc-cupancy means that owners typically need at least a minimum of ﬁve years ofterm remaining.) Every market is different, but in most cases, vacancy is veryhealthy when it is below 10 percent. Understand that new construction tendsto start when vacancy rates drop below 10 and 15 percent, so during this phasenew properties begin to be developed. Again, this phase of the cycle does notlast days, weeks, or months. It tends to last a few years, so there is no hurryhere. If and when I buy during this phase, I really make sure the numbers workand that the property meets my qualiﬁcations. There’s no way of knowing ex-actly where the top of the market is or how long it will last, so caution is therule. If you’re going to sell, Phase 2 is when you do it.
Recommendation No. 10: Phase 3 and Phase 4 are not the times 
to buy. They are the times to research and target properties to buy when 
Phase 1 kicks in.TIP
TIP104 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Market Cycle Quadrants 
Phase II - Expansion Phase III - Hypersupply
Phase I - Recovery Phase IV - RecessionDeclining Vacancy
New ConstructionIncreasing Vacancy
New Construction
Declining Vacancy
No New ConstructionIncreasing Vacancy
More CompletionsLT Occupancy
FIGURE 5.3  Market Cycle Quadrants
Used with permission by Glenn R. Mueller, Ph.D.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 104In Phase 3, the market is in obvious decline. The guessing game, however, is
how far the market will fall and how long it will take. If you bought in Phase 1,
you may have bought yourself some strength. But when you are still seeing newconstruction underway and occupancy rates increasing above the LT Occu-pancy for your market, recognize the signs that you are in Phase 3. This is knownas “hyper supply.” Obviously, I never buy during this phase no matter how badlyI want a building. I am simply not willing to ride the wave to the bottom, notknowing how far down bottom is. What’s the point when I know that therewill be plenty of time for deals that make sense in Phase 1? In fact, I’ll be buyingat bargain prices the properties others foolishly bought in Phase 3! You’ll hearpeople say that there are buying opportunities in every phase. That is true. Butit just depends on how strong your constitution is and how deep your pocketsare.
Finally, Phase 4 signals market bottom. But there’s good news in Phase 4,
too. The darker it gets in Phase 4, the better the buying opportunities will be inPhase 1. So if you’re on the buying side, relish Phase 4, and take the time to lookat properties. Look a lot, but don’t buy a thing. There’s no way of knowing thebottom until it makes the turn upward. You’ll know you’re in Phase 4 when va-cancy hits its high well above the LT Occupancy and buildings are no longerunder construction. The cranes and bulldozers will be replaced by completedbuildings sitting vacant. At this time, I do a lot of research so that when Phase 1kicks in I have pinpointed some ripe buying opportunities. I have lined up in-vestors and ﬁnancing and spoken to lots of people and told them that when theturnaround happens, I’ll give them a call.
While it is helpful to know that real estate is cyclical and in all cases inter-
connected by asset class, knowing where you are in a market cycle and predict-ing where it is going is key. Savvy investors can make money anywhere in thecycle, but it takes great skill and experience to make money on the right side ofthe line. 
Further, understand that all real estate follows this pattern and that some
asset classes will follow the curve earlier or later than others. For instance, res-idential real estate is always the ﬁrst to decline and the ﬁrst to rebound. Multi-family follows a little later, and retail and commercial after that. Commercial/industrial is usually the last asset class to emerge from a down market; howeverit is usually the last to enter it. The more familiar you get with watching thereal estate cycles, the better you will get at knowing where you are in them.Commercial real estate, for me, gives me plenty of warning to buy, sell, andhold. ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1059781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 105The Last Word on Mastery
Well, now you know how critical the lay of the land in terms of neighborhood,
asset class, and the real estate cycle is to the success of your real estate invest-ment career. But just like in baseball, there’s a huge gap between knowing how
to hit a home run and hitting a home run. That gap, of course, is technique,
practice, and unfortunately, failure. Becoming master of your real estate uni-verse will take all of those, too. It did for me. I’ve lived in Phoenix for morethan twenty years, and I still drive around the market with real estate eyes.Things are always changing, and I need to keep up with those changes. I developnew systems to make me more efﬁcient as I analyze properties and deals. AndI’m not ashamed to say on my ﬁrst deal I lost $15,000 and didn’t even end upwith the property! It never closed. These kinds of things happen to everyone,and they are what separate the serious investors from the novices. 
The same goes for baseball. Every time the Arcadia Rat Pack stepped out on
the diamond, they expected to win, but they also knew that losing was a possi-bility. Of course we did everything in our power to increase the odds of winning,but on those occasions when we didn’t come out on top, our team learned whatdidn’t work, what we had to do better next time, and what subtleties we missed.We didn’t make the same mistakes twice, and that’s the beneﬁt of losing: thelessons. 
Yes, knowledge is just part of the story. But action is the most critical part.
All the information in this chapter and within this book as a whole is only asgood as your willingness to take action on it. So make a pact with yourself tobecome master of your real estate universe. Step up to the plate. That ﬁrst swingis yours to take.
Ways to Learn More
CCIM Institute (Certiﬁed Commercial Investment Manager)SIOR (Society of Industrial and Ofﬁce Realtors)CRE (Councilors of Real Estate)NAIOP (National Association of Industrial and Ofﬁce Properties) ULI (Urban Land Institute)LoopNet.com—a great place to learn about your market and research propertiesInvestorWords.com—excellent online glossary of terms106 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 106ROBERT KIYOSAKI 107
A forthcoming Rich Dad Advisor book: How to Win in Commercial Real Estate:
Y our Guide to Finding, Evaluating, and Purchasing Y our First Commercial Prop-
erty in 9 Weeks or Less, by Craig Coppola 
One of the premier commercial real estate brokers in the United States,
Craig Coppola has been awarded the Arizona Ofﬁce Broker of the Y ear
six times in the past thirteen years by the National Association of Indus-trial and Ofﬁce Properties. He has completed more than twenty-ﬁve hun-dred lease and sale transactions over the past twenty-three years, totalinga value in excess of $2.5 billion. As founding principal of Lee & Associates
Arizona, Craig has earned the top three designations in the real estate industry: CCIM, CRE,and SIOR. Only thirty-ﬁve people worldwide hold all three. 
9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 107Garrett and I share a common love: the love of the game of rugby. Although we
do not remember each other, we played against each other years ago on op-
posing teams at the Monterrey Rugby Festival. He played for the Hastings Rugby
Club of San Francisco, and I played for the Navy/Marine Corps Flight Schoolteam from Pensacola, Florida. Unfortunately, we were not the better team, but itwas a great game.
In 2003, Garrett and I traveled to Sydney, Australia, to watch the Rugby World
Cup. It is in our humble opinion that we witnessed the greatest game of rugbyever played. It was the ﬁnal match between England and Australia. For as long asI live, I will always remember that game and feel honored to have been a spectatorin the stands as we watched England beat Australia in overtime by a score oftwenty to seventeen.
Besides being a rugby player, Garrett is an attorney. He is a very important at-
torney. He specializes in asset protection, which is a vital area of law because intoday’s world there are more attorneys who want to steal your assets than thereare who want to protect them. One of the reasons why Kim and I can sleep soundlyat night is because Garrett is an expert at making sure our assets are protected.This does not mean we are totally protected. This means Garrett has built legalﬁrewalls around different assets. It means we might lose one or two properties,but we will not lose everything.Garrett SUTTON
1086
10 Rules for Real Estate 
Asset Protection9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 108In today’s litigious world, having a Garrett Sutton on your side is vital for any-
one who wants to grow rich and get a good night’s sleep, too.
—Robert Kiyosaki
As a Rich Dad’s Advisor, one of the questions I am most frequently asked is:
“How can I protect my real estate?”
In answering this key question, a pattern of repetitive follow-up queries al-
ways ensues such that after several years I have been able to distill all of the is-
sues and concerns into what I call the “10 Rules for Protecting Your Real Estate.”
By knowing, following, and implementing these ten rules, you will not only
properly protect your assets, but you will also avoid the many pitfalls placed inyour path by the overpriced asset protection “gurus” and service providers outthere who are more interested in your money than your situation. You will havethe conﬁdence to say “No” to these people because you will know more thanthey do.
Your important and easily acquired education lies ahead. Let’s begin.
Rule No. 1: Insurance Is Never a Complete 
Asset Protection Strategy
Or: Never let a commissioned salesperson tell you how to protect your assets.
At Rich Dad events around the country I am always confronted by the personwho asserts that his insurance agent has assured him that asset protection is ahoax and that all that is needed is a good insurance policy. I have to laugh be-cause there are so many instances of insurance companies failing to cover realestate investors and others on their coverage policies, that there is a whole areaof law named after the situation. It is called “Bad Faith Litigation,” as in thebad faith that occurs when insurance companies say they will cover you, collectyour premiums, and then, heaven forbid, a claim arises and they ﬁnd reasonsnot to cover you.
Never forget that insurance companies have an economic incentive not to
cover you. As is clearly obvious, the less they pay out in claims, the more moneythey make. Also never forget that insurance agents receive a commission on allthe policies they sell. So when an insurance agent says that all you need is insur-ance instead of asset protection, please remember where his incentive lies. It isalso important to acknowledge that insurance agents are not licensed to givelegal advice. You would have to question the motives of one who would do so.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1099781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 109Given my healthy skepticism of the insurance industry, you would think that
I would advocate the exclusive use of asset protection entities without the use
of any insurance at all.
Insurance is the first line of defense when protecting assets. The proper
use of asset protection strategies is this second line of defense.
But to the contrary, I believe that insurance is the ﬁrst line of defense when
protecting assets. Many insurance companies are forthright in their dealingsand will honor their coverage commitments. Others, with the help of a legalnudge, will do the right thing. So I always advocate the reasonable use of insur-ance as a protection strategy. However, because we know that a certain per-centage of insurance companies will use exclusions and ﬁnd reasons not tocover you, you most certainly need another defense mechanism. The properuse of asset protection strategies is this second line of defense. As we will learnin this section, asset protection is not difﬁcult or expensive, but it is required ifyou are to succeed at building real estate wealth.TIP110 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: The Plight of “Paul”
Aclient of mine, we’ll call Paul, initially believed in the strident assertions of his
“insurance professional.” Instead of combining insurance with entities for his
Aspen, Colorado, fourplex, he obtained only an insurance policy on the mountain
property. He held title to the fourplex in his individual name.
Despite the 100 percent insurance protection guarantees of his agent, the policy
was very clear that the company would not cover any claims related to an avalanche.
Sure enough, Paul’s fourplex was greatly damaged in a swift and freakish ava-
lanche. The insurance company quite correctly refused to cover the claim. Its policyexpressly excluded avalanche damage.
Paul was furious at his agent who, besides assuring that the pricey policy covered
everything and that no other protection was needed, had never pointed out thevery clear policy exclusions. By relying on his agent and not taking any other pro-tective steps, all of Paul’s assets were exposed to the avalanche claim.
Paul’s problem was completely avoidable. If he had relied on a team of advisors,
including an asset protection attorney, the situation where a highly commissionedsalesperson got away with giving legal advice would never have occurred.9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 110Now that we know that insurance alone will not completely protect us, let’s
review further ways to not protect your real estate before we get to the promised
land of beneﬁcial strategies in later rules.
Rule No. 2: The Two Most Common Ways of 
Taking Title to Your Real Estate Do Not Provide Asset Protection
Or: Why to avoid joint tenancies and tenants in common.
It is indeed ironic that the two most common and popular methods of taking ti-tle to your real estate provide you with the least protection. Joint tenancy isone of the most popular forms of holding title because it provides for a right ofsurvivorship. This works such that if one party dies the other joint tenant be-comes the sole owner by operation of law, meaning it happens automatically.Joint tenancy is popular with husband and wife couples. If the husband, for ex-ample, passes away ﬁrst, then the wife has complete control of the propertywithout having to go to court or ﬁle new deeds.
The problem for real estate investors is twofold. First, joint tenancies offer
no asset protection. Suppose Peter, Paul, and Coco own a sixplex as joint tenants.If Paul gets sued, his creditor can reach Paul’s joint tenancy interest. Peter andCoco now have a new partner in the sixplex, most likely someone, who aftersuing their friend and barging their way in, they don’t like right off the bat. Aswell, this new partner can bring a partition lawsuit to force a sale of the property.It can get expensive in legal fees and messy in court.
Secondly, the right of survivorship feature that makes joint tenancies easy
and attractive to married couples is the same feature that makes them so scaryand abhorrent to investors. Let’s take another look at the joint tenancy thatholds Peter, Paul, and Coco’s sixplex. Suppose Coco were to die in a fashion in-dustry disaster. Her interest in the sixplex is automatically terminated. Shecan’t pass her interest on to her heirs because Peter and Paul, by operation oflaw, are now the two remaining joint tenants on title.
Savvy investors will not invest with you if you propose taking title as joint
tenants. The good ones know that you should never put yourself in a positionwhere someone will beneﬁt from your demise. That’s what you are doing withjoint tenancies. I will withhold comment on the state of marriage today andwhy so many knowledgeable spouses continue to use joint tenancies. But forinvestors it is not the right choice.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1119781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 111Savvy investors will not invest with you if you propose taking title 
as joint tenants.
Similarly, but with one exception, taking title as tenants in common is not
the best course, either. Again, there is no asset protection. In our example, if
Peter gets sued, Paul and Coco can ﬁnd themselves with a new and unwantedpartner. Once again, the partner can bring a partition suit to force a sale of theproperty. As well, if there is a lawsuit involving the property (i.e., a tenant suesover a defective water heater) the individual tenants in common (or individualjoint tenants, for that matter) can be held personally responsible. All of theirpersonal assets can be exposed to such a claim. Holding title to any property asindividual tenants in common does not make good sense in our very litigiousworld. In fact, it can make you more of a target.
The one exception for using tenants in common to hold title is when investors
take their interest not as exposed individuals but with protected entities. In aTiC situation (“TiC” stands for tenants in common) investors come togetherfrom 1031 exchanges or with investment money to buy a large property. Thelarge property is held as a tenancy in common with all the various investorsholding their speciﬁc TiC interest through a protective entity such as a LLC(limited liability company).
A chart helps to illustrate:
While I may have let the cat out of the bag (that LLCs are good entities for
real estate), it is my belief that most of you may have already known this. Still,
there are a few more rules involving what not to use before we get to positiveasset protection territory.TIP112 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The Difference Between Individual T enants in Common 
and T enants in Common (TiC)
 
John, 
as individualJane, 
as individualJohn’s
LLCJane’s
LLCT enants in Common
4 Plex TiC
4 Plex vs.
Outside assets protected from all claims All assets personally exposed to all claims
FIGURE 6.19781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 112Rule No. 3: Never Hold Real Estate 
in a C Corporation
Or: Fire the professional who even suggests such a thing.
One of the cardinal sins of real estate asset protection is to take title in the nameof a C corporation. While there are certainly advantages to using a C corporationin business (which are discussed in my Rich Dad’s Advisor book Own Y our OwnCorporation) there is a huge disadvantage to using a C corporation for real es-tate, which can be expressed in one word: taxes.
As you probably know, C corporations face a double tax. You pay taxes once
at the company level and then again when dividends are distributed to share-holders. With an S corporation, LLC, or LP you pay tax only once at the com-pany level. A chart graphically illustrates the difference between doubletaxation and ﬂow-through taxation.
So what happens when you have a capital gain on the sale of real estate held
by a C corporation? You pay a lot more in taxes.
Consider the situation in which a $500,000 long-term capital gain is realized
on the sale of real estate held for longer than one year.
As the chart on p. 114 indicates, you will pay $144,500 more in federal taxes
by using a C corporation instead of an LLC. Does Uncle Sam want you to use aC corporation? Of course. Will any investors join your deal if you propose usinga C corporation? Of course not. They’ll know you don’t know what you are do-ing. Avoid the professional who advises you to use a C corporation to hold anyinterest in real estate. They just don’t know what they are doing—to your laterdetriment.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 113
No Entity T ax
Flow-Through Profits After T ax ProfitsCorporate T ax
T axes Paid Once
T axes Paid T wice T axes Paid Once Dividends to
ShareholdersDividends to
Members$
C 
CorporationLLC, LP , or Sub S 
Corporation$
FIGURE 6.29781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 113114 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Avoid the professional who advises you to use a C corporation to hold
any interest in real estate.
We frequently have clients discuss how some asset protection “guru” or other
promoter advised them to set up their structure as follows:
The rationale is that the two pieces of rental property are owned by the LLCs
and each LLC is in turn owned by a C corporation. The gurus will state that all
kinds of deductions can be taken with a C corporation. The problem is that, asﬂow-through entities, the proﬁts ﬂow from the LLCs to a double tax C corpo-ration. You are still in a bad tax position.
If you are intent on using a C corporation in your entity mix (and please be
cautious of promoters who overly tout the supposed glorious beneﬁts of the Ccorporation) a better scenario is the following:TIP
LLC
4 plexLLC
Duplex
C Corporation
FIGURE 6.4C Corporation
 $500,000 Gain
 −170,000 Less 34% corporate tax (35% for larger corporations)
 $330,000 −   49,500 Less 15% tax to shareholder on distributions $280,500 Amount after tax
LLC
 $500,000 Gain −  75,000 Less 15% capital gain tax $425,000 Amount after tax
FIGURE 6.39781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 114In the structure above, the title-holding LLCs are held by an asset protecting
Wyoming or Nevada LLC, thus providing ﬂow-through taxation throughout
the structure. For those desiring the write-offs of a C corporation, a manage-ment C corporation is used. Each title-holding LLC pays a management fee tothe corporation so their beneﬁts are obtained. But there is no ownership of realestate through the C corporation, thus avoiding the double taxation of proﬁtswe had in the ﬁrst instance.
Please also beware of promoters who would have you set up more entities
than you need. The management corporation may provide some beneﬁts inlater years when there is plenty of cash ﬂow. But at the start, do you really needone? Probably not. So be very cautious of those promoters who want what is intheir best interest and not yours.
Rule No. 4: Offshore Strategies Do Not  
Work for Onshore Real Estate
Or: What have you been smoking?
As you have probably noticed, throughout this chapter and in my other writingsI have found the need to warn against the slick and salesy gurus and promoterswith their incredible claims and come-ons. Certainly some of the most outra-geous claims come from the offshore promoters who offer tax savings and ab-solute privacy. Of course, they never mention the existing United States rulesand regulations that do, in fact, run contrary to their claims. In most cases,these people actually live on small Caribbean Islands or in European principal-ities beyond the reach of U.S. authorities. They can say what they want.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 115
LLC
4 plexLLC
Duplex
WY or NV LLCManagement
C Corporation
FIGURE 6.59781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 115But as a U.S. citizen, can you afford to listen to those who intentionally mis-
represent U.S. laws? Or course not.
To further your caution, let’s review what can happen when offshore asset
protection is used in attempt to protect U.S. real estate.
Real Life Story: John’s Bad Day
John was a doctor in California. He had worked hard and paid his taxes. He owned
a twenty-unit Roseville apartment building free and clear and a significant bro-
kerage account. He felt as if he were doing well, but the combination of the mal-
practice and real estate litigation explosion and the ravenous demands of both theIRS and California’s notorious state tax collector—the Franchise T ax Board—hadled John down the path of considering offshore options.
A promoter from the Caribbean Island of Nevis held a seminar for doctors and
dentists in John’s hometown. The self-styled asset protection man with glowingtestimonials and advanced degrees from schools John had not heard of, laid out acomprehensive and seamless case for using Nevis structures to protect assets.The promoter boldly claimed that by using offshore trusts John could obtain com-plete privacy and incredible tax savings. His strategy was graphically representedas follows:
The promoter indicated that John would not have to pay any taxes. Because the
apartment building LLC was owned by the Nevis APT (“asset protection trust”),profits generated from rents could pass offshore without taxes. The domestic LLCwould simply file zero return. The promoter further stated that insurance was notneeded on the apartment building because it was now in a bulletproof structure. Aswell, by moving John’s significant brokerage account into the second APT , profitscould be generated offshore without U.S. or California taxes. Better yet, the moniescould be accessed by John, tax free, into the United States by simply requestingthe Nevis trustee—who received $3,000 a year for the service—wire the money.116 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Roseville, LLC 
20 unit apt. building
Nevis APT, INevis APT II
Offshore brokerage 
account
FIGURE 6.69781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 116John followed the promoter’s advice, paid the $25,000 for setting it all up, and
in the first year his financial condition greatly improved. With his assets offshore
and no onshore taxes paid, he was doing really well. He wondered why everyonedidn’t do this. Then, in one day, two problems arose. He was sued for malpracticeby a patient and a tenant fell at the apartment building.
When the tenant’s claim was made, John informed the claimants that there was
no insurance. When the tenant’s lawyer indicated they would sue anyway, John calmlyreplied that the building was owned by a bulletproof offshore asset protection trust.
The lawyer laughed and said John needed to get a local attorney to advise him.
When John did so he learned the bitter truth: Y ou can’t protect U.S. real estate withoffshore entities. The apartment building was located in California and, as such, Cali-fornia courts had jurisdiction. This was the law in all fifty states. The tenant could bringa claim against the LLC, and with no insurance in place, the tenant could reach the en-tire free-and-clear equity in the apartment building. The fact that the LLC was ownedby an offshore APT was of absolutely no consequence and offered zero protection.
John also spoke to his new lawyer about the malpractice claim. As a doctor, John
was sued individually. But he felt protected because his brokerage assets were pri-vately all held offshore. This was when the second shoe dropped.
The lawyer explained that if John had followed all the tax reporting requirements
associated with offshore entities, a creditor could easily learn what John owned.
John was incredulous. The promoter had assured him that he had bulletproof
privacy and asset protection without the requirement of taxes or even tax reporting.The lawyer had seen other professionals lured in before. He presented John withthe following chart detailing all the reporting requirements:ROBERT KIYOSAKI 117
TABLE 6.1
IRS Requirement IRS Rule
U.S. persons must report all gratuitous and nongratuitous transfers 
to a foreign trust.Section 6048, Section 1494
Foreign trusts owned by U.S. persons must file an annual tax return on IRS Form 3520-A. U.S. persons are subject to a 5% penalty againstthe value of offshore assets each year for failure to file. Sections 671 to 679
U.S. persons receiving offshore distributions, whether taxable or nontaxable, must report them or pay 35% penalty.Section 6677(a)
Foreign trusts owned by U.S. persons must appoint a U.S. agent so that the IRS may examine offshore records. Sections 7602 to 7604
CONTINUED9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 117John now realized that everything the promoter said was false. Given the IRS
rules, there was no privacy, no tax savings, and no bulletproof protection. With the
help of his new lawyer, John cleaned up the offshore mess by paying significant IRSpenalties and fees. A demand to the Nevis promoter for the $25,000 John was luredinto paying for worthless strategies and documents went unanswered.
Offshore strategies do not work for onshore real estate.
Rule No. 5: Living Trusts Offer 
No Asset Protection
Or: Will you please stop listening to these guys?
Many of you have seen the ads touting the signiﬁcant beneﬁts of living trusts.Invariably, one of the great features mentioned is the ability of these trusts toprotect your assets.
While living trusts do offer certain advantages it is very important to clearly
recognize the one beneﬁt they do not offer: asset protection.
Let’s take a closer look.Primarily used for estate planning, the key beneﬁt of a living trust is to avoid
probate. If you have only a will, or pass without a will, the distribution of yourestate is supervised by a local probate court. The probate process is long andtime consuming and a matter of public record, meaning that anyone can viewthe ﬁle to see what assets are involved, and perhaps challenge the distribution.
As well, the attorney’s fees awarded for probate proceedings can be quite lu-
crative for the lawyers involved. For example, with a $1 million primary resi-dence passing through a California probate, the court awards a statutorily setattorney’s fee of $23,000. An executor is entitled to the same amount. Thesefees are due, even if the home is fully encumbered by loans, and thus withoutequity to pay the fees.
The solution is to set up a living trust, which is a trust document allowing
you to use an appointed trustee, typically a surviving spouse or other familymember, to distribute your assets without the need for probate court assistanceor review. The several thousand dollars spent on a living trust can easily savemany more thousands of dollars in probate fees.TIP118 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
CONTINUED9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 118The living trust also features a great deal
of ﬂexibility. It is a revocable trust, meaning
you can change its terms and/or beneﬁci-aries at any time. But that also means itdoes not offer any asset protection. Becauseit can be easily altered, a judgment creditorcan get a court order forcing a transfer ofany property from the trust to the litigationparty.
Despite this factual lack of asset protec-
tion, living trust promoters continue to selltheir services as offering such protection.When challenged, they will parse and nar-row their overly broad claims to suggestthat their living trusts help protect against creditor claims because they avoidthe very public probate process. And this is true. But just as deciding not tosunbathe completely in the nude is not the same as the judicious use of sun-screen, avoiding a fully public probate is not the same as proper asset protection.By relying only on the former examples, you are going to get burned.
Real Life Story: Mario’s Mistake
Aclient of mine named Mario came to me after titling all of his assets—his house,
a rental fourplex, and a significant brokerage account—in the name of his living
trust. The formal name for the trust—The Mario T . and Carmen O. Sanchez Revoca-
ble T rust dated June 10, 2004—was given to the county recorder and assessor fortaking title to the two real estate properties. The Smith Barney broker took thesame name for the Sanchez’s brokerage account.
Mario indicated that the seminar promoter who set up his living trust assured
him that his assets were now fully protected. But now he was being sued by a tenantwho fell at the fourplex, and he wanted a second opinion.
It was not pleasant to inform Mario that his assets were not protected. By titling
everything in his living trust’s name, all of his assets were exposed to the tenant’sclaim.
When Mario asked if he could re-title everything into a more protective structure,
it was even more difficult to explain that it was now too late to do so. Once you’vebeen sued, or even threatened with suit, it is too late for asset protection.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 119
Sanchez Living Trust
Owns LLCXYZ, LLC 
Owns 4plex Asset Protection
Probate Avoidance
FIGURE 6.79781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 119The next question clients always have is: How do they combine the beneﬁt of
a living trust’s probate avoidance with the necessity of asset protection? The an-
swer is simple, and it is graphically charted in Figure 6.7: The LLC is on titlewith the county recorder as owning the fourplex. We have asset protection atthis level. The living trust owns the membership interests in XYZ, LLC. If bothMario and Carmen die, the living trust document will dictate who owns the LLCwithout the need for court supervision. At this level we have probate avoidance.
Y ou can’t rely on the LLC for probate avoidance, and you can never
count on the living trust for asset protection, but in concert you can get both.
Properly structured LLCs and living trusts work well together and comple-
ment each other. You can’t rely on the LLC for probate avoidance, and you cannever count on the living trust for asset protection, but in concert you can getboth.
Rule No. 6: Land Trusts Offer Privacy 
But Not Asset Protection
Or: Why privacy is not enough.
For many of the same reasons a living trust offers no asset protection, neitherdoes a land trust offer asset protection. In fact, a land trust is very similar to aliving trust. In both, you are transferring assets to a trust administered by atrustee for your beneﬁt.
According to the seminar promoters, the big beneﬁt of a land trust is its pri-
vacy. By using a trustee other than yourself, your name can be kept off the chainof title and public records. And while privacy is a good thing in this day and age,it is not a perfect substitute for asset protection.
It is important to understand the structure of a
land trust in order to appreciate why asset pro-tection is not inherent.
In our chart, Joe is identiﬁed on public records
as being the trustee, but Jane, as beneﬁciary, is notanywhere identiﬁed. In this manner, privacy canbe achieved.
But the land trust, like the living trust, does not
protect Jane. If there is a lawsuit involving thefourplex, a judgment rendered is against the ben-TIP120 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ABC
Land T rust
owns 4 plex
 
Jane, an individual
Beneficiary
FIGURE 6.89781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 120eﬁciary. If Jane, as an individual, is the beneﬁciary, then any judgment is against
her personally, and all of her personally held assets are exposed.
There are two better ways to handle it. In example A, we show the beneﬁciary
to be an LLC.
In this way, a judgment attained against the beneﬁciary is rendered against a
limited liability entity. James’s personal assets are not exposed.
Of course, this structure entails setting up two structures—the land trust and
the LLC—as well as paying the trustee to serve every year. The same asset pro-tection is attained by just setting up one entity, the LLC, as in example B.
If privacy is important you can certainly have the manager of the 
LLC be a nominee, a person other than yourself.
If privacy is important you can certainly have the manager of the LLC be a
nominee, a person other than yourself. Our ﬁrm charges $650 a year for thisservice. Others may charge more or less. But in this way you can achieve assetprotection and privacy, without the need to set up a land trust.
Rule No. 7: LLCs and LPs Are Excellent Asset
Protection Entities
Or: Why you want the charging order.
So, ﬁnally at rule seven we are getting to the good stuff. But as I mentioned,there is so much misinformation out there that I felt it was important to ﬁrstdispel the myths and outright lies. With all that completed, I can now state thatLLCs and LPs offer excellent asset protection via the charging order .
Before reviewing the charging order, the difference between LLCs and LPs
must be explained. With an LP you must have at least one general partner andTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 121
ABC Land Trust
owns 4 plex
 
James’s LLC Beneficiary Joe, T rustee James’s LLC 
owns 4 plex
 orExample A Example B
FIGURE 6.99781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 121one limited partner. The general partner, if an individual, is personally respon-
sible for the LP’s activities. To encapsulate that unlimited liability you mustform a limited liability entity—a corporation or an LLC—to be the general part-ner. While you are now fully protected, it is important to remember that youhave had to form two entities: ﬁrst, the LP , and then second, a corporation orLLC to be the general partner of the LP . With the LLC you need to form onlyone entity, the LLC. Everyone is protected within the LLC. While LPs certainlyhave their place, due to the need for only one entity instead of two, we shall usethe LLC example from here on out.
When it comes to protecting your real estate, we must also distinguish be-
tween attacks. A chart helps to explain:
In Attack No. 1, a tenant sues the LLC over a broken stairway. If successful,
the tenant can get what is inside the LLC—the fourplex—subject to any deedsof trusts against the property.
But if the tenant can get the equity in the property, you ask, why even bother
with an LLC? Because without the LLC, the tenant could get everything Johnowns—his house and bank account and everything else. The LLC limits the ten-ant to just what’s in the LLC and shields your outside assets from attack.
In Attack No. 2, John gets in a car wreck, his insurance company won’t cover
him, and a judgment creditor (the person who won in court; we’ll call him Nate)is seeking to get paid. Because the car wreck had nothing to do with the real es-tate, Nate, the judgment creditor, can’t sue John’s LLC directly. Instead, Natemust go after John’s membership interest in the LLC.
This is where the charging order comes into play. The charging order rule
provides that Nate can’t take possession of John’s membership interest, his own-ership in the LLC. If Nate could, he could then sell the fourplex and get paid.(And please note, this is what can happen with a corporation. The judgment cred-itor gets the shares and takes control and sells all the corporate assets. Nevada, todate, is the only state that has extended charging order protections to corporateshares in corporations with between two and seventy-ﬁve shareholders.)122 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
John, MemberJohn’s LLC 
4 plex
 Attack #1
T enant
Attack #2
Car Wreck
FIGURE 6.109781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 122The charging order instead allows Nate to stand in John’s shoes as a member
and receive distributions.
But what if no distributions are made? Then Nate gets nothing. He has to
wait to be paid. But what if money is made, there are taxes due, but no money is
distributed to even pay the taxes? This is called phantom income, and is frus-trating to creditors. Under the charging order, Nate is standing in John’s shoes.So he must pay the taxes on money he did not receive.
Most people do not want to be put in this position, which is why the proper
use of LLCs and LPs is an excellent deterrent to frivolous litigation. Not manypeople want to ﬁght it out in court to not receive any money and have to pay
taxes on the money they didn’t receive. Using LLCs and LPs can be an aid insettlement discussions. They can even prevent a lawsuit from being ﬁled in theﬁrst place.
Using LLCs and LPs can be an aid in settlement discussions. They can
even prevent a lawsuit from being filed in the first place.
Charging order rules vary from state to state. Nevada and Wyoming have the
strongest laws. In those states, the exclusive creditor remedy is the chargingorder. California has the weakest law. There are two California court cases al-lowing creditors to pierce through and sell off LLC and LP assets to pay thecreditor.
So if you are going to buy property in California or one of the many other
states with weak asset protection laws (including Georgia), you have the choiceof setting up your LLC or LP in the state where the property is located or form-ing in Nevada or Wyoming, and then qualifying in the state where the propertyis located. The process of qualifying involves submitting, for example, theWyoming LLC papers and appropriate fees to the California secretary of state’sofﬁce. If properly done it is always granted and keeps you within the law.
But the beneﬁt is that if you get sued as in Attack No. 2, Wyoming or Nevada
law applies, not California law. A judgment creditor has to hire a Wyoming orNevada lawyer to ﬁght a very uphill battle. This is what you want: a very strongreason for predators to leave you alone.
More information on this is found in my book, How to Use Limited Liability
Companies and Limited Partnerships (SuccessDNA, 2009).TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1239781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 123Rule No. 8: Segregation of Assets Is Good
Or: Let’s not put all of our eggs in one basket.
Since we’ve learned that LLCs and LPs are good entities for holding and pro-tecting our real estate, the question then becomes: How many properties do Iput in each entity?
This is a judgment call on your part. But consider these scenarios involving
Liz, who owns twelve properties:
In Scenario 1, if a tenant sues over a problem at one property, the other eleven
properties are exposed to the attack. In Scenario 2, with three properties ineach LLC, only two additional properties are exposed if Liz is sued. Of course,in Scenario 3 with only one property in each LLC, only one property is exposed.
I would never suggest a client hold twelve properties in one LLC. With that
many properties, your LLC is a rich target. In my experience, most of my clients124 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
LLC
12 properties
 Scenario #1
 
LLC
3 properties
 LLC
3 properties
 LLC
3 properties
 LLC
3 properties
 Scenario #2
 
LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 
LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 
LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 LLC
1 property
 Scenario #3
 
FIGURE 6.119781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 124choose somewhere between Scenario 2 and 3. As is evident, the best asset pro-
tection is obtained through Scenario 3. Only one property is exposed to any oneattack.
But some clients don’t want to pay the one time initial set-up fees and con-
tinuing annual fees for twelve entities. In a state like California, where the an-nual fee is $800 per entity, $9,600 a year for twelve entities is rather daunting.So the choice of using one LLC to hold three properties is an option. It is yourcall. But once again, the fewer properties you hold in each entity, the betterprotected you will be.
Due to these issues, a new type of LLC is being touted to help reduce the
number of LLCs you need to form, called the “Series LLC.” Unfortunately, Icannot recommend this new creature. It attempts to place separate propertiesinto separate series under one LLC, as follows:
The supposed beneﬁt is that by setting up one LLC you can independently
protect two properties. The idea is that within the Series LLC there is an inter-
nal liabilities shield whereby a claim against the duplex in Series 1 does not
affect the fourplex in Series 2. The problem is there is no guidance whether ornot this supposed internal liability shield will be upheld. There are no courtcases in the subject, and conceptually the strategy may be difﬁcult for a courtto uphold. Can two properties in the same state-chartered entity be protectedfrom each other? As well, what if one series goes bankrupt? Will the other seriesbe protected? No one knows.
The California tax authorities (the very aggressive Franchise Tax Board)
have their opinion. If you are going to try and set up one series to hold twoproperties, they are going to charge you $800 per series, the same as if you hadset up two separate LLCs to begin with.
Of course, by setting up two separate LLCs you have the certainty of sepa-
rateness, rather than hoping that someday a court will miraculously rule thatROBERT KIYOSAKI 125
Series #1
DuplexSeries #2
4plexSeries LLC
FIGURE 6.129781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 125the muddled and imperfect concept of an internal liability shield actually makes
sense.
Stay away from promoters who would put you into this untested entity
called the Series LLC.
Interestingly, the American Bar Association brought together the nation’s
brightest lawyers to review LLC developments. After looking at the Series LLCthey declined to endorse the whole concept. Stay away from promoters whowould put you into this untested entity called the Series LLC.
Rule No. 9: Transfer Title into Your Entity
Or: What’s the point if you don’t?All right, so you have set up one or more LLCs to protect your real estate. Youhave the articles properly ﬁled with the state. You have app roved and signed
the operating agreement governing how the LLC will run. You have signed theminutes of the ﬁrst meeting and issued the membership certiﬁcates. All the im-portant documents are in one binder in a safe place.
And remember, if all these steps are not taken, you are not ready. Beware of
promoters who will sell you the articles for just $99 but will not provide youwith an operating agreement, meeting minutes, and membership certiﬁcates.Our ﬁrm charges $695 (or less if you are with Rich Dad) plus state ﬁling feesfor the complete package—binder and all—with all your documents preparedand ﬁnalized according to your speciﬁc needs, along with live phone supportthrough the whole process. You have the certainty of knowing that everythingis in order.
Y ou’ve formed the asset protection entity. The next step is to transfer
title to the property into the LLC.
So assuming that everything is in order, now what?Just because you have your asset protection entity in place, are your real es-
tate assets now protected? No, not yet. You must take the next step, which is totransfer title to the property into the name of the LLC.
You must prepare a grant deed transferring ownership of your fourplex, for
example, from John Jones, as an individual, to the Jones Real Estate, LLC.
Several questions arise during this process.TIP
TIP126 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 126First, is this a taxable event? Will the IRS or my state taxing authority assess
taxes when this happens? The answer is no. This is not a sale of the property—
you are not receiving any money in this transaction. Instead, it is a transfer. Youare transferring the property from yourself (as an individual) to yourself (yournew 100-percent-owned LLC).
The property goes into the LLC at its basis, which is the amount you paid for
the property originally. That basis, for tax purposes, remains the same once theproperty is in the LLC. So, for example, if you paid $250,000 for your fourplex,the basis of $250,000 remains once it is titled in the LLC’s name. There is nogain in the transaction, and with no gain there are no capital gain or ordinaryincome taxes.
If John Jones added new members (owners) into Jones Real Estate, LLC be-
fore or after the transfer, there could be a taxable event. Be sure to consult withyour advisors prior to any change in ownership.
The next question is: Are there any transfer taxes? The answer is: It depends.Transfer taxes, a tax based upon the value of the property being transferred,
vary from state to state. Many states have an exception to their transfer taxes.If you are transferring the property from yourself as an individual to yourselfas an LLC, there is no tax. Check with your local advisors to understand yourlocal rules.
Some states are very tricky, though. In Nevada, you are free to transfer title
into your LLC. But if you transfer it from the LLC back to yourself there is atransfer tax. This situation occurs when you are reﬁnancing and the lenderwants title to be in your name when the new ﬁrst deed of trust attaches. Resistthe lender’s attempts to require this. He will argue that he doesn’t have securityif title is in the LLC. That is nonsense. With title in the LLC, he will have yourpersonal guarantee for the loan and a ﬁrst deed of trust against the property,the same as if it was in your individual name. He is equally protected in eithersituation. Seek out lenders who are enlightened as to asset protection. They doexist.
One state is very costly when it comes to transfer taxes. Pennsylvania charges
a 2 percent tax on the value of the property. So if you have a million dollar propertyROBERT KIYOSAKI 127
Jones Real Estate, LLC
 John Jones,
An individualGrant 
Deed 
FIGURE 6.139781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 127with a mortgage of $950,000, you will still pay $20,000 (2 percent of $1 million)
for the privilege of holding title in the name of your LLC. Ouch.
The best course in all of this is to take title in the name of your LLC when
you ﬁrst buy the property. With title in the proper entity at the start there is noneed for a later transfer, thus no issue of transfer taxes. There are lenders whowill let you take title at closing in the name of the LLC (or your LP). You canview the LLCLoan.com Web site for more information.
Speaking of banks and lenders, the next questions is: Will they call the loan
if I transfer title? In dealing with clients, I have heard numerous times aboutthe attitude of lenders regarding transferring title into an LLC. In their reptilianmind-set, they feel as if you are trying to hide assets from them and deny themtheir due. Of course, as mentioned, if the lender has your personal guaranteeand a ﬁrst deed of trust on the property, he is protected whether it is in yourname or the LLC’s name.
But that logic is lost on the functionaries at most lenders. They will argue
that if you make the transfer they will enforce the due-on-sale clause, whichstates that the loan is due when you sell the property. Of course you haven’tsold the property; you transferred it to yourself.
So what do you do?In my experience it comes down to: Is it better to ask for permission or for-
giveness? If you ask most lenders, as if by reﬂex, they will say no. But if you justgo ahead and make the transfer without asking you can always say you are sorrylater. The chances are good you will never have such a conversation. In mydealings, the lenders have never called a note. Will you be the ﬁrst one? I don’tknow. But as long as you keep making the monthly payments, there is a verygood chance that they are not going to call the loan. Why would they want tocreate such trouble for themselves, especially when they are being paid? If insome bizarre case they do, reﬁnance with a lender comfortable with LLCs. It’snot as if you are going to lose your property if they call the note.
But some of you may be overly cautious in this realm, which is ﬁne. If you
are willing to spend a little more money, there is another way to skin the cat.
Federal law holds that a lender can’t prevent you from transferring title from
your individual name to your living trust. Land trusts look like, and can benamed like, a living trust. So by forming a land trust and transferring title intoit, you may be able to accomplish your goals.
The extra money involved is the preparation of a land trust. Our ﬁrm charges
$395 for such a document; others may charge more or less. But remember, asdiscussed in Rules 5 and 6, neither land trusts nor living trusts offer asset pro-128 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 128tection. So when utilizing this strategy you still need to form that LLC and
name the LLC as beneﬁciary of the land trust.
With the title transferred to the land trust and an LLC as beneﬁciary of the
land trust you may be able to get the protection you need without irrationallender interference.
The only group you do need to notify when you transfer title is your insurance
company. It needs to know the policy is in your LLC name and not in your per-sonal name. Otherwise, and this does happen, your friendly insurance companymay claim it was insuring you as an individual, not your LLC, and use that as anexcuse to deny any coverage in the event of a problem at the property. Andwhile the insurance company may notify the lender of the change in insureds,that usually does not lead to due-on-sale threats.
A ﬁnal question always arises as to why to use a grant deed instead of a quit
claim deed to transfer the title. A quit claim deed merely transfers everythingyou claim you may own to the next party. A grant deed is a much more afﬁrma-tive grant of property rights. As such, in many cases, title insurance coverageﬂows to the next party with a grant deed. Since you are essentially transferringproperty from yourself to yourself, it makes sense to give yourself the mostcomplete rights you can. Use a grant deed.
Rule No. 10: Don’t Set Up More 
Entities Than Necessary
Or: Beware of promoters telling you otherwise.
Several years ago I was at a real estate event in San Francisco. A lady approachedme after hearing my speech, in which I argued that people should not go over-board and set up more entities than are needed.
I was shocked by her story.Jane was looking to invest in her ﬁrst duplex. She had previously attended a
seminar on asset protection given by a self-styled asset protection guru. Theseminar had been sponsored by a local real estate organization. She trusted thatthe group would provide her only with competent service providers.
The asset protection guy indicated that she needed the following structure
for protection: (See Figure 6.14.)
Jane stated that the man convinced her that for the necessary protection she:
1.Needed the LP to hold her LLC. The LP was then, in turn, owned by the Ne-
vada Asset Protection Trust and the Offshore Asset Protection Trust. Thesestructures gave her extra layers of protection.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1299781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 129130 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
2.Needed an S corporation to manage the LP in order to achieve necessary as-
set protection.
3.Needed the C corporation to manage the LLC in order to achieve signiﬁcant
tax savings.
The cost of this structure was $20,000. The annual fees were more than $5,000
to maintain all the entities. Jane was in tears because after spending such alarge sum of money for asset protection, she no longer had enough money forthe down payment on her duplex.
I told her the truth. She had spent way too much money. The asset protection
man’s arguments were false. Extra layers of entities do not necessarily provideextra layers of protection. If you aren’t making any money yet, you don’t reallyneed a C corporation to save on taxes. The structure they created was designedfor their proﬁt, not her needs. Jane asked me to give her a chart of what sheneeded to protect her duplex. It took ﬁve seconds to chart her strategy:
LLC
Holds Duplex
FIGURE 6.15C Corporation
Management
Co./Tax Savings
 S Corporation
General Partner
of L.P .LLC
Holds Duplex
Limited Partnership
Holds LLC interest
Nevada Asset 
Protection Trust
Offshore Asset 
Protection Trust
FIGURE 6.149781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 130Jane was in shock. She asked how the local real estate group promoter, a
person she trusted, could let such a snake in the door to present to them. I told
her something that was an open secret in that business. The local promoter inmany cases receives 50 percent of what the service provider sells. As such, thereis a powerful economic incentive for local promoters to tout the value, integrity,and importance of the service provider, as well as the urgent need for the serv-ices offered. In Jane’s case, the local promoter may have made as much as$10,000 for doing so.
Jane calculated that ﬁfteen people had signed up for all this and ﬁgured the
promoter must have cleared a total of $150,000 at the one asset protection event.She was furious and sickened by what had happened. She vowed never to investin real estate. I tried to counsel her but could not. She had gone through a hor-rible experience and was adamant that her decision was ﬁnal.
Do not let Jane’s experience be yours. Real estate is an excellent way to build
wealth, but at some points during your journey you will need to be able to nav-igate through shark-infested waters.
Important Tips
• Engage in critical thinking.
• Ask yourself if the “expert” really is such an expert.• Ask yourself if the services are for your legal benefit or the expert’s financial 
benefit.
• Use healthy skepticism and old-fashioned due diligence.• Check around, and don’t bite at the first supposedly “discounted” offer.These tips will work out to your advantage.
That said, asset protection, as we have seen, is important. You want to take
the necessary steps to protect your real estate assets and your ﬁnancial future.
The correct use of entities will greatly assist you in achieving this goal.
Remember, asset protection is neither overly difﬁcult nor outrageously ex-
pensive. And with critical thinking, never allow someone to tell you it is.
Good luck in all your asset-protected real estate investing.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1319781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 131Where to Learn More
www.corporatedirect.com
www.sutlaw.comwww.successdna.com
Garrett Sutton is a Rich Dad’s Advisor and is the author of Own Your
Own Corporation, The ABC’s of Getting Out of Debt , The ABC’s of Writing
Winning Business Plans , and How to Buy and Sell a Business. He is also
the co-author of Real Estate Advantages . Garrett is an attorney with more
than twenty-ﬁve years experience in assisting individuals and businesses
to determine their appropriate corporate structure, limit their liability,
protect their assets, and advance their ﬁnancial, personal, and credit success goals. He hasbeen featured in the Wall Street Journal and the New York Times , among others. His ﬁrm,
Sutton Law Center, has ofﬁces in Reno, Nevada; Jackson Hole, Wyoming; and Rocklin, Cali-fornia, and accepts new clients at (800) 700-1430.
132 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 132This book is called The Real Book of Real Estate because the people I chose to
be a part of it are real-life real estate investors. They are not people who just
teach real estate and make their money teaching. Wayne like the others who I
asked to be part of this book, makes his money doing what he teaches. He is one ofthe best real estate investors and one of the best ﬁnance guys I know. He is, like allof the advisors in this book, doing his own deals while teaching others how to berich using the same methods and formulas he uses himself. I am always leery ofpeople who give advice and say, “Trust me.” Then they don’t do what they aretelling me to do. Those are not the kind of teachers I want around me. And theyare not the kind of teachers who are in this book. This book is real people and real-life real estate strategies that they use to build wealth.
One of the things I like most about Wayne is how his brain goes into overdrive
whenever he sees a roadblock in the way of his or one of his client’s goals. When itcomes to ﬁnance, nothing stops Wayne’s creative mind. Obstacles become excusesfor Wayne to ﬁnd innovative ways to get around them.
Wayne is an excellent teacher, and he has taught me more through example
and through the deals we do together than even he probably knows. He can takethings that are very complex and make them simple so that I can understand7 Wayne PALMER
Of Marbles and Capital
1339781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 133them. When I ﬁrst met Wayne, I could tell from the way he talked and the way he
carried himself that he spoke from years of experience, successes, and failures.Life is the best teacher, and that’s why Wayne’s chapters and the others in thisbook are so powerful. They are full of stories and experiences that are entertainingand educational. Education should be fun. If it isn’t, I’m not interested. Wayne isa great communicator. He has a way of telling a story and teaching a lesson thatkeeps you wanting more. Read this chapter, and you’ll see what I mean.
—Robert Kiyosaki
On the bookshelf opposite the desk in my ofﬁce sits an antique jar ﬁlled
with marbles. It is there to remind me of the importance of capital. As a
fourth grader, I didn’t call it capital, and I surely didn’t realize the role thatcapital plays in business. I just knew I wanted to play marbles with the otherkids, and I couldn’t get in the game unless I owned some marbles, or at leastone marble.
Coming from a family of modest means, it was out of the question to ask for
money for marbles. I accepted that I should expect only a few new toys on mybirthday and on Christmas. If I didn’t take care of the toys I received twice ayear, I would go without or make my own. I made trucks out of scrap lumber,bows and arrows out of whittled sticks, and forts out of haystacks, but I couldthink of no way to make a marble. Every day I watched with envy as other boys,and a few bold girls, played with those ﬂashing glass spheres on the playground.I studied their techniques and strategies. I ached to get in the game. I had aplan as to how I would approach the game if I could ﬁnd a way to play, but Iwas locked out. I had no “taw.”
Where I come from, a taw is that one precious marble that each player selects
in order to play with the greatest skill. It is the perfect weight. It ﬁts the thumbjust so. It is the single marble out of the entire bag that the player feels will givehim or her the greatest advantage in a particular game. I knew if I could justﬁnd a taw, I could get in the game.
“FIND A TAW!” That was it! I suddenly remembered playing along the side
of our home as a ﬁve-year-old. While digging in the dirt to build roads for mytoy cars, I had unearthed a white marble. Having no value to me at the time, Ileft it lying in my diggings where I had found it. I wondered if it was still there.I rushed to the barn and grabbed a shovel. I turned up the dirt and carefully134 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 134chopped through the overturned earth to loosen it. I got down on my hands
and knees and sifted through the soil with a spoon. After a few minutes of min-ing, I felt and heard a click on the end of the spoon. My heart jumped into mythroat. I felt a burst of excitement tingling in my temples. I brushed back thesoil, and there it was—a somewhat dirty, but perfectly formed, ivory-coloredmarble.
Something shifted within me at that moment. I felt a rush of freedom and
opportunity. I was wild with excitement that I could ﬁnally get in the game onthe playground. It was as if I had come of age or had been declared worthy tobe a real boy. The doors to my future opened wide. I was prepared to be a marblemaster, or so I thought. Owning my own taw became a right of passage for me.
Suddenly, my jubilation was cut short by a ﬂood of fears that crowded my
thoughts. In every game of marbles, like battles in a war, someone wins andsomeone loses. What if I lose my only marble? Where will I ﬁnd another one?Who am I to think I could win when the other kids have been playing formonths or years? What if I get totally embarrassed? What if I start crying rightthere in front of the toughest guys and the bravest girls? What will they sayabout me? What if they make fun of me? I was petriﬁed.
As I clutched the marble in my hand, I realized how critical it was to my
game and yet knew I couldn’t play without risking it. Finally, I decided that if Imust take the chance, I would take the smallest risk possible. I would challengesomeone of the lowest skill level. Because I had been watching others play mar-bles for months, I knew who the champions were and who to avoid. Even ifthey called me out and teased me for being too chicken to play them, I wouldrefuse to risk my taw on a game I couldn’t win. I would play to win by carefullychoosing the ﬁrst games I entered and the opponents I faced.
I took my chances and got in the game. By the end of fourth grade, my shoot-
ing skills had imp roved considerably. I dared to play anyone in the school under
the right conditions, and I had a gallon can full of marbles as proof of myprogress. They were treasure to me. Each one held a memory, and each had astory of how it had been won. I kept my original white taw safely in a smallerpouch to remind me of how far I had come. It was no longer my best marble forplay, but would always be my favorite, for sentimental reasons.
Sometimes when I teach seminars, I ask which of the attendees consider
themselves to be capitalists. Almost every hand in the room goes up. Then I askhow many have capital. Most of the hands go down. To play in the game of cap-ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1359781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 135italism, one must own or control some capital. Like marbles, capital is the “taw”
that allows us to play the game. Raising capital is a vital skill for anyone whowants to get out of the rat race, as taught by the Rich Dad CASHFLOW game.
Louis Kelso, the father of the Employee Stock Option Plan in the 
United States said, “The right to life implies the right to earn a good income.
When 90 percent of the goods and services are produced by capital workers—people who own capital—as it is in an industrial society like ours, you can’tearn a good income without owning capital.” 
(BILL MOYERS, A WORLD OF IDEAS [NY: DOUBLEDAY, 1990])
Robert Kiyosaki expressed the same principle in one of the Rich Dad business
schools, showing the hierarchy of the economic food chain:
You may notice that those who work for money are on the bottom of the
food chain. They get only crumbs, after everyone else has taken the best returns.
Also notice that the capitalists are at the top of the food chain. Everyone worksfor the capitalists. Capitalists fund all enterprises. The capitalists own and con-trol the majority of the wealth. The biggest returns, the best leverage, and thegreatest tax advantages go to the capitalists. The capitalists are also those whotake the biggest risks. Still, given a choice, why would anyone want to remainan employee, rather than becoming a capitalist?
Working for money is an arduous way to move up the economic food chain.
If you continue to work only for money you will never escape the trap of the ratrace. What is the key to economic freedom? It is the ownership or control ofTIP136 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Capitalists
 Investment Bankers
  Corporations
    Mutual Funds
     Stockholders
      Employees/Laborers
FIGURE 7.19781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 136capital. If you want to be a capitalist instead of an employee, capital is the key.
Capital is your taw. It empowers you to leverage and move ahead faster.
So how does someone who has no capital get started? Where do you go to
get your ﬁrst marble?
There are three basic ways:
1.Save it from your earnings
2.Borrow it from someone else
3.Trade ownership (equity) for capital
Let’s look at each of these methods in more detail.
Saving
Accumulating seed capital by saving money is the long, hard way to get yourtaw, but it has been proven via ble by ﬂedgling capitalists since ancient times. In
his classic book The Richest Man in Babylon, George S. Clason shares a fablethat clearly shows how one can go from the Rich Dad E quadrant (employee)to the S quadrant (specialist/self-employed), and even to the I quadrant (in-vestor), by frugality and sacriﬁce. In America and other capitalist countries,immigrants prove ove r and over again that by working hard—som etimes even
for subsistence wages—and by saving part of what they earn, individuals orfamilies can rise quickly to capital ownership and wealth. Setting aside a portionof one’s labor to accumulate an initial capital stake is within everyone’s reach,just as I employed my own labor to dig in the dirt until I found my ﬁrst marble.However, no matter how much capital you acquire by your own labor, yourearnings will always be limited by the hours you can spend at work. Using onlythe capital you can save from your own earnings means that you will be severelyrestricted in growth and income.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 137
FIGURE 7.2  Rich Dad CASHFLOW® Quadrant9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 137138 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Borrowing
Back in fourth grade, I may have been able to get into a game of marbles sooner
if I had thought to borrow a taw from someone else. But how would I have re-paid the debt if I had lost? These are the kinds of risks we must consider whenborrowing capital as well. As my grandpa Palmer used to say, “Any damn foolcan run into debt, but everyone will crawl out!” In other words, it is easy to gointo debt, but not usually so easy to get back out. Borrowing money has conse-quences, and it is wise to fully consider those consequences before signing forthe debt. Under most market conditions, borrowing money is relatively easyfor strong investors with viable collateral. Paying it back as agreed will deter-mine the true nature of your character and business skills. If you become goodat taking care of Other People’s Money (OPM), you will likely have plenty ofcapital with which to pursue your investment opportunities.
Bad deals chase the money, while the money chases good ones.
The term OPM has become a popular acronym for the concept of raising
capital. OPM can refer to borrowed capital as well as equity capital. It is some-times spoken of with reckless abandon, as though getting others to back youridea is as easy as asking. As simple as some might make it appear, there areproven guid elines and important legalities for qualifying yourself and your proj-
ect to attract the capital of others. I have often heard this said by lenders: “Baddeals chase the money, while the money chases good ones.” In the end, howsuccessful you are at borrowing will be largely determined by the answers tothese two questions:
1.How viable is the opportunity?
2.How clear, concise, complete, compelling, and convincing is the communi-
cation contained in your loan package?
Let’s consider these questions one at a time.
Viable Opportunity
First and foremost, what you propose must be viable—it must make sense. Howdo we deﬁne a viable opportunity? It is something that the average lender couldlook at and say, “Wow, I believe that will work.” The projections of proﬁt arebased on reasonably probable outcomes, not on pie-in-the-sky dreams. The as-sumptions that lead to the bottom line are in harmony with the way thingsTIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 138work in the real world. The outcome is not dependent upon anyone turning
back the tides or walking on water or otherwise doing things that mere humanshave never done before. More importantly, the lender must believe that you can
do it. Just because Donald Trump did it doesn’t mean the average Joe can pullit off. The outcome must be highly likely, given the skills, experience, and re-sources of your team. Above all, it must be economic, which means it mustmake money. Why else would a lender risk capital on your idea?
Loan Package
Two of our companies do real estate lending. As lenders, we see and hear dozensof loan requests each week. Not long ago I received an e-mail from a would-beborrower that consisted of merely six line items, each with a large number atthe end of the line, all totaling $2.44 million. There was nothing else in the e-mail. No borrower information, no outline of the ownership entity, no informa-tion about the structure of the proposed loan, no indication of the value of theproperties that were to be pledged as collateral. Frankly, such a proposal is aninsult to a lender. Underwriters rarely have enough time to sort through themountains of paper and electronic packages that end up on their desks eachday. To have borrowers suppose that, as a lender, I am going to hold their hand,do their work for them, beg for the documents that are needed to underwritethe loan, or spend hours on the phone with them, educating them in the busi-ness of borrowing, communicates to me only how naïve, or perhaps lazy, theborrower must be. We do not risk our capital on naïve or lazy people. We preferhardworking, well-informed, and experienced borrowers. They have a bettertrack record of paying us back. To avoid making a complete fool of yourself,wasting everyone’s time, and killing your chances of getting a loan, take thetime to compile a complete and easy-to-read loan package. In other words, beprepared!
How to Prepare a Loan Package
At a minimum, a good commercial real estate loan package includes the follow-ing twelve items:
1.A brief Executive Summary: This is a one-page concise summary of the
loan request in outline form. An executive summary typically includes:
a. Name and contact information of the borrower;b. A description of the collateral property (address, type, age);c. The requested loan amount; andROBERT KIYOSAKI 1399781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 139d. The proposed terms of the loan (loan to value, interest rate, maturity
date, and balloon or call date, if any).
2.A Table of Contents for the remainder of the package: This allows the
Lender to quickly and conveniently ﬁnd any information that may be of in-
terest without reading the entire binder. It is also in your best interest to in-sert tabs at the front of each section to make the package easy to navigate.The more convenient it is to access the information, the more likely it is thatyour loan proposal will receive full consideration.
3.Maps: Include in the map section a state map, a city map, and a plat map of
the subject property/site.
4.Photos: Include a small group of pictures that give a good idea of the prop-
erty, its condition, and a sense of the neighborhood.
5.Appraisal: If you’ve had a professional appraisal done on the property, in-
clude the full document, or at a minimum, the summary pages. If there is noappraisal, provide some estimation of value, based on cost, comparative mar-ket analysis, or a list of comparable sales in the marketplace.
6.Environmental Study: Because environmental contamination is almost al-
ways an automatic deal killer, it is in your best interest to pay for a Phase OneEnvironmental Report and include it in the package. Such reports are com-piled by environmental engineering ﬁrms. The only exception may be whenthe property is known to have had zero exposure to contaminants, such asmight likely be the case with raw farm land or mountaintop property.
7 .Operating Statement and/or Projections (“Pro forma”): The operating
statement sets forth the historic annual income and expenses on the prop-erty, usually for the past two to three years. This is one of the most importantparts of the package so take extra care to make sure you compile and reportthis information accurately. Perhaps nothing will destroy the credibility ofyour proposal faster than a misstatement of the income or expenses on theproperty. The Pro forma is a projection of future income and expenses relatedto the property. An inaccurate or incomplete Pro forma is evidence that you,the borrower, have not entirely thought through the ﬁnancial future of theproject. That will likely result in the loan being declined.
8.Borrower Financial Information and Credit: This section will typically in-
clude the balance sheets and income statements on you, the borrower, andGuarantors, as well as tax returns for the prior two years. Each borrowerand Guarantor will likely be required to submit a credit report or allow thelender to pull one.140 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 1409.Management Experience: Make sure that you have a person on your team
with the experience to manage the kind of project you are proposing. Include
in the loan package a copy of his or her résumé or professional qualiﬁcationsand experience.
10.Use of Funds Statement: The use of funds statement is a one-page (or less)
description of how you will use the borrowed funds. If the proposed loan isintended to be a purchase money mortgage, which is a term used to describeany mortgage that is taken out to pay for a property at the time of purchase,also include a statement of the source of the down payment.
11.Title Report: Provide a title report on the property from a local title com-
pany. Such a report is generally called a PR (Preliminary Report) or a TitleCommitment.
12.Ask in advance about any submission guidelines your lender might have
and if he would prefer to have you submit your package electronically or inhard copy.
Perhaps most importantly, once your loan is approved and closed, pay it back
on time. Nothing will enhance your status with lenders or do more to encourageadditional funding of your investments than precise performance on your part.I relish the comment Lee Iacocca made when he was chairman of ChryslerCorporation. He said, “We borrow money the old-fashioned way; we pay itback.”
Equity
Raising equity capital is another matter altogether. First of all, there are verystringent securities laws that govern the raising of capital. Do not start solicitingfunds for your business without consulting a good lawyer to make sure you arewithin legal guidelines. The penalties for breaking securities laws can be severe.
Whereas lenders primarily look at collateral values, cash ﬂows, and the
strength of the borrower to repay his loans, venture capitalists who may con-sider investing in your enterprise additionally look to management expertiseand a solid business plan. Raising capital for real estate can take on elements ofboth borrowing and venture capital. When others approach me to be their po-tential joint venture partner, I want to see all of the information contained inthe loan packaging above. Additionally, I must also be satisﬁed concerning thefollowing:ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1419781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 141• Who is providing what to the venture? A real estate investment is made up
of two basic parts: money and management. Who will provide the money
and in what increments? And who will do the work of managing the project?Some investments require more money than work, and some require morework than money. Our companies generally negotiate to provide debt or eq-uity. We may also sometimes choose to structure a combination of both. Asequity investors, or venture capitalists, we will require our potential partnersto answer these questions:
• How much capital are we being asked to risk?• For how long will it be at risk?• Will our rate of return be based on an interest rate paid periodically, with an
equity kicker in the end, or will it be based solely on the upside equity andcash flow?
• What management skills are required to protect the capital and deliver the
projected returns?
• Does anyone on the team possess these skills or will they be contracted from
outside of the ownership group?
• How much of our time and expertise will be required?• How will those who contribute their time to the project be compensated?
Will they receive money or additional equity in the property?
• What is the order of priority for each team member in the disbursement of
funds? Most of the time, a venture is structured to ﬁrst pay expenses, includ-ing interest and personnel costs; second, the costs of sale; third, a paymentof the remaining principal balance on the debt; fourth, a return of the initialjoint venture (equity) capital; and ﬁnally, the disbursement of proﬁts to eachpartner at the pre-agreed percentages. As sponsors of an opportunity, wesometimes agree to disburse proﬁts to our money partners as a ﬁrst priority,until they have achieved a predetermined rate of return, with remainingproﬁts going to ourselves or to the group at large.
A Word About Legal Compliance
I have learned just enough about securities laws to know that they are compli-cated, diverse, and generally unforgiving. Inasmuch as I am not qualiﬁed orwilling to give anyone legal advice, the only guidance I will venture to suggestis this: Make sure you get competent legal counsel if you are going to ask anyoneelse to participate in your projects with you. Do not underestimate the serious-ness of even unintentional violations of securities regulations. The Securities142 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 142and Exchange Commission (SEC) is the regulator of securities issues on the
federal level in the United States. Each state also has wide-ranging, and some-times peculiar regulations for the issuance and governance of securities withinits respective boundaries. You are well advised to stay in compliance with therules and regulations they administer, when your venture falls within the deﬁ-nition of a securities transaction.
A Word About Entity Structure
It is critical to consider what legal structure will best serve the ownership groupand its purposes. Will it be a corporation, a general partnership, a limited part-nership, or a limited liability company? The structure chosen is more importantthan it may appear on the surface, especially when the tax position of each in-vestor is taken into consideration. Once again, seek competent legal advice informing the entity that will own and manage the investment. Garrett Sutton’schapter in this book is a great source of information, as is Garrett himself.
If I had been more astute at age ten, perhaps I could have convinced another
player to spot me some marbles from his bag, with an agreement to share mywinnings with him. In the end, I may have had fewer marbles, or I may havehad more. My treasure would clearly have been reduced by the proﬁts I sharedwith my partner, while on the other hand, getting in the game earlier may haveresulted in more winnings over a longer period of time. You will face similardecisions as you decide how you will raise capital.
Regardless of which method you use to capitalize your investments—saving,
borrowing, or equity—please consider the following perspective on money. Ifyou use your own capital, it is probably painfully clear that it represents months,perhaps years, of work, sacriﬁce, and discipline on your part. Until we have agrubstake of our own we are stuck in the rat race. As employees, we trade ourtime for money. Our time is largely someone else’s capital as long as we arestuck in the E quadrant.
In the end, the time we spend on this planet equals life. Most people
would agree that a human life is sacred and carries a higher value than almost
anything else on earth. Since we trade our time—our very lives—for money orcapital, I conclude that capital equals life. If that is the case, then capital, likelife, is sacred and should be treated as such.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1439781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 143How much different would the annals of business history read if executives
regarded Other People’s Money as a sacred trust, akin to life itself? When an
investor has worked all of his or her life to accumulate capital, then invests in aventure that is mismanaged or illegally operated and the capital is lost, a veryreal part of that investor’s life is destroyed. For the elderly, in particular, thehours, days, weeks, and years are irreplaceable. Risking your own marbles,your own time, your own life capital, is one thing. Taking upon yourself themoral responsibility of safeguarding someone else’s capital is another. I en-courage you to approach the use of OPM with this kind of serious moralgrounding. There is nothing else you can do that will have a more positive in-ﬂuence on your success. If you conduct yourself with integrity not only inword, but in deed, and keep the capital entrusted to you secure and productive,a time will soon come when you will likely have more capital than you can putto use. As suggested earlier in this chapter, the money will begin to chase you,which is perhaps a crude way of saying that as you respect capital, you will at-tract capital.
Think of all the capital that exists in the world. Land, minerals, timber, plants,
animals, ﬁsh, and even some insects and reptiles have capital value. In addition,tools, equipment, machinery, processes, intangibles (such as intellectual assetslike software and know-how), and all forms of money and securities representcapital. Various forms of naturally occurring energy, such as solar, wind, tidal,gravitational, geothermal, human labor, and animal labor (horsepower) consti-tute capital as well.
The reason I ask you to consider this enormous supply of capital is to em-
power you to overcome any thoughts of scarcity. The more we need the money,the less likely we are to believe that it exists in abundance. Under such circum-stances, fear overpowers faith that money is available in ample supply.
Even in difficult economic times, capital is rarely destroyed. It only
changes hands or changes forms.
Consider how capital ﬂows around the world. It is mind-boggling to ponder
the number of individual transactions that take place every day. From the childbuying penny candy at the grocery store, to international banks moving moun-tains of money, to balancing government currency accounts, there are billionsof individual capital ﬂows that take place every day. In its most basic deﬁnition,capital is either energy or a symbol of energy. Capital is the energy that ﬂowsthrough each economic transaction, not the money itself. The money is only aTIP144 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 144symbol of the energy, the value, the increment of human life (time) that is in-
herent in the underlying asset, process, or function.
When we start to see these countless transactions as ﬂows of economic en-
ergy, having real value, instead of as merely the exchange of money, the truenature of capital is revealed. It is not in scarce supply. It is, in fact, inﬁnitelyabundant. It is not all locked up in vaults where you cannot get to it. You alreadypossess a great deal of it in your time, your talent, your knowledge, and in yourability to start where you are to increase your stock of capital. One buried marbleproperly played soon becomes a bag of marbles and perhaps even a barrel. Youneed not wait for anyone else to begin growing your capital. You already havethe power to start where you are to increase your holdings.
What, then, is the trigger that causes capital to ﬂow in each of these individ-
ual transactions? I believe it is human emotion that drives each exchange. Com-merce is driven by emotions such as need, greed, desire, trust, or conﬁdence.Someone once told me that “emotion” is energy in motion. See if this is true byconsidering the following: If a person needs an expensive operation to preservehealth and life, he will do all in his power to gather the money to pay for it. Ifsomeone is hungry, he will move what capital he has to someone who has foodfor sale. If I believe you can teach me something of value, I may direct some ofmy personal resources to you for books or seminars or personal coaching. Ifyou decide to visit your grandma in a distant place, you will most likely pay fortransportation to get from where you are to where you want to go. Notice howin each of these examples the inﬂuence of human desires causes the economicenergy (money) to move.
My family once took a chartered bus trip across the United States. As I sat
on the bus, gazing out the window, I came to a profound realization. Somewherein the middle of Nebraska, while seeing farm after farm and wondering aboutthe people who lived on each one, it struck me. I imagined a couple of peopleliving in each farmhouse who had fallen in love and married. Their love broughtchildren into the family. Every day they worked the farm to provide for theirloved ones. It was then that I suspected the lyrics to the old song that my dadsang to my mother were true, “Love Makes the World Go ’Round.” I realized inthat moment that the economy was actually the energy of human love and otherhuman desires that spur us to creation and consumption of various kinds.
As we continued down Interstate 80 on the same bus, I noticed all the trucks
passing by me in both directions, carrying the freight produced in the factoriesand foundries of America. It was then that I ﬁrst knew that all would be welland that the economy would go on because people would keep falling in love,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1459781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 145keep having children, and keep working hard to give them a good life. The
trucks would keep running, and capital would continue to be exchanged incountless daily transactions that support the needs and desires of human beings.No force on earth, no government blunder, could bring the real economy to ahalt. It was energy in motion and would remain in motion as long as individualhuman beings had any desires for a better life.
So, since capital exists in abundance all around you, how do you cause it to
move from wherever it is now to where you want it to be?
1.First, establish the mind-set of abundance. Ask yourself if you are operating
from fear or from trust, from doubt or from conﬁdence. Be constantly mind-ful that there is no shortage of capital and that it is eager to ﬂow to you, ifyou do what is necessary to attract it and safeguard it. A dear friend of mineshared with me that her family loves blueberries. She had the feeling blue-berries were scarce because they were quite expensive at the grocery store.One day she had the chance to take her boys to the country and pick blue-berries on a farm. For the same price she paid for a small box at the store,she could buy two big ﬂats from the farmer, and he let them eat all theywanted while they picked. She realized that blueberries were in abundantsupply once she had a change of perspective.
2.Qualify yourself to attract capital ﬂows. Make a conscious choice to adopt
an energy within and around yourself that is harmonious with the energy ofthe capital you wish to attract. What kind of energy attracts capital? Read on!
3.Practice full accountability. Take the committed stand that Gene Kranz,
Apollo 13 mission control director (played by the actor Ed Harris in themovie) took during that fated mission. If you saw the movie, you may re-member that there was an explosion that damaged the command modulewhile on its journey to the moon, threatening its ability to return to earth.The astronauts had to extend their supplies of oxygen and electricity to sur-vive. On the ground in Houston, Kranz pulled his team together and declared,“We never lost an American in space. We’re sure as hell not going to lose oneon my watch. Failure is not an option.” He demanded that his engineers ﬁnda way to bring the crew home safely, using only the resources the astronautshad on board. Capital rushes toward that kind of commitment because com-plete accountability inspires conﬁdence, creativity, and can-do attitudes. Tothe total extent of your ability and capacity take personal responsibility tomake sure that no one ever loses a nickel on your watch.
4.Work with integrity. To me, the meaning of integrity is clear. It is simply to
do what you say you will do, when you say you will do it, and to tell the truth146 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 146in all things and under all conditions. Integrity is what integrity does. Being
reliable will set you apart from most of your competition. People want to dobusiness with those who are dependable.
5.Disclose. Provide your potential lenders or investors with all of the infor-
mation you would want to know if you were in their shoes and were consid-ering placing capital with you.
6.Establish the habit of over-communicating. Keep your lenders and in-
vestors constantly informed of important details. This attention shows re-spect and accountability.
7 .Prepare yourself to attract capital ﬂows. You will notice I differentiate be-
tween qualiﬁcation and preparation. Qualiﬁcation is about energy, compe-tency and your state of being. Preparation is the act of taking care of themechanics and the details, where the rubber meets the road. My experiencetells me these are the key areas of preparation.
8.Know your business. Know a good deal from a bad one. Drive yourself to
constantly study and stay abreast of the real estate industry. What are thetrends in ﬁnancing, demographics, product types, customer preferences,building materials and methods, technology, municipal codes, taxation, reg-ulations, and risk management, to name but a few.
9.Write a business plan. Create a comprehensive plan that fully explores the
risks and responses that will be required to generate a proﬁt.
10.Have multiple exit strategies. Do you have enough conﬁdence in your pro-
posed investment, based on solid economic principles and potentially chang-ing conditions, to absolutely believe that you can achieve the projectedresults? Have you run different scenarios? Do you have multiple exit strate-gies? If the worst happens, how will you protect the capital that your in-vestors have entrusted to you?
11.Deﬁne and staff up to provide core competencies. Do you, or does your
team, have the skills, the core competencies, needed to fully execute yourbusiness plan? If something is lacking, are you realistically addressing it?How will you compensate for the weakness? Will you hire someone withthat skill? Will you take on another partner who has the talent? Just imaginetrying to drive your car with one ﬂat tire! Your business won’t run smoothlyif there is a “ﬂat” on the team. An abundance of talent will overcome a mul-titude of challenges.
12.Develop a stellar track record. Protect your reputation by over-performing.
If you are just starting out and have no track record, be honest about it, andclearly communicate to potential lenders and investors that you are awareof your lack of experience. Be prepared to show them how you will deal withROBERT KIYOSAKI 1479781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 147any shortfall in your experience. Remember, experience and expertise can
be hired, too. Robert Kiyosaki continually emphasizes that he isn’t thesmartest guy in every situation, so he surrounds himself with those who un-derstand certain things better than he does. I can’t think of a time that I wasunable to ﬁnd the talent I needed. People of extreme capability love the gameand are usually eager to play with a quality team, even if it is their experiencethe team must rely upon.
13.Take care of business. It has been my experience that my JOB ONE is to
fully focus on whatever business I am operating. Businesses don’t run them-selves. Running a viable business requires the best energy and efforts of theteam. Rich rewards are in store for those who give their all to protect busi-ness operations and to provide all it takes to prosper and turn a proﬁt.
Protect-Provide-Prosper-Profit
When a business does well, everyone wants to be a part of it. Wall Street clamorsto buy shares in any enterprise that is producing a healthy return on investment.On the other hand, you have likely seen the statistics that suggest as many as 90percent of small businesses fail within the ﬁrst ﬁve years. People and companiessquander billions of dollars in investment capital on poor business investments.If you want to attract capital to your business, make your business work. Makeit proﬁtable. Infuse it with passion and the prospect of continued success. Peo-ple invest in real estate ventures to make money. If you de velop a p roven talent
for generating solid returns and offer such an opportunity to others with properdisclosures, they will naturally want to be a part of your enterprise.
As you attract the capital of others, no matter how small-scale at ﬁrst, and
take exquisite care of that capital, your investors will spread the word. Otherswill be knocking on your door to become part of a good thing. It is almost as ifthe only thing you need to do is to p rove your a bility to run your company hon-
orably and proﬁtably. If you do that in the face of the corporate corruption thatseems to be more and more prevalent, capital will seek a home in your enter-prise. However, remember that even when potential investors come to youthrough referrals, you still have the same responsibility to provide all of thedisclosures required by law.
I know these principles work because I applied them to build my own group
of companies from zero to millions in assets over a sixteen-year period. What Iam sharing with you I have learned from ﬁrsthand experience. Business schoolbaloney would have you believe that there is some magical formula, some sci-148 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 148entiﬁc certainty that makes success in business predictable and fail-safe. Non-
sense. There is much value in the average college curriculum, but it is mostlytheory. A college degree is the beginning of the journey, not the end. A diplomais only a way of qualifying yourself for a position on a team in the real worldwhere you will work for money.
It is no mistake that the metaphor of war is so often chosen to describe the
dynamics of business. Once graduation is over, every student must meet thecompetition on the corporate battleﬁeld. Out there, no one is taken prisoner.Economically speaking, everyone lives or dies by his own ability to recognizethe opportunity, strategize the attack, and execute the plan under the ever-changing conditions of battle. When I started the company National Note inDecember of 1992, my vision for it was very different than it is today. I originallyintended to broker notes to institutional buyers for a commission. That put mesquarely in the “S” corner of the Rich Dad CASHFLOW Quadrant. I soon foundthat many institutional note buyers were often too subjective and sometimeseven ﬁckle, I tired of seeing perfectly good proposals turned down for reasonsthat seemed capricious to me.
With IRA funds of my own and limited money from family, friends, and
clients I had known for years, I started buying the notes myself with privatecapital. I soon realized that I was building assets and equity in my company at arather rapid rate. My balance sheet was improving dramatically from year-to-year. It wasn’t until I read Robert Kiyosaki’s book, The CASHFLOW Quadrant,
that I realized I had become an investor (“I” quadrant), instead of merely self-employed (“S” quadrant).
Years later, while teaching a seminar with Robert, I was stunned to learn
that the rapid growth of my company was primarily because I had inadvertentlymanaged to structure it in harmony with the Rich Dad philosophy. Not beingsophisticated in any sense of the word, I simply kept my head down and focusedon managing my business as best I knew how. Others came to me with variousideas and wanted to be part of National Note. Rather than share equity, I joint-ventured new business opportunities with a few of the best people. These en-terprises, funded by National Note, prospered because of my partners’ talentsand National Note’s capital. I split proﬁts with my partners at pre-agreed per-centages, as the companies grow and prosper.
Somewhere along the way, something phenomenal started to happen. Those
to whom we had been faithfully sending checks each month, with never a delin-quency, began to tell their family and friends about us. Our business has grownevery year for the past sixteen years and is ten times larger today than it wasROBERT KIYOSAKI 1499781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 149four years ago. We simply “stuck to our knitting,” as the saying goes, and man-
aged the company in such a way as to make it stronger and stronger to assurethe safety of the capital entrusted to us.
What is the key to such growth? The very principles I am sharing with you
now. By focusing on acquiring quality assets, running our business, telling thetruth, making the required disclosures, under-promising, and over-performing,capital continues to be available to our companies.
From among the people who do business with us today, there are dozens of
inspiring personal stories of how debts were liquidated, stock market losses re-covered, retirements funded, tuition paid, and moms who quit work to stay athome with their babies. These private victories were possible because of thecareful deployment of their capital in real estate and real estate paper. For me,seeing our clients achieve such milestones is the most rewarding aspect of beinga capitalist.
There is no way I could have known when I was ten years old how important
that white marble would become to me. I trust you now understand why I keepa jar of marbles in my ofﬁce. Growing a business does not need to be difﬁcult orhighly technical. By gaining some proﬁciency in the practice of capitalism, justlike learning to shoot marbles, you, too, can build a machine that will crank outproﬁts for you and those who are fortunate enough to be in business with you.
There is no need to gamble or speculate, as so many do when investing. Find
a simple system that works, and work it! Attend to your game of marbles. Pickyour matches (investments) carefully, and celebrate as treasure ﬁlls ﬁrst a bag,then a barrel, and perhaps even a bank vault. I am astonished at how far ourcompanies have come. What a fabulous experience it is to be a capitalist! Whata ride it has been! What a joy it is to look back and relish the journey and tolook ahead with eager anticipation of an exciting future!
Now, could it be your turn? Where will you ﬁnd your “taw”? When will you
enter your ﬁrst game? How long will it take you to acquire more marbles thanyou ever dreamed possible? Those questions are yours to answer, and the jour-ney ahead is yours to begin. Good luck!
Ways to Learn More
www.waynelpalmer.comwww.nce1031.comA soon-to-be published book on real estate formulas, by Wayne Palmer150 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 150Wayne Palmer is widely regarded as a master in the creative structuring
of real estate acquisitions and ﬁnancing, using notes and other forms of
real estate paper, together with 1031 Equity Marketing formulas. His skillscome from thirty years of daily practice of his trade, as the owner andmanager of National Note of Utah, LC and several other companies. Hehas been involved in real estate development since 1978, in Utah, Idaho,
Arizona, Hawai’i, and Minnesota. By way of industry credentials, Wayne is a Licensed Princi-pal Real Estate Broker, a Certiﬁed Real Estate Note Appraiser, a Certiﬁed Cash Flow MasterBroker, a Licensed Continuing Education Provider, and holds the Equity Marketing Specialist(EMS) designation with the National Council of Exchangors.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1519781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 151Bernie Bays has been a friend of mine since the mid-1970s. He is also a fellow
marine and rugby team member. If you go over his record, you can tell he is
no ordinary marine, but a Force Recon Marine, the toughest of the tough. He is
also no ordinary rugby player, playing for USC and for Stanford University on anational championship team. Small wonder he is such a smart and respected realestate attorney.
When I ﬁrst started out in real estate, my deals were small, and I thought I did
not need an attorney. Being naïve, I thought a real estate broker and a good ap-praiser were enough. On my ﬁrst investment property—a small one bedroom, onebath condo on the island of Maui—my little dream bubble was popped. A fewmonths after acquiring the property and putting a tenant in it, netting me a whop-ping $25 a month, the septic system in the condominium complex burst and ﬂoodedthe apartment. The apartment went empty, I began to lose money, the homeownerstold me the septic damage to my unit was my problem, not theirs. My ﬁrst assetbecame a liability, and I learned a priceless but expensive lesson about real estate.Hire an attorney before you invest, not after.
Real estate is more than dirt, sticks, bricks, ﬁnancing, and tenants. Real estate
is also law, agreements, boundaries, and disputes. This is why Bernie Bays is notonly a friend; he is the real estate attorney I call before investing in Hawai’i.
—Robert Kiyosaki8 Bernie BAYS
How to Avoid and Handle 
Real Estate Disputes
1529781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 152One unfortunate reality of real estate deals today is that there is always the
possibility that you can become involved in a dispute with other partici-
pants during the making of the deal. These participants can include sellers,
lenders, construction and planning professionals, construction contractors,and buyers. Success in real estate means not only being great at picking prop-erties, managing them well, and eventually selling at the right time, it alsomeans knowing how to minimize the risk of becoming involved in a protracteddispute.
I have been representing clients involved in real estate–related disputes for
more than thirty-eight years. During that time, I have observed that some par-ticipants in real estate deals are constantly involved in disputes. Others rarelyget into disputes and when they do, they usually manage to resolve them rela-tively quickly. What’s the difference between these two groups of people: theones who seem to get into dispute after dispute and the ones who seldom do?How can you minimize your chances of being involved in a dispute?
Make no mistake about it. Disputes in real estate deals can spoil your party
by diverting time, money, other resources, and, most importantly, emotionalenergy from what you are trying to achieve: a successful real estate deal. Thereare admittedly a few perverse individuals who occasionally come out ahead bypicking ﬁghts in a real estate deal. And there are a few people who thrive onthe negative emotional energy of disputes, even though they may not reallycome out ahead. You want to avoid these people in your real estate deals. Butit’s not always about the people. Sometimes it’s the kind of real estate dealsthat are prone to disputes and you want to avoid those as well.
Disputes in real estate deals can spoil your party by diverting time,
money, other resources, and, most importantly, emotional energy from what
you are trying to achieve: a successful real estate deal.
My objective here is to give you some simple guidelines so you can reduce
your chances of becoming involved in a real estate dispute. I also want to give
you some suggestions for how best to handle the disputes that you cannot avoid.
How to Avoid Disputes
The best defense against a dispute is to avoid the dispute altogether. Here’s mylist of how to keep yourself out of trouble.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1539781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 153Work With a Good, Experienced Broker
Always work with your own real estate broker on a real estate deal. Do not just
work with the seller’s real estate broker when you are buying a property. Youwant to select a broker who has the experience and good sense to look out foryour interests rather than simply pushing you to close the deal at hand in orderto get a commission. You want a broker who is in it for the long term and knowsthat there will be other deals to do with you if this one does not work out. Youwant a trusted broker who will advise you to walk away from the deal if that isthe best thing for you to do under the circumstances.
I recently concluded a case for a client who had purchased a development
property through the listing broker without using his own broker. My clientinitially told the broker that he could not buy the property because of the three-unit affordable housing requirement. The broker told my client that if my clientwould sell him three of the lots in the proposed subdivision at a reduced price,he would construct the affordable housing on the three lots and satisfy the re-quirement. My client allowed the broker’s lawyer to draft the agreement re-garding the three lots and proceeded with the purchase of the property. He didnot have his own lawyer review the agreement, but instead just trusted theseller’s broker. After my client purchased the property, he discovered that theaffordable housing requirement for the project was actually ﬁve units, not three.Even more shocking, the broker said that he was not obligated to build any af-
fordable housing at the site. “That was just something we discussed that I mightdo if it worked out,” the broker said.
The broker then demanded that my client convey the three lots to him at the
reduced price and threatened to sue. When my client came to me, we discoveredthat the agreement drafted by the broker’s attorney provided for a sale of thelots to the broker at a reduced price, but said nothing about building the afford-able housing.
My client did not have a legal leg to stand on. We were ﬁnally able to settle
the case by conveying only two of the three lots to the broker. My client wasleft to satisfy the ﬁve-unit affordable housing requirement on his other lots.This case demonstrates how dangerous it is not to have your own broker repre-senting you in a real estate transaction. It also demonstrates how dangerous itis not to have your own lawyer representing you in documenting your agree-ments, which is what the next section is about.
Do not just work with the seller’s real estate broker when you are buying
a property. Y ou want a trusted broker who will advise you to walk away from the
deal if that is the best thing for you to do.TIP154 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 154Consult with a Good, Experienced Lawyer Early and Often
I was giving a speech a few months ago to a group of real estate developers and
joked that in real estate deals you should get a lawyer involved “early and often.”I was joking, but there is a good deal of truth in what I said. The truth here isthat an ounce of prevention in lawyer time spent drafting the deal contracts isworth a pound of cure in the form of costly litigation. So spend a little moneyon lawyers in the beginning to get clear contracts that protect your interests. Itmay save you a fortune in litigation costs later on. These are my suggestions toget the most value from your lawyer in a real estate deal:
• Find an experienced real estate attorney you trust and can afford.• Keep him or her up to speed on pending transactions and request advice
early and often.
• Specifically, have your lawyer involved in the preparation of any term sheets
or letters of intent, even though they may be nonbinding. This is usuallywhen the buyer and the seller agree upon important deal points that are dif-ficult to change later on.
• Have your lawyer prepare any binding contracts.• Do not try to save money by allowing the lawyer on the other side to prepare
the first draft of the contracts. It is better to spend the money to have yourlawyer prepare the first draft. It is often difficult to change a contract draftedby the other side. Once they have prepared and app roved it, they tend to be-
come wedded to it.
• Involve your lawyer in your due diligence process for any property you are
buying. Skimping on legal due diligence to save money is a bad idea, a falseeconomy. If a property is worth putting under contract, then it is worthspending the money on a thorough due diligence including legal.
The truth here is that an ounce of prevention in lawyer time spent draft-
ing the deal contracts is worth a pound of cure in the form of costly litigation.
Insist on Clear Contracts that Protect Your Interests
I handle real estate litigation that results when real estate deals go bad. Oftenthese cases result from poorly drafted contracts that do not do a good job ofprotecting the legitimate interests of the parties. For example, I have had twocases in the last year or so where, believe it or not, the contracts really did notrequire one of the parties to follow through on his commitments to completethe real estate projects that were the subject of those contracts. Clearly the in-tent of the parties was to execute contracts that were binding, but the contractsTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1559781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 155156 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
they signed did not effectively do the job. In one case, the party ﬁnancing the
development just refused to proceed with the project, even though the marketwas good and the project would have been proﬁtable. Unfortunately, the con-tracts did not explicitly require the investor to proceed. The developers had al-lowed the investor’s lawyer to prepare the agreements without hiring their ownlawyer, which turned out to be a very costly mistake.
In the other case, the investors gave the developer the money he said he
needed to complete the development. Unfortunately the contracts did not reallyobligate him to ﬁnish the project, and the contracts also prevented the investorsfrom replacing the developer, even if he completely failed to ﬁnish the project.The lesson here is to insist on clear contracts that obligate the parties to dowhat they have agreed to do and to have a lawyer represent you who is lookingout for your interests and protecting your rights.
You are entitled to contracts that spell out precisely what you expect to hap-
pen in the real estate deal; contracts that reduce the uncertainty and keep am-biguity to a minimum. You also want to make absolutely sure the other partiesare required to do exactly what you expect them to do when you expect themto do it. Spell out the consequences if the other parties do not do what you ex-pect them to do. By the same token, you also want to know what the conse-quences will be if you do not or cannot uphold your side of the agreement. Agood lawyer can help you deﬁne and limit your downside as much as possiblein those situations. Later we’ll talk about limiting remedies in more detail, buthere’s some legal advice: If you are not sure you can perform under the termsof the contract, then you should not sign it.
Beyond these words of wisdom, take the time to read and understand the
contracts you are going to sign. In doing so, your real estate broker and yourlawyer can give you all the help you need. Let them help you identify any risksthat others will not perform or that you cannot perform, and make the necessarychanges to ﬁx the problems. Don’t hesitate to have things explained again ifyou do not understand. And don’t worry about looking stupid. The more youunderstand, the smarter you will get. The stupid thing is to sign a contract youreally do not understand.
Y ou are entitled to contracts that spell out precisely what you expect 
to happen in the real estate deal; contracts that reduce the uncertainty and
keep ambiguity to a minimum. Y ou also want to make absolutely sure the other parties are required to do exactly what you expect them to do when you expect them to do it.TIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 156Carefully Specify and Limit Remedies in the Contract
Much of the uncertainty regarding real estate contracts can be eliminated by
clearly specifying remedies. For example, real estate contracts often providethat the seller’s only remedy if the buyer defaults is to keep the buyer’s deposit.On the other hand, if you are a seller, you want to limit the buyer’s remedy tojust getting the deposit back and you want to speciﬁcally preclude the buyerfrom getting what is called “speciﬁc performance.”
“Speciﬁc performance” is an equitable remedy that gives the buyer the right
to legally compel the seller to sell the property to the buyer upon the terms inthe contract. If the buyer is arguably entitled to speciﬁc performance, the buyermay have the ability to tie up the seller’s property in court for years while theparties litigate their respective obligations under the contract and who didwhat. This could effectively give the buyer an option on the seller’s propertyfor years with only the deposit at risk. This is not where you want to be if youare a seller. If you cannot completely negotiate out speciﬁc performance, youwant to limit the situations where the buyer is entitled to seek speciﬁc per-formance as much as possible.
“Specific performance” is an equitable remedy that gives the buyer 
the right to legally compel the seller to sell the property to the buyer upon 
the terms in the contract. As a seller, if you cannot completely negotiate outspecific performance, you want to limit it as much as possible.
Let me share with you a story of how powerful speciﬁc performance can be.
I represented a large hotel chain in litigation that resulted from the failed sale
of a trophy resort hotel in Honolulu. The buyer had failed to perform accordingto the exact terms of the contract, so my client ﬁnally canceled the deal andkept the buyer’s $1 million deposit. The buyer had also spent more than$200,000 on a lengthy due diligence before my client canceled the contract.Had I been involved earlier, I would have recommended that my client give thebuyer more time to perform and would have carefully positioned the buyer be-fore canceling. But by the time the case got to me, the contract had been can-celed, and the buyer had sued. We asked the court for summary judgmentwithout a trial based upon the fact that the buyer had not met the time deadlinesprovided for in the contract. We got lucky and the federal court gave us sum-mary judgment against the buyer.
After the hearing, I advised the top management of the hotel chain that we
had been very lucky to get summary judgment, and that the court’s decisionTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1579781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 157might be reversed on appeal. I told them that they did not want a premier hotel
tied up for years by the buyer’s potential right to speciﬁc performance whilethe appeal got resolved. I recommended that they use this opportunity to settlewith the buyer by returning some of the deposit. But warmed by the glow ofvictory, they refused to offer the buyer anything, and I was reprimanded by asenior partner for spoiling our victory with my dismal predictions about anappeal.
To make a long story short, I left the ﬁrm with some of my colleagues to
form our own ﬁrm, and someone else handled the appeal. Years later, after thehotel had increased 50 percent in value, the appeals court ruled that the buyershould be allowed to proceed with the purchase of the hotel at the originalprice with full credit for the deposit the seller had retained.
Here are some words of experience:
• Limit the buyer’s right to speciﬁc performance whenever possible• Always try to resolve the dispute instead of rolling the dice in litigation
In that case, the seller’s failure to limit speciﬁc performance and insistence
on keeping the buyer’s $1 million tied up a premier hotel for years and resultedin the sale of an $80 million hotel for $55 million. Not a good outcome!
Avoid Problem People
Do not do real estate deals with people who are likely to be trouble down theroad. Some people get into disputes with everyone. You want to do online liti-gation checks on people you are considering doing business with. If they havebeen involved in a lot of litigation you want to avoid them. This is also anothergood reason for you to avoid litigation; so that other people will not avoid doingbusiness with you! Conversely, you want to do business with people who havea history and reputation for working things out when a real estate deal hits arough spot. You want to have a mutual trust and respect for the other peopleinvolved in a real estate deal whenever possible, especially a real estate devel-opment project that will go on for several years.
Do online litigation checks on people you are considering doing
business with. Avoid litigation so people will do business with you!
Rough spots are sure to come up, and potential disagreements are certain to
arise. You want to be involved with people who will work them out with you,TIP
TIP158 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 158not make a mountain out of every molehill. The last thing you want is someone
who will blow up your deal in litigation to p rove they are right.
Avoid Problem Deals
Some deals are just more trouble than they are worth. Some deals get morecomplicated, involved, and difﬁcult as they progress. And the more complicatedand difﬁcult the deal becomes, the more likely there are to be disputes later onthat will be difﬁcult to resolve. So when the deal gets more and more difﬁcultand the brain damage mounts, you need to ask: Is it worth it? Is this deal sogood and so beneﬁcial for you that it is worth the brain damage and risk that isinherent in complex, difﬁcult deals? Some are worth it, and you may want tocontinue. Most are not, and you will be better off letting those go. Let someoneelse deal with all the headaches and problems if the potential beneﬁt to you isreally not worth the trouble. If the beneﬁt is there and you decide to go ahead,then the help of a good lawyer and the need for clear contracts become doublyimportant. However, even a good lawyer can do only so much to overcome therisks inherent in a difﬁcult deal.
The more complicated and difficult the deal becomes, the more likely
there are to be disputes later on—and problem people and problem deals often
go hand in hand.
The purchase of a large ranch that I helped a friend put together several
years ago was a deal that was just too difﬁcult and complicated. A limited part-
nership owned the ranch and the general partner who originally formed thegroup that owned the ranch had sold his interest to a stranger who had gotteninto litigation with the holder of the grazing license. In order to buy the ranch,my friend had to put together another partnership composed of some of thepartners in the original partnership that owned the ranch and some new in-vestor partners. We also had to get a federal farm loan, renegotiate the under-lying ground lease to extend it to twenty-ﬁve years, settle the litigation betweenthe general partner and the licensee, and resolve the disagreements amongeveryone as to how all this should be done. I was the person responsible for do-ing all of this. As I look back, the brain damage, work, and stress involved intrying to put this extremely complicated deal together clearly outweighed anygain. The deal ﬁnally collapsed of its own weight when the buyer went on along-planned, month-long family vacation when the deal was supposed to close.Luckily, no one involved got sued; we just wasted a lot of time and money on adeal that was just too difﬁcult and complicated.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1599781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 159Another point to consider is that problem people and problem deals often
go hand in hand. Clear contracts can go only so far in controlling problem people
in the context of a problem deal. The probability of serious disputes that willbe difﬁcult, if not impossible to resolve without litigation goes up exponentially.Some experienced real estate developers and investors would say that no dealis worth going through the brain damage, emotional drain, and risk of problempeople and problem deals and would advise you to just walk away from them. Iwill just say that the problems will be more numerous and much worse thanyou expect so you need to be sure the deal is really worth it. A few deals arethat good, but the vast majority are simply not worth it.
Do a Thorough Due Diligence, Including Legal Due Diligence
Due diligence is a period of time designated within a contract that allows abuyer to check out the property and the deal before committing to close. Usuallythe buyer’s deposits are refundable until the buyer notiﬁes the seller that theproperty and the deal are acceptable. At that point, the buyer’s deposit “goeshard” (becomes nonrefundable) and the buyer is also usually required to in-crease the deposit so that the buyer will lose a substantial amount of money ifthe buyer fails to close. This nonrefundable deposit also gives the seller comfortthat the deal will close.
If you are a buyer and you think a deal is worth doing, then it is worth
spending the money to do a thorough due diligence, including careful legal 
due diligence.
If you are a buyer and you think a deal is worth doing, then it is worth spend-
ing the money to do a thorough due diligence, including careful legal due dili-
gence. If the deal is big, then you need to spend a substantial amount of money
to check it out carefully before you agree to close. Many disputes can beavoided if you check out the property and the deal very carefully before youcommit to close. If you discover problems or issues at the due diligence stage,you can insist that the contract be amended to fairly deal with the problemsyou have discovered. If you need more time to complete your due diligence,show the seller the effort you are making and the money you are spending onthe deal and ask for an extension of time. You will usually get it if the seller isconvinced you are proceeding in good faith. But sometimes the seller won’tfeel that way.TIP160 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 160I recently had a development property in escrow and delayed the legal due
diligence to save money. I instead focused a lot of time and money on planning
the proposed subdivision and locating an adequate water source for the prop-erty. When I ﬁnally started the legal due diligence, my lawyers discovered anunusual legal restriction that prevented us from developing the subdivisionproject we had planned for the property. As a result, all the money we had spenton engineering and land planning was completely wasted.
How to Avoid Real Estate Disputes
Avoid disputes in your real estate deals by doing the following:
• Work with a good, experienced broker.• Consult with a good, experienced lawyer early and often.• Insist on clear contracts that protect your interests.• Carefully specify and limit remedies in the contract.• Avoid problem people.• Avoid problem deals.• Do a thorough due diligence, including legal due diligence.
How to Handle Real Estate Disputes
Even if you follow the steps I have outlined above, no contract is perfect, and
conditions may change in ways that may make the deal more difﬁcult for oneor more of the parties. As a result, disputes can arise, even when you have clearcontracts with decent people: One party may also just want to try to imp rove
the deal after it is agreed upon. So how do you handle the disagreements thatdo arise in your real estate deals? The simple answer is that you should alwaysdo your best to work it out. In doing this, you may want to consider the followingsuggestions:
Consult with a Good, Experienced Litigation 
Lawyer to Avoid Litigation
Strangely enough, a good litigation lawyer knows better than anyone that liti-
gation in real estate deals seldom pays off and also knows the best ways to avoidit. While helping you avoid litigation, an experienced litigation lawyer can alsoput you in the best position possible if litigation cannot be avoided. He or sheROBERT KIYOSAKI 1619781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 161can also make sure you do not give up the farm or get bullied by the other par-
ties. There is usually some middle ground between getting pushed around anddoing your part to resolve disagreements. A good lawyer can help you ﬁnd thatmiddle ground.
But here is a fair warning. Litigation lawyers make a lot more money by rep-
resenting you in litigation than they do in helping you avoid it. Some do nothave enough work and may have a ﬁnancial self interest in prolonging your dis-pute, or even aggravating it. Some lawyers also are just enamored with the liti-gation process and get carried away with protecting your position to the pointthey lose sight of the real objective, which is resolving the dispute for you asquickly and cheaply as possible. You do not want these unbalanced lawyers rep-resenting you. You want lawyers helping you who have the experience and goodjudgment to strike the right balance between protecting your interests and re-solving your dispute.
Experience warning: Litigation lawyers make a lot more money by repre-
senting you in litigation than they do in helping you avoid it. Choose carefully.
When Disputes Arise, Do Whatever You Can to Work It Out
As I have said, disagreements may occur in real estate deals, even though youhave had clear contracts prepared by a good lawyer. Generally, the more com-plicated the deal and the longer it lasts, the more likely there are to be disagree-ments. For example, a joint venture agreement to develop a planned communityover a ten- to twenty-year period is almost certain to involve a number of dis-agreements, while the sale of a house in “as is condition” for cash to close inthirty days is much less likely to generate disagreements.
My advice is when disagreements arise, you should do your best to work out
the disagreements as soon as possible. This can usually be done by respectingthe other party’s interests while protecting your own. There is no need to forcethe other party to live up to the letter of the contract if you can accommodatetheir legitimate interests without hurting yourself. You are almost always betteroff giving up a little ground, generating some good will, and resolving the dis-agreement before it becomes a serious dispute. Here are some suggestions:
• Respect the legitimate interests of the other party, and try to accommodate
them whenever you can. There is usually a way to respect the other party’sinterests while protecting your own. For example, if you are selling a prop-TIP162 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 162erty, and the buyer wants to extend due diligence for thirty days, ﬁgure out a
way to do it, maybe by getting a cash payment. This point is demonstratedby a case I handled several years ago for a very wealthy client whose namesome of you would recognize. He was buying a large oceanfront resort prop-erty for development, and the seller refused to extend the time for due dili-gence in a situation where it was reasonable to do so. The seller’s refusal toextend due diligence and abrupt cancellation of the sale precipitated a law-suit by my client that tied up the seller’s property for years and eventuallyled the seller to sell the property to my client for about $2 million less thanthe contract price, even though the real estate market had gone up. All thiscould have been avoided if the seller had just given my client a thirty-day ex-tension for due diligence.
• Generate clear correspondence to the other side with the help of your lawyer.
This will often help avoid litigation and, if not, this correspondence will bevaluable evidence for you in any litigation.
• You can usually make substantial concessions to resolve disputes and avoid
litigation and still come out way ahead. The cost of litigation is always higherthan you expect. The case always costs more than you expect and there arehidden costs. The emotional cost of litigation can be overwhelming for manypeople and the lost time, energy, and opportunities can also be huge and maybe more expensive than the direct costs of the lawyers and experts who par-ticipate in the case. The adage “avoid litigation at all costs” is only slightlyoff the mark.
Y ou are almost always better off giving up a little ground, generating
some good will and resolving the disagreement before it becomes a serious
dispute.
Try Mediation
When you have tried your best and have been unable to settle the dispute di-
rectly with the other party, you may want to try mediation. Mediation is an ab-breviated dispute resolution process where an experienced professional helpsthe parties reach a voluntary settlement of their dispute.
A number of years ago when mediation was ﬁrst used, it had a very high suc-
cess rate, between 80 and 90 percent. In recent years, the success rate is muchlower. Today, the mediation process is only as good as the mediator. Highlyskilled, experienced mediators still maintain a high success ratio while lessskilled mediators probably succeed in less than half their attempts. MediationTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1639781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 163164 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
can work when you select the right mediator, and that is probably the most im-
portant factor in a successful mediation.
The second most important factor is a mutual desire by the parties to resolve
the dispute in the mediation. Mediations used to take place in one day, but todaya good mediator may work for as long as one or two months, going back andforth with the parties to resolve a dispute. A good mediator will put in whatevereffort it takes to succeed. I was the mediator appointed by the court to resolvea series of interrelated cases that were estimated to use up one year of courttime if they were not settled. That mediation lasted several months before Isucceeded, but it saved a fortune in lawyers’ fees and court time. It was wellworth the effort I put into it.
Mediation can work when you select the right mediator and when there
is a mutual desire by the parties to resolve the dispute.
Another way to improve the odds for success in mediation is to begin the
process with a comprehensive settlement offer that includes all the details of asettlement. You then want to insist that the negotiation of major terms takeplace within the context of this comprehensive agreement so you will knowexactly what you are agreeing to.
Mediation is relatively inexpensive if it is successful and is much better than
any other method of formal dispute resolution. However, if it is unsuccessful,then nothing has been accomplished, and the mediation will have been a wasteof time and money. Because mediation can be so efﬁcient and effective, manyreal estate contracts require mediation before arbitration or litigation. I rec-ommend that you include a provision requiring mediation in most contracts.
Several years ago, I represented a client in a case that seemed ripe for medi-
ation. The parties decided to pay a blue ribbon mediator $10,000 for one day,and we all ﬂew to San Francisco to have him mediate the case. Although themediator was very experienced and had a good reputation, he completelyscrewed up this mediation and failed to get any concrete settlement offer outof the other side. My client was so anxious to resolve the case that he made re-peatedly lower offers to the other side without any counter offer, all contraryto the instructions his business advisor and I gave him repeatedly. The clientnegotiated against himself throughout the day and reduced his settlement offerfrom $500,000 (which was a fair deal for the other side) down to somethingsubstantially under $100,000, which the arrogant folks on the other side shouldhave jumped at.TIP9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 164The case ﬁnally settled years later when the vice president of the real estate
title insurance company (who was himself an attorney) called me directly and
said we had to settle the case right then. He said that he could no longer takethe amount the case was costing. He indicated his lawyer’s fees had already ex-ceeded $1 million with no end in sight. I recalled that his attorney had braggedafter an earlier hearing in the case that he had “bought a new car” with the feesfrom the case. The title company ﬁnally agreed to pay my client $850,000 incash to settle a case that could have been settled at the outset for less than$100,000 in the mediation. I estimate the total cost to the title company waswell over $2 million, all because it did not accept my client’s offer in the medi-ation. You should avoid making this mistake!
Consider Arbitration
If settlement fails and mediation fails, you may want to consider arbitration asan alternative to litigation in court. Arbitration is a trial conducted by an expe-rienced arbitrator paid by the parties instead of a judge or jury who are paid bythe federal or state government. Many real estate contracts require arbitrationinstead of litigation. Where the contract requires arbitration, then the partiesare required to resolve the dispute by arbitration, and any court litigation initi-ated by either party based upon the contract will be dismissed by the court infavor of arbitration under the terms of the contract.
The arbitrator hears the evidence and makes a binding and ﬁnal decision
based upon the evidence and the law. Your ability to appeal a bad decision madeby an arbitrator is very limited. Arbitration used to be quicker and cheaper thanlitigation, but today it is unclear whether there is any net beneﬁt to arbitrationover litigation. Because the arbitrator is getting paid and a refusal to hear allevidence may be grounds to upset the arbitration decision, arbitrations can tendto go on forever, can become more expensive than litigation, and may not getthe case resolved any quicker.
The quality of arbitrators can also vary greatly with some having difﬁculty
deciding cases correctly. Because the beneﬁts of arbitration are unclear, the trendtoward requiring arbitration instead of litigation in real estate contracts has beencurtailed to some extent. The arbitration requirement has now been deletedfrom some real estate contracts in favor of traditional court litigation. For exam-ple, the standard real estate “Purchase Contract” used by real estate agents inHawai’i was recently revised to delete the mandatory arbitration requirement.
To me, arbitration and litigation are now a toss up with no clear-cut advan-
tage to either. If your case is assigned to a good judge that your attorney hasROBERT KIYOSAKI 1659781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 165conﬁdence in then you should stick with the judge. On the other hand, if your
case is assigned to a poor judge and you can agree with the other side on a goodarbitrator, then you may want to opt for arbitration. For example, both sides ina court case I handled recently agreed to arbitration instead of going throughthe litigation process. We selected a very experienced retired judge as the arbi-trator, and my client just received a very fair award that the other side has paidin full. In that case, the arbitration was completed promptly and worked outvery well for my client.
Arbitrations can tend to go on forever, become more expensive than 
litigation, and may not get the case resolved any quicker. Because the benefits
of arbitration are unclear, the trend toward requiring arbitration instead of litigation in real estate contracts has been curtailed somewhat.
Litigation Is Your Last Resort
If you are unable to resolve the dispute by negotiation or mediation and your
contract does not require arbitration, then you are left with litigation. As I saidearlier, litigation can be very expensive and emotionally draining. The directcost—meaning cash—can be very high, and the indirect costs in terms of wastedtime and emotional energy can be even higher. But there are also opportunitiesto resolve the dispute. The court will usually agree upon a request by eitherparty to conduct settlement conferences in an effort to resolve the case earlyand without the expense of a trial. The court may also appoint a mediator tohelp settle the case. In my experience, a court-appointed mediator has a betterchance of success than one without court backing.
In one case where I was acting as a court-appointed mediator, several of the
parties were not even paying their own lawyers or returning their phone calls,much less contributing to a settlement of the case. Because I had been appointedby the court, I was able to get the presidents of those large companies on thephone and get their attention with some direct talk, and eventually I got theircooperation in contributing to a global settlement of a number of complicatedinterrelated cases.
There may also be opportunities to ﬁle motions to decide or limit issues in
advance of the trial. However, generally things are not going well if you are em-broiled in the litigation process. If you end up there, then you are left with noalternative but to do your best to win with the understanding that it will bevery expensive.
A case earlier in my career demonstrates the ﬁnancial and emotional toll
that litigation can take. I recall sitting at the counsel table in court in the morn-TIP166 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 166ing waiting for the trial to resume. The man on the opposing side was sitting at
his table, waiting for his lawyer to arrive. I could not help feeling sorry for him;he looked so dejected. His lawyer had refused to settle the case, and he hadbeen forced to go into this trial that was not going well for him. Things took aturn for the worse when the sheriff came in and served him with a complaintin a separate case that had been ﬁled against him by his own lawyer to collectthe fees he was owed. This caused a great deal of dissention between the clientand his lawyer who arrived a few minutes later. The dissention lasted throughthe rest of the trial and probably contributed to the large monetary award thecourt made against this poor individual. Leaving aside the ethical problemswith his lawyer, this graphically demonstrates the emotional and ﬁnancial costof litigation.
The direct cost—meaning cash—of litigation can be very high, 
and the indirect costs in terms of wasted time and emotional energy 
can be even higher.
Never Quit Trying to Resolve the Dispute  
No Matter Where You Are in the Process
Always keep in mind that mediation, arbitration, and litigation are only means
to an end: resolving a dispute. No matter where you stand in these processes,you should never quit trying to resolve the case on some basis you can live with.Never quit trying to work things out with the other side. Also never hesitate totake the initiative in trying to settle. Don’t worry too much about appearingweak because you have taken the initiative. Only a fool would not want to settlea case if it is at all possible. The other side is probably not having any more funthan you are, and as both sides get progressively more fed up with the time andexpense of litigation, they may be more willing to settle. So never stop trying tocome up with alternative ways to resolve the dispute.
Don’t worry too much about appearing weak because you have 
taken the initiative to settle. Only a fool would not want to settle a case 
if it is at all possible.
Several years ago I represented the developer of the only large, new oceanfront
hotel developed in Waikiki over the past twenty years. The owners and residents
of the condominium apartment building across the street had opposed his projectfrom the beginning through their association of apartment owners. They hadcontested the shoreline permit required for any oceanfront development inTIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1679781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 167Hawai’i and had appealed the granting of that permit all the way through the
court system. They also contested a number of zoning variances that the devel-oper required for the construction of the hotel. To say that my client had a greatdeal of animosity toward these people would be an understatement.
I ﬁled a motion in the case to have the variances upheld as a matter of law so
that my client could proceed with the construction of the hotel. The argumentbefore the judge went very well. We were well organized and made a clear,compelling presentation using visual aids, while our opposition made a sloppy,disjointed presentation. The judge also appeared receptive to our arguments.To observers in the courtroom, including my client, it looked like we were sureto win. I told my client after the hearing that I thought the judge’s positive re-action was because of my favorable relationship with him, and that my intuitionwas telling me that we were going to lose the motion and the variances thatwould sabotage his plans for the hotel. My client was not buying it. He was atthe hearing, and he was conﬁdent we were going to win.
Nevertheless, I started negotiations with the lawyer on the other side for my
client to make a cash payment to the condo association in exchange for droppingits opposition to the variances. The association ﬁnally agreed to accept $150,000to drop the case. My client refused, even though this case could sabotage his$100 million hotel project if he lost. He was also infuriated with me for wastingtime and showing weakness by negotiating with his enemies. He told me to stopdealing with them and just wait for the judge’s favorable decision. I got the judgeto postpone his decision and continued to negotiate a reduced amount with theassociation. The client also rejected that offer and threatened to ﬁre me. I con-tinued to negotiate. Finally, the association agreed to accept $55,000 to settlethe case. My client was very angry with me, but I kept calling and recommendingthat he accept the offer. I pointed out how small the amount was and how muchwas at stake. He told me never to call again about the offer. I continued to call.He again threatened to ﬁre me. I did not let up, and he ﬁnally agreed to acceptthe offer and paid the $55,000 to settle the case. My client considered it a com-plete waste of money since he was conﬁdent he was going to win.
I went to see the judge after the case was settled, and he told me that he
thought all the variances were wrong and that he was going to strike down allof them. Shortly after we settled the case on the variances, we won the appealon the shoreline permit, and my client was able to proceed with what is now abeautiful oceanfront hotel owned and operated by another one of my clients.So this story had a happy and proﬁtable ending, which is your goal in all real168 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 168estate deals. The moral here is this: Keep trying to settle, and never take the
risk of an adverse court decision if you can avoid it.
So, don’t reconcile yourself to trudge down the path of seemingly endless
acrimony in litigation if you can get a resolution you can live with. You are al-most always better off settling than you will be by taking the risk of an uncertainoutcome in litigation. Because of the complication of real estate deals and thelimited remedies that can be provided by the court, in many situations a settle-ment is often a much better resolution for both parties than litigation, even forthe “winner.” In short, you may not be able to get what you really need from acourt decision, even if you win.
How to Resolve Real Estate Disputes
T ry to resolve the disputes you cannot avoid by doing the following:
• Consult with an experienced litigation lawyer to avoid litigation.• When disputes arise, do whatever you can to work it out.• T ry mediation.• Consider arbitration.• Litigation is your last resort.• Never stop trying to resolve the dispute no matter where you are in this process.
Conclusion
You are almost always better off settling your disputes in a reasonable, fair way
that respects the interests of the other parties while protecting your own thanyou are having the dispute decided by an arbitrator, a judge, or a jury. And mostof all, the best solution is to avoid disputes altogether by going into the rightreal estate projects, with the right people, the right mind-set, the right contracts,and the right legal representation.
Bernie Bays is a partner in Bays, Deaver, Lung, Rose & Holma, a boutique
real estate ﬁrm based in Honolulu, Hawai’i, and is one of the few attorneys
in Hawai’i who is board certiﬁed as a civil trial specialist by the NationalBoard of T rial Advocacy and the Hawai’i Supreme Court. During his thirty-eight year career, Bernie has represented clients in landmark real estatecases before the Hawai’i Intermediate Court, the Hawai’i Supreme Court,
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1699781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 169and the U.S. Supreme Court. His experience encompasses a broad range of business and
real estate cases, including the representation of minority and majority shareholders, cor-porate proxy ﬁghts, antitrust representation of both plaintiffs and defendants, as well as lit-igation concerning real estate sales, commercial leases, land use problems, rentrenegotiations, claims for economic loss and lost proﬁt, property damage, general and lim-ited partner disputes, condominium and subdivision problems, land valuation issues, andcondemnation.170 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_1:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:04 PM  Page 170PART 2
Y our Real Estate
Project•MEL SHULTZ
•CURTIS OAKES
•JOHN FINNEY
•SCOTT MCPHERSON
•KIM DALTON
•CRAIG COPPOLA
•KEN MCELROY9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 1719781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 172
This page intentionally left blank Mel is my neighbor. We met at a neighborhood holiday party. I liked him im-
mediately because he is a real estate developer and was a longtime owner
of two professional sports teams. There is nothing like sitting in the owner’s seat
at a Phoenix Suns basketball game. The players, cheerleaders, and the action aremuch more intense at the court level. Usually I sit higher up and need to use binoc-ulars to see the game.
One of the advantages of having a friend like Mel is that I get to ﬁnd out where
the next growth areas are going to be. Being a land developer, he is operating three-to-ten years out into the future. Not only do his developments expand the city,Mel and his high-proﬁle team are responsible for bringing new life back into down-town urban areas.
Mel is a great neighbor, friend, and a real estate visionary. Whenever I want to
know about the future and where to invest, I call Mel Shultz.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Have you ever been driving around your city or town and passed by an
open ﬁeld and wondered if that ﬁeld might be the only undeveloped land
in the area? I asked myself that question many times, and actually found it9 Mel SHULTZ
Buy by the Acre, 
Sell by the Foot 
Understanding Real Needs, Financial
Logic, and Asking Questions
1739781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 173pretty fascinating. I found it so fascinating, in fact, that the question itself actu-
ally jump-started my real estate career, and the discovery became my strategy.
Driving through your city or town can reveal a great deal about real estate.
For instance, you may have noticed that houses tend to dot the interiors of mostcities and towns while shopping, ofﬁce, and other commercial properties gen-erally run along the major streets. This all makes sense once you start to noticeand make mental notes of how most cities and towns develop.
In the late 1970s, driving around seemed like a good way to ﬁnd real estate. I
didn’t own any sophisticated tools other than maps and a car to explore oppor-tunities, although I did buy one of the ﬁrst giant mobile phones that looked andfelt like a brick. Driving along the main streets of my city provided all the optionsneeded to buy property during this time before instant information. When Isaw larger parcels that were skipped over by development, yet were right inthe path of growth or on the beaten path, it made sense to ﬁnd out who ownedthese underserved parcels and inquire about the status. It seems pretty simpleand obvious; however, there were ample spots that were ignored by most landbuyers and developers. Finding the owners was just one call away to the titlecompany. Once I found the owner’s number, I handled it just like I learned inmy insurance business training: pick up the phone and meet the prospect. Theseprospects were slightly different, though. Rather than the buyers I was used tocalling, this time I was calling sellers, and I was offering to give people moneyrather than asking them to write checks.
Hard to believe, but it’s always easier to buy something than it is to sell.
Think about it. In your own life, you’ll ﬁnd it to be true. The problem is that theowner knows that what they own is valuable, so it’s worth holding on to. Onthe other hand, the owner may not want to go through the process and the riskof investing the time and money it takes to plan and perform feasibility studies,as well as other land-use studies that may be required to develop the property.
Even though real estate can be very tax favorable, the process and ﬁnal enti-
tlement received on the land may negatively affect the tax status for some own-ers. We always discuss these kinds of tax issues with our tax advisors to be surewe are never crossing the lines, or if we are, to be fully informed of the negativetax implications. This is a complex part of the equation, and I absolutely rec-ommend ﬁnding the best real estate tax counsel before even beginning to zoneor make any changes to a piece of real estate. It is just as important to under-stand the tax and legal aspects at the beginning of a property transaction so youcan get off on the right foot, as it is to understand these same implications whenselling the property purchased. This cannot be emphasized enough. Talk toprofessional tax and legal experts.174 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 174I regularly hire and talk to CPAs and lawyers before getting too far down the
road in real estate. My brother’s law practice was the logical entry place for me.
It is the oldest law ﬁrm in Arizona with expertise in all areas of real estate. I be-lieved from the beginning that a portion of my investment dollars were to beearmarked, ﬁrst for the land and, second for lawyers and other consultants whocould better my chances for success.
The value of a team is self-evident. I always wanted to be the quarterback of
our team at school. I knew the position was less about heroics and more aboutbeing sure the best support was in front of me. My job then was simply to re-member the plays and throw or hand the ball to the best players.
TheDictionary of Real Estate T erms, Sixth Edition, defines “entitlement”
as this: The right to develop land with government approvals for zoning 
density, utility installations, occupancy permits, use permits, and streets.
Matching Market Needs with 
Product Creation
Just because you buy a hotel doesn’t mean it has to stay a traditional hotel. Just
because you buy an apartment building doesn’t mean it needs to stay an apart-ment building. Markets change, market needs change, and in order to be suc-cessful, you may ﬁnd you have to change a property from one kind of productto another. Here are a few examples:
Converting a traditional hotel into a timeshare property.Converting a rental apartment into a for-purchase apartment to the renteror another buyer.
These are examples of matching market needs with product creation. Space
that already existed was transformed to create new revenue sources based on
market demands.
When it comes to land, changes may involve simply splitting one larger lot
into two or more residential lots or changing land permitted for one use to adifferent use that is usually better economically. Most often this requires theapproval of the city or town (municipality) to consent to the proposed usechange. This is called rezoning and/or the entitlement process.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1759781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 175Real Life Story: The Education on 32nd Street
In the mid 1970s, I bought a house on about five acres for $240,000. Within a
short time, a friend asked if he could buy the home. His intent was to change the
zoning from one house per acre to commercial/office use. He offered to pay triple
my price with the caveat that the closing had to wait for up to twelve months. Hefigured it would take that long to convince all the residents on the north and southsides of the property to agree and the city to approve his rezoning plan. This wasmy first personal experience watching someone change the use (rezoning) of aproperty. I was in my mid-twenties, and it seemed worth waiting a year to makesuch a compelling profit.
Time passed; his rezoning was approved, and we closed the deal. This was an
early eye opener. Suddenly, it hit me! I could add value by changing the use of theunderlying land. I decided this was to be part of my new investment path.
Real Life Story: View from the Mountain
With confidence from my 32nd Street experience, I purchased the twenty-nine-
thousand-square-foot McCune Mansion in Paradise Valley, Arizona. The mon-
strous mansion was built by oil tycoon Walker McCune in the 1960s for more than$3 million. The mansion sat on forty acres of hillside that overlooked the entire cityand the spectacular Camelback Mountain. My plan was to change the use from asingle home to a resort. The city fought the rezoning, so I decided to go with whatthey called preferred residential zoning, which included the “hillside ordinance.”This is where I truly became a real estate developer and gained firsthand knowledgeabout the zoning process and lot layout. Each lot building pad had to meet compli-cated cut-and-fill requirements—how much you could cut into the mountainsideand fill back in to create a building pad. I ended up on the committee with real home-builders rewriting the town ordinances for slope-and-hillside cutting and refilling.In the process, I found a buyer who purchased the mansion for the price I paid forthe entire forty acres and mansion. The sale included the mansion and five acres,which I carved out around the house. I then held onto the remaining land, whichwas now converted into twenty-eight one-acre-plus home sites. The lots sold from$200,000 to $600,000, and I had made my biggest profit yet. I retained one lot tobuild a home for my family, but the “desert snakes” were not my friends, so I madethe decision to sell at a later time. Sales topped $10 million.176 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 176My early experience with the mansion on the mountain got me thinking
about the economics of the land business. There’s a story about Abe Lincoln’s
farm that makes the point about creative ﬁnancial engineering better than Icould ever make on my own. It seems Abe Lincoln bought his family’s farmfrom his father, Thomas, when cash got a little tight as a way to bail him out.Eventually, after Abe became president and one of the great ﬁgures of our coun-try, the friends of the Abe Lincoln Historical Farm near Lerna, Illinois, took onthe ownership. It seems the owners of this land had a brilliant idea. They wantedto give people of Illinois and the nation the opportunity to own a tiny piece ofAmerican history in an effort to raise money for the owner’s family. Theyplanned to sell off small parcels of the estate to interested people. When theyparceled out the designated acre, they had more than six million squares tooffer the public. The net return on this is not known, but even with a low pricefor the land parcel, I am sure it was substantial.
This is the ultimate subdivision of land, almost beyond the scope of imagi-
nation. But I’m sure it won’t be the last ingenious idea. If I had to start overtoday in the real estate business, what would I do? I can answer that questionthis way. In the late 1970s we would joke about a wealthy private lender and in-vestor named Bill Levine. We’d say that if he were dropped out of a plane witha parachute on his back in the middle of China and with no money, within afew years he would be one of the wealthiest men in China or wherever else hehappened to fall. Some people just seem to know how to create wealth. Theyare the true ﬁnancial engineers.
Starting is the hardest part of anything in life.
Starting is the hardest part of anything in life. In the early 1970s I had saved
up about $5,000 from my life insurance sales commissions. A real estate ﬁrm inmy building had several older, unoccupied houses it was trying to unload. Insidethese old house bones lay bright red carpeting, purple-painted walls, andlinoleum ﬂoors from the 1950s. Even the carpet stains were better than theoriginal colors.
The cash requirement to acquire these homes was straightforward: pay clos-
ing costs, include a few hundred dollars in commissions, and assume the debt.I thought why not? I soon found that renting these showplaces was not easybecause after I had purchased the properties I didn’t have enough money to re-paint and update the interiors, nor did I have the mechanical skills to do it my-self. But somehow, enough renters were willing to take the houses and do theirTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1779781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 177own ﬁx ups. From the cash ﬂow I received, I was able to buy more houses and
sell some along the way, accumulating about $10,000 in cash. I didn’t like therent collection process much, so after selling my last house in 1973, I immedi-ately moved on to something a little more sophisticated.
My ﬁrst ofﬁce building was just east of 24th Street on Thomas Road in
Phoenix, Arizona, as were my second and third buildings. My logic was afterbuying my ﬁrst building and not knowing where else to buy, it seemed like agood idea to go next door and buy those buildings, too. If it hadn’t been forother opportunities that came my way, I may have just kept buying along thesame major road in Phoenix. What did I know? These small ofﬁce buildingswere, for me, where it really all began.
After selling the ﬁrst building and making $30,000, I began to get some trac-
tion. The next two were sold as a package with $130,000 in net proﬁt. A Cali-fornia syndicator was looking for more buildings in Phoenix, and I liked theidea of negotiating the purchase and sale. My strategy was to buy and imp rove
the properties, much like the houses I owned, except this time I wanted to beable to afford to hire contractors. After my house experiences, I learned to setaside cash up front for this purpose. The old painted white brick needed a mod-ern look, so we put in new windows and doors, added beige-colored stucco tothe brick exterior, new signage, and a parking lot. This clean, new exteriorbrought the building back to life. First impressions are lasting.
Starting Off with Real Estate Math
Getting started with basic real estate math is helpful to me. There are 43,560square feet in one acre, and there are 640 acres in a section of land. The questionarises regarding land uses and valuations. Commercial land is a higher economicuse than a similar size residential-sized lot. In the course of planning, develop-ers study the market demands and the appropriate use of a parcel of land anddetermine the best land use before buying. The planning and zoning process,which I learned after my house buying experience, incorporates the informationlearned along with the market demand to create the highest and best use. Withthat said, consider the math for a parcel of land. It may look something likethis:
On the next page is a very simple illustration of buying in bulk at a “per acre”
price and converting to a “square foot” price. Usually land owners sell largeparcels of unzoned land in areas outside traditional development cores in bulkat a per-acre price. In urban areas, commercial or multifamily property is usually178 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 178sold by the square foot. It’s really a convenience because it all reverts back to
the dollar amount paid for the land, the ultimate sales price, and proﬁt. Thispractice is convenient for both the buyer and seller. It’s similar to the way weuse inches as a measurement division of a foot. For example, rather than say it’sone-quarter of a foot, we say say three inches, which is easily understood. Per-haps smaller measurement practices were used to inﬂuence a buyer’s percep-tion of the amount being paid for the product. It is like ﬁguring out why gold issold by the ounce and not by the pound. At the end of the day, it’s perception.
Many other projects followed for me. I developed everything from business
parks to large, master-planned communities. The lesson I learned through it allwas to plan and divide the land, visualizing what a property could be and whatit “wanted” to be. A residential community wants a compatible use like a grocerystore, restaurant, pharmacy, or other convenience. That means forcing a prop-erty to a higher-return use doesn’t make sense if it doesn’t blend and ﬁt into thesurroundings. You’ve driven around your town and seen buildings that don’tﬁt. The right products in the right places feel right and look right, and the neigh-bors know that. I saw how my friend, Joe Beer, went house-to-house to let theneighbors give input, to ask them questions, and most important, to listen as hepetitioned for rezoning. This is a good practice particularly if you do this withforethought and patience and are willing to modify and compromise and besensitive to the neighbors. You may actually ﬁnd throughout the process thatthe land you bought by the acre may indeed be sold by the square foot.
Let me share a personal story. I was involved a few years back in the sale of a
site for a post ofﬁce. The buyer wanted an environmental report to ensure therewere no hazardous substances on the site. This is very typical. But as my partnersROBERT KIYOSAKI 179
Buying by the Acre, and Selling by the Foot
This example may help you see the potential of real estate in a new way.
The purchase price of ten acres is $50,000 per acre, or $500,000 total (zoned
for ten houses).
The final plan for ten acres may be 250 apartment units, which may be worth
$10,000 per unit or $250,000 per acre (after rezoning approval).
This equates to about $5.75 per square foot (43,560 square foot x $5.74 =
$250,000 per acre).
Since the land was acquired for single family and changed to multifamily, the
underlying use created an increased value of five times the original purchase.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 179180 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
and I were working our way through the
due diligence process with the buyer, anenvironmental problem came to our at-tention. Although the issue seemed topossess a very low chance of causing anyreal problem, the inspectors sent over abackhoe to test the area. During the test,a sample of soil showed a completely newproblem: The sample contained oil. Im-possible, we thought. So, they tested thesame sample again with the same results.Perplexed and bracing ourselves for a
costly soil remediation, which given the past use of the property seemed un-fathomable, we decided to take a walk around the property. Thank goodnesswe did this. While we were walking by the backhoe, one of us noticed it had anoil leak. Upon further inspection, the oils matched up with the leaky equipment.Retested with a new backhoe, the soil turned up clean as originally expected.Walking the site can make all the difference. Hands on requires a physical look,not just reading a report.
I have always enjoyed walking around the properties we are buying. 
For me, seeing is the difference between knowing and guessing.
Wisdom from the Field
If you want to get involved in real estate (and not just when the economy isbooming) then the following questions may come in handy:
How Can I Learn the Basics of Property Uses 
and Potential Changes to Use?
Each city and or municipality has its own ordinances and laws for permitted
uses for property. Find a good zoning lawyer and inquire about current zoningand permitted changes. A planner or architect who has planned and designedother local projects is the best source for ideas. Real estate brokers are also animportant part of determining potential tenants or other buyers and/or devel-opers for parts or all of a properly thought-out land use plan.TIPThree “Must Do’s” 
to Buy by the Acre
and Sell by the Foot:
1. Plan and divide the land
thoughtfully.2. Work with the neighbors inthe community.3. Always be willing to listenand compromise.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 180Who Are the Key Members of My Team, and What Do They Do? 
In addition to the zoning lawyer, the land planner or architect and the brokers
(both leasing and sales) are critical. You’ll need the following team members tohelp you along the way:
Feasibility Experts
This may include economists and often larger brokerage companies who gatherand compile sector reports for vacancy, lease rates, absorption and other reportsto help determine need for product type.
Accountant
This person can put together a ﬁnancial pro forma to estimate sales, costs, andpotential proﬁts so you can determine your offer price and capital/debt/equityrequirements. The broker should provide sales input projections.
Civil Engineers, Soil Experts, and Contractors
These experts will help you determine the improvement cost estima tes you
will need to fully evaluate the property’s potential from topographical and phys-ical maps to understanding wet and dry utilities.
When you consider the many disciplines required to make all this come to-
gether you see why many avoid this aspect of real estate. It sounds harder thanit really is. Although patience and knowledge are required, after the ﬁrst fewdeals the process becomes clear. It is much like an NBA point guard or a quar-terback on a football ﬁeld. Most of your time is spent knowing where your team-mates are and who to get the ball to. Rarely do you shoot or run; passing theball is essential. You learn by doing, and starting with a simple lot split for acouple of houses is an easy way to experience the process ﬁrsthand.
How Do I Find Property That Can Be Rezoned or Changed 
to Become a Profitable Venture? 
This is the bottom line of the whole exercise. Knowing the market needs and
economics of the speciﬁc product that will ultimately be built on the site takesstudy and some imagination. Ask questions and write them down. The more ques -tions you have, the better. A few, but important questions you could ask are these:
What would improve the living quality and/or convenience for the peoplewho live or work in the area?ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1819781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 181How many people drive by this particular property each day?
How can I help people afford to live in the area or give them a better alterna-tive for a retail shopping or dining experience?What about better medical care closer to home or more convenient servicesin a certain area?
These questions stimulate the imagination and the possibilities. Most people
ask too few questions. You can build a case for almost any business model if
you ask enough of the right questions.
Bill Gates, founder of Microsoft, was interested in information at the speed
of thought. Billionaire Warren Buffett considered simple businesses that arerun well and provide capital to grow, as places to invest. These investmentstrategies have vaulted them to become two of the wealthiest men in the world.Mr. Buffett is the master of asking questions then boiling them down to the fewmost direct and succinct ones that become repeatable observations. True geniusis when you can make the unnoticed concise. Ask and write down a few ques-tions about land you have noticed regularly.
Why has this been skipped over by the path of development?Who owns it?What is the right use or ﬁt for it?How would the math look if it were used in a different way?Who would buy or rent whatever I think should be built on this site?
After the experience of completing your ﬁrst real estate process, you will
have exercised your mind in a way that will help you look at land through new
eyes. The fun for me is to drive by or walk into a project I have been a part ofand know this was a piece of land few considered would ever be a place wherepeople would want to live, work and play.
After thirty years of planning, negotiating, visualizing, building, and selling
these ideas, I’ve learned that virtually anything is possible if you ask questions.Analyze and think through the answers, and take the steps to get your mind’sideas into pictures and then later into bricks. Remember, bricks are laid oneupon another just like your thoughts. The hardest part is setting the ﬁrst brickin place.182 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 182Mel Shultz cofounded JDM Properties, Inc., in 1983 as a full-service real
estate ﬁrm that develops and manages quality properties in Arizona andColorado, including upsca le residential and commer cial space, and busi-
ness parks. A principal of JDMD Investments, LLC, Mel and his partnersare developing the largest master-planned community in the greaterPhoenix area for more than three hundred thousand residents. Mel was
a general partner of the Phoenix Suns basketball team until the team sold in 2005, and hewas one of the original general partners of the 2001 World Championship Arizona Diamond-backs baseball team. Mel led the design and build team for the ﬁve-thousand-seat DodgeTheatre in downtown Phoenix. The company’s Web site is www.jdmpartnersllc.com.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1839781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 183Ionce accused Curtis of going “where white men fear to tread.” He laughed out
loud and said, “That’s true.” He went on to say, “I have basketball star Magic
Johnson’s philosophy of going into urban areas and bringing in development and
businesses that lift the area up.” Curtis then added, “Regardless of race, too manyinvestors just suck the cash out of a neighborhood but never reinvest to improveit. I invest to reinvest and improve a neighborhood.” This is why Curtis and hiswife, Diana, are respected friends as well as fellow real estate investors.
Today, some of the most beautiful real estate is being boarded up as casualties
of economic decline. It takes a special kind of investor to invest not only to makemoney, but to also bring an area in decline back up. I tried it once and did okaybut not great. Truthfully, I was an outsider coming in, hoping to make a quickbuck from a bad situation. Now personally wiser, I have a better appreciation forwhat Curtis does. It takes more than knowing about real estate. It takes knowingthe people and the psychology of the neighborhood, and, most importantly, havinga desire to be a part of the community. This is what I have learned about realestate from Curtis and Diana.
—Robert Kiyosaki10 Curtis OAKES
It’s All About Adding Value
1849781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 184ROBERT KIYOSAKI 185
As a successful real estate agent, investor, and developer, I’ve shared a stage
as a presenter with Robert Kiyosaki, who is a personal mentor to me. His
ideas and guidance have been instrumental in much of my success. I have pre-
sented seminars with Donald Trump, as well as coauthored with him an audioCD entitled Three Master Secrets of Real Estate Success . At this writing, my wife
and I are renovating a multimillion-dollar home in an exclusive San Francisconeighborhood. To boil it all down, I have achieved all of this by following a sim-ple mantra, one that anyone can understand and apply to achieve similar realestate successes: Proﬁt from problems. There are two foundational things thathave been a constant for my wife, Diana, and I throughout our process: knowl-edge and faith.
“My people shall be destroyed because of a lack of knowledge,” Hosea 4:6 .
“Faith is the conﬁdence that what we hope for will actually happen. It gives
us assurance about things we cannot see,” Hebrews 11:1.
Y our mantra should be this: Profit from problems.
A pristine property with afﬂuent tenants sounds wonderful, doesn’t it? No
huge maintenance issues, little problem collecting rents, and so on. Yes, thesetypes of properties are easy on the mind, but they also have a signiﬁcant costand little chance to appreciate.
A problem property, on the other hand, has an amazing, and fast, upside po-
tential. For example, let’s say that the going rate for a building in a certain areais $200,000. The problem property might be worth $140,000. Once the prob-lems are ﬁxed, however, its value will zoom to the going rate for similar prop-erties: $200,000. Likewise, rents in a problem building might be low. After youimprove the property, however, you can raise rents—increasing your amount of
income.
This is the concept of “forced appreciation,” which occurs when an investor
purchases a property that’s less than the going market value (usually due to in-herent problems, such as high vacancy rates, severely deteriorated buildings,environmental problems, etc.), then ﬁxes the problems that “force” substantialappreciation in value back up to the current market value. I also call this thevalue-added approach, where you take an asset, make various imp rovements,
and have the asset increase in value. Forced appreciation provides you with ashort-term paper proﬁt, which you can then use to your advantage in a varietyof ways. This value-added approach has helped many, many real estate investorsbuild everything from small nest eggs to multibillion-dollar fortunes.TIP9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 185I never focus on or count on appreciation when analyzing whether 
or not to purchase a property. T o me, market appreciation is always a bonus: 
if it happens, great, but if the property doesn’t go up in value based on the market, that’s okay, too, because I know that I am making what I need to make on the property in terms of cash flow and depreciation. Likewise, whensomeone says that they have an investment that will provide capital gains,thank them, then turn and run in the other direction! Why? Capital gains arebased on the speculation that something “might” happen in the future to drive up the value of that investment. The key word here is speculation; something might happen. By focusing on a value-added approach to real estate investing, you have much greater control over a property’s ultimate value.
If you resolve to become a problem solver—someone who embraces rather
than runs away from problems—your chances of achieving success in real estate
investing will dramatically increase. The next step becomes ﬁnding appropriateproblem properties.
My Story
I purchased my ﬁrst home in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1979 for $27 ,800. Iused the G.I. Bill, which meant I had 100 percent ﬁnancing. I had an adjustablerate loan with an interest rate of 17 .5 percent. That’s obscene by today’s stan-dards, but at the time I didn’t care. I was thrilled to be a new homeowner,period. This also was my introduction to leverage, which is using a small amountof money to purchase a large amount of something else (in this case, real estate).I began to buy properties as long as I didn’t have to put much money down. Ididn’t care what the interest rate was; as long as I had a positive cash ﬂow, I bought.
My life as a real estate entrepreneur took another big leap in 1982 when I re-
signed from my government job for the Naval Aviation Supply Ofﬁce. From thebeginning, I specialized in value-added properties. In Philadelphia, boarded-up houses were practically everywhere, and that’s what I looked for. Buyingand then turning was easy because I could buy a property for between $5,000and $30,000 and then decide to either rent or sell.
I had an uncle who came to visit me from San Francisco, California. Every
time he came to visit, he would go on and on about the San Francisco real estatemarket. In 1985 he ﬁnally convinced me to move to San Francisco to invest invalue-added real estate. However, little did I know that my Philadelphia successTIP186 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 186in renting and ﬂipping houses couldn’t be duplicated in San Francisco. Why?
Simply because property was so much more expensive. The average duplex atthe time was $250,000. These prices sent my nervous system into shock andfear. While I had accumulated some funds to invest, I needed a lot more infor-mation about California real estate before I could begin.
I’ve had my share of challenges and problems. But with patience and 
the right approach, value-added real estate investing can work for you, too.
In the meantime, the cost of living and real estate school was beginning to
deplete my investment nest egg. What’s more, this fear of potentially losingeverything held me captive. I wouldn’t do a deal if I saw one! I ﬁnally got myreal estate license and immediately went to work in an area in San Francisco toduplicate my success in Philadelphia. However, in Philadelphia it was relativelyeasy to identify value-added real estate. Just ﬁnd a boarded-up house at a cheapprice, ﬁx it up, and sell it. In San Francisco, however, there were no boarded-uphouses. I had to ﬁgure out how to add value in other ways. I ﬁnally found thearea and the niche. The area was called Bayview Hunter’s Point, and the nichewas called “in-law apartments.” So I went to work buying single-family homes(which were selling, at the time, for $50,000 to $75,000) and adding in-lawapartments in the rear of the garages for rental units. Once construction wascompleted, I could sell the house for between $175,000 and $199,000. I had afull-time construction crew, and we were rehabbing and ﬂipping, and life wasgood. Now, there are potential pitfalls—I’ve had my share of challenges andproblems. But with patience and the right approach, value-added real estateinvesting can work for you, too.
Finding the Right Properties
Now we’ve come to the exciting part, right? Right! Finding the right propertiesto invest in is obviously at the heart of long-term and sustained guaranteed suc-cess in real estate investing. It’s the area that will tap all of your knowledge andcreativity, and where over time you’ll build experience and expertise. You’llcome to rely on this time and time again. Finding the right properties is equalparts knowledge and your ability to creatively “see” a property’s potential. Inshort, here’s where we marry your brain with your intuition to achieve a com-plete solution (wholeness).
First, let’s review property types and property classes.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1879781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 187Property Types
The three types of buildings I’d like to focus on in this chapter are as follows:
Residential. Users live in one to four units. Can be various types, such as single
family, duplex (two units), triplex (three units), and fourplex (four units).Commercial. Five or more business units, such as an ofﬁce building or a strip
mall.Mixed Use. A single building with both residential (people live there) and com-mercial (businesses) options.
If you are just starting out investing in real estate, I suggest that you begin by
purchasing a two-or four-unit property. This way, you can begin small, leverageyour way into a property, learn all you can, and then move up to a larger propertywhen you have experience and a positive cash ﬂow.
Property Classes
There are four classes of properties:Class A. A property less than ten years old, in excellent condition, and with de-
sired amenities, such as a pool or workout center. Class A properties can askfor, and receive, high rents, generally have a better quality of tenants, usuallyhave lower maintenance costs, and are easier to manage. These properties areusually held by (owned by) investor groups and have a lower rate of return.They are the most sensitive to any downturn in the local or national economy.Class B. Buildings that are ten to twenty years old and in fairly good overallcondition. Class B properties are considered the most stable of the differentproperty classes, and are usually located in well-established, middle-incomeneighborhoods. They are new enough to offer amenities, yet still old enough tobe affordable to the average investor and tenants.Class C. Buildings between twenty and thirty years old with limited or nonex-
istent amenities. Both ongoing and long-term maintenance costs are higher be-cause of aging and the general need for a cosmetic “facelift.” They have a lowerquality of tenants, including those on government assistance. Value can be addedby updating the property.Class D. Buildings more than thirty years old that need substantial capital im-
provements. Usua lly located in declining areas, Class D properties usually have
substantial deferred maintenance issues, such as the need to replace the roof,the electrical system, the HVAC system, etc.
For beginning investors, I suggest that you focus most of your attention
on finding undervalued Class C buildings .TIP188 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 188You can look for undervalued properties in any of the four classes. However,
please note that for Class A properties, the velocity of your money—the amount
ﬂowing to you—will slow down simply because there is less upside potential.For beginning investors, I suggest that you focus most of your attention on ﬁnd-ing undervalued Class C buildings.
Starting Your Search
Here are the steps I recommend to ﬁnd undervalued properties.
Step One: Become an Expert in a Particular Area
This generally is the area in which you live. Attempting to become an expert ina city outside of the state in which you reside, for example, would be time con-suming and costly. Do as much as you can to study the area. Read the real estatesections in the local newspapers, drive around, and attend open houses.
This area should be large enough to have diverse neighbors. For example
your initial area might be San Francisco. Over time, once you feel that you’vemastered this particular area, then move on to another area.
Here’s an example:
1. Select San Francisco as your area
2. Explore it, study it, drive around, etc.
3. “Master” this area
4. Then select another area such as Oakland
Step Two: Seek Out the Least Expensive Sections 
within That Area
Again, you want to ﬁnd problem properties and then solve the problems. You’ll
ﬁnd the juiciest problems—and thus the potential for the largest returns—inthe least expensive sections of your focus area.
Step Three: Look for Problem Properties
Once you’ve become an expert in a particular area and identiﬁed the least ex-pensive section within that area, the next step is to begin hunting for problemproperties in that least expensive section.
How do you identify problem properties? They’re usually the eyesore on a
street or block. Signs to look for include buildings with one or more of these attributes:ROBERT KIYOSAKI 1899781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 189• vacant
• boarded up• tall grass / weeds• trash strewn about / overflowing trash cans• broken windows• peeling paint• general poor appearance
You also should be alert to potential property changes, such as:• building owner wanting to retire / leave
• foreclosures• probate• code violations• zoning variances not renewed or up for re-hearing• a big-box tenant just left a strip mall
Please note that searching for real estate investment opportunities can be
extremely fun, but it also can be an extremely frustrating process.
Tips As Y ou Begin Y our Property Search:
• Stay positive. Searches take time and involve walking around neighborhoods.
There will be missteps and false alarms. Stay positive and have fun, and you’ll be in
the right frame of mind when the right property appears.• Be present and focused. As much as possible, shut out past failures, negative
thoughts (“The market hasn’t bottomed out yet”), fears of failure, fears of success,and all other factors that might prevent you from seeing—really seeing—an oppor-tunity. Those who are present and open to opportunities are almost always the peo-ple who are able to grab a new opportunity when it comes along.• Put in the time. There’s a saying in the writing world: T o write a book, apply the
seat of your pants to the chair. The same is true when searching for real estate in-vestment opportunities. Y ou must get out and look for the opportunities. Y ou haveto study the newspapers, drive around town, and network with real estate agentsand lenders.• Don’t be put off by market conditions. Rarely will you find “perfect” market
conditions when making any investment. There are always problems and potentialpitfalls. Know this and accept it. Don’t let the media, friends, or anyone else dis-courage you from seeking opportunities.190 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 190This last point bears repeating—never be discouraged by ﬂuctuating market
conditions. Interest rates will always go up, unless they happen to be goingdown. Property values will continue to decline until they hit bottom, and thenthey will rebound. And so on.
This should be your “Real Estate Opportunity Search” mantra: In any
market, at any time, I can find a great deal.
Here is your “Never Give Up” mantra: Diligence leads to destiny.
You should actively search out potential deals. As well, you should create
networks of people, tools, and resources to send potential deals your way. Hereare ways to create a ﬂow of deals—or at least whispers about potential deals:
• www.loopnet.com• other investors• real estate agents and brokers• real estate lenders• attorneys• CPAs• property management companiesTIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 191
TABLE 10.1  Personal Reflections
Brainstorm and list who else might be a “deal source” for you:9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 191Property Criteria and Analysis
Once you’ve identiﬁed a potential investment property, it’s time to closely study
the property for both short-term and long-term opportunities. You will want toput each prospective property through a rigorous review, using the followingcriteria:
1. Guiding Investment Principles
a. Leverageb. Cash Flowc. Cash-on-Cash Returnd. Capitalization Ratee. Gross Rent Multiplier
2. S. W .O.T. (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats)
3. Trends
4. Demographics
Now, I could write an entire book about these four key areas of property analy-sis. Here, though, let me summarize each of these points quickly.
Leverage
Leverage simply means that you want as little of your money as possible usedto secure the biggest opportunity possible. The less money you have to investin a property, in other words, the larger the opportunity for a big payoff. Whenanalyzing a property, know exactly what you will initially need to invest.
Positive Cash Flow
A key to building my real estate fortune over the years has been cash ﬂow. Wecall cash ﬂow “king” because having cash is always our primary objective. Pos-itive cash ﬂow creates and maintains your investment’s momentum. It also hassigniﬁcant ﬁnancing and lending implications. For example, when purchasingan apartment building containing more than ﬁve units, the bank will base theamount it will lend you on the building’s cash ﬂow abilities. (Your credit scoreis secondary.) Cash ﬂow also is a signiﬁcant factor in the building’s overall value.A building with poor cash ﬂow will appraise much lower than another compa-rable building in the same area that has a stronger cash ﬂow. Never forget that.
Double Digit Cash-on-Cash Return
This is the velocity of your money. In other words, you want to know at the be-ginning of an investment how long it will take the money you invest (primarily192 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 192the down payment) to come back to you. This is critical because you want to
invest that down payment over and over again in other investment properties,so the quicker that you’re able to receive back that initial payment, the quickeryou can apply it to another opportunity.
Cash-on-Cash Return defined: This is the amount of cash you receive
from a property investment in a specified time period as a percentage of your
initial investment in that property.
Here are several examples using the same down payment amount ($20,000)
but different cash ﬂow amounts per year.
As you can see, this table shows how many years it takes for your down pay-
ment to come back to you. In the ﬁrst scenario, it takes one year. In the second
scenario, it takes two years, and in the third, three years. Your cash-on-cash re-turn is 100 percent, 50 percent, and 33 percent, respectively.
Your goal as an investor should be a cash-on-cash return in the 10 percent to
20 percent range. Anything above 20 percent is considered an exceptional cash-on-cash return.
Capitalization Rate of 7 Percent or Higher
The cap rate measures a building’s performance without considering the mort-gage ﬁnancing. If you paid all cash for the invest property, how much moneywould it potentially make? What’s the return? A high cap rate usually means ahigher risk investment and a low sales price. High cap rates are typically foundin poor, low-income areas. A low cap rate usually indicates there’s less risk anda high sales price. Low cap rates are generally found in middle-class to upper-income areas. If you know the net operating income (NOI) and the cap rate,you can calculate what the sales price should be using this formula:
NOI / Cap Rate = Sales PriceTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 193
TABLE 10.2 
Down 
PaymentYearly 
Cash FlowYears to Pay Back
Down PaymentCash-on-Cash 
Return
$20,000 $20,000 1 100%
$20,000 $10,000 2 50%
$20,000 $6,000 3 33%9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 193The Cap Rate measures a building’s performance without taking into
consideration the mortgage financing. It is the Net Operating Income divided
by the sale price.
Gross Rent Multiplier of 9 or Lower
Gross Rent Multipliers (GRM) are used as a measure to compare income prop-
erties within a particular area or neighborhood. For example, for three proper-ties within a similar area of town, you could calculate the gross rent multiplierfor each, then compare the three. If all other factors were equal, you would se-lect the property with the lowest GRM. In general, as the gross rent multiplierdecreases, cash ﬂow increases. And conversely, as the GRM increases, cash ﬂowtypically decreases.
Gross Rent Multiplier is the ratio of the price of a real estate investment
to its annual rental income. The lower the ratio, the better.
S.W.O.T.
S. W .O.T. stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats. A com-mon business evaluation tool, S. W .O.T. also applies to investment real estatesimply because each property will have its own unique strengths, weaknesses,opportunities, and threats. The savvy real estate investor—the one seeking guar-anteed success—will put each property through a detailed S. W .O.T. analysis.
Please note that generally speaking, this is a subjective analysis. In other
words, there are no “right” or “wrong” answers. Likewise, many factors are in-terconnected. For example, a property’s weakness—such as needing a fresh coatof paint—might also be an opportunity—a fresh coat of paint can quickly in-crease the overall look of the property, and thus its value.
Trends
Part of your property-seeking work should be to pay close attention to trends,or similar new tendencies displayed by a large number of people. For example,in the past, many city dwellers moved out of the city into the suburbs. Over thelast several years, however, the trend has become the opposite. Because of risinggasoline prices and other factors, people in cities are “cocooning”—they wantto live within walking distance of work, stores, restaurants, and so on.
Learning about new trends through the media and other information outlets
is important. An investor will have become exposed to even more opportunitiesTIP
TIP194 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 194if he “sees” a new or developing trend before it becomes known and published
through the media.
How can you spot new trends as they begin to develop? It’s a bit of an art,
but generally speaking you can:
• Observe what’s going on around you. Pay particular attention to what peo-
ple are doing differently. For example, eight or ten years ago, SUVs were allthe rage. It seemed like everyone had one. Over time, however—again, be-cause of rising gasoline prices and other environmental issues—SUV pur-chases declined, and a new type of transportation emerged called hybridcars.
• Read, read, read. Read as much as you can: newspapers, magazines, local
real estate magazines, and so on. And vary the sources and subject matter.What do I mean by “varied”? Every so often, read something different, anewspaper or periodical that you normally wouldn’t read. As well, do a littleWeb surfing. What are people discussing on blogs in your community? Whatnew Web sites are popping up on housing, community life, and other relatedtopics? The more that you can broaden the information you take in, the moreyou can begin to see emerging trends and other issues. This is known, gener-ally, as “connecting the dots.” Become a dot-connector.
• Listen, listen, listen. Get out in the world, and then listen to people. What
are they doing differently? What are thinking about doing differently? Whatare they interested in? Excited about? Fed up with? Your friends, family,neighbors, and business colleagues are a fantastic wealth of information re-garding what’s going on in the world. Ask questions, then listen to them.
Demographics
A ﬁnal part of your property analysis should be demographics, or statisticaldata about a particular population, such as the people in the city in which youwant to invest. Demographic research provides a snapshot of population, in-come, industries, biggest employers, and other economic details for a particularcity or area.
Demographic information can be found at libraries, city and county govern-
ment ofﬁces, and of course the Internet offers an abundance of demographicinformation. Suggested Web sites to locate demographic information include:
• www.freedemographics.com• http://realestate.yahoo.com/Neighborhoods• http://realestate.yahoo.com/HomevaluesROBERT KIYOSAKI 1959781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 195196 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
• www.elook.org
• www.economy.com (fee site)• www.city-data.com• http://quickfacts.census.gove/qfd/
Demographics That Favor Investing
When reviewing demographic information and trends, watch for these charac-
teristics that are generally favorable for investing in a particular property:
• More females than males (females tend to “nest”)
• Higher percentage of singles vs. married (singles rent apartments)• Higher percentage of younger and older people versus middle-age (middle-age
people buy homes).
• Annual income at or lower than $40,000 (home prices push them to rent apart-
ments)
•The stability and profitability of the area’s largest employer
Key information you also want to review regarding the property’s physical
location include the following:
• How close is it to public transportation?
• What’s the city’s plan for that particular area?• How close is it to a park?• How close is it to a school?• How close is it to shopping and restaurants?
Finally, you should ask yourself a simple question:Do you want to invest in this area?
Key Success Principle: Have a Great Team
As my wife, Diana, and I began to acquire what become more than twenty cash-ﬂowing properties in San Francisco, we eventually put together a team to begintackling larger problems. Our most successful team consisted of attorney Eliz-abeth Erhardt, who specializes in evictions, and Sia Tahbazof, whose engineer-ing and architectural brilliance could always see the intrinsic value that othersoften could not see on adding value to a property. Diana and I would buy build-ings in San Francisco with brick foundations or with difﬁcult tenants paying9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 196very low rents under rent control, and we would quickly pull the trigger and
close the deal. Our goal was to add value by completely remodeling all the build-ings we purchased. Liz would negotiate deals with the tenants, and Sia wouldget all our plans quickly through the planning process. On most of our projectswe used a 1031 Exchange to acquire larger properties and others we rented.They all cash-ﬂowed, but what was even better was that for most of the prop-erties the value tripled and not because the market went up or down.
Here’s an important point: The relationship we had with our team was far
more important than all of the money we ever made. There will never be a dealthat is more important than the relationships. Today, Liz Erhardt is one of SanFrancisco’s top attorneys regarding tenant/landlord issues. We are still verygood friends; she will take my call and we go on and on about our “war stories”from the trenches ﬁfteen years ago. Sia Tahbazof is semi-retired and works onlyon his own projects these days, but we are still very good friends. To this dayDiana and I work exclusively with Sia Consulting Engineering on our localprojects.
The relationship we had with our team was far more important than all
of the money we ever made. There will never be a deal that is more important
than the relationships.
I believe a large part of our success as a team was based on the saying, “Every-
one stay in their lane.” (I remember running anchor at the Penn State relays in
middle school and the track coach always saying, “Stay in your lane!”) Stayingin your lane shortens the race. Curtis’s lane was to be in charge of the demoand rough work, and Diana’s was in charge of the ﬁnishes; Liz was in charge oftenants; and Sia was engineering, design, plans, and the city’s app roval.
Always be thinking about how you can build the best team possible to support
both your short- and long-term efforts.
I believe a large part of our success as a team was based on the saying
“Everyone stay in their lane” because staying in your lane shortens the race.
Problems . . . or Opportunities
If you resolve to become a problem solver, your chances of success in real estateinvesting will dramatically increase. The key question then becomes: What isyour tolerance for problems?TIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 1979781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 197You see, opportunities are never easy. Problems, challenges, and setbacks al-
most always occur. Those who shy away from the hard work needed to embrace
opportunities fail. Over the years I’ve had friends and acquaintances come tome wanting to partner with me on various real estate projects. Often they backout. Why? It’s like a rope strung across the two sides of the Grand Canyon.They see a tightrope; I see a bridge.
What can we do to strengthen our faith so that we can embrace and overcome
more problems? That answer is easy. Take more chances. Truly successful peo-ple pursue opportunities based on faith. They don’t let fear get in their way.Successful people—the Donald Trumps of the world, for example—also are con-stantly strengthening their faith. They are admitting their fears but pursuingopportunities anyway. When we let fear rule our lives, we don’t take chances.When we live by faith, we pursue opportunities and take controlled risks.
When I was younger, I left my government job, where I was earning $60,000
a year, to become a real estate agent and investor. I was excited. I had recentlyread Napoleon Hill’s Think and Grow Rich and was ready to set the world on
ﬁre—and to do so immediately. But things didn’t happen so quickly. In fact, forseveral months, no opportunities materialized. Zero, none, nada. My savings
began to dwindle. And then do you know what happened? My mind, which hadbeen positive and focused on possibilities, began to worry. My dreams turned—mentally—from delights to disasters.
Eventually I overcame this initial slow time, and my investing took off. Only
those who have the courage and the tenacity to never give up in the face of set-
backs and other obstacles will achieve success.
Success then isn’t a straight line; it’s a series of starts and stops, two steps
forward, and then one step back. Here’s what I thought success would looklike: 198 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
FIGURE 10.1 What I Thought Success Would Look Like9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 198And here is what it actually did look like:
Only those who have the courage and the tenacity to never give up 
in the face of setbacks and other obstacles will achieve success.
If you have the patience to pursue and overcome problems, your chances for
real estate successes will skyrocket. Remember your mantra:
Proﬁt from Problems
You see, I believe that this concept of adding value to real estate can carry
over into your life in many, many other ways. For example, too often I see and
meet people who are focused on making less of other people or things. Instead,I want to encourage you to make more of every person you come in contactwith. Avoid labels; there’s no real right and wrong, just different points of view.Regardless of where you are in life right now, you can make the decision toreach up and out in your life and help others do the same.
Curtis Oakes has been a top-performing realtor for Coldwell Banker in
San Francisco for more than two decades, placing him in the top 3 percentof all Coldwell Banker agents nationwide. In 1994, Curtis and his wifeformed the Oakes Group, specializing in San Francisco Bay Area real estatesales, investment, and development. His passion for helping others haspermeated his real estate practice, and he’s helped countless individuals
realize their dream of home ownership and investment property acquisition. Through his pro-prietary Oakes Group Mentoring Program, he teaches wealth building through real estate.
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 199
y
FIGURE 10.2  What the Path to Success Really Looks Like9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 199Ihave known John for more than thirty years. He and I were both Marine Corps
ofﬁcers and played on the same rugby team in Hawai’i. He is known as the
Burger King of Hawai’i because he brought the franchise to the islands. Although
he no longer owns the franchise, having sold it a number of years ago for a stunningproﬁt, he is still known as the Burger King of Hawai’i because the name ﬁts. Johnis the king of using fast food franchises to acquire priceless real estate.
In my book Rich Dad Poor Dad I wrote about Ray Kroc, the person who made
McDonald’s famous and built it into a multibillion-dollar enterprise. In the book,Ray asks a group of students from the University of Texas, “What business am Iin?” The response from the students was, “Y ou’re in the hamburger business.” Rayshook his head and said, “No, I’m in the real estate business.” Today, McDonald’sowns the most expensive real estate in the world. Ray’s formula was to use a Mc-Donald’s franchise to pay for the real estate. 
John, the Burger King of Hawai’i, uses the same formula, the formula of using
a business to buy property. I too use the same formula today. Today my apartmenthouse business, ﬁtness club business, and ofﬁce rental business pay for my real es-tate. It is a formula used all over the world. The formula of your business buysyour real estate.
—Robert Kiyosaki11 John FINNEY
Analyzing the Deal, or
Adventures in Real Estate
2009781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 200ROBERT KIYOSAKI 201
Ihave always been intrigued by the acquisition, ownership, and sale of real
estate. For the majority of my professional life I’ve been advising people and
making personal decisions about whether or not I should acquire real estate,
how to acquire a particular piece of real estate, and ﬁnally whether to sell it,develop it, or simply hold it. That means as a practicing attorney and a privateinvestor, I’ve reviewed hundreds of real estate transactions with a “stop or go”decision point. And the projects are varied. I have developed and sold ofﬁceand residential condominiums (small and large); acquired and operated ranchesand farms; developed and operated warehouse complexes; and ﬁnanced, de-veloped, and reﬁnanced myriad other real estate–related business ventures. 
However, my principal focus today and over the last forty years has been the
consistent ﬁnancing, development, and operation of quick-serve (fast-food)restaurants and convenience stores under franchise agreements with nationalfranchise companies. It’s fascinating work acquiring sites and handling the ﬁ-nancing and development of those properties. It’s also been fascinating to own,operate, and sell nearly one hundred of these quick-serve establishments overthese past forty years. My efforts have taken me all over the western UnitedStates, Guam, Hawai’i, and Russia. 
With this kind of background, analyzing deals has become second nature.
And that’s what this chapter is all about: “Analyzing the Deal” as it relates tothe intelligent acquisition and operation of fast-food restaurants, conveniencestores, and related franchise businesses. However, don’t be mistaken that theprinciples set out here will apply only to quick-serve restaurants and conven-ience stores. That couldn’t be further from the truth. The principles here arefundamental and will apply to entrepreneurial ventures of all kinds, particularlyif they involve real estate.
Time and again, having a law background has helped when it comes to ana-
lyzing the deal at hand. But the true tempering of my deal-related judgmentcomes from my involvement in building and operating fast-food companies inHawai’i, Guam, Nevada, Colorado, and Russia. The scope of my experience in-cludes the location, ﬁnancing, development, and operation of Burger Kingrestaurants, Carl’s Jr. restaurants, El Pollo Loco restaurants, Subway sandwichrestaurants, Circle K convenience stores, and 76 gas stations, among others.This involvement in franchise deals has necessarily brought me in direct contactwith major national brand franchisors with whom I have had extensive negoti-ations. Most of these franchise opportunities have p roved successful, but there9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 201were a couple of spectacular exceptions, which I will get into later. In every
case my experience in analyzing the deal at the outset p roved to be a key to
success or failure.
In this chapter, I will set out the principles that you can use in your own
pursuit of workable, proﬁtable real estate deals that meet your expectations. Iam always suspect of people who talk only of their successes but not of theirfailures. The reality, as you and I know, is that no business endeavor is perfect.Heartache and despair happen from time to time. That’s par for the course forsomeone who is truly driven by and committed to success. So don’t expect allblue sky success stories; I will share with you some signiﬁcant failures I haveexperienced as well. They were important learning opportunities for me, teach-ing me lasting lessons about this ﬁeld. I know they will be important for you,too, because in most cases these costly mistakes resulted from my failure to an-alyze the deal correctly at the outset. 
My goal is to provide you with a basic construct to direct your analysis of
real estate and other deals, and to aid you in making intelligent stop-and-go de-cisions concerning these deals. It’s critical to put some meat on these “bones ofwisdom” so that you will be able to address any deal presented to you withpractical and useful guidelines. These guidelines to intelligent deal analysis areparticularly relevant in a tough economic climate, but they are also foundationaland have stood and will continue to stand the test of time.
The Real World of Me
At the very outset of any deal consideration, one needs to engage in some seriousintrospection. Is this deal ( job, purchase, career, etc.) what you really want orneed? Does your self image allow you to be passionate about the basic endeavoryou are considering? Does the deal with its projected result produce the kindof monetary and emotional return you are looking for? Does “doing” the dealinvolve a sacriﬁce of time and/or require relocation, thereby effectively pre-venting you from pursuing more important life goals such as good and involvedparenting, active and healthy lifestyle choices, team sports activity, church orcivic leadership, continued or advanced formal education, personal relation-ships, or living in a safe and attractive home environment. In other words, ifdoing the deal, no matter how successful, will make your life or your family’slife miserable, then keep moving. It’s not for you.202 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 202Y ou don’t need to do the first deal you see, nor do you need to pursue
every deal that seems halfway good or reasonable. Wait for the deal to come
down the track that is really for you.
My former partner, Robert Pulley, used to frequently say that deals are like
streetcars since there’s always another one coming down the track. Over time I
have come to realize how true this postulate is. I used to pursue to thoughtfuldecision almost every deal that came across my desk regardless of what it was,where it was, or what it cost. By allowing my curiosity to take charge, I spenttoo much time spinning my wheels rather than focusing on realities. That cu-riosity and arrogance concerning my personal entrepreneurial capacity (Ithought I could ﬁnance and manage anything) got me into some bad businessspots, literally and ﬁguratively. My experiences in Russia and in the nightcluband cemetery businesses (discussed later) represent painful memories that havestayed with me. 
The fact is, you don’t need to close on the ﬁrst deal you see, nor do you need
to pursue every deal that seems halfway good or reasonable. Wait for the dealto come down the track that is right for you. Your time is your most valuable as-set, so spend it wisely. Let the obvious impracticalities of any deal you considerspeak to you loudly. This is true no matter how apparently lucrative any dealmay seem. Just because the latest and seemingly hottest franchise deal is avail-able in your city doesn’t mean that it’s right for you. If ﬂipping hamburgers inDetroit, selling cemetery plots in Guam, or polishing cars, creating signs andbanners, or teaching math to preteens doesn’t really ﬁt you or create a passionwithin you to succeed, don’t do it. Just fold up your cards and wait for a newhand to be dealt. Don’t let your current circumstances, no matter how unsatis-fying, chase you into a situation where you will work harder, go into debt, andactually lose money doing something you hate.
The Real World of Me
• Engage in serious introspection.
• Ask yourself: Will doing the deal prevent me from achieving my personal life goals?• Deals are like streetcars since there’s always another one coming down the track.• If the deal doesn’t fit, don’t submit!TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2039781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 203Spend some quality time on “the real world of me” before you invest your
time chasing a deal that just doesn’t suit you or takes you to places that will ul-
timately make you unhappy, even if you are successful. 
Will the Dogs Like It?
You’ve taken the time to be introspective; it’s now time to look hard at the dealthat’s in front of you. You know, the one that looks, smells, and feels right foryou. 
A very astute Hawai’i-based Chinese businessman, whom I had the pleasure
to work with in my early legal career, used to have a favorite saying to charac-terize any deal. He applied this saying to the many, many deals he considered.He would pause after reviewing the deal situation and ask, “But will the dogslike it?”
He meant that if a deal looks good, is workable, is affordable, and is in a good
location, then the customers (tenants, purchasers, etc.) still have to show up tomake it happen. He insisted at the outset that just because something may lookright to you, it may not be quite so right to the man or woman on the street. Youand your wife (partner, friend, banker, college business professor, etc.) mightthink you have the newest take on sliced bread; however, you must take off therose-tinted glasses and look at the deal high and low. In other words, strive fortotal objectivity in your deal analysis.
Just because something may look right to you, it may not be quite so
right to the man or woman on the street.
A couple of deals from my past point out the usefulness of being truly objec-
tive. In 1977 , my partner, Robert Pulley, and I opened the ﬁrst Burger Kingrestaurant in the state of Hawai’i, right across the street from a busy and well-located McDonald’s restaurant. At that time in Hawai’i, McDonald’s was prettymuch the whole ballgame in terms of branded quick-serve hamburgers. Aftersampling Burger King’s food and visiting existing Burger King restaurants onthe mainland, we both agreed that the concept would work well in the Islands.And, even before we opened in Honolulu, we had customers banging on ourrestaurant doors to get in while we were still obviously under construction. Werealized that we had a real winner on our hands. The “dogs” really liked ourhamburgers. We set ﬁrst day, ﬁrst week, and ﬁrst month sales records for grosssales for the entire Burger King chain. In fact, our drive-through service laneTIP204 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 204routinely ﬁlled up and cars backed up on the very busy Beretania Street for
more than a mile. We had to hire off-duty policemen to control and direct trafﬁcfor seven months before we got things under control. 
Our customers fell in love with Burger King. We had a very good product
that was absolutely unique to Hawai’i at that time. There was a pent-up demandfor fast-food hamburgers other than McDonald’s hamburgers. To my partner’scredit, we obtained a “bulletproof” location right across from a key competitorthat we knew was very successful. And, we delivered good food fast. We hadanalyzed the deal objectively based on good information. In fact, as it turnedout, we underestimated how much the dogs would like it.
On the other hand, I had the opposite experience with the introduction of
the El Pollo Loco restaurant chain into Hawai’i some years later. I, along withmy key employees, had eaten at El Pollo Loco in Southern California. The ElPollo Loco concept essentially involves charbroiling fresh and big fryer chickensto golden brown and serving the charbroiled chicken with tortillas, beans, andrice. The “dogs” really liked this product in Southern California where there isa strong Hispanic tradition. People there of all types are quite familiar withtacos, tamales, and tortillas, and fajitas. They viewed El Pollo Loco as a goodMexican food concept and made it very popular.
In addition to knowing the food was good and popular (in Southern Califor-
nia at least), we had the money and expertise to develop the chain in premierlocations in Hawai’i. So we obtained the area franchise, and with the success ofBurger King in Hawai’i encouraging us, we felt sure we could create anothermajor quick-serve restaurant success. We opened two El Pollo Loco locationsat about the same time. Imagine our disappointment when we found that thedogs didn’t like the product in Hawai’i. Imagine our ﬁnancial losses.
The El Pollo Loco concept depended on some customer familiarity with
Mexican food preparation and service. What seemed routine in terms of Mexi-can food service to Southern Californians mystiﬁed many (if not most) of ourgood Hawaiian customers. The concept involved the simple act of pulling thechicken meat off the half-chicken serving and wrapping it in a warm tortillawith beans, rice, and salsa, thereby creating a world-class chicken fajita. InHawai’i, the customers did not combine the ingredients (despite clever and in-structive graphics on every table and menu); they typically ate the chicken serv-ing, which was delicious, picked at the rice and beans, and threw the beautiful,warm ﬂour tortillas away. We were stunned.
There was already huli-huli (ﬂame-broiled) chicken all over the island of
Oahu, which was a popular and long-standing fund-raising vehicle. Typically,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2059781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 205community groups involved in fund-raising would set up huli-huli wagons in
parking lots on weekends at several locations on the island. They would buildcharcoal ﬁres in the huli-huli wagons and proceed to prepare and sell tastyﬂame-broiled chickens (whole and halves) to the public at relatively inexpensiveprices. So in addition to our customer’s failure to grasp the El Pollo Loco concept,we had a serious competitor that we never considered until it was too late. 
Will the Dogs Like It?
• Is the product something that you would personally buy at the likely asking price?
• Is the product unique or better than the comparable products sold by competitors?• Is the product too complicated or too much trouble for your customers?• T ake off your rose-tinted deal glasses and look at the relevant market objectively.
Without the customers’ grasp of the chicken fajita preparation, the El Pollo
Loco chicken was simply good chicken. It wasn’t really very unique, and it was
pretty expensive compared to huli-huli chicken. We actually didn’t fail com-pletely, but our losses forced us to sell out to Kentucky Fried Chicken. KFCwanted to get rid of El Pollo Loco on the Islands, and our modest success washurting their business. So we took the easy way out with a lesson well learned.
Garbage In, Garbage Out
Projected ﬁnancial results, as you can imagine, are the primary concern in ana-lyzing any deal, and when it comes to the numbers it’s garbage in, garbage out.Essentially, if your sales projections or your cost projections are bad going in,the resulting projected bottom line (proﬁt and cash ﬂow) numbers are not onlyunreliable but outright dangerous to your ﬁnancial well-being. 
Up until now, everything we have discussed has been preparatory to real
deal focus. Now it’s time to get to the heart of our task. As you’ve seen, thenumbers aren’t the only consideration, but they certainly are most critical tothe stop-or-go deal decision. With my focus on the development of franchisedeals, I often had access to very reliable historical sales data from other fran-chise operations in comparable demographic areas. Typical numbers relatingto fast-food operations, convenience stores, gas stations, and other similar op-erations are often made available to the prospective franchisees in the manda-206 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 206tory disclosure document that each prospective franchisee must receive under
the Uniform Franchise Act enacted in most states. These “pro forma” (pro-jected) numbers are useful in analyzing the deal—and other deals involving thesame or similar product delivery—in most franchise opportunities.
Of course, using pro forma numbers to analyze a potential deal amounts to,
at best, intelligent guesswork. In every case, one has to massage these pro formanumbers to ﬁt the situation at hand. The pricing construct has to be adjustedup or down to ﬁt the intended location. Additionally, an equally important con-cern is to evaluate the relevant market (assuming the dogs like the product) toarrive at reasonable projected transaction counts and customer counts. 
Counting “heads” is the ﬁrst step in evaluating a fast-food location. I have
spent many hours personally counting every vehicle passing by my target loca-tion. In tourist locations, I often count the people who walk by every hour inhigh- and low-trafﬁc periods. Getting a good handle on real numbers of poten-tial customers who have direct exposure to your location is really chapter onein the sales number guessing book. So don’t skip actually doing a thorough, re-alistic head count or trafﬁc count. 
Of course, what your closest and most relevant competitor is actually achiev-
ing in gross sales is also absolutely key to your analysis of projected gross sales.And if you don’t have a close competitor you are either really lucky or more of-ten than not, in the wrong location altogether. I don’t care how you get thesecompetitor numbers, but you must get them. This sales data can often be dis-covered through a review of public tax ﬁlings (i.e., gross excise tax data) or bysimply interviewing your competitor’s former employees or managers. Youmight want to hire them anyway, so you certainly can interview them. In sum-mary, you must get solid and realistic projected gross sales numbers to avoidcreating garbage in, garbage out projections. 
Projected sales are only half the story. Projected expenses are equally im-
portant when it comes to developing usable bottom-line projections. Projectedexpenses can almost always be estimated reasonably with hard work. We arefortunate in the United States to have the remarkably efﬁcient distribution ofgoods and services at comparable and fair pricing (assuming you pay your billson time). With the exception of utility costs and gas, which historically canmake dramatic moves to the upside, your costs for food, paper, products, pro-duce, and people tend to be relatively stable. In quick-serve restaurants, gasstations, and convenience stores, you can move your pricing daily if necessaryso you can preserve your proﬁt margins as costs move up. Of course, you areROBERT KIYOSAKI 2079781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 207always limited by the competitive atmosphere, but given a product or products
the dogs like, reasonable pricing, and a good location, you can come up withprojected ﬁnancial results that are sensible enough to make a deal decision.
If you have hit your mark in projecting future gross sales and have a good
understanding of your expenses, you should be able to derive some fairly goodand usable guesses at cash ﬂow and proﬁtability numbers. When I have reallydone my homework, I have been able to avoid the garbage in, garbage out syn-drome that turns business projections into birdcage lining. When I didn’t dothe work of counting vehicles and heads, or failed to research the success orfailure of my closest competitors, my deal analysis was faulty. If I failed to bediligent in projecting reliable expense numbers, I had garbage or unrealisticexpense numbers to factor into my proﬁtability formula. Sometimes I got luckyand things turned out better than I had hoped for. However, you can’t rely onluck and the mistakes that are burned into my brain resulted from overly ag-gressive sales projections and garbage out at the projected bottom line. 
When I have really done my homework, I have been able to avoid
the garbage in, garbage out syndrome that turns business projections into
birdcage lining.
Years ago, I along with my partner, Robert Pulley, built a Burger King restau-
rant in the heart of Waikiki in Honolulu, Hawai’i. Although the site was on the
ground ﬂoor in the front of the popular Kings Village shopping center, the actualwalk-by trafﬁc seemed a little thin for this very expensive location. However,one-half block away on Waikiki Beach were absolute throngs of tourists, mostlymilling about at the popular corner of Liliuokalani and Kalakaua avenues. Mypersonal tourist head count revealed several thousand potential customers pass-ing through this adjacent and very popular intersection every hour. 
The downside of this location was that the view from this key corner to my
target restaurant site was largely blocked by a ticket and information booth. Abad deal! So if I was going to choose this site, I’d have to adjust my sales projec-tions way down. After all, they were based on actual walk-by trafﬁc at the time.The obstruction by the ticket booth meant there was nothing to draw customersour way from that busy corner. My partner and I fortunately engaged in some“what-if” analysis before passing on this potentially great site. Our conclusionwas that if we could create unobstructed sight-line visibility from this majortourist corner to our site, the deal would work. So I made a last-minute potential“deal-breaker” demand to the landlord that the offending ticket booth be re-TIP208 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 208moved to clear up the sight line. Fortunately, the landlord agreed. They wanted
us in the center. So we ended up with probably the most successful quick-serverestaurant I have ever built. The dogs liked us, now they could see us, and therewere plenty of dogs! Our ﬁrst-year sales were more than $2.7 million out of lessthan twenty-seven hundred square feet. These are hall of fame numbers forfast food.
On the other hand, I once developed a cemetery on a parcel of land that my
then partner, Bernard Bays—also a contributor in this book—and I had acquiredto develop high-end residential condominiums. How did a parcel of land gofrom high-end condos to burial plots? Simple answer: Hurricane Iniki and an-cient but unmarked graves on the property. As you can well imagine, everyoneI knew razzed me with the old joke, “Hey John, I hear people are dying to getinto your new project.” Yeah, wrong kind of dying. All joking aside, the grosssales potential on paper from any new cemetery is just phenomenal. Anytimeyou can convert, as an example, six acres into six thousand saleable grave plotsin a major metro area, your potential ultimate sellout can be as high as $15 to$20 million! Since our land was already paid for, I had only to face cemeteryapprova l and development costs, w hich I had a pretty good handle on. So I con-
structed some very elaborate and detailed sales and cash-ﬂow projections thatconvinced Bays, myself, and several of our associates that we had a winner in-deed, even if it wasn’t via condo development. The cash ﬂow-to-cost ratio wasvery favorable on what seemed to be ultimately reasonable sales projections.Our deal analysis looked really good, but it was very wrong.
Unfortunately, I grossly overestimated how quickly people would buy burial
plots in the cemetery. We had originally built the cemetery with the thought ofselling it to a major company involved in the funeral home/cemetery business.In fact, we had a basic agreement that this company would run the cemeteryand ultimately buy the operation and property at a price yielding a substantialproﬁt to our group. So, even though we really had no experience actually oper-ating a cemetery, we proceeded to develop it anyway. We wrongly assumed thatour deal to sell to the pros would go through before we actually had to operatethe cemetery business. The projected cash ﬂow made us conﬁdent of closingsuch a sale. Unfortunately, our prospective buyers went into bankruptcy a shorttime after completion of the cemetery. There I was a fast food impresario, takingover cemetery operations. 
I was stuck with the job as head “cemeterian,” which I knew little about and
greatly disliked. I soldiered ahead because our projected numbers still lookedterriﬁc. We still had millions of dollars in unsold inventory already paid for andROBERT KIYOSAKI 2099781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 209210 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
waiting to be sold. I just didn’t ﬁgure that it might take my lifetime to sell this
inventory. Talk about garbage in, garbage out. I would likely be buried in thiscemetery, and there still would be more than half the plots left to sell! 
Many years later after investing countless and thankless hours learning about
and actually running the cemetery, I ﬁnally ended up selling it at a loss. Mypartners and I are now much older and wiser. My projections of cemetery plotsales were based on selling signiﬁcant numbers of plots from the get-go. Wedid ﬁnally begin to see signiﬁcant sales of plots every month. However, thissales tempo took years to achieve. What I did not factor into my projected plotsales was the essential attribute of “heritage,” which every new cemetery mustgain slowly if at all before signiﬁcant plot sales can be achieved. This is particu-larly true in smaller cities with more limited population bases. 
The simple truth is that it is hard to get families to bury their deceased loved
ones in new places. If aunty and uncle are buried in the public cemetery, the restof the family will also likely want to be interred there no matter how “seedy” theold town cemetery has become. People will come to a new cemetery, but it takestime. They are dying to get in but just not fast enough at a new cemetery. So mydecision to proceed to build a cemetery was driven by sales projections thatwere honestly derived but simply too aggressive for this kind of business. Thiswas particularly true since we lost our major cemetery consolidator/operator atthe very outset. My deal analysis was faulty because of overly aggressive “gar -bage” sales projections. 
Garbage In, Garbage Out
• Access and use sales numbers from the best sources available (franchisor stan-
dard disclosures and competitor numbers, for example) 
• Count the “heads” and/or traffic personally
• Do your homework when you work up expense projections • Ask the “what-if” question before passing on a deal • If you build it to sell, you better have a “bulletproof” buyer
Build It and They Will Come (or Not)
Now that I have discussed some practical concerns that will prepare you for
getting into a deal and shared some stories and my opinion about the relevance9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 210of numbers to every deal, it’s time to focus on the question of location. Although
I have related most of my discussion to quick-serve restaurants, conveniencestores, and related businesses, the location question is central to analyzing any
real estate deal. 
It is often said that the three most important aspects of any real estate deal
are location, location, and location. This is true, true, and true in any fast-food-type deal, but it is also the compelling issue in most real estate deals. Certainly,it is the central issue in the real estate deals I am referring to in this chapter. 
Choosing the right locations for fast-food, quick-serve, gas, and convenience
store businesses becomes an art after you have done it time and again and en-joyed success and experienced failures. I discussed above in the numbers analy-sis section the importance of counting heads and checking competitors’ sales. Ialso stressed that the visibility of any site is a key part of this location issue.And ﬁnally I emphasized being in an area where the demographics supportyour product, where it is both needed and wanted by the people. Remember,will the dogs like it? For as simple as those concepts seem, be assured that youcannot properly analyze any real estate deal involving commercial sales to thepublic without paying close attention to these basic principles of site selection.Take it from someone who has learned these lessons the hard way.
In most cases, the location you want and are sure of is easy to ﬁgure out but
is unavailable because of zoning, expense, public ownership, size (too big to af-ford or too small to be workable), and/or access. The locations that are availableoften are available because no one wants them or can afford them. This is espe-cially true in major metro areas. If the site is available, you’d better go slow be-cause usually there is something wrong with it. Never assume your competitorsare dumb or lazy. Proceed with caution or you will build the perfect store andnobody will come. 
I can’t tell you how many times I have fortunately passed on real estate deals
that were just about right, meaning just about in a great location, but wereslightly off for one reason or another. Maybe the site was just interior from thekey dominant corner or was in a perfect corner location but on the second ﬂooror down a half-ﬂight of stairs. Or the site was blocked by a huge banyan tree,ticket booth, adjacent building, or some other obstruction so you couldn’t see itfrom the “coming home” side of the road. I will assure you that you can’t buildor manage your way out of a poor location, no matter how hard you try or howmuch you spend. I refer here to my area of expertise involving quick-serverestaurants and convenience/gas facilities; however, I believe this location issueis at the heart of every deal that involves sales to the general public. ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2119781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 211Y ou can’t build or manage your way out of a poor location, no matter
how hard you try or how much you spend.
Aside from location visibility, access for your customers is another important
consideration. I have thankfully passed on a number of sites that seemed per-
fectly located but suffered from limited access because of trafﬁc, trafﬁc controls,or limited parking. If it’s not convenient the “dogs” will pass on by to someplacethat’s easier to deal with. So, if you build on a location that your customers can’tget to, they won’t come. 
My partner, Robert Pulley, and I had some fantastic successes by securing
locations that were seemingly unavailable or unattainable for our quick-servehamburger restaurants. I mentioned above the Waikiki location with the prob-lematic ticket booth. Once we got rid of this visual impairment we had an ab-solute grade “A” location. We had many other successes that I like to thinkwere enabled by creative thinking and action.
When I was looking for deals that would compete favorably with my number-
one competitor, McDonald’s, I had to be creative since this competitor had seem-ingly tied up all the available, really good locations. I always laughed when areal estate broker would tell me that I was ahead of McDonald’s on any particularsite or that I was being offered the site ﬁrst. I assumed, usually with completeaccuracy, that any site McDonald’s wanted in my city would end up in theirhands no matter who else was interested. They were deﬁnitely the “big kahuna”in my development area, and they usually got the ﬁrst right of refusal on anynewly available sites. I guess it’s good to be the real boss.
So I, along with my partner, had to think creatively if we were going to grow
and succeed. Our deal analysis on sites had to be not only accurate but innova-tive. This creative mind-set led us to open the ﬁrst nationally branded fast-foodoutlet ever in a U.S. military installation at the Navy Exchange at Pearl Harbor,Hawai’i. (We lost this location some years later when we sold out to a Japanesecompany, but that is another story.) We opened, with great success, the ﬁrstfast-food restaurant with a partner in the Honolulu International Airport, andwe opened the ﬁrst national fast-food franchise operation in a Hawai’i publicpark at Ala Moana park in downtown Honolulu. We actually retroﬁtted part ofa YMCA building to create a Burger King restaurant next to the University ofHawai’i, which was another ﬁrst. 
We deﬁnitely had to be creative in our site selection to survive and grow our
company. We actually built ﬁve or more of the most successful restaurants inTIP212 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 212ROBERT KIYOSAKI 213
terms of sales volume in the history of quick-serve restaurants. In every case,
the successful location was equal or superior to our competitors’ locations orwas uniquely situated to avoid any competition. In every case, the location wasthe key to our success. Our deal analysis was spot-on in these unique locations. 
However, I would be less than honest if I didn’t tell you about a couple of
bad experiences I’ve had because of poor site selection. By that I mean, I builtit and they didn’t come. The ﬁrst example involved building a very fancy andexpensive Burger King restaurant on the ground ﬂoor of a high-end residentialcondominium that my partner had developed in Waikiki. Honestly, my site(deal) analysis was skewed by the ready availability of this commercial site,which my partner had in his back pocket as the condominium developer. WhatI didn’t see were some major problems with this “captive site,” although it waslocated on a busy Waikiki corner. First, the dogs didn’t like it. The homeownerswere less than enamored by a fast-food hamburger restaurant at the entranceto their new, exclusive, and expensive condominium complex. To add furtherinsult, a fellow high-end restaurant tenant sued to stop our restaurant’s con-struction as a violation of his exclusivity clause. But the real oversight in ourdeal analysis was that our location was on the busy corner but one-half ﬂoorbelow street grade. The walk-by trafﬁc didn’t seem to ﬁnd our location becauseit was below their sight line. A ﬁnal straw was that, even though there werehundreds of cars passing by every hour, there was no parking. 
Here’s a lesson I learned that is for everyone: If you are in the convenience
food/store business you had better be convenient and readily accessible. I havenever had much success in this quick-serve/convenience area when I locatebelow or above street level. So in analyzing site locations, don’t count on toomuch tenacity or insight on the part of your customers—they just don’t carethat much. 
In analyzing site locations don’t count on too much tenacity or insight
on the part of your customers—they just don’t care that much. 
My experience in developing, owning, and operating a nightclub was equally
painful. In this instance, a close personal friend, Robert Mardian Jr., had givenme some solid advice against building this club on the Big Island of Hawai’i. Hewas in the club business there, as well, and knew the ropes. Unfortunately, I ig-nored that good advice and proceeded with the nightclub development. Myreason for going forward was simply that I had space in a warehouse complexTIP9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 213that I owned, which had already been substantially built out as a nightclub at
great expense. I recaptured the space after my tenant defaulted (that shouldhave been my ﬁrst clue), and I decided the best idea was to ﬁnish out the cluband operate it. So I spent hundreds of thousands of dollars building a state-of-the-art nightclub that opened with considerable fanfare. Unfortunately, I soonfound out that, even if the dogs liked the club, they wouldn’t come if theycouldn’t ﬁnd it.
Another important and costly lesson I learned is that you can’t 
turn a sow’s ear into a silk purse.
I had committed two major mistakes here concerning location. I had failed
to heed the clear and sound advice from a knowledgeable consultant who ad-vised me that the club would fail because of location. Also, I should haveknown that no matter how much money you spend, you cannot build yourselfout of a bad location. This just wasn’t appropriate space for a nightclub be-cause it was in the back of an industrial warehouse that was off the beatentrack. People who actually wanted to come couldn’t find it. I used to joke thatpeople just needed to drive until they heard gunfire (this was a rough arealate at night). I ended up disliking the nightclub business as much as the ceme-tery business. 
By now I think you get it. Deals where the location is “bad, bad, and bad”
won’t work no matter what you do. We ﬁnally tore out the nightclub imp rove-
ments and returned it to warehouse use. The entire complex has been full since.Another important and costly lesson I learned is that you can’t turn a sow’s earinto a silk purse. 
Build It and They Will Come (or Not)
• Location, location, location is true, true, and true.
• Count heads, review access and visibility, and check out the competition.• If the site is readily available there is probably something wrong with it.• Think “outside the box” to get unique locations. • If you are in the convenience business you’d better be convenient.• Seek out and listen to the experts.• Don’t try to turn a sow’s ear into a silk purse.TIP214 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 214Trouble with Travel
With any deal you are considering, you simply have to ask yourself, “Can I man-
age the deal effectively? If the deal is located more than one day’s travel fromyour home, you’d better ask (and answer) some serious questions about yourpersonal span of control. You can’t manage the type of deals I have been dis-cussing by staring at a computer. You need to be at the site at least weekly if youare the majority partner. Or you’d better have a good, capable, and trustworthyoperator/partner.
And that leads to an important point. One of the most important considera-
tions in analyzing whether to proceed with any real estate deal or developmentis the availability of good management. And usually the key to good managementis your personal involvement in the development and operation. Having goodpartners can solve many of the concerns about good management; however, ifyour own money is at risk in any deal it will require your personal attention.The question then is whether realistically you will actually be able to devotesufﬁcient time to a deal to make it successful. 
One of the most important considerations in analyzing whether to 
proceed with any real estate deal or development is the availability of good
management. And, usually that means you, with direct personal involvement in the development and operation. 
I have found if a deal or operation is located too far from my home base or is
difﬁcult to get to, I won’t pay enough personal oversight and attention to the
situation to ensure good management. I have also found that it is very rare tosee any deal run on its own without major problems. If I have to get on an air-plane or drive several hours to a location, you are not going to see me very often.It really amounts to the trouble with travel. 
I once stretched the limit concerning my effective span of control by agreeing
to be a founding member of a company formed to develop Subway sandwichrestaurants in the old Soviet Union. Before we got the ﬁrst restaurant built, theSoviet Union imploded, so we had to be satisﬁed with the nation of Russia withonly 300 million people or so. My major point here is that you don’t need totravel to the other side of the world to ﬁnd trouble. You can usually ﬁnd plentyof trouble right at home.
How I ever got involved in Soviet Subway restaurants is a story of seduction.
I was intoxicated by the sheer potential magnitude of a deal that involved anTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2159781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 215entire nation, despite the fact that it happened to be Russia—a mere 12,500
miles from my home. The prevalent “kleptocracy” that seemed to be the domi-nant ideology in the early nineties in Russia should have raised a cautionarynote in my Russia deal analysis. The fact that I would have very little to do withday-to-day management of the restaurants should also have raised my personalred ﬂag. Despite these serious road blocks to good deal formation, I along withsome other U.S. partners built the ﬁrst Subway sandwich restaurant in Russiaon Nevsky Prospect in St. Petersburg. It took some real creativity and out-of-the-box thinking to build a workable and visible restaurant in a two-hundred-year-old building.
The restaurant was a rousing success primarily because I sent one of my
very best partners from Hawai’i, Steve Brown, along with his wife, Roberta, tobuild and run the Russian Subway operations. Of course, Steve was also enam-ored with the prospect of owning part of the hundred or more Subway Restau-rants we intended to build throughout Russia, so I am not entirely to blame fordisrupting his life. Shockingly, we were taking in wheelbarrow loads of rubles(literally) and lots of hard currency (dollars, marks, etc.) from the very start ofoperations in St. Petersburg. Under Steve’s management with some help fromme and the other three principals, we had one of the most successful Subwaysandwich restaurants in the world—for about three months. 
After weeks of hard work and success, Steve and Roberta ﬁnally took a short
trip out of Russia to decompress, leaving one of our partners in charge as themanaging director, which was required by Russian corporate law. Call it confu-sion about travel plans and return dates, but we had literally one day without aso-called managing director in charge of operations in St. Petersburg. Our Russ-ian partner, whom we took on at the outset of our plans because of his apparentcontrol over some key real estate and his political connections, chose that dayto make his move. He had been sitting on the sidelines as we operated for ninetydays without any active part in management. He expressed great frustrationthat we were banking all our net receipts to pay start-up bills before makingany partner distributions. What we didn’t realize at the time, was that our part-ner had some very bad characters who had control over him and were part of amajor Russian mob. 
Under mob instructions (we think), he was waiting for his chance to gain
control over the restaurant as managing director. He seized that one day’s op-portunity. When Steve Brown returned from Russia a day later he found ourRussian partner’s security people (formerly our security people, ex-KGB ap-parently) in charge. They literally ran Steve out of the restaurant at gunpoint!216 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 216So we lost control of the restaurant
and the backing we had lined up tobuild many more restaurants. Andour Russian “partner” soon ran theexisting restaurant into the ground.Talk about a mess!
Despite the fact that our company
ﬁnally got the restaurant back yearslater, we all lost most of our invest-ment in this deal. Now we may ulti-mately get back some of our moneyas my old U.S. partners continue tobuild Subway sandwich restaurantsthrough franchise agreements in Russia under the auspices of our former com-pany. However, I have often reﬂected on my poor decision in getting involved ina deal so far from home and on hazardous turf we knew little about. I can’t helpbut repeat that you don’t need to travel halfway around the world to invest yourway into trouble; there are plenty of landmines to step on right here at home. 
Deals Are Like Parachutes
So far, we’ve covered many of the considerations involved in analyzing and ne-gotiating good deals. Now let’s discuss the importance of getting out of a bad ormarginal deal. Think of deals as if they were parachutes. If you’re freefalling orsinking fast, you need to be able to pull the rip cord to save yourself and get outof a deal that’s simply not working. That means ﬁrst and foremost, determinewhether you can negotiate an “out” clause in your initial deal analysis. If youdon’t succeed in obtaining this concession from the landlord/seller you maywant to pass on the deal.
When I ﬁrst started building restaurants, my partner and I routinely signed
personal guaranties on leases for long-term leasehold properties. We were reach-ing to obtain the best real estate available and believed, in many cases correctly,that we had no chance to obtain these superior sites without “kissing the paper,”which is another way of saying signing personal guaranties. We ultimatelystopped doing this since a personal guaranty on a long-term lease is like a lifesentence. If the lease term is long enough you have to worry about whether thelease rent is being paid for the rest of your life. This is especially true if youhave assigned this lease to someone else. ROBERT KIYOSAKI 217
The Trouble With Travel
• The trouble with travel is that it 
reduces your span of control. 
• Will you actually go there after you
have built it?
• Deals don’t run on their own.
• Foreign countries are especially
dangerous turf.
• Y ou don’t have to leave home to
find trouble.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 217Although we ultimately got our names off most of these guaranties when we
sold the restaurants and assigned these long-term leases, in some instances we
could not get releases because the landlords were just too tough. And, ourmarker (guaranty) was called in a couple of times by landlords who we had nodealings with for years. So, if a personal guaranty is demanded, you must care-fully consider whether you want to accept this liability for the term of the lease(or loan). This extra liability greatly burdens the beneﬁt of any potential dealand should be factored into your deal decision making.
If a personal guaranty is demanded, you must carefully consider
whether you want to accept this liability for the term of the lease or loan—
a potential life sentence.
After a couple of bad experiences, I not only stopped giving my personal
guaranty on lease deals, but I began to insist on “rip cord” clauses to get out of
leases that p roved to be f or marginal locations. In most instances, landlords
met this demand for an “out” of a long-term real estate lease with stiff resistanceor refusal. My resolve to leave a par-tially open door to get out of a baddeal was equally strong. My negoti-ating stance was to point out that Iwould be fronting signiﬁcant im-provement costs at the outset, whichI would not walk away from withouta really compelling reason. Some-times I was able to negotiate only aqualiﬁed release from my personalguaranty, which was better thannothing. For example, my personalguaranty would go away after the rent had been paid for a short term of threeto ﬁve years or on payment of a lump sum. But I was always prepared to walkaway from deals that were just too tough in terms of personal guaranties orlong-term lock-ins.
Make My Day, Make My Life
At some point in every viable real estate deal you have the opportunity, or atleast the consideration, of whether or not to sell. In my experience, the decisionTIP218 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Deals Are Like 
Parachutes
• A long-term personal guaranty can
amount to a “life-sentence.”
• Negotiate a “rip cord” clause in
long-term leases if possible.
• Be prepared to “walk” if terms are
too tough.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 218to sell or not to sell is usually an easy or obvious one. If the price is right, every-
thing is for sale. The analysis issue is which course of action—sale or retention—will optimize the return from your deal. I have personally made some greatselling decisions and also some pretty bad decisions that irk me to this day. 
Generally speaking, there are certain rules of thumb that are commonly used
in the sale of operating businesses. Of course, these rules can be warped in ahundred different ways to accommodate the unique features of every differentdeal. Fast-food restaurants often sell based on a ratio of annual (trailing twelve-month) cash ﬂow. Six times annual cash ﬂow is generally considered at thehigh-end while four-and-a-half times cash ﬂow is considered at the low-end ofselling prices for such operating businesses. And, my reference to cash-ﬂow re-ally more correctly refers to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, andamortization, or EBITDA. There are other variations of this cash-ﬂow acronym,but this is the one I use. 
There are certain rules of thumb that are commonly used in the 
sale of operating businesses. Of course, these rules can be warped in 
a hundred different ways to accommodate the unique features of every different deal.
Of course, operating businesses are sold for all kinds of reasons and all kinds
of prices. I remember an old legend concerning the sale of a gas station/conve-
nience store. Essentially, the owner of this business was a sharp operator whowas trying to push the sales price beyond normal cash-ﬂow rules of thumb. Soevery time a potential buyer was due to inspect the business, the owner woulddump trash around the buildings, leave the restrooms in a mess, and generallypresent an untidy, dirty appearance about the business. Then when the buyershowed up, the owner would take him aside and point out the seemingly obviousfact that if someone would “just run the business properly” sales and proﬁtswould soar. It is also common for the owner/seller and spouse to add back tothe cash ﬂow their salaries (car allowance, expense account, etc.) to pump upthe cash ﬂow. This is true, even if the owner/seller and spouse are the veryheart of the business management and operation. Owners play all kinds ofgames with the sale of operating businesses. More sophisticated buyers andsellers will rely on industry norms concerning cash ﬂow and a real objectiveanalysis of the numbers to arrive at a price. 
Robert Pulley and I sold our Burger King restaurants in Hawai’i at a price
that approached one times the gross sales, which probably doesn’t happen veryTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2199781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 219220 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
often. However, we had a business in the seemingly terriﬁc state of Hawai’i, we
had good management and good locations, and we had enthusiastic foreignbuyers. The analysis of whether to sell or not in our case was an easy yes. I havesold restaurants at other times on the six-times cash ﬂow multiple, but I per-sonally have not seen another deal with a price approaching parity with grosssales. 
Analyzing the deal in raw land sales, presuming one has staying power to
hold on to the land, relates basically to the greed factor. How much gain isenough? There are no real rules of thumb concerning the sale of raw land ordevelopment land. You need to make the hard decision of whether holding theland or the further development of the land will justify holding costs. Of course,these decisions to sell raw land are often driven by the owner’s inability to con-tinue to pay carrying costs. In cases where you are going to lose the propertyotherwise, selling becomes an easy decision.
My most memorable mistakes in terms of selling prematurely involve selling
houses in Hawai’i that practically doubled in value a year or two after my sale.We all have had or know of examples of seller’s remorse in personal house sales.This was particularly true in many areas of the United States that were experi-encing explosive increases in house prices. I, along with lots of other sellers,failed to judge the rapid upward move of the market. 
Of course failure to sell during market peak can be an equally grievous error.
We also have become familiar with holding strategies that lead to dramaticlosses in rapidly declining residential and commercial real estate markets.
There are factors other than price that may impact the decision to sell or to
buy. You might decide to sell if you no longer are able to manage a business ortake care of a house. You may know of planned major infrastructure changesthat will impact the relevant market negatively or positively. You might want to
Make My Day, Make My Life
• Utilize common “rules of thumb” to reach a realistic valuation decision.
• Cash flow rather than assets determine sales prices (usually).• Unless you have a “crystal ball,” you can get burned on market directions (up or
down).
• If you can’t afford the deal you need to sell it.• Don’t miss a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to sell; i.e., the “make my day, make
my life” decision. 9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 220sell to key employees to avoid losing them. In every case, the analysis of the
deal, or the sale, requires every bit as much consideration as a deal to build oracquire. 
Ways To Learn More
Look for future writings by John Finney on the adventures on real estate.
Rich Dad Poor Dad, by Robert KiyosakiABC’s of Real Estate Investing, by Ken McElroy
John Finney is the current president of Industrial Income Properties,
Inc., a company he formed to ﬁnd, develop, own, and operate real estate,
ranging from residential and ofﬁce condominiums, cattle ranches, fast-food restaurants with adjunct convenience store and gas facilities, singlefamily residences, farm properties, nightclubs, and other real estate ven-tures in Hawai’i, Guam, and the western United States. Prior to that, he
and his partner Robert W. Pulley secured the Burger King franchise rights in Hawai’i and inten years opened thirty-ﬁve stores and sold them in one of the biggest deals in Burger Kinghistory. And each has had many other real estate ventures in the United States. John is anattorney and a graduate of Stanford Law School and a former U.S. Marine.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2219781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 221Imet Scott in 1999 at the Phoenix Open golf event. I knew of his reputation as
one of the biggest mortgage bankers in Arizona, but I did not know that he
knew me. Smiling as he walked up, he said, “I’m glad you’re saying what you say
about stocks and mutual funds. They’re terrible investments.”
At the time, I was under blistering attacks from ﬁnancial planners and ﬁnancial
magazines that were supported by mutual fund company’s advertising dollars.Y ou may recall that in 1999, the stock market was red hot and people believed theywere making billions in the new economy of the dot-com world. So to have a personof Scott’s reputation back up my philosophy that stocks and mutual funds wererisky investments was a welcome relief and validation. His pat on my back madewatching the Phoenix Open even more enjoyable.
Today Scott is one of the three mortgage bankers I call when I need the straight
story about real estate ﬁnancing. It was Scott who, years ago, warned me of thereal estate bubble being formed by the sub-prime mortgage ﬁasco. It was becauseof Scott that my wife, Kim, and I became more conservative in our real estate in-vestments while others became real estate gamblers.
I’m an advocate for ﬁnancial education because when you get smarter, you
minimize risk. That’s what this chapter is about. Scott has made me smarter, and12 Scott D. McPHERSON
Real Estate Due Diligence
2229781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 222ROBERT KIYOSAKI 223
the knowledge he has shared with me minimizes my risk with every new invest-
ment I make. His wisdom in this chapter will do the same for you.
—Robert Kiyosaki
When talking about the subject of real estate due diligence, you are really talkingabout nothing more than a team effort of discovery and veriﬁcation. That’swhat due diligence is, and every real estate transaction you do, whether it is asingle family home purchase or a very complex commercial real estate devel-opment, will require the buyer to take certain fundamental steps of underwrit-ing. Only through that process can a buyer fully assess all aspects of the propertyhe or she is purchasing. And if you are the buyer, you’ll want to make sure youare diligent about due diligence.
Benjamin Franklin once said, “Diligence is the mother of good luck.”
When you as a real estate investor have identiﬁed a property that you want
to purchase, you have come to the conclusion to buy it based on a series of some-what superﬁcial facts. You have usually seen the property, and generally havereviewed some of the ﬁnancial information that the seller or broker has providedyou. And based on this information and your belief that the property ﬁts yourbusiness plan, you make an offer to purchase. Once the seller has accepted youroffer, your work—or should I say your team’s work—has just begun!
I am a real believer in putting together a very strong team when you approach
a real estate acquisition. Many of the authors in this book have stated the exactsame thing in their chapters. The fact is, most highly successful people or com-panies are built using a team approach to getting things done. No one can be anexpert on every aspect of real estate, and frankly if you are investing on behalfof other people and are using their money, you should always seek competent
third-party input.
In this chapter, I am going to walk you through a due diligence process and
give you an overview of why the various members of your team are important. Iam also going to include my Eight Tips and some real-life examples of why se-curing qualiﬁed and unbiased advice on your proposed acquisition is so critical.
To me, assembling a team to assist you with your due diligence is just like
putting a puzzle together. Each of the team members have separate and spe-cialized disciplines, but when they are brought together by you as the leader,TIP9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 223the pieces come together, and all of a
sudden the full picture comes to life.You can see what you are really buying!
I have separated the due diligence
process into ﬁve main categories: phys-ical review, legal, title, third party re-ports, and accounting tax. Let’s startwith the ﬁrst one on this list.
Physical Review
During the physical review, you and your team inspect the property to see if itfalls in line with your business plan and your expectations. Let me expand a biton this. As an example, let’s say that you are planning to buy an apartmentbuilding and then do some slight renovations to the units that will allow you toincrease the rents over the next couple of years. So how does the process start?
Before you make your offer to purchase the property, you will want to inter-
view and select a property management company to help you prepare your op-erating and renovation budgets for the property. The key word here is before!
This is not something you want to do after you make the offer. The results ofthis work will help you decide whether the property is worth making an offerat all.
If you are going to be a professional real estate investor, have your 
team lined up before you make the offer!
A successful and competent property management company can go over
your operating and renovation budgets to make sure they are realistic and giveyou credible feedback on all the previous assumptions you may have made onthe property—assumptions such as operating expense savings, new income op-portunities, and even cash ﬂow projections. They can look at your business planand give it a thumbs up or a thumbs down and help you adjust it so it is attain-able and realistic. Remember, you will rely on a property management companyto make your business plan work, so you had better make sure you are both onthe same page from the beginning.
The property management company will have its own sub checklists for its
own due diligence process. The people in the company will walk through everyTIP224 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Due Diligence Process 
Categories
• Physical Review
• Legal Review• Title Review• Third Party Reports Review• Accounting and T ax Review9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 224apartment and check the condition of the property in a multifamily project, for
example, and bring in the sub-trades such as rooﬁng companies, landscape com-panies, etc., that can provide detailed reports on the condition of the property.
In addition to spearheading the physical inspection, the property manage-
ment company will also review all the rent-rolls, the operating statements, andtenant proﬁles, all in an effort to gain an understanding of the true, current op-erating income of the property. Usually it will present you with a summary ofthe ﬁndings.
The property management company is a critical member of your team.
Find the best one you can and work closely with it.
I cannot tell you how many times during my career that this work and the
report that it generates has helped buyers make the right decision about a prop-erty. Let me give you an example from two perspectives. I was involved in atwenty-unit apartment community that I was going to buy and convert to for-sale condominiums. When we did our walk-through, my property managementcompany brought along several contractors who were going to do the work onthe project once I closed.
To convert the apartments to condominiums, I planned to put about $20,000
of renovations—including adding a washer and dryer—into each unit. This wasa non-negotiable expense since my market study indicated that other condoprojects in the market all had washers and dryers. We needed to be competitive.
After the inspection, the owner of the property management company called
me and said that everything checked out and there were no real surprises, ex-cept one. I asked, “What would that be?” He proceeded to tell me that hisplumber and framer felt that because of the existing plumbing and stairwellconﬁguration, putting in the washers and dryers would cost an additional ﬁvethousand dollars per unit. That added up to an additional $100,000. OUCH!
Well clearly, that unexpected expense was not in my budget, so I went back
to the seller to renegotiate the terms of the deal. Speciﬁcally, I agreed to removeall contingencies after the completion of my due diligence, and in exchange Irequested that the seller reduce the price by $100,000. He agreed. Having anexpert in the room saved me $100,000! For as valuable as the property man-agement company was in ﬁnding a potentially deal-breaking hidden cost, aproperty manager can also add strong value by reviewing the rent-roll and ten-ant proﬁles.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2259781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 225Here’s my story: I was ﬁnancing an acquisition of a large apartment building
in Scottsdale, Arizona, that had been grossly undermanaged. My client was go-
ing to buy the asset and renovate the units and gradually raise rents. He thoughtthe quoted street rents for this property were below market for the submarketand felt he could increase them once he renovated the exterior, imp roved the
amenities, and did some minor interior work.
What the property management company reported after reviewing the rent-
roll was both startling and exciting. They discovered that more than 25 percentof the existing tenants had not received a rental increase since they signed theiroriginal leases! Two tenants were actually paying the same rent they had paidwhen they moved into the property the day it opened . . . ﬁfteen years prior!This news meant that the property’s net operating income would indeed in-crease signiﬁcantly simply by raising the old rents to the current market ratesand once the additional rent kicked in, based on the planned property improve-ments. The property management company earned its keep that day.
Legal Review
Hiring a lawyer that practices real estate law is a must. I am not advocatingthat you spend an incredible amount of money on legal fees, but with complexissues regarding title, contracts, entitlements, lender documents, and otheritems that you are certain to run into, you’d better have a good lawyer on yourteam. If you are an experienced real estate investor and you are buying a homeor something without too many issues, maybe you can handle the transactionon your own. But regardless, the legal review phase is not the place to savemoney on professional fees.
In my experience, if you have a good lawyer who is a “deal maker” you should
get him or her engaged on the issues he/she knows best. I have seen some prob-lems arise when the lawyer becomes the negotiator for the transaction. Re-member you are the team leader, and all of the members should be reporting toyou. That’s when a lawyer, as well as all your other team members, can reallyadd value. There are many examples of how lawyers have added value in thenumerous transactions in which I have been involved. Let me share a favorite.
I was ﬁnancing both the debt and equity for a condo developer on a property
in Portland, Oregon. My borrower hired a much-respected lawyer in Portlandto review all title and entitlement documents regarding the property. He dis-covered during the title review that one of the owners had recorded a document226 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 226requiring his approval before a property could be converted to condominiums.
Without this owner’s approval there was no way to get the state real estate ap-
proval to sell the units individually, and no way to deliver clear title to the buyers!
My borrower could not close the transaction without having this provision
removed from the title. The only solution was to go back to this previous owner
and get that person to remove the provision. Guess what? The previous ownerwas willing to comply, but for a price. My buyer was paying $48 million for aproperty that he was going to convert to condominiums and that he now dis-covered would not close until this provision was cleared up.
In this case, our seller and the previous seller agreed to a settlement, and we
closed the transaction at no additional cost to my buyer. Thankfully, my client’slawyer had reviewed the documents thoroughly and was on top of this issue.This is the purpose of legal due diligence: ﬁnding the problems before they be-come insurmountable and providing you with the knowledge you need to makea go/no-go decision based on the ﬁndings and the proposed solutions. Justthink if my buyer had closed on the property and then found out that he could
not convert the property at all. Or worse yet, imagine the cost to remove the re-striction post closing! My buyer would have been at the complete mercy of theprevious owner.
I do recommend strongly that if you are getting into larger and more
complex transactions that require new debt or joint venture equity that you get
legal representation at all times.
I am primarily a commercial mortgage broker. I provide debt and equity for
commercial real estate transactions around the country. I can tell you that loan
documents and joint venture agreements are extremely complex, and you doneed someone who can thoroughly understand them and explain them to you.
Title Review
Just as it’s important to work with a lawyer you know and trust during the legaldue diligence review, it’s just as important to work with a title company youknow and trust for this part of the process. In any deal I do, I try to control thetitle company choice in the purchase contract if at all possible. I ﬁnd it best togo with a larger ﬁrm that has the capacity to provide a satisfactory level of in-surance coverage for all parties.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2279781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 227Using a title company that you know and one that is acceptable to your
lenders and lawyer will save you a lot of time and effort.
I also like to use title companies to search comparable sales, foreclosures, or
other owners in a particular area to help give you a feel of what is going on in the
vicinity around the property. This is important intelligence you’ll need as youformulate your marketing plans and your forecasts for a particular property.
Lawyers aren’t the only ones who can save the day when it comes to due
diligence. Let me give you an example of how a title company made me a quickproﬁt on a house I was buying. The year was 1987 , and the home was in ParadiseValley, Arizona. It was kind of a hidden jewel. I saw a sign on it one morningwhen I was jogging and decided to make a call. The house was small, but sat ontwo and a half acres surrounded by four other houses on ﬁve acres. I knewhomes with that kind of acreage were not common, so I thought there might bevalue in this property.
When I got the broker on the line, he said his mother had passed away and
they needed to sell the house quickly. They were asking $225,000 and wouldcarry some amount for a quick close. I offered $185,000 that day, and they ac-cepted my offer. That gave me thirty days to close and ﬁnd the money!
Working with the title company, I asked them to pull up all the sales in the
surrounding area so I could see who my neighbors were and how much theypaid for their properties. What I discovered was that about ﬁve of the ten sur-rounding properties had changed hands in the last twelve months. Then I noticedsomething even more interesting about the sales. Each one was in a differentname or entity, but they all had the same mailing address for the tax bills.
BINGO! The light went on that someone had been assembling these larger
properties. I went to the address on the tax rolls and found out the entity was aland development company in town. Furthermore, I read in the paper that thisland development company had just signed the Ritz Carlton and was going toannounce a resort hotel development shortly!
Thanks to the information from my title company, I now knew that I was
just about to close on a piece of property that the land development companyneeded to complete the assemblage for their planned resort development. AfterI closed on the house, I set up a meeting with the development company andsubsequently sold them the property for $375,000. A whopping $150,000 morethan I paid for it! On top of that windfall, I negotiated free rent to live in thehouse for one year. Remember what wise old Ben said: “Diligence is the motherof good luck.”TIP228 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 228Third Party Reports Review
This is another crucial part of the due diligence process. The third party reports
that I am talking about are primarily the Environmental, Property Conditions,Appraisal, and Market Study. You may or may not need them based on the typeof property you are buying, but in most cases they are good to get and even maybe required by your lender. Let’s start at the top of the list.
Environmental
I would highly recommend that you hire a company to provide you with an en-vironmental study on the property. This report looks at soil composition, haz-ardous materials, and the like. Typically you contract for a Phase 1 report, whichis affordable, approximately in the $2,000 to $3,000 range. This report is wellworth the expense if the company turns something up like toxicity in the soilor some other hazardous materials.
The downside risk is way too large not to spend the money on a Phase 1
environmental report. Do one, no matter what.
If you are using a conventional ﬁnancing source, your lender will require a
Phase 1 report. They often have an approved list of vendors, so I recommend
that you check with your lender before you hire a provider to do this work. Ifyou do not have a lender yet, you should hire a national company that has afﬁl-iates in your region, then ask them for a list of lenders they have done businesswith.
Property Conditions Report
A property conditions report does just as the name states. It will call out issueswith the property’s condition that the inspections reveal. This would includestructural issues, roofs, asphalt, sewer, and other building systems. The reportalso will give you an estimated useful life for those items. This is very importantwhen you are capitalizing your budget.
The property conditions report gives you a second opinion on the 
condition of the property and can either affirm/dispute the inspection 
findings that you and your property management firm did earlier. Or it can find something you both have overlooked. That’s important to know.TIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2299781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 229When it comes to costs, property conditions reports can be all over the board,
but this is no place to skimp. Not only do you want a ﬁrm that is experienced
and knowledgeable, you want to hire a ﬁrm that has a national presence and isacceptable to your lender if you know who that is. As I mentioned earlier, if youhave not yet chosen a lender, your inspection company may be able to help witha recommendation.
The other beneﬁt of having a property conditions report is that it is a third
party report and completely unbiased, in contrast to the report compiled byyour property management company. If you go back to the seller with yourproperty management report, asking the seller to pay for something that iswrong with the property, he or she may feel that the report is biased in your fa-vor. That’s hard to do when you are also holding a third party property conditionreport that reﬂects the exact same issue. This report gives you much more cred-ibility and negotiating power.
Appraisal
Depending on how sophisticated a real estate investor you are, you may notthink you need an appraisal. My advice is almost always to get one. If you are ﬁ-nancing your project, you will need one anyway, and why not be sure that theproperty is valued where you believe it to be? It validates your own assessments,or in some cases refutes them. Either way, the knowledge is good to have.
As the borrower, it can get a little dicey if you hire the appraiser. Federally
chartered banks have guidelines that they must adhere to. One of those guide-lines is that the borrower cannot order the appraisal. Most banks and nonbanklenders are more comfortable making the decision on whom to hire. What I doin those instances is let the mortgage broker hire the appraiser or go to thelender with an appraiser in mind and let him hire that person. I generally wantsome say in the appraiser.
The mistake I see the most is when appraisers are hired and they are inex-
perienced in the type of property the buyer is purchasing. I run into this quite abit with banks. They just send out a bid sheet to three appraisers and hire onenot necessarily based on his expertise but on his time availability and price. Abad appraisal can bring the entire transaction to a standstill in a second.
To avoid this I always suggest having one or two appraisers that are good at
what they do and qualiﬁed in your type of property that you can recommend tothe bank. I also recommend that you take the time, or let your mortgage brokertake the time, to share your vision of the property with the appraiser. If the ap-praiser does not see the value that you currently see or are going to create, you230 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 230are toast. Finally, be proactive with him and provide him with as much infor-
mation as you can.
Remember an appraisal is an opinion of value. Y ou may have, and are
entitled to have, your own opinion, but you’d better be ready to back it up.
Market Study
Usually the appraisal will contain a good discussion of the market for your typeof property. However if you are planning to do something a little more on theedge or something that is complex like a condo conversion, hotel, golf course,or some kind of unique single family project, for example, you may need an ad-ditional market study not only for your own knowledge but to help move yourideas forward with the people around you.
There are companies, both regional and national, that can do market studies
geared directly toward your kind of project and just about any other kind ofproject including ones I mentioned in the previous paragraph. Consider engag-ing them to do the report and show it to everyone who you think needs to seeit. What I mean by that is show your market study to clarify and support yourvision and to defend your position.
Show your market study to clarify and support your vision and to
defend your position.
Warning—these market reports can be expensive. It is common to see them
run in the $10,000 to $30,000 range. But at times, they are worth their weightin gold. I have successfully used these types of reports to argue the assumptionsused in an appraisal that came in low. Again, it is much easier to argue yourpoints on absorption, price points, rents, etc., when you have a credible third-party report supporting you.
Accounting and Tax Review
This is the last review on our list, and it is the one that can make you very happyat tax time. Having an excellent real estate and tax accountant on your side iscritical. You are going to have to make decisions prior to closing the transactionand post closing, and the advice you need can come only from people who maketheir living understanding and staying on top of complex tax code. Prior toTIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2319781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 231232 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
closing, they can work with your lawyer to develop the best ownership structure
for you and/or your partners. Is it an LLC? A corporation? And how should itbe structured? It matters because as you learned in the chapter on entity struc-tures in this book, these decisions have tax implications. Post closing, your taxaccountant can ﬁle the K-1 forms (the form used to report each owner’s shareof income and certain expense items) and perform audits if necessary.
If you do not have a good real estate and tax accountant, get one.
One of the great beneﬁts of being in the mortgage brokerage business is that
I get to see amazing real estate projects and have the privilege of helping verycreative entrepreneurs put those real estate projects together. I have learnedmuch more from their good practices and bad decisions than I ever did in schoolor in my own real estate investment career.
Real estate is a magical way to use leverage to your advantage and develop
sustainable wealth. With that as a premise, it also requires you have a profes-sional focus that not only sees the big picture or vision but also forces you topay attention to the details.
All real estate involves taking risks. The difference between the professional
investor and the amateur is that the real professional tries to manage this riskby surrounding himself or herself with an incredible team that adds value atevery turn. Property due diligence is one of those turns and it is too critical tojust roll the dice!
Scott McPherson is a principal and cofounder of a highly specialized
real estate ﬁnance company called Capital Advisory Group, LC. Estab-
lished in 2001, the ﬁrm has successfully closed around $3.5 billion ofstructured debt and equity in the United States. Scott has ﬁnanced every-thing from raw land to high-rise condominium towers from Portland, Ore-gon, to T ampa, Florida, and has successfully sourced and closed multiple
projects in excess of $100 million in cost. For more information, visit www.capitaladvisorygroup.us.
TIP9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 232Ioften refer to Kim Dalton as the chameleon. She is the interior designer my
wife, Kim, and I hired to be a member of our design team—a team of profes-
sionals that included our architect, general contractor, landscape architect, and
interior designer. I describe Kim Dalton as a chameleon because there were days Idid not recognize her. She would show up at the job site completely transformedwith a totally different look and a totally different energy. She would change asthe nature of the project changed. She was that ﬂexible, and design ﬂexibility isessential for an interior designer.
Today, when people walk into our home or our business ofﬁces, they often say
“ooooh” and “aaaah” because the impact of Kim’s work is powerful, yet subtle.Kim’s input to our projects is priceless. Not only does she increase the immediatesales value of our projects, her work gives our home and business environmentwarmth. Her work increases our desire to stay at home and also to be at work.
As a professional real estate investor, I think there is nothing worse than a mul-
timillion dollar project that goes cheap on interior design. I have been in homes,condos, and commercial projects where the developer went cheap or went boring,leaving the interior design up to him or his wife. Rather than inspire a sale, cheapand tacky interior design can drive buyers away. Y ou’d be surprised how inexpen-sive coats of paint in different or unique shades can make a $100,000 project look13 Kim DALTON
Creating Value from 
the Inside Out
2339781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 233like a million dollar project. That is why Kim Dalton’s professional design touch is
essential to our success in real estate.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Perhaps I’m biased, but I consider interior design to be an essential part of
real estate investing. Whether you are planning a spec home, preparing
an existing home for resale, rehabilitating a multifamily complex, or renovat-ing a commercial property, appropriate interior design can always help to in-crease the value of a property. It can also dramatically shorten your salescycle. Thoughtful interior design will carefully organize space while integrat-ing color, light, pattern, and finish in order to supplement function, flow, andperformance.
Don’t be confused. Interior design is not home staging, which was developed
years ago to help homeowners sell residential properties. Staging specialistsare trained to maximize the perception of space and light using principles thatappeal to a broader audience of potential buyers rather than family, friends,and guests. Interior designers do all that plus include the elements of aesthetics,temperature, sound, smell, balance, and harmony. All of these are value-addedelements that will help your property sell quickly and easily. They are certainlyworth your consideration as an investor and could very well be the differencebetween selling a property and getting top dollar for a property.
Assembling Your Team
Although you may see putting together a team of professionals for your real es-tate project as a costly and unnecessary expense, in reality it can be the smartestinvestment you make beyond the investment in the property itself. Stronglyconsider any or all of the following professionals to help you make the most ofyour investment project. I am and have been very careful with my team selec-tion. I started my business by aligning myself with a great architect and that re-lationship has lasted for more than twenty years. I know that the way my teamcollaborates is instrumental in the outcome of any project I undertake. Yourteam should include an architect, interior designer, general contractor, land-scape architect, engineers, and appropriate subcontractors. Your architect andgeneral contractor will usually recommend engineers and subcontractors withwhom they work, but it never hurts to have a few in your back pocket.234 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 234How to Select Your Team
1.Interview. Ask the tough design questions, but also try to get to know the
person to understand how he or she works.
2.Conversations with references. Ask about the outcome of the project, but
also listen for clues about work habits and service philosophy. Always ask
the question: “Would you hire this person again?”
3.Site visits to similar projects. Visit and view the end result to assess if the
ﬁnal product lives up to the words.
4.Willingness. How willing is this person to work holistically to achieve a
common goal, that is, a proﬁtable product that sells quickly and easily? If apotential team member balks at the collaborative approach, it may be best tomove on.
Assemble your team right at the start because early involvement will beneﬁt
both the process and the outcome. Delivering value is key, so the sooner theteam is assembled, the sooner everyone can begin contributing. The earlier inthe process those ideas surface, the more likely it will be that they can be implemented.
Real Life Story: Having a T eam 
Y ou Can Count On Really Counts
We have a wonderful client who has several homes. Some time ago, we were
awarded an elaborate remodel of their vacation home in Santa Fe. Because
we were based in Scottsdale, Arizona, we thought it might be more cost effective to
hire a local contractor to handle the details for phase one of the project. We learnedthe value of a cohesive team the hard way.
Although we made several trips to check on the project and oversee the con-
struction, we hit a few roadblocks. The contractor had challenges he could not han-dle with the team he had assembled, and communication was difficult from theget-go. When we embarked upon phase two of the project, we decided to use ourArizona-based team to handle the project. Instantly, our communication improvedand we were able to solve problems much more quickly than before. Moreover, be-cause our tradespeople had worked together so often in the past, they were able toeffectively collaborate and avoid potential pitfalls even when they were on site with-out us.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2359781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 235Teams make great things happen. One day several years ago, Robert Kiyosaki
stopped by to visit me in my ofﬁce. He wanted to discuss a new project he had
for me. My excited staff gathered around to hear all about it. Robert humblymentioned that while he was not a very knowledgeable man (highly debatableby many), he did consider himself to be excellent at assembling a team of expertsin their respective ﬁelds. He considers that to be of utmost importance whenembarking on a project of any type. He has come to call that team his “trustedadvisors,” many of whom appear in this book.
Now let’s get to the people you’ll want on your team.
Team Member No. 1: The Architect
The right architect can be invaluable in providing not only a set of drawings forconstruction but also insight into current trends in construction, engineering,lighting, and environmentally friendly design. I don’t do anything today withoutan eye toward green sustainable design. Depending on the size and scope ofyour project, you can look to an architect to help guide the planning, design,documentation, and construction administration of your project.
The architect on any project is usually considered the team leader. Not only
will he or she be able to provide a wealth of recommendations for other teammembers, the architect will also be instrumental in keeping the project on track,both from a budget standpoint as well as in terms of scheduling. Additionally,because of the nature of their work, architects must be up to the minute oncurrent building codes and requirements. Building code violations can severelyimpede the construction process by the assessment of ﬁnes and a signiﬁcantdisruption in schedule. A good architect can also be an invaluable asset whenapplying for building permits.
You’ll want to select an architect who will assume the role of team leader,
while allowing his or her team to ﬂourish under his guidance. Again, collabora-tion is the key here. While an architect is valuable for many parts of the project,he or she must rely on team members for their respective talents. Of course,basic chemistry is always a good barometer. Trust your intuition. Is this some-one with whom I could trust with my project? Remember, the whole idea of as-sembling a team is to allow you to achieve something you do not have theexperience or expertise to accomplish yourself.
When it comes to money, architectural fees vary with the project scope and
needs. Most architects will prefer to work on a ﬁxed-fee basis with a deﬁnedscope of work, or on an hourly basis with a “not to exceed” fee limit.236 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 236Team Member No. 2: The Interior Designer
The right interior designer is the one who not only shares your vision but en-
hances it. He or she is the next necessary addition to your team. An interior de-signer differs from an architect in many ways. While an architect is concernedwith the structure of your space, the interior designer helps you create spacesthat work and that ﬂow in a logical and functional way.
Because an architect’s role encompasses several aspects of the design and
construction process, the interior designer can focus on realizing the overall vi-sion of the project. Several years ago, I was hired to design a home on the coastof Oregon for a longtime client. Luckily, I was brought on early in the project towork with the client and the architect before they had completed the plans. Wetraveled to Oregon, walked the site, and talked for hours about what the housewas to be. From those many discussions, we developed a set of rules for thehouse. This would allow both the architect and me to adhere to those rules andkeep the design intent consistent. It becomes the designer’s job to ensure theinterior of the space will function as the team intends. Finishes, lighting, andfurniture are all integral parts of a successful project. The interior designer canassist in any or all of these areas as well as in accessorizing and art placement.
The same rules for selecting an architect apply to selecting a designer. For-
tunately your architect can often recommend a designer or two from his ownteam who would be ideal for your project. That’s how I began working withRobert and Kim. Several years ago, they bought a very tired, but charming homewith the intent of lovingly restoring and adding on to it to make it their own.They hired an architect who referred a general contractor. They also hired aninterior designer referred by a friend to complete their team. While Kim andRobert are very easy to work with, the process did not go smoothly. A seconddesigner was hired with similar results. She simply did not share the vision theteam had. This is in no way a reﬂection on those designers or their capabilities.It is simply a reinforcement of the importance of the team as a whole. Never-theless, the contractor arranged a meeting between the team and me, and therest is history. The team certainly faced its challenges along the way, but we allshared the same vision, had a common goal, and were determined to producethe best project possible.
Team Member No. 3: The Landscape Architect
The landscape architect is in charge of site design, and this is the one person,more than any other, who will set the property’s ﬁrst impression. When youROBERT KIYOSAKI 2379781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 237think landscape architect, think curb appeal, and if you’ve bought or sold a
home, you know the importance of that. Look to a landscape architect for re-gional neighborhood context design, site planning and furnishings, and high-impact features with low maintenance. You want a design that enhances theoverall quality of the building or development and mixes well with the envi-ronment. Here’s what I mean.
I recently completed a facelift for a twenty-year-old ofﬁce building. The
owner wanted to sell and felt a fresh look to the building would speed up theprocess. Without a huge budget, we knew we had to rely on color and landscapeto do the trick. We selected exterior paint colors to work with the existing nat-ural stone and brought in a landscape architect to accentuate the building’sbest attributes. He suggested we clean up the entry by reducing the number ofovergrown plants, replacing them with smaller, easily maintained varieties. Thisgave the building a cleaner aesthetic as well as an enticement to potential buyerswho were looking for less exterior maintenance. He also worked to accentuatethe main entries of the building, leading tenants and visitors to the entranceswith ease.
Team Member No. 4: The General Contractor
Very often, team members will recommend a general contractor with whomthey have successfully collaborated. If not, please refer to your local state agen-cies to assist with the selection of a qualiﬁed contractor. When choosing a gen-eral contractor, I look for a company or a person with whom I would enjoysocializing. I know that sounds strange, but remember, this will be the teammember you will see most often. Of course, this person must meet all the othercriteria as well, but you really must have a good relationship with your con-tractor. After all, he will be responsible for spending your money. WheneverRobert and Kim embark on another project, we all look forward to the reunionof our team, knowing the general contractor will ensure we get the project donewith minimal problems.
Many investors opt to handle the oversight of a project on their own. While
this can work well, it more often than not goes badly, particularly if the personis inexperienced. My advice to clients is to always consider the scope and com-plexity of the job before making that decision. Think about it. Do you have an-other career that will keep you away from the jobsite? What is your time worthcompared to a contractor’s fee? Are you familiar with the local building codes,construction methods, backup trades if necessary? Do you have strengths inscheduling, budgeting, and managing people?238 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 238The value of an experienced contractor to manage the project and trades-
people is often a smart investment. On the other hand, if your remodel includes
little more than paint and carpet, you may be ﬁne managing the project. A briefconsultation with an interior designer can help you select materials and providerecommendations for appropriate trades. Bear in mind, however, sometimessmall projects lead to bigger ones. I’ve witnessed the discovery of problemsthat are bigger than any owner can handle.
Eventually, the more you work with your team of experts, the more they will
become your trusted advisors, and you’ll consult them for projects big or small.The more longevity you have with your team members and the more your rap-port and working relationship with them grows, the better your outcomes willbe. I’ve found that projects become easier, move quicker, and deliver better re-sults the longer I work with my team. Robert understands this, and that is oneof the beneﬁts of this book. His trusted advisors—his team—can now be yourteam through the pages of this book.
As a real estate investor, you will want to maximize your return. And just as
good property management plays a huge role in a property’s value, so does thedesign of that property. But how do you know what design will bring in thebucks and what will just be another expense that lowers your bottom line re-turn? Here are the guidelines I use for different types of real estate endeavors.
Existing Home Strategies That Sell
The trend of purchasing an existing home, remodeling, and selling it has madethe need for staging unavoidable. Everyone wants to buy a home that looks likea builder’s model. This concept was ﬁrst developed by Barb Schwartz in 1972and has grown over the years to become a widely used selling tool. It’s all aboutmerchandising the rooms to make them look like much more than just fourwalls.
The goal of interior design for a residence is to personalize the space
according to the tastes and preferences of the homeowner. Staging is the 
opposite. The professional stager’s job is to depersonalize the space and allow potential buyers to imagine themselves living there.
As I mentioned before, professional staging is often confused with interior
design and actually, the two couldn’t be more different. Let’s talk about staging
for a moment because it is crucial to selling an existing home. When you decideTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2399781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 239to sell, agree that you will live there in a much different way. In fact, you’ll want
to get packing early because all the personal effects in your home must go. Pre-cious collections, photos, mementos, all the things that are “you” will say toprospective buyers that this is your home, not theirs. So if you hire a stager ordo it yourself, get serious and get rid of the clutter. It’s all about vision.
As an interior designer of both residential and commercial spaces for more
than twenty years, the last thing I thought I needed when preparing to list myhome for sale was a stager. My realtor tactfully suggested that I meet with herstager, “It can’t hurt,” she said. I grudgingly agreed. I will warn you, this is ahumbling experience. It’s unsettling to have someone tell you that your collec-tion of exquisite Chinese foo dogs may be best placed in a box in the garage. Myadvice is to listen and obey. I had spent seven years working to create a cozyspace out of a large, open tract house. She told me I had succeeded. That, how-ever, is not what the typical homebuyer is looking for. Light, bright, and airystill seems to be the best rule of thumb when preparing to sell a home. Also,clean, uncluttered rooms provide the most appeal.
In tough real estate markets when nothing is selling, the staged house will
nine times out of ten be the one that sells ﬁrst. So, as much as you won’t likethem, here are the ﬁve C’s of successful staging:
1. Clean. Everything should be immaculate. That means carpets, ﬂoors, walls,
counters, and bathrooms should look model-home perfect.
2. Clutter Free. Make counters, tables, and shelves ready for the buyer’s fa-
vorite things, not yours. Remove everything, and then some more.
3. Color. You may have loved it wild and crazy to match your purple sofa, but
buyers want to picture their own furniture and colors. Hot pink walls makethat difﬁcult.
4. Creativity. Give buyers something to talk about and remember. They’ll be
looking at a lot of homes that eventually all blend together. Make yours un-forgettable.
5. Compromise. Stagers will tell you to do it all, and you may ﬁnd that you’ll
only go so far. No problem. Compromise and do those things that mattermost.
Did you know that most buyers make their buying decisions within the ﬁrst
ﬁfteen seconds of seeing a property? That’s a prevailing rule in real estate thatI believe to be absolutely true. What does that tell us? First impressions areeverything. It’s worth spending extra time and money on curb appeal or thewow factor of the house.240 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 240ROBERT KIYOSAKI 241
Sell That House in Fifteen Seconds or Less
First impressions are everything and buying decisions are made in the first fifteen
seconds. Here are the top five areas to spruce up:
1. The front yard, including lawn, trees, walkway—clean, sweep, and plant flowers
with lots of color.2. The front door and entryway—Give your door some color, or at least removethe cobwebs, and then be sure the first few steps inside the home are memorable.3. Exterior and interior paint —nothing freshens a home more than new paint.
4. Flooring, including carpets, tile, etc.—no stains, no worn carpet, no dirt 
allowed.5. Healthy green plants —emphasis on healthy, shiny plants without dead or dry
leaves, dust, messy pots or water stains. Placing plants and trees near windowswill blur the gap between inside and out, thus making the space feel larger andmore connected to nature.
Staging will make your property look so good that, if it is your own home,
you’ll wonder why you lived in it the way you did for all those years. I advise
everyone, particularly after my own experience, to hire a stager to help you weedout the clutter. It takes brutal honesty, and stagers are known for it. Stagers willrearrange furniture to maximize the appearance of space as well as downplayless desirable features. If you want to take things to the next level—and in tightmarkets you may have little choice—hire a professional stager and allow him orher to use their existing inventory of accoutrements to enhance your home.
If you are selling a home that is unoccupied, don’t listen to people who say
an empty home sells better than one that is furnished. If that were true, nobuilder would ever furnish a model home, and most all of them do. Stage thehome as best you can within your budget. If you can’t rent furniture from astager for the main rooms, set up small vignettes within the home. This can beas simple as adding a few wall hangings, live plants, towels in the master bath,and soft music. You’ll be surprised at the results.
The tangible aspects of a home are important, but there are intangibles as
well that you must consider. Have you ever walked into a space and immediatelyfelt uncomfortable, but had no idea why? That’s energy ﬂow, and all spaceshave it. That discomfort usually comes from stale or bad energy in a space.There are consultants who specialize in clearing spaces of this negative energy.The ancient art of feng shui incorporates these principles and has done so for9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 241more than three thousand years. Listed at the end of this chapter are Web sites
that will help you understand energy ﬂow and how to improve it in your home.
Believe it or not, your own energy will either add to or detract from your
home. A positive attitude will create better energy in the space. Instead of wor-rying about how long it will take you to sell the house, imagine how great thoseprecious foo dogs will look in your new home.
I know this all sounds like a lot of effort, but consider the statistics—having
homes properly staged signiﬁcantly shortens the selling cycle as well as bringsa higher selling price.
There are lots of helpful resources to learn more about staging, such as home
stagingresource.com and stagedhomes.com. Perhaps the best book on stagingis by the creator of staging itself, Barb Schwarz. Her book, Home Staging: TheWinning Way to Sell Y our House for More Money is the bible on the subject.
And she’s right about staging paying dividends. Homestaging.com. sites a recentHomeGain Survey that shows home staging delivered as much as a 169 percentreturn on investment. That’s a signiﬁcant ﬁgure, making staging well worth thetime and effort.
Make Your Multifamily Housing 
Project a Winner
Just as selling your own home is less about you and is all about the buyer, when
investing in multifamily housing, it’s all about the target resident. Ask yourself,“Who is that person, and what will he or she want or expect from this prop-erty?” Then, how can you take those expectations one step further to truly wowthem? Whether you developed the project from the ground up or are rehabili-tating an existing property, spend your money on the things that will count inthe eyes of the target resident. Of course, you’ll want to contain your ambitions242 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: It’s All About Experience
Recently my real estate agent, Joanne Callaway, related a staging success story to
me. She had been trying for months to sell a seemingly marketable home. The onlyproblem area was the dining room. It had one red wall to match the homeowners’linens. I was surprised that this was the problem area as I often paint dining roomsred. Nevertheless, Joanne called upon the services of her favorite stager who im-mediately had the wall painted, changed the linens, added cushions to the diningchairs, and the house sold in one week!9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 242to a reasonable amount in proportion to the potential rent you can collect, but
you will need to focus on those things that will leave a lasting impression. If aproperty isn’t special in some way, it will not be easy to rent. Ask yourself, “Whywould someone rent this property instead of the one down the street?” Considerthese factors when preparing a multifamily project:
1. Curb appeal. Clean up the trees, bushes, add a fresh coat of paint, dress up
the windows with awnings or shutters, repair steps and walkways, re-sodthe lawns, and plant ﬂowers, lots of ﬂowers.
2. Accessibility. Make sure you purchase properties with ample parking for
residents and guests. Inadequate parking is next to impossible to change.The property should be ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) compliant,or you may have to make it that way, which can be costly.
3. Location. This is real estate, after all, and location is everything.
4. Security and safety. Walls, security gates, security alarms, and security cam-
eras all add up to making residents feel safer, and can also justify higherrents for very little up-front investment.
5. Durable ﬁnishes. If you are rehabbing the property, use the best ﬁnishes
you can afford and still maintain your proﬁtability projections. Check yourcompetition in the area. If they have tile counters, you may need to have tilecounters.
6. Neutral ﬁnishes. This is so important in multifamily projects. Choose colors
that work for everyone, which usually means light, light, light.
7 . Common area aesthetic. Is there a pool? Is there a clubhouse? Is there a
courtyard or garden? If so, it should look picturesque, clean, and be a trueamenity, not an eyesore. Make it a point of difference.
8. Views. People buy views, and views can be big wow factors. Even if your
project doesn’t look out to rocky mountain majesty, be sure it doesn’t lookout on the dumpster or an unkempt parking lot. If you are building, plan forinternal views to gardens or pool areas.
Showing a rental property is no different than showing a home. Here we go
again! Yes, you’ll want to furnish a model if you can. Rental spaces are usuallysmall and look even smaller without furniture. Once furniture is in place, how-ever, spaces look bigger, and people can visualize living in them. They can seethat the space isn’t small after all. It is cozy, livable, and oftentimes just right.
Senior living properties are another type of multi-unit housing. As the baby
boomers age, the concept of the traditional nursing home is changing rapidlyand drastically. Independent living facilities are being built all over the country,and there are new requirements for them, not all of which are coming fromROBERT KIYOSAKI 2439781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 243government regulations. I’m talking about buyers’ requirements. This aging
population demands a much higher level of design than the generation preced-ing it and they are willing to pay accordingly.
I am currently working with a developer on a number of senior living com-
munities. Think twenty-ﬁrst century; they in no way resemble the nursinghomes of the past! These independent living communities are based on the de-sire for an active lifestyle with minimal constraints from the residents’ pasts,i.e., home maintenance, yards, housekeeping, etc. These communities focus onthe active lifestyles of this population with the utmost attention placed on com-fort, autonomy, and quality of life. Obviously, we are working to respect and de-liver on the changing needs of this population as it ages, but research has proventhat it can be done with good design and thoughtful planning. One project willbe set on the side of a mountain, and the hilly terrain obviously presents poten-tial obstacles for an aging population. The architects and landscape architectshave worked on a site plan that will take advantage of the scenic views and thewonderful climate by means of a series of covered breezeways and no stairs.This is just one example of how we can maximize accessibility without callingattention to potential limitations.
Commercial Spaces That Stand 
the Test of Time
As you venture into the world of commercial real estate, many of the principles
we already talked about still apply. But ﬁrst and foremost, you still need to takethe target tenant into account ﬁrst and create a fantastic ﬁrst impression. Afterall, people want to be proud of where they work, and they want that space to befunctional and comfortable. That charge isn’t always easy because commercialproperties can often be quite large, quite complex, and rather impersonal. Thekey is creating personal, more intimate spaces inside or outside a large buildingto add that personal touch and provide respite from a busy day. It doesn’t takemuch. A shady tree, a fountain, or a comfortable bench away from the hustleand bustle can achieve this important goal. Alcoves within a lobby space withnice art and comfortable furniture can work, too, while they welcome visitorsand provide a gathering place for tenants.
If your project is new construction, get an architect and an interior designer
on board right from the start. An architect’s primary role is creating the struc-ture itself. An interior designer’s role is to design the interior spaces. Unless244 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 244you do this for a living, creating the design by yourself will not work. I’ve seen
the aftermath of do-it-yourself commercial projects, and many of them are be-yond hope or beyond the pocketbooks or the proﬁt potential of most buyers torehabilitate.
Lifecycle costs (meaning how long do you want these materials to last, will a
new tenant mean new ﬁnishes?) and total budget are great places to begin yourdiscussion with these professionals. They’ll want to know who your target mar-ket is because they will design differently for a medical building than they wouldfor a day care center, for instance. You’ve probably heard this phrase before:“form follows function.” Well, this is what they mean by it.
While form and function are absolutely critical to good commercial space,
so is using the natural environment as a guide to design. In fact, it has and, Iwould go so far to say, always will be a failsafe guide for many interior designersand architects in their quest for interiors and structures that stand the test oftime. That’s why certain styles of design and architecture are common to certainareas of the country and, indeed, the world. Suitable architecture and designrespond to the environment rather than ﬁght it. By using the natural environ-ment as a guide, interior designers and architects establish rules to help guidethe design process. And it’s best to stick with them.
Unfortunately, rules get broken, and not always in a good ways. One building
comes to mind in Phoenix—a desert city with desert mountains surrounding itand very bright sun most days of the year. Smack in the midst of mostly stuccobuildings is a dark, wooden, modern for its circa-1970 construction structurethat looks like it should be in the middle of the Rockies in Colorado. Interest-ingly, when I look at this building in Phoenix, it seems terribly out of date andout of place, but if I picture it among the pines and aspens in Colorado it wouldbe spectacular. That’s what I mean. The architect and designer of this projectdid not look to the environment and, therefore, the building design did not last.
So when I hear the common question when starting a new project, “Will it
be outdated in ﬁve years?” I always have the answer: “Not if we build in har-mony with the environment.” The best way to avoid the problem of short-livedtrends is to use materials and color palettes derived from the surrounding en-vironment. The natural environment will not change drastically, and that meansa timeless aesthetic to your building.
The only time this doesn’t work is if the design is for a high impact space
that needs an extreme reaction to attract tenants or visitors. These projectstend to be cont roversia l and often get early press attention because one groupROBERT KIYOSAKI 2459781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 245or another loves or hates the design. But once completed they often become
well-known and admired landmarks. Projects that fall into this category couldinclude an art museum or a high-end jewelry store.
The best way to avoid the problem of short-lived trends is to use materi-
als and color palettes derived from the surrounding environment. The natural
environment will not change drastically and that means a timeless aesthetic toyour building.
Renovating a property requires a different tack because there are subtle
trends in design that when followed will improve your chan ces of success. For
instance, color preferences change from decade to decade, and you absolutely
want to be up to date, not a throwback from the last century, unless your prop-erty is historic and then you’ll want to go two centuries back. But kidding aside,color is critical. We’ve all seen buildings or been in ofﬁces with outdated colorsof walls, cabinetries, ﬂoors, and carpets. They don’t look like places with com-panies poised for future growth; they look like places where companies go tostagnate and die. It’s amazing how interiors drive our impressions, but right orwrong, they always do.
To ﬁnd out what colors are trending up, take a walk through some of the
newest retail centers—the highest-end ones you can ﬁnd—and you will see manyexamples of colors and materials. Locations that come to mind are KierlandCommons in Phoenix or La Encantada in Tucson—both Westcor properties.The Power & Light District in Kansas City, The Palazzo in Las Vegas. There aremany others.
Of course, you will have a plan for the revitalization of your commercial
building, and it will be based on projected net operating income and cash ﬂow.But some designers don’t relate to the numbers side of the business and can de-velop designs that spiral costs out of control. Choose a designer that under-stands the business fundamentals of an investment property and be criticalwhen evaluating a proposed plan to update a building. Believe it or not, simplethings like paint, landscape, and signage can go a long way when sprucing upan existing property.
As with the other types of properties, commercial buildings require balance
and harmony, too. Ofﬁce buildings are meant to house large numbers of varyingbusinesses in the same overall space. When you utilize the principles of balance,harmony, light, and accessibility, it can only enhance the workplace experience.TIP246 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 246Commercial Building Must Have’s
1. Accessibility. ADA compliance is a must, as is ample parking and easement 
access.
2. Ease of circulation, both internal and external. Well thought-out placement
of elevators, doors, lobbies, signage, etc., go a long way.3. Intuitive way finding. Buildings and office spaces built like mazes are not fun.They leave guests lost and sometimes even embarrassed. In emergencies theycan be dangerous.4. Customization. What is the unique wow factor for this building? There shouldalways be one.5. Familiarity. Way finding is a method people use to intuitively navigate a space.Using landmarks like the big painting or the blue floor or the potted plant toremember the way lessens any anxiety about being in an unfamiliar place.6. Smell. Some people are going so far as to run scent through their ventilation.Scent matters because our sense of smell affects our mood and is closely tied tomemory centers in the brain (UPI, October 17 , 2008).7. Sound. If you can hear the quiet, break the silence with soft music that fills the
room. Match the music to the mood you are trying to convey and you’ll have a winner.8. Location, location, location. When it is all said and done, location is the key.
Sustainable Design
In recent years we have seen an enormous push toward sustainable or green
design. Sustainable design means using our resources efﬁciently while creatinghealthier buildings. A green building is one that is designed, built, renovated,operated, or reused in an ecological and resource-efﬁcient manner. You maythink that green building design is more expensive than conventional buildingpractices, yet while some up-front costs may be higher, the long-term beneﬁts,both ﬁnancially and environmentally, generally outweigh the initial costs.Proper design can signiﬁcantly reduce operating costs over the life of the build-ing while helping to preserve natural resources and minimize waste.
The ﬁrst stop for anyone interested in green design, and today that should
be everyone, is the Green Building Council and its Green Building Rating Sys-tem called LEED, Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design. This ratingsystem is the nationally accepted benchmark for the design, construction, andROBERT KIYOSAKI 2479781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 247248 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
operation of high-performance green buildings. LEED process certiﬁcation
provides building owners and operators with the tools they need to have animmediate and measurable impact on their building’s performance. LEED prin-ciples have now been adapted to a variety of residential and commercial build-ing types.
The city of Scottsdale, Arizona, was one of the ﬁrst in the country to adopt a
voluntary Green Building Designation Program. Those homeowners, develop-ers, and builders wishing to participate must complete a detailed checklist basedon a point system. Points are given for meeting or exceeding environmentallyconsiderate building materials and practices. Applicants must meet the pointtotal necessary for certiﬁcation. These categories range from recycled buildingmaterials to the use of indigenous materials, which cuts fuel consumption, toenergy use.
Green Building Check List
Use this checklist when developing your green design plan.
1. Sustainable site. Opt for an existing site rather than undeveloped land.
2. Water efficiency. Think about adding on-site infiltration systems and storm
water management.3. Energy and atmosphere. Consider the location of the building as it relates tonatural light, and explore the use of solar power.4. Materials and resources. Always research the possibility of using reclaimedconstruction materials.5. Indoor environmental air quality. Reducing off-gassing from furniture andfinishes can lead to improved overall indoor air quality.6. Research. Do your homework to ensure you have carefully considered all viableoptions to help ensure the completion of a sustainable project.
Once you get your green designation from the city or town, you’ll be in a posi-
tion to take advantage of it. Here are just a few of the beneﬁts of green building:
1. Social and economic revitalization of depressed or disadvantaged neighbor-
hoods and renewed sense of community pride
2. Greater market demand for the project
3. Water conservation and lower costs
4. Reduction of air and water pollution9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 2485. Great energy and power reliability and reduced dependence on the local
power grid
6. Reduced waste clogging up our landﬁlls and conservation of new resources
7. Improved hea lth of construction workers and building occupants
8. Superior indoor air quality
All these add up to a better, more responsible working environment that people
can be truly proud of, enjoy working in, and feel better about. That signals moreproductivity.
Of course anyone doing any new building, remodeling, or revitalization
knows that the quicker you can get through the city planning and zoning reviewprocess the better. Plan reviews can often take up to several months, and youknow what they say: “Time is money.” But some municipalities are providingincentives. For example, builders who participate in the Scottsdale Green Build-ing Program projects receive “fast track” plan review service. This means greenbuilding projects receive building permits in half the time as regular projects,depending on the degree of complexity.
On the other hand, site inspections tend to be more thorough, scrutinizing
environmentally sensitive aspects of the building to make sure they measureup to the standard. The city also provides Green Building site signage, whichtells the world that this owner is willing to invest in the protection of the envi-ronment. Anyway you slice it, that adds up to good public relations as well asresponsible development.
Government agencies in Arizona have become involved in enticing compa-
nies to “go green” by offering sales tax exemption for the purchase of solar en-ergy devices. Also, local power companies offer rebates to those companieswilling to invest in solar power. I fully expect to see tax concessions on the useof environmentally supportive or recycled materials in the coming years.
The Final Word
Design, whether it be green or any other color in the rainbow has the power toadd value to your property. From residential to commercial, every property canbeneﬁt from good interior design, and it can save you from making costly mis-takes that, once made, are hard to correct. The key is maximizing the space andthe light, and working in harmony with the environment. Hire the right pro-fessional to pull all this together and you’ll have a timeless building that you’llenjoy or will generate income for you for years to come.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2499781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 249250 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Ways to Learn More
www.epa.gov/brownﬁelds
www.epa.gov/owowwww.energycodes.govwww.ashrae.orgwww.asgbc.org/resourceswww.spiritualclearing.com
Kim Dalton is an award-winning interior designer with more than twenty
years of innovative interior design experience. She has the unique ability
to transform clinical and institutional spaces into supportive, healing en-vironments that are cohesive, economical, and timeless. Since foundingDalton Interiors in 1990, Kim has designed signiﬁcant real estate projects,including Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Del E. Webb Memorial Hospital,
Christ Church of the Valley, and suite renovations at Chase Field in Phoenix.
9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 250Scott McPherson is the mortgage broker I go to when I want to know the
straight story about what’s going on in real estate ﬁnancing. He’s more than
just a mortgage broker; he is an investor, and, again, like all the others in this
book, he lives what he teaches.
I can count on Scott to be a part of teaching the classes I hold on ﬁnance. He
donates his time, just like he did to contribute to this book, to teach others how tobe smarter with their money and with their investments. He has years of wisdom,is smart and experienced, and is an excellent resource particularly during timesof economic chaos.
I met Scott in an unlikely place at the Phoenix Open Golf Tournament in 1999.
His reputation preceded him; I knew him, but I did not think he knew me. When Idiscovered he agreed with my position on stocks and mutual funds, I felt reliefand afﬁrmation. Few agreed with me at the time, and I was under attack. Nowpeople are learning otherwise, and they are seeing their stock and 401(k) portfoliosslashed. The critics aren’t so loud anymore.
From that day forward, Scott has been a great friend and a trusted advisor to
Kim and me. He has the ability to see what’s on the horizon. He has saved Kimand me a lot of money and saved us from a few investments that would have been14 Scott D. McPHERSON
Financing for Real Estate
Investors
2519781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 251252 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
mistakes. I cannot emphasize the importance of having trusted advisors around
you. If you can ﬁnd a mortgage broker like Scott, you’re very lucky.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Ihave always believed from early on, that there is no substitution for actual
experience, no matter what you take on in your life. I can tell you that I
am not a professional writer, but I am very active in the real estate financebusiness.
The principles of real estate ﬁnance are basically the same whether you are
buying a single family home to rent or you are converting three hundred rentalapartments to for-sale condominiums in Scottsdale, Arizona. The key to un-derstanding real estate ﬁnancing is really not a secret; it is just how to ask your-self some basic questions and follow some very simple steps along the way.
What I want to do in this chapter is walk you through the fundamentals of
real estate ﬁnance and give you the pathway to apply them to your particularsituation or requirements.
Being Born with a Silver Paint Brush in Hand!
When I was studying real estate and ﬁnance at Arizona State University, Ithought I had the world by the tail and could hardly wait to get out and carvemy niche in the real estate business. I was living in an upscale apartment nearcampus, driving a nice car, and was doing well in my classes. I became the pres-ident of the Real Estate Club on campus, and at that point no one knew moreabout real estate (at least in my mind) than me.
That all changed when my father, Douglas McPherson, who was a successful
real estate investor and owner of a prominent commercial real estate brokerageﬁrm, sat me down and said, “Look, you think you know a lot about real estate,but it has only been from textbooks with no practical experience. If you reallywant to get in the business, you need to step up and buy something!”
I was planning on going to work after school for my father’s company, but I
did not know that it was predicated on me actually going out and buying someproperty. That twenty-minute discussion with my father was probably the bestadvice I have ever received in my career, and here is why.
I went to work trying to ﬁnd a single-family home to buy, live in, ﬁx up, and
rent in order to get into the game. I got the newspaper out and suddenly realized9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 252I did not know where to even begin. After a couple of weeks looking at homes
in locations that I wanted to live in, I quickly realized I was way out of my af-fordability range and unsure what to do next.
It was very hard for me to accept that I was about to get a degree in real
estate and ﬁnance from a major university, and I was not prepared to buy ahouse!
I asked my father for help, so he spent two weekends with me, driving neigh-
borhoods and reading want ads in the newspaper. We ﬁnally found somethingthat sounded interesting. It was a small ad by an attorney who represented awidow that wanted to sell two houses for $15,000. AS IS. We went and lookedat them, and I was completely not interested. They were in an older neighbor-hood in Phoenix and needed lots of clean-up work.
My father and I went to lunch, and he proceeded to tell me what a great deal
this was. He pointed out that the properties were below replacement costs, andwere in good rental neighborhoods. My problem was I could see these homesonly as places for me to live and not as a real estate investment!
The other beneﬁt of this deal was that the seller would carry her own paper
or mortgage back because of the property’s condition. I had no idea what thismeant at that time, but I quickly learned that it was the key to becoming a realestate investor. I bought the property for $15,000 with $1,000 down, and theseller carried the mortgage of $14,000. I was on my way!
My father made me put together a budget for the property acquisition and
renovation along with a stabilized pro forma once rented. I cannot stress enoughhow I struggled trying to ﬁgure out if this was a good deal or not. My father putup half of the down payment; $500 for half of the proﬁts and turned me loose.
I really struggled at ﬁrst, but I realized I had to make this work because my
whole career was on the line. I spent a year ﬁxing up the properties and leasingthe homes and eventually sold the properties for $25,000 in eighteen months.During that time, I learned about basic property renovation, negative cash ﬂows,property management, partner issues, tenant lease issues, and how to developan exit strategy for my investment.
I learned more about real estate from owning two ﬁx-up homes in a rough
area of Phoenix than I did my entire time in college.
I went on to purchase twelve houses over the next two years  
and I found one common thread in all my purchases: Understanding  
the financing was critical.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2539781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 253I was now addicted to real estate investing! I went on to purchase twelve
houses over the next two years and I found one common thread in all my pur-
chases: Understanding the ﬁnancing was critical. Just like the ﬁrst two homesthat I purchased, I almost always had sellers carry the mortgages for me. Thisdid two things: One, it allowed me to get much better leverage and ﬁnancingterms than a conventional lender would or would not give me; and, two, it al-lowed me to close very quickly without appraisals. When an owner wants out,he or she wants out fast.
I quickly realized that having a good knowledge of how to ﬁnance these
homes was paramount in my business plan. I actually enjoyed trying to comeup with some pretty creative ways to get someone else to put up 80 to 100 per-cent of the capital to make my business plan a reality.
Three Basic Steps to Understanding  
and Obtaining Financing
Have a Business Plan!
In my business, it is a pleasure to come to work and see very creative real estate
transactions and hear the sponsor’s or developer’s vision. I can tell in the ﬁrstﬁfteen minutes of our discussions if this person is really someone we can ﬁnanceand is truly a real estate investor. I have a policy that we promote internally inmy ofﬁce that if we (being the mortgage broker) are steering or making toomany of the decisions for the borrowers, it is time to rethink their abilities.
Business plans can be very simple or complex based on the amount of mov-
ing parts, issues, or challenges your particular real estate transaction mighthave. All of this has signiﬁcant impact on the type of ﬁnancing that you shouldpursue.
I would encourage you to ask yourself the following questions:
Why am I buying this real estate?
Shelter. You need a place to live? If that is your motivation, then how much
can you afford on your own, or should you bring in someone to help you withthe down payment, or be a tenant?
Investment. What kind of investment? Short-term trade? Long-term hold?
Buying for income? This can be very complex because everyone has differentreasons for investing. The reason this is so important is that you need to matchthe appropriate ﬁnancing with your correct business plan.254 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 254ROBERT KIYOSAKI 255
Real Life Story: Two Properties . . . The Financing 
Was Not Created Equal
Let me give you an example of how different the financing can be for the same
type of real estate with two different buyers who had two different business
plans.
When my son was born, I purchased a two-bedroom condominium in a complex
that I had placed the financing on for a developer client of mine. I purchased the
condominium for the sole purpose of having someone else fund my son’scollege education through rent! I set up the financing such that it was amortized
more than twenty years and coupled it with enough down payment that a tenant’srent would cover the mortgage payment and the HOA dues.
I then leased the unit and let another person just gradually pay the loan down
monthly though his rent. I was not concerned if the property appreciated one dollar. Ijust wanted the property to be free and clear when my son was ready to go to college.
Another friend of mine purchased another unit in the same complex and wanted
to hold it for six months and sell it. He borrowed as much as he could and paid ahigher interest rate than I, but he was able to pay the loan off in six months when hesold the property for a profit, without any prepayment penalties. He used leverageto his benefit.
Both of these loan structures were appropriate for the investors; however, they
were very different in structure and actually had two different types of lenders.
How much risk am I willing to take?
You need to ask yourself how much risk you are willing to take. Ask some
tough questions of your personal ﬁnances and lifestyle. If you are a ﬁnancially
capable, sophisticated real estate investor then leverage and debt can be yourbest friend. If you are not in that category, be honest with yourself and borrowless or spread your equity risk by bringing in a partner.
One of the strongest traits that I see in my business is that successful
real estate investors know their risk tolerance levels.
A good example of this was when another customer of mine wanted to build
400,000 square feet of speculative industrial space in the Phoenix metro area.TIP9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 255This would be the ﬁrst development for this client in the Phoenix market. He
has done similar projects throughout the other southwestern states.
He hired me to ﬁnd an equity joint venture partner and a construction loan.
We spent quite a bit of time talking about how to ﬁnance the development, andhe decided that he wanted a low-leverage construction loan and a large institu-tional partner that could weather any bumps in the road.
I brought him a pension fund that put in all of the equity and had a very
long-term investment strategy. My client was very happy to get his ﬁrst Phoenixproject started with minimal equity requirement from him. This client couldhave easily done the project all on his own but decided to reduce some risk.This is probably why he has been in business forty years!
Develop Multiple Exit Strategies
For your piece of mind, your investors, and the lender’s, please know how youare going to get your money back, along with everyone else’s!
When I look at any real estate investment, I always start by asking how am I
going to get out of the deal. You may have the greatest idea in the world forbuying, building, or converting something, but with no clear way to get yourcapital along with a lender’s capital back, you will never attract anyone to thedeal!
When I look at any real estate investment, I always start by asking how
am I going to get out of the deal.
Build a Credible Team
It does not matter how talented you think you are, you need to surround yourselfwith a very good team! As I pointed out earlier, my father really jumped in andbecame my team when it came down to actually buying something.
Try to sit down and put together a list of people to hire to help you execute
your business plan. Here’s the short list:
Real Estate BrokerAppraiserProperty ManagerMortgage BrokerTIP256 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 256Accountant
Real Estate AttorneyContractorProperty Conditions ReportsEnvironmental Consultants
Let me give you an example of how and when I would use these team mem-
bers. For this example, I am going to use a twenty-unit condo conversion project
that I purchased in Scottsdale, Arizona. The property was a tired twenty-year-old property in a transitional neighborhood and needed major renovations be-fore we could convert it to for-sale condominiums. Prior to closing:
• I interviewed (more on that process later) residential real estate brokers who
gave me the condo market resale analysis and pricing matrix for the individ-ual units once I had them completely renovated. I also asked them to provideme with a timeline for getting them sold. Remember the exit strategy!
• I hired a well-known appraiser to value the individual units as if they were
fully renovated.
• I interviewed and hired a property manager to audit the existing operational
statements and to create HOA budgets and run the HOA when it was turnedover to the homeowners.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 257
Y our Exit Strategy Options
Exit strategies can be very easy, depending on the type of real estate project you
are doing. Here are the options:
No Exit. If you are buying a home or duplex to live in, your exit is you! Very simple.
However, just be sure you and your lender understand that.Refinance. Maybe your plan is to renovate one hundred apartments that have been
neglected and raise rents. If so, put together a forward-looking proforma with yourteam (more on this in step two) and show your investors or lenders how a refinancewill get their capital back.Sale. If the plan is to buy and then re-sell the property, then you must show how,
when, and why that will occur. If your plan simply is to buy and let the market makeyou money, you are going to have a tough time just relying on that unless you madeone incredible buy.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 257• The mortgage company interviewed and hired me! The reality would have
been to interview a mortgage broker who has successfully financed condo
conversions and could help me structure my debt and equity requirements.I did hire a residential mortgage broker to provide take-out loans for thebuyers. Remember the exit strategy!
• I used my accountant to minimize our tax liability.• I hired a very experienced attorney to set up our ownership, HOA, and con-
dominium subdivision documentation.
• Since this property required about $35,000 per unit in renovations, I wanted
to be sure my contractor did not miss anything. I matched his scope of workwith my property conditions report along with the required finish levels thatmy residential real estate broker developed. Remember the exit strategy!
• I also engaged a property conditions report to backstop my contractor and
to make sure I had a sound building. I coupled that with an environmentalreport to point out any environmental issues I needed to deal with.
When I assimilated all of this information and hired all of my team, I looked
like the best condo converter that walked the planet! My goal was to fully un-derstand what I was getting into before I went to a lender or investors to getthe capital needed to do this conversion prior to closing on the property.
By hiring the best team you can, you have demonstrated to yourself, your
lender, and your investors that you recognize areas that you need some supportwith. You also will potentially eliminate the “oops!” factor down the road thatcan become extremely costly in terms of proﬁts and credibility.
How to Hire Y our T eam Members
How do you hire team members? My answer is very simple, once you locate
them through referral or other means. Please go meet with them and ask these
tough but basic questions:
• Have you done this type of work before?• How many of these have you done?• Would you mind if I spoke to one of your clients about your abilities?
If they stumble on any of these questions walk away. Y ou have too much at risk
not to get the “A” team because they are out there for you.258 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 258Show Me the Money!
You now have found a property, created
a business plan, and assembled yourteam. Now where do I get the money?
Most people when asked where they
will go to get money for a real estatetransaction will say “to the bank, ofcourse.” Clearly the local, regional, andnational banks are a source for capital,but by no means are they the only placeyou should look. Have you consideredany of the sources at the right?
All of these lenders will not ﬁt all
types of ﬁnancing requirements. Thatwill depend on size, risk, or propertytype, but you should be aware thatthere are many ways to ﬁnd the debtand the equity to do your transaction.
I have done many multimillion dol-
lar ﬁnancing deals with a borrower thathad marginal ﬁnancial strength. What he did not have in ﬁnancial net worth hemade up for in a very strong business plan and an incredible team.
Remember this, lenders want to make you a loan or provide you with equity.
They make money only when they loan money out. It turns from a liability toan asset on their books.
They also want to do business with people they have conﬁdence in and who
can repay the loan at some point in the future. Remember the exit strategy!
How Do I Obtain Access to These Lenders?
If you are an experienced real estate investor, you may have some access tothese types of lenders already. Unfortunately, if you are not on top of theselenders on a daily basis they may be out of the market when you need them.
If you’re starting out and want to do this ﬁnancing on your own you can talk
to successful real estate brokers for the particular product type and ask for a re-
ferral. You can search the Internet and real estate ﬁnance publications. You canalso go directly to some of your local banks to see what they can do.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 259
Capital Sources Other
Than Banks
Credit Companies
Life Insurance CompaniesReal Estate Finance CompaniesMortgage FundsREIT’s Thrifts / Industrial BanksInvestment BanksHedge FundsPension FundsCredit UnionsPrivate Debt / EquityOpportunity FundsMezzanine Debt FundsOffshore Investment FundsFriends and FamilyAngelsHigh Net Worth Investors9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 259I suggest you hire a competent mortgage broker. It may sound a little self
serving, but here is why.
First, when you go to hire a mortgage broker you need to be sure you are re-
ally hiring someone who knows how to help you and adds value. If you are buy-
ing a single-family home, you should go to a good residential mortgage brokerthat can help guide you through the various programs that she or he can deliver.If he works for a bank and can deliver only limited programs offered by thatbank, you move on because you are not being exposed to all the ﬁnancing prod-ucts you may need.
On the commercial side of the business, it is also very important to interview
several commercial mortgage brokerage ﬁrms and ask the tough, but basic ques-tions we talked about before:
• How long have you been in the business?• How many financings like this have you done?• Could I see one of your loan submission packages?• I would like to talk to someone you have done similar business with.
A credible and competent mortgage broker should not have any hesitation
in answering these questions.
Financing for real estate investors is really a blending of using good common
sense and surrounding yourself with the best talent possible. I started with one260 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Hire a Good Mortgage Broker First
Irecommend hiring a good mortgage broker before you go looking for properties
for these reasons:
• He can give you a realistic view of the capital markets for your type of transaction.
This is extremely important to you as you are preparing an offer to purchase the
property.
• He can provide another set of qualified eyes as to your underwriting assumptions
and financial modeling of the property and the market.
• He can suggest credible team members to join you such as contractors or lawyers.• He can package you and your property properly, so it will be presented in the best
light to potential lenders.
• And, finally, he should be able to present your property to a wide variety of lenders
that never would have access to, hopefully giving you multiple options to choosefrom.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 260team member—my father—and have developed additional members over the
years as needed.
I encourage you to ﬁnd the opportunities that are out there in the real estate
market today. Go after them, knowing that there is a way to secure the appro-priate capital for the transaction regardless of current market conditions.
Ways to Learn More
The best way to learn more is from the professionals you surround yourselfwith. Seek them out. Ask them questions. Be an active learner.
Scott McPherson is a principal and cofounder of a highly specialized real
estate ﬁnance company called Capital Advisory Group, LC. Established
in 2001, the ﬁrm has successfully closed around $3.5 billion of structureddebt and equity in the United States. Scott has ﬁnanced everything fromraw land to high-rise condominium towers from Portland, Oregon, toT ampa, Florida, and has successfully sourced and closed multiple proj-
ects in excess of $100 million in cost. For more information, visit www.capitaladvisorygroup.us.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2619781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 261Craig is the most well-organized person I know. Not only is he one of the most
highly regarded commercial real estate brokers, but he is also an investor in
his own right, and together, he, Kim, and I have done several deals together. I say
that Craig is organized, but I really mean he is very goal oriented. He has accom-plished more in his life than many of us could achieve in several lifetimes. He at-tributes this to goal setting and prioritizing what he really wants from life. Craigis one of those rare people who chooses what he wants carefully, then goes aftergetting it with a vengeance.
He has his days planned to the minute and is constantly self improving. He
studies and invests in his personal development on a regular basis. Y et, his familytakes the highest priority, and he is very involved in his children’s lives. Again,what I learn from Craig beyond just about everything I know about commercialreal estate is priorities.
Craig has a lot of designations after his name, but I don’t need them to know
that he knows what he’s talking about when it comes to commercial real estate in-vesting, leasing, and brokering. His track record and his guidance speak loudenough. He has shown us that commercial real estate takes a different set of eyesthan the ones we have as investors in multifamily residential properties. WheneverKim and I see a commercial building that we think looks interesting, we call Craig.15 Craig COPPOLA, CCIM , CRE, SIOR
Lease It and Keep It Leased
2629781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 262It usually only takes a few answers to a few questions that Craig asks us before he
tells us whether the property is worth any more of our time or if we should keepdriving the deal. He’s that good.
He takes the time to teach with every deal, and he actively teaches and mentors
others in his profession. Like the other contributors in this book, Craig practiceswhat he preaches. He lives the real estate life he talks about.
—Robert Kiyosaki
If you build it, they will come. And if you own it, they will lease it from you.
No they won’t! On both counts. As much as you may like to think that every-
one will be as excited about your real estate investment as you are, this simplyis not the case. In most markets, there are several buildings for rent and lots ofchoices for business owners regardless of whether they are looking for a ClassA high-rise for their $500 per hour law ﬁrm partners, or a master carpenterlooking for multiuse workshop space to create custom furnishings, and every-thing in between. Choices abound, as they say.
So what does it take to lease your building and keep it leased? It takes at-
tracting good tenants. It takes professional management that makes the expe-rience of being in your building an exceptional one. And it takes understandingthe difference between a leasing company and a management company. Thereis a big difference.
I see so many ﬁrst-time commercial property owners, and even those who
should know better, think they can lease their properties themselves. Whilemany of them know they don’t want to manage the properties themselves, after
all the thought of the Friday 5 p.m. toilet clog is enough to tame that crazy no-tion, I’m always surprised when people say they want to do their own leasing.My only conclusion is that they don’t realize what is involved. I know from ex-perience if they are not set up for leasing—and most building owners are not—it is nearly impossible to successfully lease a building. Building owners mayalso rationalize by asking why should they pay a commission to an agent whenthey can do the leasing themselves.
In my book, right up there with being able to analyze a deal and performing
good due diligence is leasing your property. Why is this so important? Becauseleasing drives your cash ﬂow. And cash ﬂow is a signiﬁcant deﬁner of propertyvalue.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2639781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 263The Types of Leases Available
You may have heard terms like “triple net” or “full service” when it comes to
buildings. This is the language of leasing, and there are four kinds of leases in
all. The type of leases that you have for your tenants will dictate the amount of in-
volvement that you and your property managers will have maintaining and payingfor upkeep to your properties.
The decision to go with one lease or another depends on the market and what
tenants are accustomed to paying in that market. In Chicago or New Y ork, for ex-ample, it’s called triple net for office space, whereas on the West Coast it’s called“gross.” Even within a single building there can be different tenants signed to dif-ferent types of leases.
Here are the types of leases that are out there. Get to know them. They will be-
come your language as you continue along your path as a real estate professional.• Gross. Gross means full service. Y ou as property owner would pay for all utilities,
upkeep, and maintenance. The tenant pays for everything in one check to theowner.
• Net. This can mean a number of things, but generally it means the tenant pays
for one or more aspects of the property’s utilities, upkeep, and maintenance. Forexample, “net utilities” means the tenant will pay for utilities. “Net janitorial”means the tenant will pay for janitorial.
• Triple Net . In this type of lease, the owner is responsible for structure, roof, park-
ing, etc., or maintaining capital elements to the building. But the tenant covers allother expenses it takes to operate the building, including utilities, taxes, utility re-pair, and maintenance. Companies like Walgreens and Jack in the Box, for example,typically sign triple net leases. T riple net is designated NNN in the industry, andyou’ll see it often on sales literature.
• Absolute Triple Net. Here, the tenant pays everything—real estate taxes, janito-
rial, and all capital improvements, including if the roof caves in. This is the leastamount of work for you, but you’ll find these leases are typically in single-tenantbuildings where the tenant almost owns the building. They are typically long-termleases, and sometimes they are known as “sale lease back” deals in which a tenantowner sells their own building to an investor then leases it back for a long-termagreement.264 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 264Leasing Is Marketing
The reality is that in most cases investors can’t lease the building themselves
because it takes leasing and communications knowledge most investors don’thave. Leasing is actually marketing, and unless you know this specialty, in-vestors’ efforts are trial and mostly error. I am an investor, but I am also a leasingagent/advisor and have been for more than two decades. I know through myown successes and failures how to effectively lease a building. And I know thatleasing a building starts with a good marketing plan. You may think that allthere is to leasing a building is putting a sign out front and praying, but there’sa lot more to it. In fact, when I am working with a client, we develop an entiremarketing plan that is designed to generate awareness of the building and in-terest in its features and beneﬁts.
Our basic approach is two-pronged. First we go business-to-consumer, mean-
ing we market directly to those persons or companies that may be in a positionto lease. And second, we go business-to-business within our trade, so that everyother leasing agent/advisor is aware of the property, its particulars, and its avail-abilities. A good leasing agent/advisor knows how to work his or her industryand knows how to create buzz about a property. He or she knows how to posi-tion your property as more lucrative than others to these fellow leasing agentsand advisors. They know how to steer them toward you and away from yourcompetition.
The truth about leasing is that the space always follows the business. By that
I mean that business owners look for space that reﬂects what the business doesand how it operates and how it succeeds. A creative advertising business, forexample, would not seek out a plain-Jane, white-walled shell with a sea of built-in cubicles. No, a creative business like that would look for space that is inter-estingly designed with unexpected hallway angles, unique ﬁnishes, and moodylighting. How many of those spaces exist? Not many. That is why so much ofleasing is looking at a space for what it can become, not what it is at the moment.It takes a very skilled leasing agent and advisor to have this vision and then beable to communicate it to the client. If the company doesn’t see itself in thespace, then that’s it. No deal.
The truth about leasing is that the space always follows the business.
A funny thing about this business is that every building owner thinks his
own space is not only wonderful, but that everyone will want it. Owners allTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2659781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 265think that it will lease or sublet very easily because it’s so perfect. They are al-
ways surprised when no one shares their enthusiasm. But they shouldn’t be.The building and the space is a ﬁt for the owner or the existing tenant, but notnecessarily a ﬁt for anyone else. It happens all the time, so be prepared to eitherhave a lot of vision or hire someone who does, and then knows how to marketthe sizzle along with the space.
Leasing Is Selling
Leasing is marketing, but leasing is selling, too. And that’s the part that surprisesmany property owners. I’m not exactly sure why. When I am working with aproperty owner, the sales and negotiation process is time consuming and takesexperience and expert knowledge of selling and the market. It takes profes-sionals years to discover what works when it comes to positioning the beneﬁtsof a product, minimizing the shortcomings, and overcoming objections.
It’s also taken me years to get that gut instinct about a prospective tenant.
And as much as I wish I could teach you that in this chapter, I can’t. I can tellyou a horror story, however, about a project in my market and an owner whodecided to go it alone and lease the rest of his building after the ﬁrst two ﬂoorswere leased by a broker. He had found and placed in those spaces excellentbusinesses that were growing and successful—upstanding, too. The top ﬂoor ofthe building was being saved for one big tenant that had the type of businessthat would value the exceptional views the nearly ﬂoor-to-ceiling windows af-forded, and who could handle the pricier rent.
Well, the building owner got a little impatient and got a little greedy, thinking
he could do this himself. After all, leasing doesn’t seem that hard. Why shouldhe pay a leasing agent/advisor for something he could do himself? He ﬁred hisbroker. Within no time, the building owner had a tenant. The problem was, thetenant wanted only a portion of the top-ﬂoor space, so the building owner ﬁg-ured what the heck and leased it. That was a bad decision. Another bad decisionwas that the tenant was a medical practice for transgender surgery. Everyone isentitled to his own life choices, but let me to tell you what happened to thebuilding.
Within a year, the quality business tenants in the lower ﬂoors had moved
out, and on the top ﬂoor near the medical practice a hair club for men movedin. It was all downhill from there. In less than a year, a solid class-A propertywith a quality tenant mix became an undesirable property to all but a fewfringe businesses. Quite a shame. Professional leasing agents/advisors know266 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 266what can happen if you lease to the wrong kinds of tenants. Little did this guy
know we turned down the businesses that he naïvely signed. You get what youpay for.
In my experience, the best leasing folks are the ones who know how to pro-
vide the vision that the client wants to hear. But they don’t do this out of thinair or try to stuff ten pounds of potatoes into a ﬁve-pound bag. They do it byknowing the client and understanding the needs and the business. They have afeel for the kind of space that will really excite. The best leasing people knowhow to create a match between client and space, and then they have the abilityto sell the vision, even if it is not completely obvious.
The best leasing people know how to create a match between client 
and space, and then they have the ability to sell the vision, even if it is not 
completely obvious.
But the vision is more than just how the space looks—or can look—on the in-
side. There are many more variables, which we will get to shortly. And many of
them are just as important, if not more so, than the interior space itself. Nobuilding is perfect, but it is the job of the leasing agent/advisor to assemble thetop picks, inspire, and close the deal.
Leasing Is Detail Work
Leasing a building is seldom easy; actually it is quite the opposite. That’s be-coming obvious. It’s generally very labor intensive. When we’re doing a mar-keting plan for a building, we begin by looking at the property and effectivelypositioning it in the market. That requires us to do an intense market study ofall competing properties—both the ones that are already there and the ones ex-pected to be completed in the coming months or year. By understanding themarket, we can ﬁnd the gaps that will make the property we’re representing farmore desirable and therefore more leasable.
But our work doesn’t stop there. We look at all the comparables and analyze
each deal to understand the speciﬁcs and ﬁnd the clues we need for our ownsuccess. We even look at the transaction activity rate within the vicinity of theproperty we are representing to see any trends up, down, or sideways. We don’tstop until we have a full picture of the market. From these details we formulatethe true value of a building or a space, and that enables us to set the rental pricesand all the terms that accompany a lease. This includes operating expenses,TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2679781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 267tenant i mproveme nts, free rent, o ther concessions, parking terms, security de-
posits—I could go on and on. It’s pretty extensive.
Often, I see people who are doing their own leasing and end up pricing a
space out of the market. The ﬁrst reason they do it is that, as you recall, their
space is perfect and everyone will want it, right? We know that argument doesn’thold any credence. The other reason is that they have not done their homeworkor they have done it poorly. Often they are comparing their building or space tospace of a higher quality or class. The ﬁnal reason they overprice is that theyare setting the price based on how much they paid for the building itself. Howmuch you pay for a building has nothing to do with how much you can chargetenants for rent.
An important lesson of leasing: The market sets the rental prices, not you.
As with any good sales function, eventually prospecting begins. From lists
and sources that we have developed over time and others that we would developspeciﬁcally for the project at hand, we send our literature and make cold callsto gauge interest. We work inside and outside the target location, and we evendo out-of-state prospecting, targeting companies that are coming into town.We give a lot of presentations to tenants in other properties that are in ourtarget size and business range.
As I mentioned earlier, we’ll also work within our industry and communicate
regularly with the other agents/advisors in the community. We identify whichones specialize in buildings like the one we are representing. We do our pre-sentations to their ofﬁces and their staff. We use e-mail, direct mail, and hostparties to keep others informed about the properties we represent.
And, of course, we use the sophistication of the Internet to help us target
those business prospects who are using the Web to troll for new ofﬁce space.Our sophisticated Web sites are searchable and detailed. We are connected di-rectly to listing services, and our user interface is the result of more than tenyears of improvements. Clearly, you’re beginning to see that a lot goes into ﬁnd-ing the right tenants and getting a lease signed sooner rather than later.
Once we understand how we’re going to market the property and to which
companies, we create a development strategy that will outline our plans to ﬁllthe building. This is a complete plan that includes rent rates, leasing terms, ex-pense stops (the maximum expenses per square foot for the building), tenantimprovement limits, o ther concessions, even commissions.
The sign in front of the building may be the most visible part, but it is the
smallest part of the marketing efforts for a building. If only it were as easy asTIP268 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 268ROBERT KIYOSAKI 269
hammering a sign into the ground and answering the phone. The truth is, ex-
perience is everything in the process. There are literally an unlimited numberof pits that the novice can fall into. Over our careers, we have fallen into themall. That’s another reason leasing agents/advisors are so valuable; they’ve al-ready taken the falls for you.
The Deal Makers and Deal Breakers 
in Leasing
Earlier in this chapter, I mentioned that it takes more than the vision of great
space—space that matches the business—to actually get the business. There aremore variables that come into play. I believe there are numerous variables thatevery client will consider before signing on the dotted line. Here’s my top-twenty list:
1. Rates. Of course every client is going to be concerned with the rent and the
cost per square foot because most every client has a budget. He knows howmuch his business can allocate to this expense-line item. I work to staywithin my clients’ budgets, not trying to oversell them. It is in everyone’sbest interest to have a client who pays on time every month. Rental rate isone of the most important considerations on the list.
2. Term. The length of the lease agreement is another important factor. Some-
times my user clients are looking for a short-term ﬁx, and sometimes theywant the lease agreement to run longer in exchange for some other consid-eration. This can be a highly negotiable variable, and the match is madewhen the term connects with the client’s objectives.
3. Free Rent. Many building owners offer free rent for some length of time as
part of the negotiated agreement. What’s negotiated is the number of monthsand what is included. Is it just the rent, or does it cover common area main-tenance fees, parking fees, etc.?
4. Tenant Improvements. Many lease agreements have negotiated into them
some allowance money for tenant improveme nts, or “TIs” as they are called.
This can be a lot of money or a little money. A good leasing agent/advisorwill know the current market and know what is a realistic, yet generous,amount to request. A rookie can really mess up an otherwise good deal bydemanding too much, or cause a client to overpay by not asking for enough.
5. Layout. This refers to the interior ﬂoor plan and the shape and size of the
space. Sometimes square or rectangular spaces are a plus, and at other timesoddly shaped space is what a client is looking for. It all depends on the client9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 269and the business. Again, when I know a client’s objectives, I know what
space conﬁgurations will work and which ones won’t.
6. Quality of Building. The building exterior on a commercial property is like
the curb appeal on a residential property. It says a lot about your business,just as a home says a lot about you. A prestigious building with excellent up-keep and landscaping says to the world that this company is a player. That itis reputable and can handle my business. A shoddy-looking building tellsthe world that a company might be ﬂy-by-night, not very progressive, or justplain cheap. If “the clothes make the man” as the saying goes, the buildingexterior makes the business.
7 . Parking Type and Ratio. I’ve walked away from buildings as an investor
and as a leasing advisor because the property is under parked; in other words,the number of parking spaces for the size of the building is light. I know myclient’s customers will not be happy if every time they visit, they have toallot an extra ten minutes to search for a place to park. Nothing is worsethan a building that doesn’t have enough parking, and in most cases there islittle that can be done about it.
8. Parking Location. As bad as it is to not have enough parking spaces, clients
also don’t like having to park far away from a building. The reasons are ob-vious with safety concerns being one of the biggest. No one likes the idea ofwalking a great distance through a dark parking lot or alleyway to get to thecar. And it’s no fun to walk a distance—briefcase, workout bag, coffee cup,and cell phone in hand—to get into the building in the morning. We won’teven talk about rain, snow, and ice. Parking should be easy and safe.
9. Efﬁciency. Clients look for generally efﬁcient buildings, meaning that they
are easy to ﬁnd, get into, walk through, locate the businesses in, and ﬁndthe restrooms, etc. Some buildings—and you probably can think of a fewyourself—are just poorly designed. It’s hard to ﬁnd the entry, it’s hard toﬁnd the elevator, it’s hard to ﬁnd the ofﬁce numbers, it’s hard to get to therestrooms, and the list goes on.
10. Access. Here’s a big one. Accessibility means how easy it is to get into and
out of the building site. Some buildings have excellent access, and others donot. I just moved one company because the business owner hated makingan unprotected lefthand turn across a very busy street every time he turnedinto the building. While we were looking for his new space, he would jokethat he was going to hold me personally responsible if he got into a wreckwhile he impatiently waited! We found him space with better access, andhe is much happier.270 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 27011. Signage. Some businesses need very visible signage, and others do not. This
is one of the negotiation points that is critical for businesses that rely on ei-
ther walk-in business or that want to use their building signage as awarenessadvertising.
12. Amenities On Site. Some buildings have shopping, banking, places to eat,
dry cleaners, and more perks right on site in lobbies or in undergroundretail centers. To some of our clients, these conveniences matter. I knowone person who leases in a building on a small municipal airport runwaythat has hangar space for corporate jets. That’s a big amenity for some busi-ness owners.
13. Amenities Off Site. Then there are some buildings that seem to be on an is-
land all their own. There’s no place to go for lunch, there’s no grocery storenearby, there’s little to nothing around. Sometimes this is the nature of newdevelopment—retail and restaurants have not moved in yet—but sometimesit’s just the way it is.
14. Property Management. Good property management is like a gourmet meal
that has great presentation, tastes amazing, and completely satisﬁes you.And best of all you never have to be concerned with any of the details. It’sjust there for you to enjoy. Bad property management lets you know it’sthere at every turn. To go back to our gourmet meal, you have to ask for thesalt, your silverware isn’t clean, the food looks overcooked, and, in general,the whole experience is unpleasant. All you see are the details—the misseddetails.
15. Ownership . The ownership matters as much as the property management.
Some owners can be terriﬁc landlords, and others have baggage. One friendof mine leases space in a building advised by our company. The buildingowner is a very successful entrepreneur who makes his rounds every sooften to his tenant businesses just to see how things are going and to catchup. He’s a good guy, a welcome visitor, and a friend to those who lease fromhim. There’s another building owner down the street who jets off for Caboevery other week and is incredibly unresponsive.
16. Americans with Disabilities Act Compliance . To many businesses, this is a
very important consideration. It is critical that those who use wheelchairshave easy and safe access to all areas of the building and grounds.
17 . Location, Location, Location. Some space has views of beautiful vistas, and
other space has no view at all. Some space is visible right off the elevator,and other space is tucked back in some insigniﬁcant hallway corner. The lo-cation within the building matters. It says a lot about a business.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2719781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 27118. Location of the Building Itself . This is most critical requirement, and that’s
why it is not just number 18 on our list, but 19 and 20, too. The right location
is one of the absolute musts.
What to Look for in a Leasing Agent/Advisor
My hope is with the stories and the work load described in this chapter so farthat I’ve convinced you to at least consider the value of having a leasingagent/advisor working on your side. If that’s the case, then I should also pointout that not all leasing agent/advisors are created equal. There are leasing agentsout there who don’t do their homework and say “yes” to shaky businesses allthe time. There are leasing agents who don’t know the market, leasing agentswho are terrible negotiators, and leasing agents who simply can’t sell. If you’regoing to hire a leasing agent, and I suggest you do, hire a good one, a true advisor.Aside from the obvious qualities like experience, motivation, organization, in-telligence, expertise, and integrity, here’s what else to look for:
Relationship vs. Transaction
Although real estate seems like a huge industry, it really is a small local industry.Each city or town has a small, tightly knit, and very intertwined real estate com-munity. It is critical to ﬁnd a leasing broker/advisor who sees his or her job asone of relationship building, not just completing transactions. I have spent thelast twenty years doing deals and in the process building excellent relationshipswith the real estate professionals where I live and work. And this effort paysoff for me and my clients every day.
The reality is that most transactions happen through other leasing agent/
advisors. The opportunities come in through them, and we market our owners’opportunities outbound through them. How eager would they be to bring tome top-quality tenants, or even be interested in looking at space I pitch to them,if I had a reputation for win-lose arrangements where I win and they lose? Notvery.
As a rule, I put a great deal of time and energy into providing lots of informa-
tion to prospects and clients. Even if there is no agreement for representation,I generally am eager to help because I know that’s how to build a relationship.And experience has proven to me that relationships eventually pay off. Onestory I recall was when a large healthcare insurance provider was moving intotown. A high-powered agent came in from New York and called our ofﬁce andsaid she was coming in to look at space. I asked if she needed local representa-272 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 272tion, and she said no. Regardless, I told her I’d get her a list of available buildings
by the next day.
We met, and during that meeting I helped her in any way that I could. When
she returned to New York, she told her boss she met an agent who could reallyhelp and who she wanted to work with. He said no, but she insisted. Long storyshort, she got her way, and I ended up doing not one but nearly ﬁfty transac-tions with that company. Had I not been willing to freely give of my time andknowledge, I would not have been on the receiving end of that lucrative pieceof business.
Rapport with You
This whole leasing effort has to be a partnership. There has to be a good rapport.A good leasing agent/advisor understands your objectives, and then works tomatch the right space and the right tenants. Plus, a good leasing agent/advisorwillingly takes on even small businesses or buildings and educates clients asthey grow into bigger businesses. I found space for one software company manyyears ago. It was their ﬁrst space when they were just three people strong. Ithink the ofﬁce was all of twelve hundred square feet. At the time, I was doingmuch bigger deals, but to me that didn’t matter. We developed rapport and withina few years, I handled the transactions surrounding their 137 ,000 square footcorporate ofﬁce and their more than forty-four ofﬁces worldwide. It happens.
Location Knowledge
Any leasing agent/advisor you work with must have not only a versed knowl-edge of the metro area, but also intimate knowledge of the submarket areawhere your building is located. This comes back to the fact that real estate isreally a small, localized industry. The best leasing agents/advisors are handsdown the most knowledgeable people around, not about the whole city or town,but about one square mile. Find this person, and you’ll be in good shape. It’snot hard; just drive around and look at whose name appears on the leasing signsmost frequently.
Deal Maker vs. Processor
There are leasing agents out there who are not advisors. They are the peoplewho do little more than play middleman and parrot messages back and forthbetween prospect and building owner. That’s not the type of representation youwant. You want an agent/advisor who will add value by working for you andnegotiating on your behalf. Anyone who has some training can relay informationROBERT KIYOSAKI 2739781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 273274 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
and process paper; that’s not what you are paying for. You want to ﬁnd a true
advisor who can weed out the ridiculous and the no-chance-in-you-know-whereoffers and deal points to get to the end game quickly and efﬁciently.
Reputation
Finally, and this probably goes without saying, you want a leasing agent/advisorwith a solid reputation in the community. How can you be sure? You ask around.You talk to other building owners and talk to other business owners who haveworked with the person you are considering. It’s worth the extra time and theeffort to do this and can be the ﬁrst step to developing a leasing agent/advisorpartner for life.
These are the qualities I have developed in myself over the years, and they
are the same qualities that I work to foster in young people who are enteringthis profession. Not all can cut it. The requirements are demanding. And if theycan’t cut it, they either get out of the business altogether or move over to mycompetition. Either is okay with me.
Choosing your leasing agent/advisor partner is one of the most important
decisions you will ever make. It can mean the difference between a propertythat generates positive cash ﬂow and one that doesn’t. It can mean the differ-ence between owning an asset or a liability. A good leasing agent/advisor canactually enhance the reputation and standing of your business within the com-munity and bring you more business along with more proﬁtability.
The Last Word: Coppola’s Five Rules of Leasing
I will not need every deal.
I will discuss challenges with the client immediately.I will not allow a commission to drive any transaction.I will consider long-term relationships more important than any fee.I will develop a professional profile that provides me access to all decision makers.
Ways to Learn More
SIOR (Society of Industrial and Ofﬁce Realtors)
CRE (Councilors of Real Estate)9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 274One of the premier commercial real estate brokers in the United States,
Craig Coppola has been awarded the Arizona Ofﬁce Broker of the Y earsix times in the past thirteen years by the National Association of Indus-trial and Ofﬁce Properties. He has completed more than twenty-ﬁve hun-dred lease and sale transactions over the past twenty-three years, totalinga value in excess of $2.5 billion. As founding principal of Lee & Associates
Arizona, Craig has earned the top three designations in the real estate industry: CCIM, CRE,and SIOR. Only thirty-ﬁve people worldwide hold all three designations. He is a Rich Dad Ad-visor and author of the forthcoming book How to Win in Commercial Real Estate: Your Guide
to Finding, Evaluating, and Purchasing Your First Commercial Property in 9 Weeks or Less .
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2759781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 275One of the great pleasures in my life is having best friends as business partners.
In my life, Ken McElroy is one of those rare persons. On top of that, Ken has
made me a millionaire many times over.
There have been many valuable lessons I learned from my rich dad. One lesson
is “Out of every bad deal comes a good person.” This lesson has been priceless be-
cause it makes me less hesitant about having business deals go bad. Explainingfurther, I will often go into a deal, even if I do not trust the people. I go in becauseI know that I will probably meet a good person along the way, even if the dealgoes bad.
I met Ken in a deal that went bad. In fact it was a horrible deal. The person
who put the deal together—a young man I will call George—eventually went tojail. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) eventually shut his operationdown. Unfortunately, George was married with three kids.
Ken and I smelled a rat early on and did not participate in George’s investment
scheme. We almost invested, but we passed on his bogus opportunity. The goodnews is I met Ken, just as my rich dad’s lesson taught me.
Today, Ken is a Rich Dad Advisor, writing on real estate. His books, The ABC’s
of Real Estate Investing , The Advanced Guide to Real Estate Investing , and The
ABC’s of Property Management are must reads for anyone who is interested in16 Ken McELROY
The Perils of Careless
Property Management
2769781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 276ROBERT KIYOSAKI 277
real estate investing. He also has a priceless product entitled, How to Increase
the Income from Your Real Estate Investments. It includes a due diligence check-list, which is an essential checklist that every investor should go through beforebuying a property.
The thing I like most about Ken is that he is extremely generous with his knowl-
edge. He and I have traveled to many parts of the world to speak about our favoritesubject: investing in real estate.
He and his wife, Laura, are two of Kim’s and my favorite friends. We have a
great time together, teaching, sharing knowledge, and supporting each other’sfamilies in becoming richer and more ﬁnancially secure in a ﬁnancially volatileworld.
—Robert Kiyosaki
Of all the subjects in this book, property management might be the most
misunderstood. The reason for this is simply the fact that in order to be a
successful real estate investor, you don’t necessarily have to be a successfulproperty manager.
That statement might seem a little odd to you at ﬁrst, but if you think about
it for a second, you’ll know it’s true. You can have tremendous instincts andability to ﬁnd, analyze, and even take down phenomenal real estate deals. Youmight have an extensive network of equity sources and solid and trusted in-vestors waiting for your next deal. You can have a solid team of lawyers, mort-gage brokers, and general contractors. All of these things will enable you to besuccessful at ﬁnding and investing in real estate. But they are all transactional.By that I mean they are needed to invest well in real estate. This is often the fo-
cus of many real estate investment books. None of these things, however, willmake your investment successful once you actually own it.
One of the things I appreciate about Robert Kiyosaki and the Rich Dad team
is that they understand that being a successful real estate investor goes beyondjust ﬁnding and acquiring quality deals. They know you have to manage thosedeals effectively to realize their full wealth-making potential. That is why I’mso glad that Robert contacted me to write this chapter. Mark my words, you canhave the most incredible real estate holdings in the entire world, but if they aremismanaged they could quickly become worthless. Why is this? Because in or-der to be a successful real estate investor, the ﬁrst rule you have to remember isthat real estate values are typically based on performance, not on the asset itself.9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 277And in order for your real estate portfolio to run at its maximum potential you
need to manage your property professionally.
The first rule you have to remember is that real estate values are 
typically based on performance, noton the asset itself.
In this chapter I’ll show you why property management is so vital to the
health of your investments. The topic of how to manage a property effectively,while an important thing to know as a real estate investor, is much too large atopic for the space I’ve been given here. Rather than try and give you a crashcourse on how to manage properties effectively, my efforts here will focus on:
1. Why professional property management is essential for success
2. What successful property management entails
3. How to ﬁnd an exceptional property manager for your assets
I guarantee that a fuller understanding of the importance of property man-
agement will make you a more successful real estate investor. In fact, I wouldventure to say that it’s essential.
An Outsider’s Perspective
Just like you, I didn’t begin my career as a successful real estate investor. I havepeople like Robert and the Rich Dad team to thank for opening my eyes morefully to the immense wealth-building potential that real estate investing affords.Well before I began investing in real estate, I made my living by managing otherpeople’s assets. In the process, I’ve built some of the largest and most well-known property management companies in the southwestern United States.
In the course of managing more than 20,000 apartment units, I saw ﬁrsthand
how poor property management can cause untold damage to a property’s valueand to the net worth of an investor.
I still remember the day when John called me at my ofﬁce. John was part of
a group of investors in Colorado who had purchased a multifamily property inPhoenix, Arizona, and he was in a bit of a panic.
“What can I do for you, John?” I said over the phone.“I think we have a bit of a problem with one of our properties,” was his re-
sponse. “I was wondering if you could help us out with our operations.”
As it turned out, John had more than a just a little problem. His company’s
property was literally in shambles. What brought them to this point was a seriesTIP278 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 278of mistakes that, in the course of my career as a property manager, I’ve seen
over and over again.
John’s ﬁrst problem was that his group purchased a large multifamily build-
ing with very little research, which is commonly called due diligence, and theyhad little knowledge of the local real estate market since they were based inColorado.
John and his partner’s second problem was that they decided to be cheap. In
an effort to save some money (or to make money off the property), they gavethe task of managing their property to someone in their ofﬁce, who was locatedin Denver, and who had no experience in property management. This personﬂew down about once a month, if that, to see how things were going. Why aninvestment group of very smart individuals would trust a multimillion-dollarasset to someone with no experience is a mystery to me.
I knew things had to be bad because John was basically ﬁring himself for
poor performance, and things are usually in pretty bad shape for this to happen.In fact, things had gotten so bad that they were having trouble making theirmortgage payment.
I reluctantly told John I was willing to help him. After hanging up the phone,
I shook my head. I knew the property he was talking about, and while it was ina good location and in a great neighborhood, the property itself was known forhaving high turnover of residents and high crime. Drug activity was prevalentat this property, and members of local drug cartels were actually living in someof the units. In the ﬁrst week that we took over, one of these problems came toa boiling point when one resident, a local drug dealer, was shot down in coldblood inside his unit right in front of his girlfriend. It was well known that thiswas a gang-related incident because the man’s hands were tied behind his back,and he had been shot point blank in the head, execution style. His girlfriendwas unharmed and is now in the witness protection program. So, as you cansee, this was deﬁnitely not a little problem.
You’re probably asking yourself: What kind of property was this? What a ter-
rible neighborhood! I can tell you that this property was in an upscale area nearmajor employers, a school, and an upscale regional mall. This kind of thing canhappen anywhere.
When my team surveyed the 250-unit property, we were shocked at its con-
dition. We already knew its reputation, and we were expecting it to be bad. Whatwe didn’t expect was just how poorly the asset itself had been maintained—thephysical condition of the property was astonishingly bad. The landscaping wascompletely shot, decks were rotting through and posed potential safety risks,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2799781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 279and more than 20 percent of the interiors of many units were so rundown that
they were not rentable. The result was that while comparable nearby propertieswere enjoying occupancy levels in the mid-90 percent range, this property wascollecting less than 70 percent of the potential income. This, of course, is becausemany units were vacant, and many of the current tenants were not paying theirrent.
Beyond that, people were leaving the property in d roves because they were
worried about their own safety and disgusted at the condition of the property.
So, the owner’s problem was twofold: They couldn’t rent to new residents
because they did not have the money to ﬁx up the property and the existing va-cant units; and many of the current residents were moving out, citing healthand safety reasons. As a result, the ﬁnancial performance of the property wasvery poor.
We quickly realized we had a lot of work on our hands. Thankfully, my com-
pany has tremendous experience in turning around poorly performing proper-ties, and we were eventually able to get this property in good condition. But ittook a lot of time and a lot of money. In the end, the poor decision to “savemoney” cost John and his partners millions of dollars. But the damage to theirpartnership was irreparable. The tensions boiled over, and their partnershipcame unglued. Harsh words were spoken, friendships were destroyed, andJohn’s reputation was severely damaged.
I had little pity for John and his partners. While it is unfortunate that they
lost so much money, those losses could have easily been avoided if they had re-tained a quality property manager to partner with them in both the due dili-gence process when purchasing their property and to help them manage iteffectively after they acquired it.
Knowledge: The Key to Success
You may be thinking that this is just a severe, isolated case of stupidity. I assureyou it is not. Every day, smart investors become idiots because they lack knowl-edge of the importance of property management and underestimate the workinvolved in managing a property well. I now make my living by capitalizing onsituations just like John’s. Because of my years of experience in property man-agement, I buy deals just like John’s at a signiﬁcant discount from their marketvalue and turn them around and reap huge returns for my partners.
Here’s the good news. If you take the time to understand the importance of
property management and to attain a thorough knowledge of how successful280 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 280property management is achieved, you too can ﬁnd the key to success as a real
estate investor.
So this begs the question: What does successful property management look
like?
The Triple Threat
In my experience, successful property managers know how to imp rove the
value of a property in three general areas—what I like to call the “triple threat”of property management: income, expenses, and systems.
Property managers know how to improve the value of a property in three
general areas, which is what I call the “triple threat” of property management:
income, expenses, and systems .
Income
As I stated earlier in this section, the value of a property is not based on theasset itself, but rather on its ﬁnancial performance. The number one miscon-ception that can turn a good real estate investment into a bad one is by not un-derstanding that real estate is a business, not just an investment. As such, themost important aspect of your investment is not how it looks, where it’s at, oreven how much it costs. While those things are important, they pale in com-parison to the importance of the bottom line. In order to be a successful realestate investor you must understand that the value of your property, just aswith any business, is based on how much net operating income it produces, that
is, income after expenses.
Income - Expense = Net Operating Income (NOI)
And when it comes to maximizing your property’s NOI, nothing is more im-
portant and easier to control than the actual total income your property produces.
In investment real estate, total income is determined by a number of factors.
They are:
• rent• occupancy• other revenue opportunitiesTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2819781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 281Rents
One clear indication that a property could be mismanaged is when its rents are
obviously substantially less than what the rest of the market is charging. I comeacross this frequently when I’m looking at a potential acquisition, and it excitesme. As an investor, buying a property with low rents is a substantial opportunity.
In order to understand the importance of getting your rents right, you need
to understand a little bit about how an investment property is valued.
The value of a property is not based on the asset itself, but rather on 
its financial performance.
The most common way to value a property is by using a capitalization (cap)
rate. In any given market, cap rates will vary. You don’t have to worry abouthow to ﬁgure out what a market’s cap rate is; you can get that number from aknowledgeable broker. For our purposes, you do have to understand how caprates are used to estimate the current value of a property. The equation lookslike this:
Net Operating Income
÷Market Cap Rate = Value
What Does This Look Like?
For simplicity sake, let’s assume we are looking to buy a two-hundred-unit prop-
erty that makes $500,000 in annual NOI. And let’s assume the market capital-
ization rate is 7 percent. That would mean the estimated value of your asset in that
market would be $7 ,142,857 .
$500,000 ÷7 percent = $7 ,142,857
Now, let’s look at why keeping a close eye on your rents and making sure that
they are in line with comparable properties is so important and, quite frankly, theeasiest way to add value to your property.
How NOI Affects a Property’s Value
Let’s assume our property has an average rent of $800. During our due diligence,
we find out that the average market rents for comparable properties is $900.TIP282 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
CONTINUED9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 282That would mean that the current ownership, with absentee management, is real-
izing a rent loss of $20,000 per month (two hundred units times $100), whichequals out to $240,000 per year in lost potential income. That would mean that in-stead of an annual NOI of $500,000, our property should be making $740,000 peryear. Let’s see how that affects the value of our property:
$740,000
÷7 percent = $10,571,428
Amazing, isn’t it? While it takes time to increase everyone’s rents by $100 per
month, it is worth it because by doing so, as shown in this example, we have createdan additional $3,428,571 in value. The best thing about this is that I am creatingvalue through good property management of the existing property and with the ex-isting residents, so my business plan is not just based on relying on market appre-ciation, but I usually get that, too!
That’s the power of effectively managing your property’s income and the reason
why keeping a close eye on not only your rents but the market rents is so vital toyour property’s financial health.
Occupancy
Another great way to add value is to increase the occupancy. Remember, the
Net Operating Income determines your value, so any and all income is very im-portant. One very basic method to create better occupancy is have a good baseof residents who take good care of your property and who do not move often.This is done by properly screening every occupant.
It is typical for many property managers to not run credit and criminal back-
ground checks for every occupant—a practice that every professional propertymanagement company does. It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to explain the po-tential problems of renting to someone who cannot pay the rent or who createsproblems in your property, but in a rush to ﬁll vacant units, this basic functionis often overlooked.
Problem residents can, and do, create vacancy and decrease your occupancy
and can cause damage to the property itself. They can drive out good payingresidents, which lowers occupancy, and many times they end up on a delinquentlist, creating more work for the owner, eventually to be evicted, which also low-ers your occupancy. Higher vacancy creates higher expenses with increases inmaintenance, advertising, payroll, and supplies.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 2839781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 283284 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
There are countless other ways that a good property manager can increase
your occupancy; get him on your investment team and you will see the results.
Other Revenue Opportunities
In addition to rents, a property can realize substantial income if you look for
numerous other revenue opportunities. These would be things like utility sub-metering, adding washers and dryers, charging pet rent and large pet deposits,charging rent premiums for prime locations . . . there are literally dozens ofways to increase your property’s income like this. The problem is that mostpeople don’t know that these opportunities even exist, let alone charge forthem.
A Real Life Story: How 288 Washers and Dryers 
Netted $1.9 Million
My partner, Ross, and I rece ntly purchased a 288-unit building in T ulsa, Okla-
homa. One of the strategies for our investment was to add a washer and dryer
in every unit. This property already had small laundry rooms with all the electrical
and plumbing in every unit. All we had to do was purchase the machines and installthem. Before we did this we checked the local market to determine what additionalrent we could get for a washer and dryer. As it turned out, many of the residentswere already renting them, in many cases, for $40 to $50 per month.
We decided to buy 288 sets of washers and dryers and install them in the first
year of operation. We budgeted a $40 increase to be realized over a two-year period.Let’s look at the value we created for our investment.
288 units x $40 per month = $11,520 per month
$11,520 x 12 months = $138,240 in potential annual NOI
$138,240 NOI
÷7 percent cap rate = $1,974,857 added value
There are many revenue opportunities that may be great ideas to you but are con-sidered ordinary for a professional property management company.
Expenses
When it comes to property management, expenses are generally the factor you
have the least control over. The reason for this is that they are most often dic-9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 284tated to you. Typical expenses are for advertising and marketing, repairs and
maintenance, management fees, payroll, utilities, property taxes, and insurance.
Property taxes, insurance, and utilities will be the biggest expenses a property
will face. To a large extent, these are costs you simply can’t control.
However, there are a few things you can do. For instance, a professional man-
agement company might have better purchasing power when it comes to in-surance premiums and can get a better rate than the average person because ofthe size of its account, and you can also negotiate the property limits and thedeductibles. A good property manager will utilize a tax consultant to analyzewhether he might be able to challenge the property tax for the property.
Remember talking about running credit and criminal background checks?
Well, let’s examine the expense side of this. The actual credit check itself ispaid for by the potential renter, so the cost, which is usually less than $50, isnot paid by you. If you have ever bought or reﬁnanced a house, you know thatyou pay for your own credit check.
The cost of notrunning a credit report and a criminal background check
is very high. Eventually, you will get burned.
The cost of not running a credit and criminal background check is very high.
Eventually, you will get burned. Here is a typical scenario. You spend your hard-earned money getting a unit rent ready from the last move out, let’s say $500for cleaning, painting, making minor repairs, and cleaning the carpets. A badresident moves in. You now have a renter who does not pay you. You are losingrevenue because you cannot re-rent this until they move or are evicted. Thecost to serve notices and to evict varies by state, so let’s say it costs about $500.Eventually they move out, owing you rent plus legal costs, plus damages. Younow must get the unit ready to rent, again which costs you another $500.
Don’t get caught up in the estimated amounts; the point in this scenario is
that you learn a lesson to run background checks. So far, you would have spent$1,000 to get the unit rent-ready two times. Legal fees were $500. Unpaid rent,late charges, etc., are estimated at $800. All in all, this mistake cost you $2,300.There was $1,500 in actual expenses, plus your time and lost rent until youcould rent the newly vacant unit.
I think you realize that this story concerns just one unit. Imagine if this were
happening on a two-hundred-unit property. These additional expenses resultingfrom high turnover due to poor management can and will lead to a lower overallproperty value.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2859781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 285Systems
In our discussion here about systems, I want you to think back to the story
about John and his investors. While they were facing management issues sur-rounding both income and expenses, they were also facing serious issues re-garding their property’s systems. They didn’t have any. What I mean by this isthat due to poor management, they allowed a horrible resident base to moveinto the property, and the property itself was in serious disrepair due to deferredmaintenance issues. All of these things added up to major losses for John andhis partners.
Had they had solid management systems in place, that management would
have used strict occupancy standards for potential residents. They would haveperformed extensive background checks, verifying the potential resident’s in-come, job history, and rental history. They would have trained staff that wouldhandle the daily reports to the management company and perform daily main-tenance. The property would have been following an app roved operating budget
with monthly goals. The vacant units would have been “rent ready” withinthree days of the prior move-out. The lack of all of these systems or policiesand procedures equaled lost income.
Do You Feel Lucky?
I’ve only scratched the surface of how property management, whether good orbad, can affect the value of your investment. Needless to say, there are hundredsof other factors that go into effectively managing a property. And the margin oferror is very small. One seemingly minor oversight can end up costing you hun-dreds of thousands, if not millions of dollars. It should go without saying thatmanaging a property is a full-time job, requiring an inordinate amount of timeand expertise.
So the question you have to ask yourself is “Do I feel lucky?” Well, do you?
Do you feel conﬁdent that you have the expertise and the time to effectivelymanage your hard-earned investments? If so, then this chapter should be a re-minder and a catalyst for you to further increase your property managementknowledge and to go back and reevaluate how effectively you are managingyour properties. A timely review of your practices, and a little time spent fur-thering your property management knowledge could net you even more incomethan you are already realizing.286 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 286ROBERT KIYOSAKI 287
If you don’t feel conﬁdent in managing
your own properties, or don’t feel that you
have the time available to do it effectively,then by all means, ﬁnd a good, professionalproperty manager and hire him as soon aspossible. It will be one of the best businessmoves you will ever make.
Finding a good property manager is not
as simple as picking up the yellow pagesand calling the company that sounds themost professional. Given the information we’ve covered already, it stands toreason that choosing your property manager will be one of the most importantdecisions you’ll make in regards to your investment. Here are some helpful to-do’s for ﬁnding the right ﬁt for your property. This is by no means a compre-hensive list, but it will get you thinking in the right frame of mind. For a morecomprehensive discussion on this topic see my book, The ABC’s of Property
Management .
1. Use your team. As Robert Kiyosaki says, “Business and investing are a team
sport.” If you don’t know of a reputable property manager that you can trustfully with your investment, then ask the members of your team. Chancesare they will be able to refer you to an excellent company. But don’t taketheir word for it. As I always say, “Trust, but verify.”
2. Trust, but verify. If you were smart, you conducted a thorough due diligence
on your property before you purchased it. You probably dug into every ﬁ-nancial, scrutinized every lease, and walked every unit. You need to performthe same level of due diligence when looking to hire a property manager.Get a full client list, and interview the existing clients of the managementcompany in question. Do they like the service they receive? Have there beenany obvious mistakes or blunders you should be concerned about? Ask howthe property management company has increased the value of the owner’sproperty. Also, interview the employees of the company and the potentialon-property manager for your property. Make sure they are upbeat, knowl-edgeable, and a good ﬁt for your personality. You will have to interact withthese people on a continual basis.
3. Find the right ﬁt. There are tons of different types of management compa-
nies out there, each with their own specialization. Some companies will spe-cialize in commercial property management, while others will specialize inKen’s T op-Five
Words of Wisdom
1. Use your team
2. T rust, but verify3. Find the right fit4. Y ou get what you pay for5. Money matters9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 287apartments. Some companies will be better suited for large properties; others
will be a perfect ﬁt for smaller properties. The point is that, even if you doﬁnd a good management company, they might not be good for you and yourneeds. You wouldn’t want to hire a large property management companythat specializes in large apartment buildings to manage your duplex. Theymight be awesome at what they do, but your property would get lost in thefold—it would be too small for them to give it full attention. On the otherhand, a smaller, local property management company would jump at thechance to manage your asset, and they would give you personalized serviceand attention.
4. Y ou get what you pay for. Too often, people want to save money, and they
balk at the fees a management company charges. Don’t. Management feesvary by market and property type and size. But I will say that if a fee lookstoo good to be true, it probably is. Every investment in the world, if it is man-aged, costs you money. The beauty of property management is that you atleast know what the fee is. Often, with investments like mutual funds andstocks, the fees are hidden (and substantial) so you don’t feel them. Youknow what they say, “Ignorance is bliss.” But with property management,the fees should be clearly explained and spelled out up front. I guaranteethat if you ﬁnd a good company, it will be worth its fees. In just a few simple(and common) examples, I’ve shown you how much income an effectivelymanaged property can pull down.
5. Money matters. Make sure that any company you retain has a very good ac-
counting department. When it comes to managing your investment, properaccounting is a must. You want the company that you use not only to under-stand what is going on with your property’s operations, but also what’s goingon with your property’s ﬁnances. Also, make sure that your property’s moneywill be held in a separate account.
In Conclusion
Nothing is more important to the success of your investment than good, knowl-edgeable property management. Oftentimes it is the difference between meetingyour investment goals and losing untold amounts of money. Whether you man-age your property yourself, or have someone else do it for you, don’t try to “savemoney.” That always leads to disaster and loss.
The good news is that now you know. And if your investments aren’t being
properly managed, the solution is easy, and the ability to increase the value of288 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 288ROBERT KIYOSAKI 289
your assets almost instantly is right in your hand. So, take the plunge. I promise
you won’t be disappointed.
Ways to Learn More
Knowledge is the key to success. So, here are some of my suggestions on how toﬁnd property managers and how to increase your property management knowl-edge.www.irem.orgwww.naahq.orgwww.kenmcelroy.comThe ABC’s of Real Estate Investing , by Ken McElroy
The Advanced Guide to Real Estate Investing,b yK e n  M c E l r o yThe ABC’s of Property Management ,b yK e n  M c E l r o y
How to Increase the Income from your Real Estate Investments (audio book), by
Robert Kiyosaki and Ken McElroy
How to Find and Keep Good Tenants (audio book), by Robert Kiyosaki and Ken
McElroy
The Property Management Tool Kit, by Mike Beirne
As copartner of MC Companies, www.mccompanies.com, Ken McElroy
has more than twenty years of partner-level experience representing
more than 20,000 units of multifamily asset/property management, de-velopment, project/construction management, investment analysis, ac-quisitions, and dispositions. As host of WS Radio’s weekly Entrepreneur
Magazine’s Real Estate Radio program, Ken interviews experts in the real
estate, ﬁnance, and legal arenas. He is a popular speaker at industry events, and his accom-plishments as an author include The ABC’s of Real Estate Investing , Rich Dad’s Advisors:
The Advanced Guide to Real Estate Investing , and The ABC’s of Property Management .
9781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 2899781593155322_2:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:05 PM  Page 290
This page intentionally left blank PART 3
Creative Ways to
Make Money inReal Estate•GARY GORMAN
•CARLETON SHEETS
•DEAN GRAZIOSI
•W. SCOTT SCHIRMER
•TOM WHEELWRIGHT
•WAYNE PALMER
•MARTY DE RITO9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 2919781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 292
This page intentionally left blank Taxes are our greatest expense. Today the average person is paying more than
50 percent on income taxes and hidden taxes. One of the beauties of real es-
tate investing, when compared with investing in stocks and mutual funds, is the
ability to pay nothing in taxes, legally. As far as I know, this real estate loophole isthe biggest and best legal tax loophole remaining, and that is why Gary Gorman ismy friend and advisor. Gary has both saved and made Kim and me a lot of money.
While this tax loophole has saved a lot of people money, it has also caused
people to lose a lot of money. Many people lose money because they sell a piece ofproperty, deferring their tax bill, but fail to plan their next real estate purchase.This failure to carefully plan their sell and their next buy causes them to eitherpay the capital gains tax anyway, or purchase a bad piece of property just to avoidthe tax. Often, rushing to buy a bad piece of real estate is worse than paying thecapital gains tax.
Today before I sell or buy a property, I call Gary Gorman’s company for strategic
advice. I call Gary before I call a real estate broker.
—Robert Kiyosaki17 Gary GORMAN
Getting from A to B 
Without Paying Taxes
2939781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 293One of the last great tax shelters left in the United States deals with the
ownership of real estate, and more importantly, with how it’s taxed when
you sell it. There are essentially four different classes of real estate: property
you own for development, property you own for a short time (less than oneyear), your personal residence, and investment property you own for an ex-tended period of time (at least a year). Each is taxed a little differently. Here’s aquick overview.
First, property you own for development is subject to ordinary income taxes,
as well as self-employment tax (the self-employed equivalent of FICA). Short-term property, by contrast, is subject to short-term capital gains tax, which istypically taxed at the same rate as your salary and other ordinary income.There’s no self employment tax. Your personal residence is treated differently,too. It qualiﬁes for a gain exclusion of different amounts, depending uponwhether you’re single or married. That leaves us with investment property that
you’ve owned for at least one year, and this is where real tax shelter advantageskick in.
Four Property Types and How They Are Taxed
1. Property owned for development—is taxed as ordinary income.
2. Short-term property—is taxed as short-term capital gains.3. Personal residence—qualifies for a gain exclusion based on marital status.4. Investment property—is the place where real tax shelter advantages kick in!
The government actually wants you to invest in long-term, investment-type
real estate. So to encourage you to make this type of investment, it offers you a
couple of tax beneﬁts: The ﬁrst is that you are allowed to write off the cost ofthe property, over a predetermined period of time, through annual depreciationdeductions . The beneﬁt of this depreciation deduction could be used to offset
other income that you’ve earned.
For those of you who want to sell your property, you’ll pay long-term capital
gains tax, which is at a much lower rate than ordinary tax rates.  Another authorin this book, Tom Wheelwright, does a great job of discussing these beneﬁts inChapter 21 of this book. My chapter, however, is about my favorite tax beneﬁt,which is available only with long-term investment property, and that is yourability to roll the gain from your old investment property over to your newproperty. This is called a 1031 Exchange because Section 1031 is the Internal294 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 294Revenue Code section that allows you this beneﬁt. The 1031 Exchange is a beau-
tiful thing.
All sophisticated investors include 1031 Exchanges as a critical technique in
their bag of investment tools, and if you’re not using this tool, you need to learnhow powerful it can be to the creation of your personal real estate wealth. Startby understanding how an exchange works: When you sell your old investmentproperty and buy a new investment property, you can roll the gain from the oldproperty to the new one without paying the tax until some time way in the fu-ture. Investors who are experienced with this tax code section often can actuallypick the amount of tax they want to pay, and when in the future they want topay it. The obvious beneﬁt of doing this is that you don’t have to write a checkto the government every time you sell a property. An even bigger beneﬁt is thatit allows you to buy a bigger property, which will result in more cash for yousomewhere down the road.
To illustrate this, let’s say Fred and Sue are selling their rental property, and
the tax on their gain would be $100,000. Fred and Sue decide to do an exchangeinstead so that they’ll be able to plow this money back into their new property.Because they are getting a 75 percent loan on their new property (which meansthat their lender will loan them three dollars for every one that they put intothe deal, or $300,000 to their $100,000), Fred and Sue are able to buy $400,000more property than they would have if they had paid the tax and not done an
exchange.
$100,000 + $300,000 = $400,000
Let’s say a few years go by and their new property doubles in value, and they
sell it. The additional $400,000 of property they bought with the 1031 money is
now worth $800,000. After paying off the $300,000 loan they used to buy thisadditional property, they have the balance of $500,000. In other words, by doingan exchange, Fred and Sue were able to leverage the $100,000 tax check theywould have written to the government into a half-million dollars’ worth of cashin their pocket (before taxes of course)!
1031 Exchanges are a great way to build wealth!
So, what must you do to have a successful exchange? Well, there are six basic
rules to an exchange (which is another way of saying that there are six thingsthat the IRS will look at if it audits your exchange). Speaking of the IRS, andbefore I start, let me clarify that because Section 1031 is an IRS code section,TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2959781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 295the IRS must allow you to do an exchange. However, Section 1031 is a form-
driven code section. That means that you really do have to dot the i’s and cross
the t’s, and the tiniest misstep could get your exchange disallowed. Keep that
in mind as you read the six rules.
The Six Rules of 1031 Exchanges
1. Hold property for investment
2. Adhere to the forty-five-day identification period
3. Replace the property within 180 days
4. Use a qualified intermediary
5. Follow the title holding requirement
6. Buy equal or up, and reinvest all the cash
Rule No. 1: Hold for Investment
Section 1031 applies only to property held for investment, but if you meet thisrule you can sell any type of investment property and buy any other type of in-vestment property. In other words you can sell a rental house and buy a duplex;296 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: How $5,000 
Grew to $200,000
About ten years ago, I bought a small, two-bedroom condo for $55,000 by put-
ting $5,000 down and borrowing the rest. I rented the bedrooms to my son
and daughter while he was going to college and she was finishing law school. After
they were out of school, I sold the condo at a profit and exchanged into a very nicecondo unit at the top of a building in downtown Denver that had beautiful views ofsnowcapped mountains. I have great monthly cash flow off this unit, I’ve gotten myoriginal investment back many times over through cash flow, and my $5,000 equityhas grown to about $200,000—just because of the exchange I did. There are twolessons to this story: The first is that you don’t have to be Robert Kiyosaki or DonaldT rump to do an exchange. Exchanges hold equal power for everyone. The secondlesson is that exchanges are a great vehicle to pyramid wealth and build cash flow.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 296you could also buy an ofﬁce building, an apartment building, a warehouse, or
bare land. We have clients who sell bare land, which is not income producing,and then buy rental properties, such as apartment buildings, which do produceincome. In other words, they use an exchange to create cash ﬂow. We also haveclients who sell one income-producing property and buy another in order toincrease their cash ﬂow, and we have some who sell income-producing prop-erties, generally apartment buildings, and buy bare land in order to get out ofthe hassles of managing their property; they use an exchange to simplify theirlives.
1031 Exchanges are a great tool to help you accomplish your 
investment strategy.
A common misconception that people have about 1031 exchanges is that if
you sell a purple duplex, you have to buy a purple duplex, and this is not thecase; simply put, both your old property and your new property have to be held
for investment .
One of the ongoing debates is whether vacation homes (or second homes),
qualify for 1031 Exchanges; many of you own these type of properties. The de-bate is whether or not vacation homes are investment properties (which do
qualify for exchanges) or personal-use properties (which don’t qualify for ex-
changes), and since vacation homes by their nature fall somewhere in-between,the debate has raged for years. We do a lot of counseling with our vacationhome clients to make sure that they are doing everything they can to protecttheir rights to exchange their property, and if this is the kind of property youhave, I suggest that you work with a good intermediary (which I’ll deﬁne in amoment) to make sure that you follow current law. Current law, by the way, al-lows you to exchange vacation homes if you follow very strict guidelines.
One of the things that Section 1031 does not allow is the exchanging of prop-
erty held for resale. The IRS, however, does not deﬁne the terms held for invest-
ment and held for resale. Guidelines for these terms have arisen from a series of
court cases that give us a pretty good understanding of what an investmentproperty is versus a property held for resale. I expect that as time goes on, thecourt will continue to reﬁne these deﬁnitions, but for now a property is heldfor investment if you hold it as such for at least one year and one day before youtry to sell it. Property that you try to sell within the year after you bought it isgenerally considered to be held for resale. While a deﬁned holding period isTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2979781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 297298 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
not mentioned in the code section, most exchange professionals are comfortable
with a holding period of more than one year because one year is the requiredholding period to get long-term capital gain treatment if you sold the propertyand did not do an exchange.
A classic example that deﬁnes the term “properties held for resale” is the
“ﬁx-and-ﬂip.” A ﬁx-and-ﬂip is where you buy a “ﬁxer-upper,” clean it up, andthen put it back on the market. Because your intent is to sell the property rightaway, the property does not qualify for an exchange, even if you have troubleﬁnding a buyer. Does this mean that you can’t buy a property with the intent toﬁx it up? No, you just have to hold the property for investment. How do you dothat? The best way is to hold the property for at least one year and one day be-fore you put it back on the market.
Hold your investment properties at least one year
before you try to sell them.
In the past, I’ve bought ﬁxer-type properties, but I always make sure that I
hold them for at least one year before I try to sell them. I might ﬁx the propertiesup, rent them for at least one year, and then sell them, or sometimes I will rentthem for at least one year and then ﬁx them up before I sell them. Regardless ofthe process, the important lesson here is that I always make sure that I holdthem as an investment for at least one year before I sell them.
One last thing before I go to rule number two is that, obviously, if your old
property is real estate, you have to buy real estate as your replacement property,and anything that is land, or attached to it, or part of it, qualiﬁes as real estate.Timber rights, water rights, and mineral rights are all examples of real estate. Isold a property several years ago, did a 1031 Exchange into another property,but had about $100,000 of cash left over after the purchase (which I did notwant to pay tax on). I took the cash and bought some oil and gas interests tocomplete my exchange. The oil and gas interests provide a nice, consistent,monthly cash ﬂow without my having to manage the investment.
Rule No. 2: Forty-Five-Day 
Identification Period
Starting the day you close the sale of your old property, you have exactly forty-
ﬁve calendar days to come up with a list of properties you might want to buy.TIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 298On this list you may place up to three properties with no limitation. For example,
if you sold your old property for $100,000, you could list three properties for$10 million each, for a total of $30 million. While this may seem like a strangeexample, I actually had a client with this exact scenario several years ago. Hewas in the market to buy a shopping center and was actually looking at threedifferent properties. Before he could complete his purchase, he got a call froma tenant who wanted to buy a small condo that he owned. Since my client wasgoing to buy one of the shopping centers anyway, he threw the sale of the condointo the mix and did a 1031 Exchange so he wouldn’t have to pay tax on it. Itwas just lucky timing for him, and he was able to sell the condo without a taxliability, even though it was insigniﬁcant to the overall transaction.
You may put more than three properties on your list, but if your list has more
than three properties the IRS will subject you to an additional set of rules thatsays, in effect, that the combined purchase price of everything on your list maynot exceed twice the selling price of your old property. This is called the 200percent rule. Going back to my example above (where you sold your old prop-erty for $100,000), if you had put four or more properties on your list, the com-bined purchase price of everything on your list would be limited to twice($200,000 in my example) the selling price of the old property. In other words,you could list three properties for $30 million or more, but once your list ex-ceeded three properties your whole list is limited to $200,000 (twice the sellingprice). My advice: Keep your list to three properties or less.
Keep it simple—keep your forty-five-day list to three properties or less.
As I said, the forty-ﬁve days are calendar days, starting the day you close the
sale. This means that if the forty-ﬁfth day is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a holiday,that is the date that your list must be completed, and you don’t get until the fol-lowing business day to complete your list. And no, you cannot get an extensionof this time limit.
When you make your list, you have to identify the properties clearly enough
that if you get audited the IRS agent could look at your list and go directly tothe property. In other words you have to state: “123 Main Street, Phoenix, Ari-zona.” You cannot say “a three-bedroom, two-bath house on Main Street in
Phoenix.”
You then give your list to a person called a qualiﬁed intermediary, which I’ll
discuss in rule number four.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 2999781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 299Rule No. 3: 180-Day Replacement Period
Again, starting on the day of closing of the sale, you have exactly 180 calendar
days in which to purchase your replacement property, but whatever you buyhas to be on your forty-ﬁve-day list. You can buy one of the properties, two ofthem, or all three if you wish, but whatever you end up buying has to be onyour forty-ﬁve-day list, and it has to be closed by the 180th day.
As with the forty-ﬁve-day requirement, these are calendar days, which mean
that if the day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, that’s the day, and barringan emergency declaration by the president, there are no possible extensions.Note that your timeframes are forty-ﬁve and 180 days—not six weeks and sixmonths. Both the forty-ﬁve and the 180-day requirements are cast in concrete.You either meet them, or your exchange is toast.
The time limits are very critical. Obey them.
Rule No. 4: Qualified Intermediary 
Requirement
You are not allowed to touch the money from the sale of your old property dur-
ing the time between that sale and the purchase of your new property. The lawrequires that you use the services of an independent third party, called a quali-
ﬁed intermediary , to hold these proceeds and to prepare the documents the law
requires to document your exchange.
Despite the implication that by being qualiﬁed the intermediary has been
somehow approved by the IRS, qualiﬁed intermediaries are essentially un-
governed. They’re not required to pass any tests of their knowledge and abilities,and for the most part, they may do as they wish with your money while theyhold it. In most states, anybody with enough money to print business cards canhold themselves out as an intermediary.
There has been a pattern in the exchange industry of periodic losses of ex-
change proceeds by intermediaries who have used the funds for their own pur-poses or have made bad investments with the funds. Some of these badintermediaries have been attorneys, some have been successful business peoplewith successful track records, and some have been title companies. These losseshave ranged from the comparatively small to the spectacularly large, but theyall stem from the practice by the intermediary of commingling (or pooling) theTIP300 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 300funds of their clients. In other words, they put all clients’ funds into one pool
or account.
Intermediaries hold their clients’ monies in one of two ways: Either they
commingle all the funds into one account, or they set up a separate bank accountfor each client. Every problem that has arisen from intermediary theft stemsfrom commingled accounts. Despite this fact, approximately 95 percent (frommy informal poll) of the intermediaries commingle funds.
California, Nevada, and Idaho are the only states that at this point have
adopted statutes designed to regulate intermediaries and protect consumers. Anumber of other states have proposed legislation to protect their citizens, butnot surprisingly, the intermediary industry has strongly resisted any type ofregulation. So, the bottom line is that you are on your own to protect yourmoney.
Since you are required to use an intermediary to handle your exchange, what
should you look for when you pick one? First, make sure that your money is notcommingled, but placed in a separate account with your name and tax identiﬁ-cation number associated with it. Call the bank frequently to make sure thatthe funds are still in the account. One of the intermediaries that failed had ledtheir clients to believe that they had separate accounts, when in fact, the monieswere commingled. So when you call the bank, keep a record of when you calledand whom you talked to.
Make sure your money is placed in, and stays in, a separate 
account for you.
Second, make sure that they know what they are doing. Many intermediaries
have little or no background in tax law, real estate law, or 1031 law, yet they areall too happy to handle your exchange and hold your money (these intermedi-aries are easy to spot by the low fees they charge). Ask them how many ex-changes they’ve done? How big is their staff? Will they give you a list ofreferrals? Have they ever had a complaint ﬁled against them? Don’t get hungup on who they are or what their degrees are—it’s your job to protect yourmoney because no one is looking out for you.
When you watch the news at night and some reporter is interviewing a fraud
victim, the victim never says, “It doesn’t surprise me that he ripped me off. Inever trusted him; he just seemed like a crook.” No, they never say that. Instead
they always say, “I can’t believe that he ripped me off. He was the nicest, mosttrustworthy person. My kids go to school with his kids; we go to the sameTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3019781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 301church; his wife is so sweet; I just can’t believe he could do this to me.” So, if
you can’t trust the people you can’t trust, and you can’t trust the people you do
trust, who do you trust? Nobody but yourself! You are the only one who is re-sponsible to safeguard your money.
When it comes to your exchange funds, if you can’t trust the people 
you can’t trust, and you can’t trust the people you do trust, who do you trust?
Only yourself!
Rule No. 5: Title Holding Requirement
Section 1031 deals with the taxpayer who owns the old property, sells it, and does
an exchange. That same taxpayer is the one who has to do the exchange, reportit in their tax return, and buy the new property. A lot of our clients want to changethe title to the property midstream, which as a general rule you can’t do.
Y ou have to complete the exchange using the same taxpayer that sold
the old property.
Let’s say that Fred and Sue Jones are selling their purple rental house, which
they own in their names, and want to have Jones Investments, Inc., the corpo-ration they own, take title to their new property. Since the corporation has adifferent tax identiﬁcation number, this would not be a valid exchange.
Since that won’t work, what if Fred and Sue transferred the ownership of
the rental house to their corporation right before the sale closed (that way theseller of the old property and the buyer of the new would be the same entity)?This won’t work either because, if you remember from rule number one, youhave to hold the property for at least one year and one day for it to be investmentproperty. If Fred and Sue transferred ownership right before the sale, the IRSwill argue that the corporation owned the property for resale rather than in-vestment because it sold it right after it got title to it.
The best time to structure the sale of your property to minimize the tax
is when you first buy it.
The main reason that our clients want to transfer ownership to another entity
in the middle of the exchange is that they want to own their new property in anTIP
TIP
TIP302 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 302entity that limits their liability. I fully agree with what they are trying to do, but
doing it in the middle of the exchange is the wrong time to do it. There areways to accomplish what Fred and Sue are trying to do—ways that are beyondthe scope of this chapter. Call us and we’ll walk you through your options to ac-complish this, but the best advice I can give you here is that the best time tostructure the sale of your property to qualify for a 1031 Exchange is when youﬁrst buy it.
Rule No. 6: You Must Buy Equal or Up, and You 
Must Reinvest All of the Cash
In order to pay notax on your exchange, you have to do two things: you have to
buy equal or up, and you have to reinvest all of the cash.
Let’s go back to Fred and Sue selling their purple duplex. Let’s say that they
sell it for $100,000, there is an unpaid mortgage, and closing costs associated
with the sale total $40,000. This means that if I was their qualiﬁed intermediaryI’d receive the balance of the proceeds of $60,000. If Fred and Sue then buytheir replacement property for $90,000, they’d pay tax on the buy-down of
$10,000 (they sold for $100,000 but bought for only $90,000, hence the $10,000buy-down). Note that the buy-down does not toast their exchange; they simplypay tax on it. And note also that the whole buy-down is taxable—they can’toffset any of their tax basis against the buy-down gain.
Let’s change the example—Fred and Sue still sell the purple duplex for
$100,000, but instead they buy the new property for $150,000, so in this case theybought up from $100,000 to $150,000. To pay for this purchase they plan to get amortgage of $100,000, which means that they need only $50,000 of the $60,000in funds that I’m holding to close the sale. So what happens to the unspent fundsof $10,000? They are taxable; and again, the entire $10,000 is taxable.
In order to pay zero tax on your exchange, you have to buy equal 
or up, and you have to reinvest all of the cash.
To recap this last rule, in order to pay no tax on your exchange, you have to
buy equal or up, and you have to reinvest all of the cash. In these two examples,
my implication is that Fred and Sue inadvertently ended up in taxable situations.Some of our clients actually want to buy down and are willing to pay the tax, ormore typically they want some cash from the sale to buy a car or pay off a creditcard.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3039781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 303If you are one of those people who want some cash from your exchange,
there are a couple of ways to approach this: If you don’t want to pay tax, you
can wait and borrow from the new property after the closing. Let’s go back tomy second example above, where they’re selling for $100,000 and buying for$150,000—by getting a loan for $100,000 they end up not spending all theircash. Remember, they have $10,000 left over. That’s the taxable amount.
But what if they want the $10,000 in proceeds? Is there a way they can get
that money without paying tax? Yes, if they buy the property for the $150,000using all of the proceeds I’m holding (meaning their loan is only $90,000),they’ve completed their exchange and they can then reﬁnance and pull proceedsfrom the reﬁnance without paying tax. How long do they have to wait after thepurchase to reﬁnance tax free? One nanosecond ! Yes, it’s true! They can reﬁ-
nance the new property immediately. I say reﬁnance, but a good intermediarycan show you how to set up the loan on the purchase of the new property sothat you can walk away from the closing with cash without having to get twoloans. There is one caveat, however: The reﬁnance has to be on the new prop-erty—if you try to do it on the old property before you sell it, the IRS couldargue that you’ve violated rule number four and touched the money.
Reﬁnancing tax free works great if you are buying equal or up, but what if
you are buying down? When do you get the proceeds from the buy-down? Goback to my ﬁrst example; Fred and Sue sell for $100,000 but are buying for$90,000. When do they get the cash from the buy down? There are actuallytwo places that they can get the $10,000. The ﬁrst place is at the closing tablewhen they sell the purple duplex, and the second place is after the 180 dayswhen their exchange has ended. If you know that you want cash from the saleof the old property, you have to convey that to the intermediary before the clos-ing takes place so that the intermediary can prepare the exchange documentsto allow this. Otherwise your money will be tied up until the end of the exchangeperiod. Once the transaction closes and the intermediary has your proceeds,you cannot touch them until the exchange period has expired.
One last thing before I ﬁnish this chapter: I did notsay that you have to have
debt on your new property at least equal to the debt on your old property. Thissimply is not the case, even though a lot of intermediaries and most CPAs andattorneys seem to think so. If Fred and Sue sell the purple duplex for $100,000,netting $60,000 in proceeds, and then buy their replacement property, also for$100,000 by using the $60,000 that I’m holding, the balance of the purchasefunds can come from any source: a savings account, a loan on the property, orsome combination of the two. For example, they could use the $60,000 I’m304 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 304ROBERT KIYOSAKI 305
holding, take $20,000 from their savings account, and get a loan for the balance
of $20,000.
Now that you’ve ﬁnished this chapter, sit back for a moment and see the big
picture: 1031 Exchanges are a great way to get from A to B without paying taxes.The place to start is with this question: “What are you going to do with themoney when you sell your investment property?” If one of your possibilities,even with part of the money, is to buy another investment property, then youwant to take advantage of this great code section.
Gary Gorman is a well-known educator and published author on the sub-
ject of 1031 Exchanges. He has written Six Basic Things You Need to Know
about 1031 Exchanges and Exchanging Up! With more than thirty-six years
of real estate tax experience, Gary is recognized as an expert witness inthe federal courts on 1031 tax issues. Revolutionary exchange systemssuch as 1031Connexions.com, 1031 T axPak, and 1031Access have all been
developed by Gary to beneﬁt the industry.
9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 305Carleton is a legend in the world of real estate. He has single-handedly taught
more people about real estate than anyone else I know.
Y ears ago, when I was just starting out, I was watching Carleton’s television
infomercial on real estate. I bought his program, and it is one of the smartest in-
vestments I have made.
Carleton and my Rich Dad are cut from the same bolt of cloth. They come from
the same philosophy. They believe in cash ﬂow and see value that most peopleoverlook. They are not afraid of investing in distressed areas. They understandthe need for a roof over a person’s head, regardless of how much money the personmakes.
Today, Carleton and I work together with the Professional Education Institute.
PEI supports Carleton’s work through his real estate coaching program, and sup-ports me through all of my Rich Dad coaching programs. Regardless of whichcoaching program you select, PEI does a fabulous job for anyone who is seriousabout their ﬁnancial future.
—Robert Kiyosaki18 Carleton H. SHEETS
No Down Payment®
Using Other People’s Money
3069781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 306In my many years of teaching people how to build wealth by investing in real
estate, probably the most common objection I hear is this: “But I don’t have
any money to get started.” That one common misconception has kept so many
people sitting on the sidelines rather than pursuing their dreams.
Lack of ambition (not lack of money) will lead to failure.
I could have been one of those people, but something happened that changed
my life forever. After graduating from college, I started working in the privatesector, working for one company eight years and then another for eighteenmonths.
I was pretty aggressive in trying to climb the corporate ladder, and as I look
back I honestly think that I exceeded my capabilities. I was ﬁred from the sec-ond company. I toyed with the idea of going into business myself, but I suddenlyhad a revelation. I realized that I had moved four different times with thosetwo companies, and that each time I bought and sold a home I had made $5,000to $8,000. That was a world of money back then! So I thought, why not go intoreal estate? However, I had very little money and no credit.
The “no credit” mind-set was a carry-over from my conservative midwest
upbringing where my parents had instilled in me this philosophy: Never borrowmoney except to buy a home; otherwise pay cash. And since all of the money Ihad made from selling my previous homes had been reinvested in larger andmore expensive homes, I needed to ﬁnd something to support my family andenable me to make mortgage payments and to pay for all of the other expensesof everyday living.
So, I decided to become a real estate investor. I went back to school and at-
tended seminars. I read books and studied courses. I sought out other investorsand brokers who could advise me. The good news is that I quickly learned thatyou don’t need a lot of money or perfect credit to successfully invest in real es-tate. What you doneed are the time-tested and p roven creative techniques to
invest in real estate the smart way—by using other people’s money.
When you think about it, this concept is used in business all the time—but
with different terminology. When a large corporation changes hands, it is oftenthe result of a “leveraged buyout.” In essence, this simply means that the buyersused leverage instead of their own cash to accomplish the transaction. In otherwords, they used other people’s money. But can this method work for you? Theanswer is “Yes!” The only major difference between the leveraged buyout of aTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3079781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 307huge corporate enterprise and purchasing a single-family home using other
people’s money is the number of dollars.
The basic concept is this: Use other people’s money.
You might ask, “What people, and where can I get this money?” These are
legitimate questions, and I’ll share a number of answers with you. It all dependson which creative techniques will work in a given situation. For example, sometechniques involve the seller, some use partners, and still other techniques bringin additional investors.
The techniques that I am going to share with you are timeless; they work in
any market: markets with high interest rates or low interest rates, boom marketssuch as in 2003–2005, and down markets as in 2008–2009. But they’re not one-size-ﬁts-all. Each investor has his or her own unique goals and circumstancesand skills, and each property he or she analyzes will have a different set of cir-cumstances. That’s the beauty of these creative methods! You can pick andchoose whichever techniques are best suited for each situation. As you learnthe details of each strategy, you will recognize certain elements that will notwork for you, while other elements will be a perfect ﬁt. Control of the situationis in your hands, and once you’ve learned the ropes you will know preciselywhat to do when opportunity knocks.
The Seller Can Help You Finance 
YOUR Purchase!
One of the most obvious sources for funding to consider when purchasing a
property is the owner. After all, who has a more vested interest in seeing that asale occurs? The seller is the person who will answer either yes or no whenyou ask, “Are you open to ﬁnancing arrangements?” or “Are you willing to takea promissory note?”
Always remember that the seller has the most invested in making sure
the deal happens.
Depending on how motivated the seller is, he or she may have a very attentive
ear when you offer to pay the asking price—in return for working cooperativelywith you to make the sale happen.
One of the key words to consider here is “motivated.” Motivated sellers are
those who don’t just want but need to sell the property and may not have theTIP
TIP308 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 308ROBERT KIYOSAKI 309
time or patience to sell it the “traditional” way—that is, listing the property for
sale, waiting for a qualiﬁed buyer, negotiating price, then ﬁnally selling theproperty months after they listed it. Sellers may be motivated for any numberof reasons, including divorce, foreclosure, job relocation, or even a death in thefamily. These sellers are not “down and out”; they are just in a position wherethey are anxious to move on.
When you use creative ﬁnancing, you can make the situation a win-win for
both buyer and seller.
Ways to Use the Seller as a Source of Financing
There are many ways you can utilize the seller as a source for financing. Y ou can:
• Ask if the seller will hold a second mortgage, in lieu of a down payment. For exam-
ple, obtain a 70 percent loan from a lending institution or through partners, andask the seller to hold a second mortgage note for 30 percent.
• Ask if the seller would give you credits at closing for repairs. For example, negotiate
a $5,000 credit at closing for roof repairs and new carpet allowance. The credit willappear on the closing statement, and you may even get money back at closing.
• Ask if the seller would consider a lease option or a land contract. (I’ll talk more
about these techniques later.)
• Ask if the seller would trade services for a discount on the property. The key is:
Don’t be shy!
You may feel uncomfortable asking someone to help you ﬁnance the sale of
his own property, but this will get easier for you in time and when you know
the facts. You will feel more conﬁdent in your offer and be able to explain thewin-win scenario to the seller. These suggestions are only the beginning. Youare limited only by your lack of creativity when problem solving.
Using these tools will also help you educate buyers when you become the
seller!
The Property Itself Can Help 
Finance Your Purchase
Every property has worth. The value lies not only in the actual value of the
house and land itself, but in other areas as well. Trees and mineral rights mayhave cash value. A vacant lot next door or furniture left on the property mayalso provide a source for cash.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 309310 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Online valuation services, and even some comparable market analyses
from a real estate professional, usually don’t include the value of trees or 
mineral rights. Check with a realtor or city or county office before you purchasea property. Educate yourself as to what local code enforcement or zoning willallow. Don’t be afraid to ask questions, and always do your due diligence.
A property’s value is often calculated by the sales of similar properties in the
same neighborhood. You can research this information yourself or have a realtor
help you. For a ballpark valuation, you can look online at a number of Web sites,including www.zillow.com, www.realestate.yahoo.com/homevalues, and my fa-vorite, www.netronline.com. Visit www.CarletonSheetsRealBook.com for up-to-date links and resources.
Real-Life Story: Carleton’s Success Story No. 1
Some time ago, I bought a forty-eight-unit apartment building creatively with
very little money down. I then converted the apartments into condominiums
and sold them in blocks of four and five to individual investors at nearly twice what
I had originally paid on a per-unit basis. While the use of the building did not change,the legal framework did and, by doing this, I was able to make a huge profit.
Investors Are Always Interested 
in Real Estate
People seem to have no problem putting money into the stock market. However,
it can be risky and difﬁcult to ﬁgure out exactly what to invest in. For example,when you buy a piece of rental property, you can reasonably anticipate whatthe future rents and expenses will be. But if you buy a stock, the value of thestock could drop in half almost overnight, and its dividend could be totally elim-inated! Real estate, by contrast, is a much safer investment. Moreover, you willﬁnd that investing in real estate becomes easier and easier as you acquire moreproperties. In fact, once your friends and acquaintances see how you’re amass-ing properties, they’ll often ask if they can “get in on your next deal.” When in-vestors don’t have the time, but do have the cash, they will frequently loanmoney to you at a good rate of return, or perhaps even agree to share in a portionof the proﬁt upon resale of the property.TIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 310Where can you ﬁnd investors? Check your local newspaper for “money
lenders,” or do an online search. It may even be as simple as a friend who isn’t
happy with his or her return in the stock market and is willing to lend you alarge sum to purchase the property, while they hold the mortgage, and make agood return on their investment through your monthly payments. And if youhave an investor willing to loan you only a portion of the purchase price, besure to ﬁnd out what your lender’s requirements are before you structure adeal.
Real-Life Story: Student Success Story No. 1
Lupe began building her reputation by purchasing and rehabbing condos, one
by one, in a run-down complex in her town. Her reputation spread by word of
mouth, and, before long, investors were approaching her to get a better return than
their 401(k)s were paying. These investors didn’t have the time or knowledge of in-vesting in real estate, but they did have some money they were willing to invest.
Partners Will Put More Skin 
in the Game
Partners may sound like just a synonym for investors, but actually there is a
distinct difference. Partners are people who will actually be purchasing propertywith you, not simply ﬁnancing a loan for you.
Partnerships are a great way to get started. A partner can help 
expand your portfolio and borrowing power, while sharing the work load. 
There are many types of partnerships, and I suggest you investigate each type and tailor yours to fit your individual needs. Seek professional help if you are unsure.
Where will you ﬁnd your partners? For starters, ask family members who
have the foresight to realize the relative safety and potential of investing in real
estate. Over a period of time, you may have a dozen or more partnerships com-prised of family members, friends, and business associates. Each partner willhave put up cash (or services) in return for an equity position (ownership) inthe property.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3119781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 311312 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real-Life Story: Carleton’s Success Story No. 2
When I first started in this business as a real estate agent, my first listing was
an apartment building. I kept wondering why it had not sold. It seemed like
such a good investing opportunity. One of the seminars I had attended had focused
on the benefits of partnership investing: accomplishing with others what you cannotdo by yourself. I had learned some very effective techniques from the instructorwho had a solid background in forming syndicates or partner groups, so I decidedto acquire the building. I put together a partnership that consisted of two investorswho contributed 100 percent of the required cash down payment, with the seller fi-nancing an 80 percent first mortgage. I contributed my “expertise,” and we wereoff to a profitable start and, I might add—the beginning of a career that has spannedmore than four decades.
But be aware: Partnerships can be a double-edged sword. Partners might see
their responsibilities, duties, and partnership goals differently, which could
lead to conﬂicts that can destroy the partnership. Make sure that all partnershipagreements are in writing. Go to www.CarletonSheetsRealBook.com to ﬁnd outmore about my program that is devoted entirely to partnerships. As always,consult an expert for legal advice when necessary.
Borrow the Broker’s Commission, Seriously!
Sometimes when a property listed is by a broker, it requires just 10 percentdown. The reality is that the seller just wants to receive enough cash at closingto cover the broker’s commission and closing costs.
The typical broker’s commission ranges from 5 to 7 percent. In a real estate
transaction, there are usually two brokers—the “listing” broker who listed theproperty on the MLS and represents the seller’s interests, and the “buyer’s bro-ker” who represents the buyers and sells them the property. If one broker bothlists the property and sells it, he or she gets all of the commission (subject tostate law and the commission-splitting arrangement that the broker may havewith the brokerage company he or she works for); if one broker lists the prop-erty and another broker sells it, the two brokers split the commission.
What is the MLS? MLS stands for Multiple Listing Service. It is a
regional or local (depending on where you live), fee-based service whereby
members of the Board of Realtors exchange their listings.TIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 312For a real estate investor, the best opportunity to “borrow” the commission to
use as the down payment is to negotiate with the listing broker, because he or
she is in a position to receive up to 100 percent of the commission.
It is helpful if you work with a real estate broker or realtor who is also 
an investor. They understand creative financing and using other people’s
money, and they may be more apt to loan their commission in the form of anote against the property.
Building rapport and credibility with brokers is crucial. Brokers may be re-
luctant to consider delaying receipt of their commission, but that reluctance
can be tempered by an offer in which you give the broker a note for an amounthigher than the commission, for example, $3,500 for a $3,000 commission. Thepremium price is offered for the broker’s cooperation in accepting a note inlieu of full payment at closing.
Your Own Services, Skills, and Resources
Here’s a technique that most people never even think of, and yet it’s a greatway to buy property without putting a lot of money into it. Many propertieswon’t interest conventional buyers and investors because of needed mainte-nance or repairs. Sanding, painting, replacing—all of these “needs” have a dollarvalue. However, without having to put up actual dollars, you or a partner maybe able to convert services or skills to dollars by identifying and meeting theseneeds. And you could negotiate a credit to be paid to you at closing to reimburseyou for the cost of performing these repairs. The credit will appear on the clos-ing statement and will decrease the amount of cash you need for closing (orwill increase the amount of cash you receive back at closing).
Negotiating repair credits at closing can be enough to cover the 
down payment.
Do you have something of value, say, a boat, jewelry, a 401(k), or an insur-
ance policy that you can borrow against? Tapping into the equity of these as-sets by using a line of credit can be a great way to leverage a piece of property.Caution is advised, though. You will have to pay back a line of credit, usuallythrough monthly installments, and you may not be able to deduct your interestexpense. Again, consult an accountant to understand the specifics in your sit-uation. Make sure that you can afford to make these payments. Alternatively,TIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3139781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 313314 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
you could arrange a private loan from an investor using one of these assets as
collateral.
Real-Life Story: Student Success Story No. 2
Some investors use the actual asset itself as a down payment. Scott is one of
my students who sold sixteen of his properties as a package. His buyer pur-
chased them by trading a condo and a lot the buyer owned “free and clear,” as his
down payment. A bank financed the balance of the $1.6 million transaction. So atclosing, Scott received a mortgage-free lot and condo, and he also gained a mone-tary profit from the sale.
The Most Timeless Technique of All: 
The Lease Option
I’m often asked which is my favorite technique for buying or selling real estate.
Well, my program is ﬁlled with dozens of great techniques I have enjoyed usingsuccessfully over the years. One that has performed particularly well for bothbuyers and sellers, especially since the real estate “meltdown” that began inmid-2006, has been the lease option.
A lease option works in any market!
In simple terms, a lease option is a contract between a buyer and a seller that
gives the buyer tenancy in a property, as well as the legal right to purchase theproperty at a predetermined price, or formula for price, on or before a speciﬁedfuture date. When you enter into a lease option with a seller, you promise to leasethe property for a certain period of time and to make speciﬁed monthly payments.In return, the seller is obligated to sell the property to you under terms speciﬁedin the lease option agreement if you choose to exercise your option.
At ﬁrst glance, it appears that a lease option beneﬁts only the buyer. After
all, the buyer is not obligated to buy the property. But if he or she does chooseto buy the property, the seller is required to sell. If the lease option is carefullystructured, however, it can be good for both the buyer and the seller.
When a buyer enters into a lease option with a seller, he or she is betting
that the value of the property on a speciﬁed future date will be greater than theTIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 314agreed-upon purchase price. Even if this doesn’t happen, considerable equity
may still be achieved as a result of the credits of some or all of the monthly pay-ments from the purchase price. As a result, there is a high chance that by pur-chasing the property at the speciﬁed date and price, he or she will gain instantequity. If, however, the value of the property on the speciﬁed future date is lessthan the speciﬁed purchase price, the buyer can walk away from the contractor attempt to renegotiate the price.
The seller is free to keep any option consideration (something of value, usu-
ally money, given as an inducement to enter a contract) that may have beenpaid and realize the gain from a monthly rental income. And if the buyer walksaway, the seller is also free to start the process over—to either sell or rent orlease option the property.
Over time, the real estate market is bound to change. The lease 
option technique allows both buyer and seller to take advantage of any 
market change and “bridge the gap,” so to speak, with minimal risk.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 315
TABLE 18.1
Benefits for the Buyer (Optionee) Benefits for the Seller (Optionor)
The risk is low, and the financial leverage 
can be high.The agreed-upon price of the property is 
frequently at the top of its current market 
value range.
The buyer receives control and possession 
of the property.The option money that the seller receives is 
tax-deferred until exercised or expired.
Very little, or no, initial closing costs. The option is forfeited if rent is not paid on time.
The buyer can walk away from the contract if the
value of the property on the specified future date
does not justify its purchase at the agreed-upon
price, or the buyer can attempt to renegotiate the
price or terms of the purchase.The seller receives all the equity buildup 
(amortization) on the mortgage during the 
option period.
The tenant has pride of ownership and, 
therefore, an incentive to take good care 
of the property.
The rent, including the amount, if any, 
that is applicable to the option purchase price, 
is at the top of or above the fair market
rental range.
The ability to regain possession and control 
of the property in the event of the optionee’s 
default in meeting the terms of the agreement.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 315Lease option contracts can be written to include several options—for both
buyer and seller. These can include the following:
• Lease optioning a property with the intent to sublease to another person
with a purchase option (sandwich lease).
• Lease optioning, then selling or assigning your position to a third party.
• Lease optioning a property requiring a modest rehab to sell to an end user or
keep as a rental.
The lease option can be used on commercial investment properties as well
as residential or investment properties.
Real-Life Story: 
Student Success Story No. 3
This lease option was negotiated a number of years ago. The numbers may seem
low, but the principles and the economics of the transaction are very much ap-
plicable in any market. The buyer (my student) owned a house worth roughly
$100,000. There were a fair number of rental homes in the area; most of themrented in the $500 to $700 range.
Seeking to find a substantially nicer home, the buyer s ought out a ne arby upscale
town where the home values exceeded $200, 000. Rentals in this  upsca le area were
fairly scarce. The buyer found a home for sale for $220,000, and it appeared to bereasonably priced. The seller was very anxious to sell since he had already movedout of state, and the home had been on the market for several months. The buyerproposed a lease option, and they ended up agreeing to a four-year option at theasking price of $220,000. The monthly rent was $900 (low for this particular house,but high in comparison to almost all other rentals in the surrounding areas), andthe buyer received a 50 percent rent credit ($450 per month) toward the eventualpurchase. The seller was to pay taxes and insurance during the option period, andthe buyer agreed to pay for all of the maintenance (an inspection revealed that thehouse was in very good shape). The buyer put down $3,600 as a nonrefundabledeposit for the option consideration, which was equivalent to less than 2 percent ofthe option purchase price!
The buyer was amazed when he figured out the “effective” interest rate that he
was paying. He realized that, of the $900 a month he was paying, only $450 wasthe true “cost” of owning the house. From that, he subtracted the cost of taxes and316 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 316insurance (which were $340 per month—an amount he would have had to pay had
he owned the property) to yield a net “cost” of $110 a month. This worked out to anincredible effective interest rate of 0.6 percent ($110 times twelve months equals$1,320, divided by $220,000, which equals 0.6 percent). That’s less than 1 percen t!
After three years, the buyer was certain that he was going to exercise his option
at the end of the four-year period (because, among other reasons, property valueshad been increasing very nicely in this area—at about 7 percent per year), but he fig-ured it was worth the effort to see if the seller would be willing to extend the optionin exchange for some additional consideration. The buyer and seller ended up agree-ing to extend the option for one additional year in return for the buyer paying $10,000of additional option consideration (which meant that it would be fully applied to thepurchase price, but it would be forfeited if the buyer did not buy the house). Was thisa good move? I sure think so. Even if it cost the buyer 10 percent interest to borrowthe $10,000 for a year (which is $1,000), it was a small price to pay for another yearof ownership at the effective interest rate of less than 1 percent.
After the five-year period, the buyer exercised the option and obtained the nec-
essary funds by simply securing an owner-occupied loan (loan programs specificallydesigned for owner-occupants) for $179,400, which was the total amount due tothe seller ($220,000 less the deposit of $3,600, less the additional considerationof $10,000 paid in year four, and less the rent credit of $27 ,000, which is equal to$450 for sixty months or five years). The property appreciated, and it appraised for$290,000; thus, the new loan was for only 62 percent of the property’s fair marketvalue. (By the way, the buyer eventually sold this house about a year later for$320,000 and, you guessed it, has since moved on to an even nicer home!)
The buyer’s “profit” on his initial investment of $3,600 was $90,000—based on
the property appreciation of $70,000, and the $20,400 savings of not paying taxesand insurance while living in the house. Under a lease option like this, the buyer(and seller, in this case) benefited in that the real estate taxes remained fairly steadythroughout the five-year period because there had not been a reported sale of theproperty.
The action that the buyer took at the end of year three (asking for and getting
the seller to agree to an additional year’s extension) is an excellent example of thepower of creative thinking. This would have been a great investment even if thathad not occurred, but by thinking creatively and being willing to ask questions, thebuyer turned what was already a great investment into one that was even better!ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3179781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 317TABLE 18.2 Benefits for the Buyer and the Seller
Benefits to the Buyer Benefits to the Seller
Flexibility of option to purchase 
any time within a four-year term 
(this option was additionally extended for 
one more year).The seller received full asking price.
Out of the total monthly rental payment 
of $900, $450 is credited toward the purchase,
which makes the cost of occupancy 
$450 a month.The seller is relieved of all maintenance 
responsibility and cost associated with the 
property.
Initial down payment of $3,600 and 
subsequent option extension of $10,000 
are credited directly against the 
purchase price.The seller receives sufficient income to cover 
the property taxes, insurance, and the principal 
and interest payment on the existing 
mortgage, plus a monthly profit.
The buyer had the advantage of time to 
put himself in the position to buy a home 
that he may not otherwise have been 
able to afford.The seller receives a nonrefundable deposit 
up front.
Based on appreciation of approximately 
7% per year, the buyer will enjoy instant equity 
of $110,600 
($290,000 fair market value minus $179,400 
option purchase price balance).The seller retains the $54,000 in rent 
payments ($900 per month) and the $13,600 
total option deposit if the buyer fails to exer-
cise the option. If he exercises the option, 
the seller credits back these amounts 
against the purchase price.
The buyer will have a much easier time 
obtaining favorable loan terms with $110,600
in equity in the property and therefore needs 
a mere 62% LTV (loan-to-value) to pay off the 
balance of the option purchase price.The seller enjoys the reduction of the loan 
principal, which increases the amount the seller 
will cash out at closing or the equity the seller 
will have in the property if the buyer does 
not complete the transaction.
The seller enjoys the deferment of taxes on 
the portion of money applied to the option 
purchase price (including the $3,600 
and the $10,000 consideration) until the 
option is exercised or abandoned.
The seller has the peace of mind of knowing 
that the property is under contract and is being
maintained by someone motivated to take 
good care of it because, hopefully, he will 
soon own it.318 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Let’s take a look at how the buyer and the seller fared over this ﬁve-year
deal.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 318ROBERT KIYOSAKI 319
This story is a perfect example of how a lease option can be very powerful
for the buyer, and yet still represent an attractive proposition for the seller.
To learn more about lease options, and many other creative techniques to
purchase property, go to www.CarletonSheetsRealBook.com to view my free
online programs.
Putting It All into Action
These are powerful techniques, but there is still one additional step that youneed to take: learning to negotiate and structure offers. The best creative ﬁ-nancing in the world won’t gain you anything if you don’t use it as part of awell-planned strategy with terms that are favorable to you. It’s not really as dif-ﬁcult as it may seem. You might even discover that you are a better negotiatorthan you thought you were.
For me, it all begins with trust and credibility. For starters, keep in mind that
people are naturally suspicious when it comes to conducting business withstrangers. Yet in more cases than not, we ﬁnd ourselves (as either buyers orsellers) negotiating with people whom we are meeting for the very ﬁrst time.The number-one question on both parties’ minds, therefore, is “Who do I trust?”
Use the seller’s name in conversation.
I once read a book that made the case that people are successful in life only
to the degree that they are able to make people like and trust them. This is cer-tainly true in negotiating. When talking to a seller, take a few minutes to estab-lish a rapport. This builds a trusting relationship that is so essential tonegotiating. If sellers feel comfortable with you, they often will be more forth-coming with important information, such as their true needs.
So how do you convince a seller that you’re on the up and up? How do you es-
tablish that magical relationship based on rapport? One of the simplest tech-niques is a very basic one. When you get the person’s name, remember it! Writeit down, and be sure to get the right spelling. Then, when engaging him or her inconversation, be sure to use it. It isn’t, “I’ll tell you what,” it’s “I’ll tell you what,Joe.” That’s a quick and easy way to begin building a rapport with the seller.
Avoid being overly critical. Y ou’ll seldom, if ever, force the seller into 
lowering the price or terms by harsh criticism.TIP
TIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 319320 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Another important element of rapport and trust building is being a good lis-
tener. As you talk to the seller, remember to always be an empathetic listener.
Imagine yourself in his or her situation and try to experience, emotionally, whatthe seller is experiencing. By doing so, you might gain a new perspective on thenegotiation and be able to make an offer that the seller is more likely to accept.People like to know that they’re being listened to.
Using Nonessential Contingencies
Establishing a good rapport with someone is not in and of itself a negotiatingstrategy. It is merely one component of your overall approach. Compromise iswhat negotiations are all about. If you enter negotiations with an open mind,the seller is more likely to have an open mind, too. This mind-set allows both ofyou to create a win-win situation.
During negotiations, both parties must give something to get something;
therefore, good negotiators always use nonessential, but purposeful, contin-gencies as negotiating tools. In other words, when you use a nonessential contingency—such as requesting that the seller include some, or all, of the fur-niture—you ask for concessions that you do not necessarily need or even want(concessions you are willing to “negotiate away”). In return, the seller concedeson a point that is important to you.
By using nonessential contingencies, you will arm yourself with effective ne-
gotiating tactics. You might only want the seller to pay all of the closing costs,for example, but by adding the other nonessential contingencies, you have someextra items that you can “give up” to get the one that you truly want.
Making Multiple Offers 
Simultaneously
The “traditional” way that people make offers on
real estate is to make one offer, wait for the sellerto counteroffer, go back and forth once or twice onterms or price, and then come to an agreement. Bymaking more than one offer simultaneously, youwill be able to pinpoint what the seller’s needs are,and how your offer can meet his or her needs.
You may want to consider using a letter of intent
when making multiple offers (or, for that matter,Multiple Offer
Options:
A cash offer at a deeply
discounted price.
An offer that incorpo-
rates seller-financing.
A lease option.
Make sure all amounts
are clearly stated.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 320ROBERT KIYOSAKI 321
with any type of offer you are making). A letter of intent is a letter stating a
buyer’s intent to make an offer to acquire a certain property. It is not a bindingcontract, but it shows a good-faith desire to own the property, and it can be areal time saver compared with ﬁlling out a formal contract offer to purchase. Ifa seller responds in a positive way, it could be the basis for further negotiations.If you are proposing a creative way to purchase the property, it may be helpfulbecause you can show exactly how the transaction will beneﬁt the seller by us-ing a letter of intent.
In your letter of intent, you can bullet point two or three different scenarios
that would work for you in purchasing the property. Make sure the seller un-derstands that he or she cannot combine the offers. If you are ﬁlling out a formaloffer to purchase, you will have to ﬁll out one per offer with the creative detailsin the addendum.
To view a sample letter of intent, as well as many other forms, log on to
www.CarletonSheetsRealBook.com.
If you are working through a real estate agent, request to be 
present when your offer is presented to the seller. Y ou will be able to 
explain any questions that the seller may have, as well as establisha sense of professionalism and build rapport.
It should also be noted that these negotiating skills work equally well when
you are either the buyer or the seller. As real estate investors, we tend to always
think of ourselves as the buyer, but this is not necessarily true. In fact, in many
instances, one of the best ways for you to turn a proﬁt is by knowing when tosell one of your properties. This is especially true when you have bought a ﬁxer-upper with the intention of ﬂipping it for a signiﬁcantly higher amount ofmoney. Knowing how to use other people’s money in creative ways can make itmuch easier for you to ﬁnd buyers. And the negotiating tactics we’ve been dis-cussing will come in handy for you when you are the buyer as well.
Some Good Advice—Basic Do’s 
and Don’ts
I’m often asked for advice from my students, such as, “Should I do this deal?”
But mostly it’s, “How do I get started?” Well, it’s difﬁcult to answer everyone’squestions, personally. But I’ve adhered to some guidelines over the years thathave helped me—and may help you get started.TIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 321TABLE 18.3 Carleton’s Do’s and Don’ts
DOKeep an 
open mindNew ideas always seem strange at first. Imagine what it must have been like 
for the Wright brothers when they told people that they could fly! But new ideascan lead to a wonderful new way of life. And when it comes to real estate investments, the person with an open mind, who is always willing to entertainnew ideas, is the kind of person who is most likely to succeed.
DOWrite down
your goalsIt’s amazing what a difference a piece of paper can make. Once your goals arecommitted to paper, you are much less likely to veer from your plans or to bedistracted. Writing down your goals will also make you better organized andhelp you to maintain your focus. Having dreams and aspirations is a good thing.In fact, I strongly encourage it. That doesn’t mean, of course, that you shouldkeep your head in the clouds. Be a down-to-earth, practical and realisticdreamer. Set achievable goals for yourself, and then enjoy the ride as youachieve them one by one.
DOCommit 
yourself 
100%Making goals is not enough. Y ou must commit to achieving those goals. Setaside a reasonable amount of time and energy per day or per week to pursueyour real-estate-related activities. Stick to your schedule, and don’t be distracted. Small steps add up and you will be surprised how much you havelearned and how far you have progressed in a short amount of time. 
DON’TListen to
naysayersAs we all know, there are positive people in our lives and negative people, somewho want to see us succeed and others who would be jealous of our success.Negative people will always find reasons to tear you down and criticize whatyou’re trying to do to improve your life. Do not listen to these people or let theminfluence you. They are not being your friends and will only hurt your chancesfor success.
DON’TBe afraid 
to failThe most successful people in the world have had more than their share offailures. They know all about the concept of trial and error. Don’t be afraid ofmaking mistakes. Instead, allow every failure to teach you a valuable lesson.However, always make sure that your “worst-case scenarios” are something you can afford to live with. If not, then the risk is too great and you should move on to the next opportunity.
DON’TGet 
emotional
about a 
propertyI realize that homes are often more than just buildings; they have emotional and sentimental value for the people who live in them. However, as an investor,you need to always keep in mind that this is a business—your business—andeveryone involved in buying or selling real estate has a right to profit from eachtransaction, as long as it is conducted in an honest and ethical manner.322 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The Wave of the Future
I’ve been involved with real estate investing for many years, and one thing I
can say for sure is that the market is always changing and evolving. What mightbe true today may not be true tomorrow. As you know, there are buyer’s markets9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 322ROBERT KIYOSAKI 323
and there are seller’s markets (compare 2005 to 2009!). That’s why success
takes more than just learning a set-in-stone collection of rules. You have to beﬂexible and take into account the cyclical, ever-changing nature of the real es-tate market.
All of the sources and techniques I’ve outlined in this chapter will work for
both buying and selling properties. You have to determine which techniqueswill work best for you in a given situation and market.
The United States recently experienced a sharp increase in the number of
homes in foreclosure. This is a tragic situation for many homeowners. It hap-pens for a variety of reasons; in short, people get into ﬁnancial difﬁculties andcan no longer afford the mortgage on their homes. For the investor, however,this means a large pool of highly motivated sellers. One of the most populartechniques involving foreclosures is known as a short sale. A short sale takesplace when the lender agrees—with the homeowner’s app roval—to a ccept less
than the amount owed on a piece of real estate.
A short sale could happen for a few different reasons, but the most common
is the value of the property has declined below the value of the loan. This couldbe due to the property being in distress, or it could simply be that values in thearea have signiﬁcantly declined since the property was purchased.
Although foreclosures seem to be the “buzzword” between the years 2008
to 2009, don’t overlook estate sales, tax liens, or tax deeds (depending on yourstate) or “for sale by owner” properties for leads to motivated sellers. That’sone of the many things I love about real estate—you can ﬁnd your own nichethat best ﬁts your goals and your level of risk.
T o learn more about how to invest in foreclosures, visit 
www.CarletonSheetsRealBook.com for my complete foreclosures 
program, which is absolutely free.
Another deﬁnite trend of the future—if you’re not already using it—is using
the power of the Internet. More than ever before, people have information at
their ﬁngertips. And they can demand answers at the touch of a “send” button.Almost any resource an investor would need is available almost instantaneouslyby searching the Internet. Using the Internet, you can:
• Search for local investment clubs for networking opportunities. For example,
take a look at www.reiclub.com, or www.creonline.com.
• Market your properties through online advertising, or build your own cus-
tomized Web site. Check out www.fsbo.com, or www.forsalebyowner.comTIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 323for “by owner” opportunities. To build a specific Web site inexpensively, try
www.yahoo.com, or www.networksolutions.com. However, if you are lookingfor a pre-built Web site designed specifically for real estate investors, con-sider www.investorpro.com.
• Pinpoint properties that fit your investing profile through a variety of online
service providers, including www.realtytrac.com, www.realtor.com, andwww.fsbo.com.
• Search the public records online to find past sales prices and owner infor-
mation (or even to find out how much neighbors, friends, or family paid fortheir homes). I recommend www.netronline.com for links to local countyrecords .
• Find lenders. Try www.lendingtree.com, or search “money lenders” on your
favorite search engine.
Go to www.CarletonSheets RealBook.com to access any site I have mentioned.
The possibilities are endless, and this is by no means a comprehensive list. Butmy point is that it has never been as easy to ﬁnd information—and all from thecomfort of your own home.
You Can Make Money in Any Market
No matter what the market dictates, one fact remains constant: people still needa place to live. Whether they are renting or owning, there will always be situa-tions where a growing family needs to upsize, or a retiree needs to downsize.The real estate market is never totally stagnant. And any market can be a goodmarket to invest in—as long as you know how and when to apply the techniquesI’ve given you.
Y ou can tailor your real estate investing techniques to mirror market
conditions. When the market is good, consider flipping properties. When the
market is slow, consider buy-and-hold strategies—it’s all up to you!
The changes that have taken place in recent years, within both the real estate
market and the banking industry, are actually very good changes for the savvy
investor. And using my creative ﬁnancing methods is likely to become evenmore necessary to succeed in real estate in the future. Banks now have lendingrequirements that are stricter than in the past—which potentially impact bothbuyers and sellers. When participants on both sides of the transaction have aneven greater incentive to do things in a more innovative way, they will considerTIP324 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 324ROBERT KIYOSAKI 325
creative options that they may not have even thought of before. Ultimately, that
sort of creativity is good for the market and can keep it a dynamic, ever-changingarena where good ideas and strong visions are handsomely rewarded.
Ways to Learn More
Visit Carleton Sheets on the Web at www.CarletonSheetsRealBook.com. Thissite is your source for all things real estate. You’ll ﬁnd many of Carleton’s best-selling real estate programs online for free, as well as links to Web resources,current trends and real estate news, blogs, products and services, and a forumfor networking with other investors nationwide.
Carleton Sheets is recognized as the best-selling author of the No Down
Payment ® home study course as well as other successful real estate
books, video, and audio programs. He has sold more than three million
copies of his programs in the United States alone. In 1984, Carleton part-nered with the Professional Education Institute to distribute his messagenationally about creative real estate investing. His No Down Payment tel-
evision program is now accredited as being the longest-running program of its kind, span-ning twenty-ﬁve years. After thirty years of successfully selling his programs, Carleton begansharing his real estate programs online at no charge. His wish is to reach as many people aspossible to help them achieve their dreams—as he has achieved his—with real estate. T oday,on his own or with partners, Carleton has bought and sold more than $50 million of com-mercial and residential income-producing real estate.
9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 325Iﬁrst saw Dean on television, with his “Motor Millions” television infomercial.
I was very impressed with his communication skills. He was clear and to the
point, and his sincerity came through the screen.
A few years later, I saw his new infomercial, this time on real estate. While I do
not know much about cars, I do know a little about real estate, and I could tell
that Dean did, too. His wisdom on real estate came through the television screenas well.
A friend of mine, Joe Polish, called one day and asked if I would like to meet
Dean. When the two of them walked into my ofﬁce, it was like looking at a pair ofbookends. I have known Joe for years, and he is what I call a “natural entrepre-neur.” So is Dean. Listening to the two of them talk about their businesses, I real-ized both young men were born entrepreneurs. I had to learn to be one. For severalhours I listened to both guys educate me on subjects I thought I was pretty goodat. Both Joe and Dean are natural teachers.
Dean has the gift of being good at business and being good at real estate invest-
ing. It is a perfect combination of skills for anyone who wants to live their lifedoing something they love, while they become rich and ﬁnancially free. That iswhy I invited him to be a part of this book.
—Robert Kiyosaki19 Dean GRAZIOSI
Marketing: Y our Ticket to
Finding and Profiting fromForeclosures
3269781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 326I’ve never met a person who couldn’t become wealthy investing in real estate.
It doesn’t matter who you are or where you come from. I didn’t come from a
family that had money. I had no mentors and never went to college. I was not
even smart enough to read a book like this one to gain wisdom from peoplewho were smarter than me when it came to investing in real estate. Learningfrom other people’s trial and error, and success and failure is by far the fastestway to success. I know this now and have been fortunate to write a few NewY ork Times best-selling books myself. But it took a while for it all to sink in. So
you have more going for you than I did when I ﬁrst started, and I congratulateyou for taking action and being ready to learn.
Although I didn’t have money, a degree, or a mentor, I was fortunate enough
to have a strong desire to get the things I wanted out of life and a mind thatwas open to possibilities. I didn’t like the fact that my single mom worked twojobs to make about $90 a week when I was growing up. I hated that we lived ina trailer park for part of my childhood and that money was always an issue inour home. The pain caused a major drive inside of me. What is your motivation
for getting the life you deserve? Find it, and don’t let anything knock you offcourse.
What is your motivation for getting the life you deserve? Find it, and
don’t let anything knock you off course.
When Robert asked me to write a chapter in his book, I was happy to say
“Yes” and share some capabilities, strategies, and wisdom that could shortenyour learning curve for acquiring foreclosure property—so your downside riskwill be minimal and your upside gain will be huge.
In this chapter I am going to share with you one of my most guarded secrets
on how to make killer foreclosure deals actually come to you, automatically,rather than spending a ton of time, effort, and money going out and looking forthem. In fact, my students who have bought my Be a Real Estate Millionairebook love this technique the most.
So, to make sure I do my best to wow you, I’ll be sharing my marketing strat-
egy with you right here. But ﬁrst let me tell you the story of one of my ﬁrst realestate investments. This deal took place in the late 1990s and I have been makingmoney from real estate ever since. As I am writing this, I currently have thirty-something deals in the works. So I don’t just write about how to proﬁt from
real estate, I live it every day. Here we go.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3279781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 327My First Deal
In my late teens, I was flat broke and constantly looking for some opportunity to
make money. There was an apartment house in town that had once been a decent
place, but the owners had let the wrong tenants in, and the place began to deterio-
rate. This apartment house was for sale, but its horrible appearance meant that nobank was going to give anyone a loan to buy it. I started talking with the sellers, ask-ing them questions, and bringing up the things that needed repair on the building. Itold them, “I’d like forty-five days to clean that place up, but then you have to sell itto me. . . . T o keep you from selling it to anybody else, I’m going to give you a tinydown payment. But in forty-five days, I will start pursuing a bank loan. Then I wantsixty days to close on a bank loan.” The seller agreed.
Looking back, what I did next is pretty scary, and I would not suggest this to
anyone else. Once the seller and I had a deal, I immediately went to work on
the place before I even knew whether I could get a bank loan. I thought if thebank happened to look at this place before I made it look pretty, I would neverget the loan.
So I blindly put my heart, soul, and sweat equity into cleaning up the place.
First, I got rid of the junk in the front yard by calling a junk dealer who tookeverything away for free so he could sell it for scrap. Then I got together withsome friends and hired the cheapest laborers I could ﬁnd. Together we ﬁxedall the broken windows, the front door, and the porch. My contract with theowners allowed me to evict some of the worst tenants, so I got rid of the oneswho were unwilling to be part of the massive cleanup.
We planted ﬂowers across the front, mowed the lawn, trimmed the hedges,
and painted the front of the building. Then we went inside and painted thehallway and cleaned up a couple of the apartments where some of the evictedpeople had lived. They were nice apartments; they just needed to be cleaned.
In forty-ﬁve days, the building looked gorgeous. I then went to the bank and
was fortunate enough to get a loan. In fact, I got a loan for 100 percent of themoney I needed because the property appraised for much more money than Iwas buying it for. I kept that apartment house for many years, and each monthI enjoyed great positive cash ﬂow from it. Then I sold it during a peak cycle andmade a wonderful proﬁt.
Looking back, that property was a foundation for many amazing future 
properties.328 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 328What a great learning experience, and what a great sense of accomplishment.
To this day, I can remember standing on the front lawn, looking at the building
after I purchased it, and feeling the sense of accomplishment that came fromknowing I did everything I said I was going to do.
I was so aggressive because I knew what I wanted, and I wasn’t going to let
anything stand in my way. There was no “what if” option—only “when.”
I don’t know if I’ve gotten smarter or just more cautious, but I don’t invest
like that anymore. One reason my ﬁrst real estate deal worked was because Inever thought that it wasn’t going to work. My youth and inexperience keptme focused on winning and nothing else. If I had been older and had overana-lyzed the situation, I may never have done it. That’s an important lesson to re-member. I don’t know a successful person alive who didn’t also fail a lot at thebeginning. The fear of failure is always lurking in the background of the mind,waiting to sabotage one’s success. If you pretend it’s not there, you can’t dealwith it. Acknowledge it. Then move forward and do your best. If somethingyou try fails, learn from it. Don’t let life’s failures talk you out of future accom-plishments. The past is the past. Use it as research and development, and thenstart fresh—looking forward to what’s next.
I don’t know a successful person alive who didn’t also fail a lot at the
beginning. The fear of failure is always lurking in the background of the mind,
waiting to sabotage one’s success. If you pretend it’s not there, you can’t dealwith it. Acknowledge it. Then move forward and do your best.
In the twenty years that I’ve been investing in real estate, a great amount of
my time and effort also has been spent studying direct marketing. Smart market-
ing makes a huge difference in your level of success as an investor. There are ahost of classic marketing ideas that will help you stand out in the crowd of in-vestors who are competing for the same properties, as well as some nifty littletricks on how to mail letters of interest to homeowners that get opened and read.
Just like other investors, I’ve used many of the strategies and time-tested
techniques borrowed from direct marketing. They are great for helping to ﬁndpotential deals, and they make the process easier.
The more I continued to study and use direct marketing, the more I realized
that I could come up with new ways to target speciﬁc types of investments withsmart marketing. I threw out all my conventional “investor” thinking and tooka strict marketing approach. In other words, if I was trying to market a productto a certain group of people, I asked myself, “How would I do it?”TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3299781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 3291. Direct response marketing is a form of marketing designed to solicit a direct response that is speciﬁc
and quantiﬁable.330 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Well, one of the things I would want to do is avoid competing for the same
investments. I would not want to advertise in the same places my competitors
would advertise. I also would want to automate as much of it as I could.
You may have seen or heard of the technique of using free recorded messages.
Movie theaters have used recorded messages for years to deliver the scheduleof shows and show times. Marketers use these to offer everything from free in-formation to educating prospects and generating leads. Real estate agents userecorded messages to deliver automated information on homes they list, andinvestors do the same. It’s a tremendous time-saver and a smart way to automatethe task of providing duplicate information to many individuals.
Avoid competing for the same investments. Don’t advertise in the 
same places your competitors advertise.
I’m going to teach you a method of using recorded messages targeted to
homeowners with direct response marketing1that allows me to attract deals
that no other investor may be able to ﬁnd out about, and then funnel the dealsin such a way so that I’m left with only the deals I am interested in. It has revo-lutionized the way investors can ﬁnd and proﬁt from investments. It completelyreverses what 99 percent of other investors are doing. The difference is this:Instead of me making a “cold” contact with a person, I use some very speciﬁc,marketing strategies, sit back, and let them automatically contact me!
This method will work regardless of the type of property I want to ﬁnd, but
I’m going to explain how I use it to invest in pre-foreclosures.
Automated Marketing for Foreclosure 
and Pre-Foreclosure Investing
As you may know, foreclosure is the legal process in which a lender sells or
seizes a person’s property to recover and repay the debt attached to that prop-
erty. Foreclosure occurs when someone borrows money to buy real estate butcannot pay the agreed-upon monthly payments.
I hope that you will agree with me that none of us wish hard times on anyone
else, but when a foreclosure does occur, it creates an investment opportunity.Someone is eventually going to take advantage of it, so my philosophy is to beﬁrst in line. The great thing about foreclosures is that you can make moneyTIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 330Foreclosure is the legal process in which a lender sells or seizes a 
person’s property to recover and repay the debt attached to that property.
Foreclosure can be prevented by bringing payments current. But most often, homeowners can’t catch up, and they lose everything. My strategy is to come in prior to foreclosure, buy the property, allow the homeowner to pay off the loan, and save their credit rating.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 331
with them in any market cycle, but down and bottom markets are the best to
ﬁnd and make money with foreclosures. This marketing strategy literally makes
people in pre-foreclosure and other stages of foreclosure contact you!
Again, when homeowners are facing foreclosure, they have the opportunity
to stop it by bringing their payments and any other associated fees current. Butmost often they can’t catch up, and they lose everything! My strategy is to comein before that happens, when the owners can sell their property to a third party(me) during what is called the pre-foreclosure period.
Now this may sound like a horrible position for me to be in as the buyer—
approaching a person who is losing his home, and I’m looking to buy it andmake a proﬁt. But look at it realistically. The person is going to lose that propertybecause he can’t make or catch up on his payments. A sale of the property meansthe owner can pay off the loan and avoid having a foreclosure on his credit his-tory. Then he can go out and ﬁnd another, more affordable home, without theblack mark of a foreclosure on his record.
Getting to the owner before he goes into foreclosure gives me a jump on other
investors who rely on methods that depend on the entry of foreclosures intopublic records or paid listing services. It also eliminates all the grunt work as-sociated with locating properties using those methods! 
Here’s how it works.
Step 1: Finder Strategies
I use direct response marketing methods to create “ﬁnder strategies” that ﬁnd
and drive qualiﬁed prospects to me. Let’s start with what I’ll call ﬁnder ads for
now. I create ﬁnder ads for a number of different applications. I use classiﬁeds,business cards, ﬂyers, mailers, yard signs, and even ad words on Google.
These ﬁnder ads must all follow the rules of good direct response advertising:
1. They all have a compelling, targeted headline.2. They make a big promise to create interest.3. They ignite a desire to ﬁnd out more.4. They tell the prospect what action to take.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 331The key to these ﬁnder strategies is that they have to promise helpful infor-
mation to people, or they won’t work. Anyone facing a potential foreclosure is
going to experience a wide range of emotions. He can be angry, afraid, depres -sed, and even ashamed.
A foreclosure can occur for a lot of reasons: a job loss, an illness, an unex-
pected death in the family, even a change in the interest rates. Any of theseevents can get in the way of people being able to continue making their mort-gage payments. If a homeowner can’t keep up with the payments, the lenderputs the property in foreclosure.
The ﬁrst step toward foreclosure usually happens when the lending institu-
tion notiﬁes the owners in writing that they are in default of payment. In mostcases, the lender will bring in an attorney to start the foreclosure process afterthree consecutive payments are missed.
The attorney will send a letter informing the owners that if they do not pay
what is owed, the lender will be forced to begin a foreclosure proceeding. Thelender can also request a trustee sale or judicial foreclosure, where the propertyis sold at public auction.
The homeowners can still avoid foreclosure at this time by making the loan
payments current and paying all overdue amounts after the notice of the defaulthas been recorded. This is called the right of reinstatement. The last date possi-ble for the money owed to be brought up to date and paid is called the cure
date. It is usually no later than a few days before the property’s impending sale.
If the homeowner cannot make these overdue payments, the foreclosed prop-
erties often get sold at a real estate auction or trustee sale, where it is sold tothe highest bidder.
If the property is worth less than the total amount owed to the lender (which
can occur if property values have dipped since the homeowner took out theoriginal loan), the lender can seek a deﬁciency judgment , and the homeowner
would not only lose the home, but also be saddled with the additional debt,which would be the difference between what the home sold for at auction andthe balance of the loan.
Sometimes people simply give up and walk away from their property, letting
the foreclosure occur. Most people are looking for ways to stop the foreclosureand save their house, or at least prevent a foreclosure by trying to sell it. Sothey want answers and solutions to their problem, and they want them fast.The ﬁnder ad must be structured to address not only their concerns, but theiremotions.332 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 332ROBERT KIYOSAKI 333
Step 2: Position Yourself as an Advocate
Although the ﬁnder ad is designed to attract people long before they show up
on any foreclosure lists, some of the people who respond will have had some
kind of encounter with another investor. That investor may have left an im-pression of being interested only in taking the property for proﬁt. The personfacing foreclosure, however, is interested only in ending his own pain, not inhelping an investor make a proﬁt. So in my ﬁnder strategies and recorded mes-sage, I achieve the end result of positioning myself as an advocate, not an “op-portunistic” investor.
“Quick List” Important Elements of the 
Recorded Message
The recorded message explains the real options to stop a foreclosure.
It gives them a true understanding of the reality of their situation.
It helps gain the owner’s trust.
It screens out the deals that would not work, or deals that I don’t want.
I end up with the best of the best to choose from and pursue.
I do that by providing the person with a number of potential, step-by-step
solutions to stop his foreclosure, and only mention the possibility of maybebeing able to buy his home. By doing that, I am 99 percent more likely to beperceived as an advocate. Truth be told, if I shared with someone a way for himto save his home and I didn’t get a chance to buy it—that would be wonderful tome. I truly want to be an advocate for people in trouble, not pretend to be. Ifthe real-life suggestions and tips I provide do not work for them, and their sit-uation is irreversible, then I get to be the investor.
Step 3: Remove Emotional Barriers
All the ﬁnder strategies will direct people to a twenty-four-hour free, recorded
information line. As I mentioned earlier, this is a well-known technique thatsmart marketers have used for years to automate their marketing. I take it tothe next level by using the message to sift, sort, and screen out the bad deals.That way I spend time on only the incredible deals.
The ﬁnder ads clearly state that they are calling a recorded information line.
This makes calling a very nonthreatening action for people to take. They know9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 333they don’t have to talk to anyone when they call. They don’t have to be afraid of
being “pressured” into anything. It’s risk free, so anyone who is even slightlyinterested is more likely to call, and it “saves face” (remember, anyone who isever faced with losing his home has varying degrees of negative feelings aboutthe situation). Compared to calling and talking to a live person, the recordingcan help alleviate any sense of shame or fear a person might feel.
The message the caller hears is strategically written. To help me create my
message, I hired a professional copywriter (even though I have written best-selling books, and I feel very conﬁdent in my ability to write and communicate).I provided him with the important facts I wanted to communicate, and he wovethem into verbiage that is empathetic to the person’s situation, and gives callersseven options they can take to stop their foreclosure. It reveals to them the spe-ciﬁc actions to take, depending where they are in the process.
Attract Homeowners to Y ou
Here is part of a message I use to attract owners who are skeptical of being
scam  med:
My name is Dean, and I want to thank you for calling my Foreclosure Scam Warn-
ing Line. In just a moment I’m going to reveal to you some scams to watch out for,
and then I’ll provide you with tips and facts that most lenders and banks don’t wantyou to know. Tips that can prevent the foreclosure process from ever starting, andeven stop it once it has started.
By the time you’re done listening to this message, you’ll know exactly what your
options are, and you will be able to make an intelligent, informed decision about thecorrect course of action to take.
You may want to have something handy to take notes, as I’m going to be going
through this material rather quickly. However, at the end of this recording I’ll provideyou with my contact information if you missed anything or have further questions.
Let’s get started with the things to watch out for.If you are facing the threat of losing your home to a foreclosure, beware of certain
individuals and companies offering to “help” you out of your difficult financial situa-tion because some of them are scams.
These scams specifically target homeowners who are in financial distress. Scam
operators advertise just like legitimate businesses. You may find their ads on the In-ternet and in local publications. They often copy legitimate businesses by plasteringflyers on telephone poles and at bus stops. They drop flyers off on people’s front doors334 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 334ROBERT KIYOSAKI 335
or contact people whose homes are listed in public foreclosure notices. Sometimes
they direct their appeals to specific religious or ethnic groups.
The typical scenario is where the scammer offers to “buy” your property by paying
off your overdue amount on the loan. Then the scam artist convinces you to moveout and deed the property over to him or a third party. Signing over a deed in no wayreleases you from your mortgage responsibilities!
These scammers even have been known to give you the option of renting the
property with the option to buy it back later. Neither of these promises is ever deliv-ered on. They never pay off the overdue amounts, and if you are naïve enough to paythem rent, you later wind up faced with eviction from the home, still owing the originalloan amount.
The message continues, and after it gives all the options for preventing a
foreclosure to callers, it offers them one more: If none of the solutions I have
already suggested work, that “I may be able to buy their property” and preventa foreclosure. Then, it qualiﬁes them for me. The message asks the questions Ineed answered before I can consider their property for purchase.
Questions like this:
What is the amount owed on their mortgage? And how many payments have
they missed?What’s the location of the home, the home’s age, square feet, and the numberof bedrooms?What’s the condition of the home?Do they have an appraisal of the home?Has a “Notice for a Sheriff’s Sale” been sent?Has the bank sent a list of additional expenses owed to them for the foreclo-sure process?
Putting It All Together
So what does this all look like? A sample ﬁnder strategy used in a classiﬁed admight look like this:
Free Foreclosure Help
Learn What to Do If You Are at Risk9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 335FREE RECORDED MESSAGE
Call anytime twenty-four hours a day
xxx-xxx-xxxx
Here is another example:
7 Ways to Stop Your Foreclosure
Don’t let the bank steal your home and ruin your credit! You do have options.
In the next 5 minutes you can ﬁnd out
exactly what to do and it’s provided FREE!
Call this 24-hour recorded consumer message now and learn how to 
stop this nightmare!
Call xxx-xxx-xxxx
Again, the ad drives people to my recorded message. The recorded message
educates them, screens them, and provides a means for them to request contact,
or to contact me. The people that I ultimately do contact are highly qualiﬁed. Ican get as speciﬁc as I want with my message to sift deals down to the tiniestdetails. The beauty of it is, this method will sift, sort, and screen the best possibledeals for me, every day, twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.
Investors use the classiﬁed section all the time to ﬁnd folks in foreclosure,
but when people see my ads, they want to know what the secret is, so they call.I also use the same strategy on business cards, larger ads, even postcards.
Don’t Forget the Internet
I also direct people to a Web site that contains all the same information as therecorded message. However, from the Web site I can capture their e-mail ad-dress and put them on an auto-responder series that drips out professionallywritten e-mails that repeat the helpful information and also remind them thatI am there to help if possible.
This method saves so many wasted hours that in itself would be enough for
any investors to stay excited about it. But the fact that it drives deals to my doorbefore others investors can even get wind of them makes it unique and highlyproﬁtable.
When people see one of these “ﬁnder” ads, it will grab their attention. It
speaks to their emotions in a very compelling way— and it’s nonthreatening. I
am able to attract far more deals using this system than I could by old-fashioned,labor-intensive methods.336 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 336It helps me create more win-win situations than anything else I could possi-
bly do. Even people who aren’t in foreclosure see my notices and they often tell
a friend or acquaintance who is in foreclosure.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 337
Classified Ads
 Business Cards
  
Mailers
 
Recorded Message
Sifts, Sorts, and 
Screens for Great Deals
 Killer 
Foreclosure 
Deals
 Flyers
 Google
 
FIGURE 19.1 Marketing Strategy
Real Life Story: Marketing Works!
One of my students is named Jackie and she lived in Indiana. Jackie told everyone
she knew that she was starting a real estate investing career and was looking
for property. By simply doing this, one of her friends responded and told her about a
couple who were losing their home.
They were in pre-foreclosure status and the couple owed only $10,000 on it. This
was a great buy because homes in the area were selling for $20,000 to $30,000more than what was owed on this home. This was Jackie’s first experience in buyinga pre-foreclosure home, and it fit her investing budget. She was nervous about ap-proaching the owners—almost as much as the owners were nervous about gettingbank letters.
She asked the right questions and found out that they would be happy if they
could just walk away from the home and not owe anybody anything. Jackie foundout the exact amount owed to the bank and then asked the bank whether they couldhelp with some of the penalty costs because she was going to pay off the debt. Thebank agreed and took a flat $10,000 for the home!
Jackie had just enough in savings to purchase the home, and afterwards, because
she owned it free and clear, she had the options of refinancing and pulling out cash toremodel the property or do a quick fix-up and resell it. There are many other waysJackie could have done this. She could have borrowed the money from a hard moneylender. She could have gotten a new loan to purchase the home, as it was appraisedfor much more than her cost, so you don’t have to have cash reserves to make it work.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 337338 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
I use this concept to ﬁnd and choose the best deals and purchase them myself,
but it can also be used to ﬁnd deals to offer other investors, and make your
money in the middle.
My students do this all the time; here’s one of their true stories.
Real Life Story: Find the Deal and Win
Brett was a twenty-two-year-old college student who wanted to get involved in
real estate but did not have enough money for a down payment. That didn’t
stop him. He found one property owner who was in foreclosure and owed around
$450,000 for the house and was three weeks away from foreclosure. After doing alittle work to find comparable houses in the neighborhood, Brett knew that thehouse was worth between $500,000 and $525,000, so the deal had a good amountof equity. Brett immediately called an investor he knew in the San Diego area andexplained the situation, asking for a 2.5 percent finder’s fee from the investor.
Brett sent over a spreadsheet showing the asking price as well as the comps for
other houses in the area. The investor called Brett and agreed to his terms. Brettput the owner and the investor in contact, and they closed the deal in two weeks.The owner was able to walk away with a few thousand dollars and his credit intact.The investor was able to get a great deal on a house and had to pay only 2.5 percentinstead of the traditional 3 percent or 6 percent that a realtor charges. Brett profitedmore than $11,000 without using any of his money and very little of his time. It wasa win-win-win situation for everyone.
It really isn’t rocket science! Sure, deals like this aren’t on every corner, but
they are out there, and with a little bit of effort and the right marketing actions,
ﬁnding them isn’t as difﬁcult as one might think.
When investing in foreclosures there are a few do’s and don’ts to pay atten-
tion to.
You can be successful. We all have obstacles that we face every day, some
minor some horriﬁc. But with the right strategy, you can turn your life aroundin a second and change your destiny.
You’ve heard the old adage “knowledge is power,” right? Well, I disagree.
Knowledge is only as powerful as the extent to which it is applied. I say “Knowl-edge + ACTION = Results.” Knowledge with no action is just trivia.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 338I hope I have provided you with some new knowledge and have provoked
you to take action and make a change, to create a better life—with conﬁdence.
Knowledge + ACTION = Results–That’s Power!
Ways to Learn More
Check out the free online community of other investors at http://www.dean
graziosi.com.
You’ll ﬁnd it is an amazing resource for “everything real estate investing”
from free real estate investing forms and calculators, to free forums.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 339
Foreclosure Do’s and Don’ts
Dopredetermine what you will do with any property you purchase. Will you sell the
property right after it’s purchased, commonly called “flipping” or keep the property
and rent it out for positive cash flow?Doset a goal of creating win-win situations for everyone involved in the deal.
Do enough research on areas where you are considering properties, and learn to
identify your local market condition.
2For example, if you plan to reinstate and rent,
you’ll look at the deal very differently than if you plan to flip the property wholesaleto another investor.Dolearn how to structure your deals carefully; mistakes can be costly.
Don’t become emotionally attached to a property. There may not be enough equity
to make it worth your time.Don’t get greedy or arrogant. Both can make you careless, and neither of those
traits are conducive to making good decisions.Don’t fleece folks by trying to squeeze every last cent of profit possible out of a
deal. I promise you this: At the end of the day it feels better to take a little lessmoney on a deal, where I helped a person avoid foreclosure and still let him walkaway with some start-over capital, than to be the only one walking away fat andhappy from a deal.
2. National and local market conditions can differ greatly. Assessing them is essential to making good
investment choices. See chapters 4 to 6 of Be a Real Estate Millionaire for an in-depth explanation (New
Y ork: Vanguard Press, 2007).9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 339340 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Want the complete system Dean detailed in this chapter? You can get it. To
see the “plug and play” Automated Foreclosure Finder he created at his stu-
dents’ requests, visit www.automatedforeclosureﬁnder.com.
Listen in on Dean’s monthly teleconference training calls on current real es-
tate topics for free by visiting www.askdeang.com.
Dean Graziosi is an entrepreneur, successful investor, author, speaker,
and teacher. His Think a Little Different Real Estate program and his book,
Be a Real Estate Millionaire , have touched the lives of hundreds of thou-
sands of people and have transformed countless lives from debt andworry to prosperity. Dean is a thriving and successful real estate investorwith real estate holdings valued in the multimillions. His books, T otally
Fulﬁlled and Be a Real Estate Millionaire: Secret Strategies for Lifetime Wealth T oday are both
New York Times best sellers.
9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 34020 W. Scott SCHIRMER
Entitlements
The Sleeping Giant of Real Estate
Profitability
341Scott is my neighbor. He lives directly across the street from Kim and me. Every
year, our neighborhood has a number of parties, and at every party I look for-
ward to seeing Scott and asking him for his views on the world of money, real es-
tate, and investing. Not only is he a neighbor, but he is a great friend, and someoneI look to when I need more sophisticated information on the subject of real estate.
One aspect of real estate is politics. Being a developer, Scott needs to be tuned
in to the local politics of the areas he is developing. Being a developer means hemust be looking years into the future, years before he breaks ground. As some ofyou know, many times a worthy project—a project that will lift the value of thearea—will be shot down by local neighborhood organizations that are resistant tochange. This is where politics comes in.
I do not care where you live, politics and real estate go hand in hand. Local pol-
itics and politicians can improve or destroy the value of the real estate in an area.For example, at our last Christmas party, I was asking Scott about a local Arizonapolitician and that person’s relationship to the police department. It was Scott’spoint of view that this politician and the police did not see eye to eye. That is whythe crime in this one area was increasing and values of the property were goingdown. I did not invest in the area based on Scott’s view of the future of this area oftown. Today, many people who did invest in that once-friendly neighborhood are9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 341losing ﬁnancially as crime infects the area. This means, when I talk to Scott, I am
often talking politics, but really I am discussing real estate.
If you are to become a professional real estate investor, you must, and I do
mean must, have a person like Scott who you can talk to about local politics andthen talk about real estate.
—Robert Kiyosaki
The current financial crisis in the United States is likely to be judged 
in retrospect as the most wrenching since the end of the Second World 
War. —ALAN GREENSPAN, FORMER U.S. FEDERAL RESERVE CHAIR, MARCH 17 , 2008
Missing from Mr. Greenspan’s assessment is the other side of the coin: Those
getting into a critical aspect of real estate now, who prepare for the eventualupturn, will be among the most successful in gaining wealth and security. Howcan that happen? This chapter will show you how to add value to real estate today—often without even owning or developing it—to capitalize on large re-turns tomorrow.
Whether you want to work in the area of entitlements or not, it is important
that you understand this critical area of real estate. The knowledge can makeyou money, and it can make your life easier. Ask yourself a question: When youdrive around your state or across the country, do you ever wonder who ownsthose acres and miles of raw land? The answer is that someone possesses everysquare inch of it, and it is owned by the federal government, the state, the county,the city, the Indian Nation, or a private party such as a company or an individual.Most people believe that private parties are the biggest property owners of ourcountry. But this is not necessarily true. In Arizona, for example, only 15 percentof the land is privately owned.
Another illusion when it comes to real estate is if you own land as a private
property owner, then you can do what you want with it. You own your property,you pay taxes, you buy insurance for it, and you maintain it. You own the rightto do all that. But what you do not own is the right to do anything you want with
the property. Surprised?
This is where the term entitlement enters the equation, and it is not a com-
plicated concept. It simply means what you are entitled (or “ allowed”) to do
with your property as deﬁned by the city, county, or state in which the land islocated with regard to development. Those decisions are controlled by entitle-ments granted by the federal, state, county, or local government agencies. TheseTIP342 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 342agencies tell you whether your land is useable for agricultural, commercial, res-
idential, or industrial uses. They tell you how much you can build on your prop-erty; whether you can remove vegetation; how to mitigate wildlife disturbancesthat exist on your property; whether you have rights to access streets, water, orsewer; and whether a septic system is permitted, along with many other gov-ernmental controls.
Here is an old adage that will serve you well today and tomorrow: In real-
ity, owning an asset is not as important as controlling an asset. And those who
entitle an asset have the potential to obtain great profits from their endeavors.
Love Thy Neighbor?
Today, one of the most unquantiﬁable controlling factors that involves the useof your property is your neighbor—a factor that has historically caused ownersand developers much grief. Neighbors have always held that they should have asay about what is done with the vacant lot they view over or visit, now and for-ever. Today more than ever, neighbors believe they have an inherent right to usea parcel of land as they see ﬁt: parking, playing, cycling, jogging, walking, dump-
ing, and controlling it, even if that vacant lot now happens to be your property.
Neighbors feel that when it comes to your property, whether vacant or with
existing structures on it, you, the property owner, should abide by their rulesand wishes. Because I’ve heard these complaints so often, I’ve given them theirown name and formalized the list into: “The Top-Twenty Neighborly Com-plaints for Nondevelopment.” Are these complaints ﬁctitious? Believe me, Icould never make this stuff up. Each one is based on a real-life situation I haveexperienced, and I marvel at the list every time I read it.
All developments, whether residential, commercial, or industrial, have many
of the same neighborhood concerns. Commercial development adds the appre-hension that you may be bringing people from other areas of the communityinto their neighborhood. Industrial development embodies fears about pollutionand the potential hazards of large vehicles in the area. These neighbor issueshave always been present but to a lesser degree than what they are today. Thereare two reasons for this increase in neighborly concern:
1.There has been a shift of political thought in the country from an attitude of
self-reliance to an attitude of rights and entitlements. Your project might beTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3439781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 343the proper development for the site, but the neighborly feeling is, “Not in
My Back Yard.” (Such people are commonly referred to as NIMBYs.)
2.There has been an increase in the ability for a small group of NIMBYs or ac-
tivists to organize a vocal minority of people through the Internet. The In-ternet has changed the political landscape. What has not changed is theaxiom that a squeaky wheel does get the oil, and on the Internet a littlesqueaking goes a long way in creating an adverse situation between neighborsand owners.
Our society has evolved in a way that is less social in nature and more segre-
gated geographically in political thoughts and beliefs. As someone who grew
up in the Midwest, I knew all of our neighbors. We watched out for each other.I had a feeling of self-reliance, but I knew my neighbors were there for me if I344 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
The T op-Twenty Neighborly Complaints 
for Nondevelopment
Do not change the height of the existing building, for it will hurt our privacy.
We have always walked across the land and must continue to do so.Y ou will disturb the habitat of existing animals, and this you must not do.We will not be able to see over or across the land, for you will block our view.Y ou will create traffic, and that is unacceptable to us.Development will overburden the number of children in the schools.Y ou must not change the character and compatibility of the neighborhood.The old building that is on your property is historic; do not touch it.There are rare biological plants that must be nurtured forever.The apartment complex you want to develop will bring in undesirable people.Y our development will import crime into the neighborhood.Whatever you do will not be environmentally friendly, so you may not do it.The developer is out of state, and we are wary and suspicious.The developer is greedy, and we are not. End of discussion.If we let the owner develop, it should be with less density.The owner should take less money for the property.Any development will increase noise, and that is not good.The lights from the development will destroy the night sky.The city is too crowded, and we do not want anyone else in our neighborhood.If we refuse to let you to build the roads, people will not come, and that is good.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 344ROBERT KIYOSAKI 345
needed help. And I was there for them. It was a close reﬂection of the Ozzie
and Harriet Nelson society.
Moving to the West, I ﬁnd our communities are developing in a way that
segregates people. Neighbors are transient. They don’t know each other. Thereis little feeling of community and of looking out for each other. It has forcedpeople to push what they perceive as their “rights” onto others. The Nelsonshave given way to The Simpsons and Married . . . with Children.
Assembling this disenfranchised group is easy through the Internet because
it provides empowerment, and it offers pervasive access to large numbers ofpeople almost instantaneously. This, in turn, creates a purpose for social gath-ering, often led by a vocal resident who feels validated to carry the cause: theself-appointed squeaky wheel.
Why have I spent time talking about this? Because whether you realize it or
not, it is not your desires but the vote of the politicians to whom you presentyour product for app roval that d etermines the use of your property. And it is the
NIMBYs who elect and therefore inﬂuence those politicians who hold the cards.
“All politics is local.” —REP . TIP O’NEILL, LATE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE
The World of Local Politics
Is it just me, or have politicians changed over the years? “To better serve yourcommunity” is no longer a motivation to run for ofﬁce; it has become a campaignslogan void of reality. It seems that a large number of elected ofﬁcials are in po-litical ofﬁce for their own personal gain. They want the ofﬁce as a career; indeed,they feel as entitled to it as the neighbors who embrace a personal ownershipof the property you own. Once such politicians have tasted the power, control
and beneﬁts of their positions, they will do whatever is necessary to keep theirpositions. Therefore, a small group of vocal voters do make a huge difference inthe outcome of your project.
Real Life Story: The Politician Who Wasn’t
As young people starting out in real estate development, my colleagues and I
assembled one hundred adjoining parcels in a rundown area of Phoenix and
presented a master plan for redevelopment to the Phoenix City Council for approval.TIP
CONTINUED9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 345T wo hundred people showed up to rally against the redevelopment. I remember
Mayor Margaret Hance standing up in front of the angry crowd and wagging herfinger, telling the crowd how good this was for the city. The project passed overneighborhood opposition. Mayor Hance was a leader, not because she voted for aproject I was involved in but because she took a stand in support of a project thatmay have been against her own personal political interest, but that was nonethelessgood for the city. She was a popular mayor in Phoenix, in part because she was rec-ognized for her caring about the city. She was also an exceptional politician becauseshe didn’t act like one. Most of the time, you will not be dealing with that kind ofleadership. Y ou’ll be dealing with quite the opposite.
Real Life Story: The Politician Who Was
Recently, I made an application for a mixed-use residential development in the
city of Phoenix for my firm, M3 Companies. There was NIMBY opposition from
a group that elected a councilman from the district in which this parcel was located.Before city council heard the application, this councilman announced he was againstthe development. He said he needed to take an early stand; that he was showingleadership. In this case, he was afraid to do what was best for the city. He wanted toappease the vocal NIMBYs for his own political gain. I’d like to say this is a rare oc-currence, but it is not. Y ou will find this behavior to be very common in today’s po-litical landscape.
Entitlements = Profits
Are entitlements difﬁcult to secure? The answer is yes. Then why not purchase
property that has already been entitled? You can, and most developers do. Butyou can make a lot of money by entitling property for yourself or for otherswithout the ﬁnancing or capital risk that other areas of real estate require. En-titlement can be a proﬁtable area of real estate just by relying on your learnedskills. Your proﬁts have nothing to do with how much money you have to buyreal estate.
There are three secrets to entitlements that lead to success and great prof-
itability. You will hear them from me more than once in this chapter. Please remember:346 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
CONTINUED9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 3461.Knowledge
2.Knowledge
3.Knowledge
How do you obtain this knowledge? To quote from J. R. R. Tolkien (with
apologies to The Lord of the Rings), “The tale grew in the telling.” The way I
gained my knowledge was by starting slowly and deliberately, and from there Iworked my way to a comfort level where I could begin to take action. You canstart and grow this way, too. Only I’m going to make it easier for you with my re-ality-based Detailed Entitlement Process. Each area is based on what I’ve learned,and these guidelines continue to serve me well. The remainder of this chapter isabout the Process and it contains everything I do to proﬁt from entitlements.
You’ll ﬁnd this Process to be a huge advantage as you learn. But, it will be
only as valuable as your willingness to put in the time and rely on self-motivationand determination. There are no shortcuts to building a knowledge base, butthere are long-term gains to be made. Give yourself at least six months to acquirethe foundation necessary to succeed.
Scott’s Detailed Entitlement Process
Know Your City or County Plans, 
Ordinances, and Ways of Doing Business
Become knowledgeable with your city’s or county’s goals and planning. This
will help you understand what the city or town is doing or plans to do and why.You also need to understand how business is conducted to avoid rookie mis-takes. Trust me, I have made them.
Your mission:
• Study the general plan for your city or town.• Read the zoning code and ordinances.• Learn how the “game” is played.• Think in terms of how you can beneﬁt the politicians, not the other
way around.
Be on Top of City and Town Politics
Learn the political structure. Every city or town is governed by elected and staffindividuals. (I will get to them in a minute.) Developing relationships is impor-tant. And believe it or not, mayors and council members are approachable.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3479781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 347Why? Because they are always looking for new people to help secure their po-
sitions and advance their self-interests. This is not cynicism; it is the way of theworld. A lifelong friend of mine, Dr. Mark Horowitz, is both a businessman and348 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: When a Hole Is Not the Whole
Iacquired a twenty-acre piece of property that was in a great location but was a
massive hole. It was an eyesore to the community and was preventing a major
road from being built in the area. This property would require six hundred thousand
cubic yards of compacted, clean dirt to fill the hole. For reference, a large dumptruck carries about eighteen cubic yards of dirt, so when I say it was a big hole, Imean it. It would take about thirty-three thousand dump truck loads to fill it!
I wanted to develop a commercial shopping center on the property, which would
require that I change the zoning from residential to commercial. The city was en-thusiastic and said it would support my application. I deeded the right-of-way thecity needed to allow for the development of the road. That was my first major mis-take. Then I made the application to rezone the property. The process would takesix months. Immediately after applying for rezoning, a contractor approached mewith a request to dispose of dirt from a nearby canal project he had been awarded.He would fill the hole in my property with clean, compacted dirt at no cost to me.Naturally, I thought I had hit a homerun since I would not have to pay to fill thehole.
It took the contractor three months of night-and-day hauling of dirt to fill the
property. The property looked great when it was completed! That was my secondmistake. Timing is everything, and as fate would have it, my rezoning request washeard before the city council a month after I had filled the unsightly hole. I was
thrilled! I had held up my end of the bargain. As fate would also have it, at the citycouncil hearing a number of NIMBY residents turned out to protest my application.They didn’t want commercial zoning in their neighborhood.
Astonishingly, the politician who promised me his support (pre-right-of-way and
pre-hole) suddenly had a change of heart and led the charge against my rezoning
request. It turned out that with the roadway and hole problems solved in his district,he was now worried only about votes. Thanks to my fine work, he had the right-of-way for the city road, and he had the “eyesore” problem solved. His job was done.
He had the whole enchilada!Lesson Learned: Make sure that you receive what is promised to you before you
perform your end of an obligation with a politician.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 348a scholar of early Tudor England who has spent much of his life researching
and understanding the relationships between those in power and those whobeneﬁt from the powerful. In a special issue of the journal Historical Researchcommemorating the ﬁve hundredth anniversary of the death of the ﬁrst Tudorking (1509–2009), Mark deﬁnes politics as “the pursuit of self-interest and self-
preservation through the use of power.” Henry VII is a model for all leadersand for those seeking beneﬁts from them when it comes to cultivating relation-ships for “political” ends. Half the battle is simply showing up.
The same is true for you. For example, on Tuesday go to the planning com-
mittee meetings, and on Thursday the council meetings. In between, hold meet-ings with staff members and make appointments with developers. Go to theirfunctions, help them, learn about them, and become known to them. Positionyourself positively. When it comes time for you to make an application, theywill all know you, which will go miles in helping you get your project app roved.
Remember: Those in power are motivated by self-interest and self-
preservation, and they are looking for new faces and new ideas to help them
with both!
These are the critical players in any city or town that you will want to get to
know and that you will want to know you.
The Staff
The staff in the planning departments are a constant. They are government em-
ployees until they retire. Politicians, on the other hand, are elected every twoor four years. Politicians and elected ofﬁcials come and go. The staff in the plan-ning department stay year after year. They play a very important role in the po-litical support for your project.
Your mission:
• Meet the planning staff. Get to know them personally. Take them out to
lunch, a cup of coffee, or play golf with them.
• Ask for their help. Make your project their idea. (Self-interests, remember?)
Understand how they think.
Appointed Boards or Neighborhood Groups
Even though these groups may be informal and volunteer-based, they are pow-erful and should not be underestimated.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3499781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 349Your mission:
• Go to every neighborhood meeting.
• Get on neighborhood boards.• Determine the leadership structure and who the decision makers are.
Planning Commission
This usually consists of a board whose members are appointed by the electedmembers of the city council. Their decisions are usually advisory only, but theyserve an important role as political cover to members of the city council.
Your mission:
• Go to every planning commission hearing and meet every planning commis-
sion member.
• Get to know them and learn their backgrounds.• Make friends with them.• Understand how they vote and determine which of them are business-
friendly and which are neighborhood-friendly.
• Understand the alliances they form and why.• Determine whose vote you need to pass your project through.• Support their ambitions and causes.
City Council
This is the ultimate voting body. It will make or break your project, and it hasthe power to hold it up indeﬁnitely.
Your mission:
• Go to every city council hearing.• Meet the mayor and every city council member.• Support them politically.• Become their friends.• Get to know all members and what their hot buttons are, and try pushing a
few.
• Become known and trusted by them.• Understand how they vote, and know which ones are business-friendly and
which are neighborhood-friendly.
• Understand the alliances they form and why.• Determine whose vote you need to pass your project through.350 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 350ROBERT KIYOSAKI 351
• Work on political campaigns and attend political functions.
• Go to events where they are present and make yourself visible.• Find out the local election dates and when different members of the city
council are up for re-election.
When it comes to politics, you do not want to bring a controversial 
case before the city council within twelve months of the election of any 
member of the city council whose vote you will need. The politician’s desire to be re-elected will work against you every time.
Does all this homework, knowledge-building, and cultivation of relationships
guarantee success? The answer is yes and no. Yes, it will lead to great successes
for you, because you are way ahead of the curve and therefore ahead of yourcompetitors who do not make the time or the effort. But no, like all of life, therewill be some setbacks. It is therefore important to know when to cut your losses,and I am the ﬁrst to admit that despite all my success in the realm of real estateand entitlements, some things are beyond my control.
Real Life Story: Crack the Code to 
Corner Y our Market
Some time ago, I was trying to purchase a corner that was zoned properly for
the commercial retail center I wanted to develop. I had a major grocery chain
interested in leasing part of the property, but the grocery store representative
wanted to have a meeting with the head of the city planning department beforemoving forward.
At that meeting, the head of the city planning department asked the grocery
store to locate to another property that was miles from my site, stating that he be-lieved the trade area my site was located in was already adequately served, and theproperty he was offering had a trade area that was underserved. This is city “code”for saying that the city can generate more income from sales tax revenue by locatinga business in one area over another. The city views each piece of property based onvarying degrees of revenue-producing potential. Luckily in this case, the sales pitchdidn’t work, and the grocer ultimately located on my site due to the stability of thetrade area.Lesson Learned: Altruism usually isn’t. Crack the code, and you’ll understand the
real motives.TIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 351Stay Ahead of Neighborhood Opposition
No matter what project you propose for a neighborhood, there will be neigh-
borhood opposition. Indeed, I began this chapter giving you the Top-TwentyNeighborly Complaints. Expect these opposing views and build them into yourplan. Again, knowledge is power. But as you are planning, be proactive.
Your mission:
• Study the leaders of the neighborhood opposition.• Is it the same person or group of people who show up for every entitlement
case? What are their backgrounds?
• Are they NIMBYs responding only to issues next to their neighborhood or
are they full-fledged activists on zoning issues with the community at large?
• Talk to them. Listen to their issues. Become their friend.• Do they use the Internet to communicate with one another? See if you can
get on their e-mail list.
• Try to get hold of the database to be able to communicate with all of the
neighbors. Then when it comes time to present your project, your messagewill be heard directly from you, without filtering.
• Go to every neighborhood meeting. Get on neighborhood boards.• Set up your own Internet Web site as a proactive approach to groups or indi-
viduals both for and against your project.
• Use your Web site to educate the public about your project. Include testi-
monials and quotes from supporters of your project, especially neighbors.This will be a counterweight to NIMBY Web sites and help you control yourmessage.
Most important, do not view NIMBYs as your mortal enemies, although they
clearly can have an impact on your aspirations and your billfold! I approachthem as citizens who want to be heard for some reason, and not necessarily thereason they may be voicing. Sometimes it can be a gripe or grievance that canbe addressed without any harm to your project. Treat them with respect, andsome can even be turned around to your point of view.
Have a Timetable and Patience
Depending on the jurisdiction in which you are working, entitlements can takeanywhere from six months to many years. Here is the short and the long of it:
• Short timetable: This comes into play only if you have the full support of all
parties; it is just the actual process itself that takes time.
• Long timetable: If you encounter opposition to a project and/or if you have352 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 352ROBERT KIYOSAKI 353
Real Life Story: T urning a Mountain into a Mole Hill
One project I developed early in my career involved a residential community.
The owner of the property adjoining mine believed that my property would
stay vacant forever. (See Complaint No. 2 in the T op-T wenty List.) Now that I had
arrived, he feared that my development would impede his view of a mountain. Wetalked about his concerns at length and after some homework I came back to showhim how I could reorient the houses to maintain his view. (See Complaint No. 4 inthe T op-T wenty List.) In effect, I converted an adversary into an advocate and theproject went through.Lesson Learned: Compromise can turn NIMBYs into allies.
developmental issues (e.g., water rights, environmental, access, etc.), your
timetable will be extended.
Realistic timetables are critical to your success for several reasons:
• You don’t want your case to be heard in an election cycle.• If you are working with a landowner and you are purchasing the property
subject to receiving entitlements by a fixed date, you don’t want to run outof time with your seller and be unentitled: You will have invested too muchtime, effort, and money to get to this point.
• The market cycle in real estate may pass you by.• The capital markets change. The supply of money, interest rates, and under-
writing criteria may change.
Get to Know the Developers and Builders
Just as you have met every staffer and every committee and council member atcity hall, meet every developer and builder that makes an application. Call themon the phone and make an appointment to learn about their projects. Meetthem at all hearings. They will be enthusiastic to tell you about their projectsbecause they will want your support.
Your mission:When you speak with the developers and builders, seek to answer the fol-
lowing questions:
• What are the opposition’s issues, and how are you, the developer or builder,
overcoming those objections?9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 353• What third-party vendors are you using? These may include the following:
land planner, architect, civil and structural engineer, zoning attorney, traffic
engineer, contractor, and their subcontractors.
• Who does your soils report, and who performs your environmental studies?• What title company and escrow officer do you use?• What real estate broker are you using?
After attending a number of meetings, you’ll have a good idea of the vendors
who do quality work and can perform on time. These vendors will become in-valuable to you when the time comes to put your own team together. Think ofthe education you will be getting from actual practitioners. And it’s free!
Understand What Developers and Builders Want
To repeat: Knowledge is your most important asset. I made getting it a point
early on in my career and continue it to this day. When it comes to developersand builders, I try to ﬁnd out everything I can from each type. I want to knowas much as I can about single-family, multifamily, retail, ofﬁce, industrial, ormixed-use development. These developers and builders are putting theirknowledge, reputation, and capital on the line. Why not learn as much as youcan from them? All of these resources are coming to the city seeking app rovals.
It’s a “knowledge vein” that is yours for the mining and is much better than
school-based education. This is the real world, and that is where money ismade. Your only impediment to success is your own lack of effort in miningthis knowledge.
Builders want to acquire entitled property! Hence, you are of great value
to them, and they will pay for that value.
Entitlements involve all types of real estate: apartment buildings, residential,
commercial, medical, mixed use. The key is to be aware of the speciﬁc require-ments of each and understand the differences. Then, learn as much as you canabout similar projects and how they have been entitled.
Here are the questions that I have asked of developers and builders. This
will get you started and will help expand your knowledge base for planningyour ﬁrst project.
Your mission:Ask residential builders these questions:
• What size lots do you want to develop. Why that size?• What are the setback distances from the front, back, and side yards?TIP354 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 354ROBERT KIYOSAKI 355
A Few Truths About Buyers and Builders
• A new home buyer is sold on a home before he or she walks in the front door.
• The streetscape of the subdivision, landscaping, and the elevation of the home
are most important for the sale.
• School districts matter. Locate your residential developments in the best ones.• Cities with the best images may be more expensive but create the most security
for your investment.
• See if the builder will share his infrastructure costs with you. Find out:
–On average, how much is the cost to engineer the subdivision to a recorded
plat? This is called “paper lots.”
–How much does it cost on a per lot basis to construct the streets, sewer, water,
common area amenities, and landscaping?
• It’s good to know how much it will cost a homebuilder to improve a single family lot.
Builders will pay 20 to 25 percent of the sales price of the home for an improved lot.
• What are the sizes of the homes you are building?
• How many phases do you plan for? How many lots per phase?• How many lots do you need in order for you to develop a model home com-
plex? Where do you like to locate your models within the subdivision? Why?
Beyond just asking questions, visit their subdivisions. Go through their model
homes. Talk to the salespeople. Find out what are the most sought-after homefeatures buyers ask for, and why. By knowing the kind of product they build,you’ll be in a better position to provide them the entitled land they are lookingfor down the road.
Your mission:Ask apartment builders these questions (the same as above, plus these addi-
tional):
• What density do you like to build? Usually it is fourteen to twenty-one units
per acre, depending on the city and projected rental rate of the project.
• How many units does it take to make a project operationally feasible?• What do you pay per unit (referred to as per door) for a piece of property
that is entitled?
• What unit mix—one-, two- or three-bedroom units—are best for the market?• What size—one-, two-, or three-bedroom units—do residents want most?
What is the best mix?9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 355• What rental rates does the market accept?
• What amenities are being offered and why?• How many parking spaces per unit does the city require versus the market
demand?
• What is the land size necessary for the density needed to operate and park
properly?
• Are there any specific lighting, trash locations, and noise abatement issues?• What kind of vehicle and pedestrian integration into the adjoining neigh-
borhoods is needed?
• What about schools and crime?
Your First Project and Jump-Start Game Plan
After six months of hard work, you now possess the three secrets to entitlementsthat can lead to great success, and you should be able to rapid-ﬁre repeat themby now:
1.Knowledge
2.Knowledge
3.Knowledge
Gaining these assets has brought you to this point, and no one can take your
knowledge from you. You can succeed or fail using other types of “capital,” butyour best chance of success in entitlements is directly proportional to yourknowledge “capital.”
Principal Rule: Use your knowledge base as capital to create value.
Your mission:Put into action my Jump-Start Game Plan to get your ﬁrst project off the
ground.
Scott’s Jump-Start Game Plan
1.From the knowledge you have gained, you can put together the best team of
third-party vendors, such as surveyors, land planners, environmental com-panies, etc. Quality and reliability are key.
2.You know which areas of the community are sought after the most. Ask your
real estate broker to map out vacant land or redevelopment opportunities inthis area. Try to locate in a popular school district.TIP356 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 356ROBERT KIYOSAKI 357
3.Compare your prospective sites to the city’s general plan.
4.From your learned knowledge, work with your land planner in developing a
plan which will be marketable to a buyer upon receiving entitlements.
5.Because you learned from the builders what they are willing to pay for enti-
tled property, apply that number to the value of the property.
6.From that price, subtract the following:
–The cost of the land.
–Unusual or extra costs of construction required for the property you are
considering. This might include rocky or expansive soil conditions, bring-ing in utilities to the property, undergrounding power lines or irrigationditches.
–The cost of your team’s work to entitle the property.–Your cost of resale, brokerage fees, and title work.
7 .If you are successful in entitling the property, this total will be the proﬁt you
earn for your knowledge and hard work. Determine if that bottom line is ac-ceptable to you for your time and effort and cost of planning.
8.Meet with the people you are now familiar with in the city’s planning de-
partment. Ask what use and density they would recommend for each prop-erty you have potentially selected. See if it matches your estimate.
9.Narrow the scope of your search to the most proﬁtable properties if they
were entitled for what you want and what the city staff would recommend.
10.Work with the landowner of the property you want to purchase. The land-
owner already has his capital in the land. Find out the motivation behindthe landowner’s desire to sell. If you can meet the seller’s need, you mightbe able to get enough time to purchase the property subject to getting it en-titled. Again, your proﬁt is the value you create through entitlements.
Real Life Story
Be prepared for unusual requirements or actions that often defy logic. Y ou will
be exposed to every imaginable roadblock for your project, from underground
mice to crashing airplanes! Do not be discouraged. I have encountered the most
outrageous hurdles. Approach them with tenacity, and later you’ll have great storiesthat will keep everyone laughing.Hurdle No. 1, or the Mouse That Roared  We were working on a master-planned
development in Colorado. The fish and game department was concerned that anendangered animal known as a Preble’s mouse might exist on the property. 
CONTINUED9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 357358 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
CONTINUED
Unfortunately, the only way to prove that supposition was to catch mice, kill them,
and check their DNA for a match, thus potentially endangering the endangeredspecies in the process. The department decided that we needed to set aside prop-erty within the development to provide habitat, just in case the mouse existed.Moreover, they told us that we had to impose a ban on the ownership of cats by res-idents since they might hunt and kill the mouse, should it exist. (This is no joke!)Through negotiations, we were able to change the department’s requirement fromforbidding cats entirely to making it a requirement in the Convenants, Conditionsand Restrictions (CC&Rs) of the community that any cats residing in our communitywould have to remain indoors. We complied, fully realizing that this was the politicalsolution to a problem. Commissioners, developer, residents, and mice were all happycampers.Hurdle No. 2, or Sinking the Boat to See If It Floats  We wanted to subdivide
620 acres in Santa Barbara County, California. It was an area where water wasscarce and permits were rationed for homes. However, we had three wells on theproperty, and the hydrology reports concluded that there was more than enoughwater for the development. The county determined the reports to be insufficientand decided that, despite the scarcity of water in the area, they would need to meas-ure the water in the wells by letting the water run into ditches . . . for an entire year!At the end of the year, and at great cost and enormous loss of water, it was deter-mined that in fact there would be sufficient water for the development.Hurdle No. 3, or Playing It Straight  For a seemingly simple single-family resi-
dential subdivision with improved lots, we proposed a layout that was a little out ofthe ordinary. It involved adding curves to roads rather than creating a straight gridplan where houses lined up like barracks. The staff for this city said the plan wasunacceptable. “Why?” we asked. It was then that the city informed us that elderlypeople who might not be able to make the subtle turns could be driving the streets.They could run off the road. (We call this protecting every issue that isn’t an issue.)We countered by saying that elderly people can make a subtle turn, and that if theycannot they shouldn’t be driving. Moreover, like the mouse in Colorado, no one knewif in fact there was a problem to begin with, in this case regarding the street design.The staff would not compromise, and the streets were built perfectly straight. Infairness, we believe no elderly people have run off any of the roads to date.Hurdle No. 4, or It’s a Bird! It’s a Plane! It’s Y ou’re Kidding, Right?  A vacant
piece of land was already developed on three sides. The fourth side fronted on a9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 358major road. We designed a small residential subdivision with one access point. The
city didn’t like this plan because they wanted two access points, which in fact wasphysically impossible to accomplish. Why two access points? One city staff memberoffered this explanation: “What if an airplane crashed in the entryway of the project?How will the fire department get in and save the people?” My response was plainand truthful: “They wouldn’t get in, and everyone would die.” Of course, it is an ab-surdity to think that you can plan or respond to every event that more than likelywill never happen. Moreover, even with two access points, the fire department, underthese circumstances, wouldn’t be able to save anyone anyway. The result: We tookthe staff’s objection and went to the city council, which overruled the staff and ap-proved the subdivision. Indeed, they saw the logic to our plan. I am happy to reportthat after thirty years, maybe a few birds, but no airplane has crashed into the sub-division. No meteorites have, either.Lesson Learned: Prepare to get very good at jumping hurdles . . . calmly.
Know the Power of Control vs. Ownership
Remember, control of a piece of property is as effective as owning it, with the
additional beneﬁt of minimizing your risk. If you purchase a piece of propertybefore it is entitled, you will need to think about the following factors that couldimpact your investment:
• Capital. You’ll need either your own or your investors to purchase the property.• Risk. You risk the capital invested if your entitlements are unsuccessful.• Unprofitability. Your cost of capital and interest may eliminate any potential
future profits.
• Marketability. You now have an unentitled property that you may not be able
to sell.
You may be wondering why would a seller give you the time to go through
the entitlement process without risking any money. There are some very valu-able reasons. First, you can offer the seller more money than his property ispresently worth, which is obviously appealing. You can do this because, re-member, if you purchased the property outright, you would be paying intereston the capital used to purchase the property so you might as well give that tothe seller in the form of an increase in price.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3599781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 359Another reason a seller would allow you the time needed to gain the entitle-
ments relates to taxes. If the seller sold the property, most likely he or she would
pay capital gains tax on the sale (currently 15 percent federal tax, plus statetax). Then, when that money is reinvested and earning interest, that interestwould be taxed as ordinary income (up to 38 percent under current law for fed-eral income tax plus state and local taxes). If you offered the seller more moneyfor their property to “buy” the time to get the entitlements and close the dealthereafter, the seller will be paying tax at the much lower capital gains rates in-stead of the higher ordinary tax rates.
Another incentive is offering to give the seller the survey, environmental re-
port, soils report, trafﬁc study, utility study, land plan, and title work you aredoing as compensation for the time if you are not successful with entitlementsand do not purchase the property. The seller will need those studies anywaywith another buyer, and that information will decrease the time and up-frontmoney needed by a new buyer. This information is worthless to you if you arenot successful.
You can even ﬁnd out if the seller will pay for the reports mentioned above.
You can offer the seller an increased price for the land and a percentage of theincreased value you are creating from your knowledge and entitlement work.Since you don’t have to pay for the reports, now you don’t have any capital atrisk and only upside potential with the increased value you will be creatingthrough entitlements. This is the best real estate position to be in.
Time can also be a blessing when a seller wants to ﬁnd an exchange property
before closing the sale of the current property, so there is no exposure to thestrict time constraints for a 1031 Exchange. By giving you time to get the enti-tlements, the seller gets more time to search for another property investment.Exchanges must be executed within a speciﬁed period, and this allows the lux-ury of time most sellers would love to have.
Finally, a seller may want to be a part of the development on his property.
The property may have been in the family for generations. There may be familypride regarding what is developed on the land. The motivation of a seller willeither be monetary or family legacy.
An Agreeable Agreement—for You
Have your real estate attorney draft a standard Letter of Intent (LOI) for you touse with each seller. An LOI outlines the terms and conditions of a sale, is usu-ally a nonbinding agreement but is used as a “gentlemen’s handshake.”360 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 360ROBERT KIYOSAKI 361
Once you have an executed LOI, ask your attorney to draft a purchase agree-
ment for execution using the signed LOI as your guide. Make sure you have the
right within the agreement to rezone the subject property for your intendeduse. Once the purchase agreement is signed, you have the property under yourcontrol. I repeat: It is not what you own that leads to wealth generation, it iswhat you control.
Once the purchase agreement is signed by all parties, open escrow with the
title company and escrow ofﬁcer you have learned to be the most reliable. Havethe title company give you a title report with all recorded easements and liensand the requirements for an extended or lender’s title policy.
Your mission:
• Have your real estate attorney draft an LOI.• Execute the LOI with the seller.• Have your real estate attorney draft a purchase agreement with the appro-
priate provisions from the LOI, particularly the right to rezone the property.
• Get the agreement signed. You now control the property.• Open escrow and get the title report.
Some Diligence Is Due
It is important to continue growing your knowledge base to protect your in-vestment and avoid unwanted surprises. Consider these steps:
Your mission:
• Review your title report with the help of your title company. Make sure there
are no recorded Covenants, Conditions or Restrictions (CC&Rs) recordedagainst the property that would affect your intended use.
• Check for deed restrictions that would affect ownership or use of the property.• Read the recorded easements and understand who has the right of access.
Make sure you have legal access to your property.
• See if there are any assessments recorded against your property that you will
become responsible for.
• Study who has the rights to the minerals on the property.• Give the title report and all recorded documents to your civil engineer to
create an ALTA Builders/Lenders Survey.
• Once you have control of the property, have your team’s real estate agent
contact potential buyers for the property subject to your acquiring the enti-tlements. Don’t think of a good real estate broker as a cost. Rather, he or she9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 361is a valuable member of the team. A good broker has developed creditability
over many years with builders and buyers. This will help ensure your success.If the deal can’t afford the real estate fee, don’t do the deal.
• Work with that builder/buyer in the planning process. Do not plan your
property around one buyer unless that person has paid you a sizeable, non-refundable deposit if you are successful in entitling your property and hedoes not perform. If planned around one buyer, you might ultimately receivethe entitlement but no one else can use the plan.
Real Life Story: Removing Rocks from Y our 
Soil May Be Mining
Recently, M3 Companies were involved in moving 6 million cubic yards of dirt
on one of our two-thousand-acre master-planned communities. We were not
selling the dirt or rock during the grading process but simply sifting the dirt to elim-
inate rocks for the golf course. We also crushed the larger rocks on site to a moremanageable size.
By chance, a representative of the Bureau of Land Management (BLM)—a fed-
eral governmental agency—was driving by the site and noticed what we were doing.When he returned to his office he wrote us a letter saying we owed the BLM a royaltyright for mining the minerals on the property since it owned these rights from theoriginal governmental patent.
Almost every development crushes rocks on site and moves earth materials and
screens soil. We explained that we weren’t moving any material off-site or selling it,and therefore we did not believe we were mining minerals on the property. Theyreplied to our argument that if we picked the rocks out of the soil by hand, insteadof using machines, they don’t consider it mining. The rocks were far too big for that.
Never before had they imposed this requirement on any other development of
this scope. We ultimately negotiated a settlement with them to avoid the costly de-lays in construction and litigation.Lesson Learned: Expect the unexpected, and bone up on your negotiation skills.
Surveys and Reports
The next step is securing a lender’s survey, which shows all of the recorded
title report issues such as easements, property lines, and net/gross acreage/square footage. It also outlines unrecorded roads and encroachments, legal de-scriptions, etc. It is used as the basis for all other planning on the property.362 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 362Your land planner will use the survey’s information for computing acreage and
for laying out everything that you do. It is your foundation. Below is a guideyou can use during this important phase.
Your mission:
• Review your survey to see if there are any encroachments such as fences,
structures, etc., that your neighbors have on your property or you have ontheirs.
• See if anyone is using unrecorded access points on your property or un-
recorded paths and roads across your property that may be a claim for ad-verse possession by the using party. This may restrict financing and abilityto develop.
• Determine if there are any power and gas line easements and how that may
affect the usability and marketability of your property.
• Make sure your engineer includes floodplain information on the survey.• Give the survey to your land planner to help you develop a land plan and 
layout.
I never rely on my land planner’s input only. I’ve found my learned knowl-
edge and research is just as important to the ﬁnal product. There is a belief,with some merit, that you design for a plan with a greater intensity and densitythan you really need so you can cut back at a later date. Why? So that the NIM-BYs and politicians can feel they have pushed the developer back and got theirway. You are catering to today’s political correctness.
Your learned knowledge will tell you whether you should bring in a repre-
sentative of the NIMBY group to be part of the land planning process. It is al-ways better to have the NIMBYs as part of the planning process.
• Be prepared to cover your third-party vendors with liability insurance when
they go upon the land of your seller to do their work. I would recommendthat you provide at least $1 million of coverage. This insurance is relativelyinexpensive.
• In addition, get these reports done up front. There’s no point in waiting.
A Soils Report
A soils report determines if there are any soil conditions that will increase thecost to build on the property and therefore lessen the price someone can payfor the property. Some sites have expansive soil that would increase the cost ofconstruction. Some sites have hard rock and may need to be blasted. That wouldincrease cost, too. If you were going to use septic tanks instead of city sewers,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3639781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 363364 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
your soil condition might not meet the peculation requirements. Some sites
even have underground ﬁssures that are not readily determined. How importantis a soils report? I have a true story.
Real Life Story: Low-Cost Property 
Can Be Very Costly
During the frenzy of the recent soaring real estate cycle, a buyer purchased nine
hundred acres of land at a low price with the intent to “flip” it for a profit. The
buyer came to me to help him after he had bought the property. The buyer did not
order a soils report during the due diligence period prior to him buying the property.If he had, he would have realized that the soil was very expansive. That particularsoil condition would make the foundation work for each house so cost-prohibitivethat the homes would have been priced out of the market. Sadly, although the landwas acquired at good price, the actual cost of the property was very high due to theincreased development costs to mitigate the poor soil conditions. There wasn’tmuch I could do. The buyer could have avoided all this by doing homework . . . andgetting a soils report!Lesson Learned: Soil matters. Never skimp on things that cost little and can save
you a bundle.
A Phase I Environment Report
This report will show you if your property is located within a Superfund site
area, or if there are any environmental issues recorded on adjoining propertiesthat may affect your property. It would include such things as a previous gasstation on the adjoining property that had a fuel tank leak, which is now ﬂowingunder your property.
If any issues are discovered, you’ll receive a recommendation to do a Phase
II. This is more expensive and extensive. Laboratory testing will determine ifcontamination exists and what remediation methods need to be done. The re-mediation of environmental issues is often next to impossible to quantify. Ifyour Phase I report comes back with a recommendation for Phase II, back awayfrom the property . . . do not look back, and most of all do not move forward on
any property with environmental issues is this stage of your career. And onemore thing. If your proposed property is in a rocky, granite area, you shouldhave your environmental engineer do a radon gas study to see if there is a needfor mitigation.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 364A Constraints Report
Besides doing the survey, have your civil engineer prepare a constraints report
on the property. This will be a study of all the utilities to service the property. Itwill include water, sewers, telephone, gas, electric, cable, ﬁber optics, and stormsewers.
This study will show the location, capacity, water pressure, service providers,
and methods of access to these services. It will also ascertain whether you aregoing to incur extra development costs by resizing existing utilities to serveyour development or extending utility lines to provide these services to yourproperty.
Have your engineer provide any Utility Development Fees and Utility Re-
covery Charges/Agreements in their report.
A Drainage Report
This report will determine if you have any 404 issues. These are federal regula-tions by the Army Corp of Engineers on all navigable waterways. Don’t thinkyou need a stream on your property to come under this jurisdiction. It may beonly an irrigation ditch. You also want to determine if there are any excess costsfor retention, detention, or runoff of water from your property.
Archeological Study
If you are in an area that has artifacts or where artifacts are believed to exist,you should do an archeological study. Just because you are far away from acolonial settlement or an ancient Native American village does not mean that“something” may not be buried on your property.
Real Life Story: Unfortunately the Builder 
Didn’t Strike Gold
Ahome builder was well into the development of his project when he discovered
artifacts while digging water and sewer lines. The project was immediately put
on hold—for eighteen months—while archaeologists, tiny picks and brushes in
hand, meticulously uncovered and retrieved the artifacts. It almost bankrupted thebuilder because his capital costs, debt payments, contracts with vendors, and othercash outlays were dependent on his completion of the project on time. An archeo-logical study in advance of development may have prevented this calamity.Lesson Learned: If it can happen, it just might. Don’t tempt fate.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3659781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 365FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) Review
Make sure the FAA has not imposed any restrictions on your property. Is it lo-
cated out of the noise zone and ﬂight paths? It’s a good idea to be sure.
Wells
Check to see if there are any water wells on the property and if they have beenproperly recorded with the State Department of Water Resources. Also checkto see if there are any historical records on the depth of the well, pumping ca-pacity, and draw down of the water table. Make sure all abandoned wells areclosed properly.
The Application
We’re getting close now. You can begin to see the light at the end of the tunnel,assuming that all your reports came back positive and you didn’t have to “backaway from the environmental hazards” or anything else. It’s time to make anapplication for the entitlement you are requesting. Every jurisdiction has dif-ferent requirements. Some may require a trafﬁc study, drainage study, landscapedesign, or letter from the school district on the impact of your proposed devel-opment on schools. Spend money only on the reports as are necessary.
Your mission:
• Take your plan door to door and give every neighbor within six hundred feet
of your project a personal presentation of your plan. Bring with you:
–A full-color site plan and renderings of your development.–Traffic information generated by your development.–Letter of support from the school district.–Your business card and contact information.–A petition for the neighbor to sign in support of your project.–Printed cards giving the location, times, and dates of hearings, and the
names, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses of the mayor and citycouncil members.
• Start your presentation with the neighbors farthest from your project. They
may be the least interested. You will have a better chance to get their signa-ture on a petition of support.
• Use those signed petitions of support when asking the next neighbor for his
support. Keep building those support petitions for your presentation to theneighbors that are closest to the project and to show to members of the citycouncil. Give only those supportive neighbors your printed cards with thetimes and dates of the hearings.366 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 366ROBERT KIYOSAKI 367
How to Talk with the Neighbors
It’s easy to make mistakes when talking with neighbors. Follow these guidelines
and you should come out without incident:
Things Y ou Should Do
• Dress neatly and be enthusiastic about your project.• Always be polite.• Present facts and be honest.• Be prepared to answer objections.• Listen. Don’t debate.• Make friends and develop relationships.• If you do not know an answer to a question, return to personally give an answer. It
gives you another chance to develop a relationship.
• Be proud of what you are doing.• Ask for support and get contact information.• Communicate with your neighbors.• Ask supportive neighbors to invite their friends to a small meeting so you can ex-
plain your project.
• Get petitions of support signed. Ask supportive neighbors to be at the hearings.
Have dates, times, and locations of meetings ready as a handout that you can distribute.
• Ask for them to e-mail and call city council members expressing their support.
Have that information available to give to them as a handout.
• Get the support of the Chamber of Commerce, Homebuilders Association, and
Board of Realtors.
Things Y ou Should Not Do• Do not leave any project information behind except for your business card and
hearing information, and give it only to supportive neighbors. Y ou may need tochange your site plan while you are going through the process. If you leave yourinitial site plan behind, you will be accused of being deceitful by your neighbors ifit changes in process.
• Do not exaggerate your project.• Do not have group meetings initially. Group psychology is more difficult to cope
with than handling individual concerns.
• Do not allow your differences with neighbors to become a matter of principle.• Do not threaten neighbors with alternate uses, but point out to them the range of
possibilities for which the land could be developed.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 367At the Same Time . . . 
Continue to call upon all of the people you have met over the previous six
months, including your friends on the city planning staff, on the communityboards, the planning commission, and the city council. Try to get the leaderswithin each group to support your project. Use that support and visit with everymember of each group. This is very important.
Politicians you have developed relationships with want to help you, but you
need to give them the political reasons to support you, including narrowing theobjections of the NIMBYs. Let the politicians know if there is neighborhoodopposition, what objections they have and what you are doing to resolve theirissues.
A politician always needs to understand why it is in his or her political inter-
est to support you in the face of opposition: self-interest and self-preservation!Being prepared for this through your previous six months’ worth of studyinghow the politician has reacted to other cases before you made your application,you will have insight into the right answer almost instinctively.
Remember, the vote that counts is the vote of the city council. Know that
you have the votes that are required for approval before you allow your appli-
cation to be heard for a ﬁnal vote. Postpone the hearing until you have the votescommitted.
The End Game
What are the best-case scenarios for all your hard work?
• Your acquired knowledge and relationship-building will help you obtain the
right to purchase property you will entitle.
• You will get your property entitled, creating value.• You will have a builder buy the property, with you profiting from the differ-
ence between the negotiated price from the landowner and your markup forentitling it.
• You will have succeeded by applying your knowledge, and not your capital.
Remember: You don’t have to own a piece of property; you just have to
control it.TIP368 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 368Knowledge, Knowledge, Knowledge
Starting small is the way to learn. But what you’ll soon discover is that the size
of the project is meaningless. You will go through all of the same steps for asmall project as you would for a large project. That means the bigger projectshave the potential to net you more money with the same amount of effort. It’sjust a matter of building conﬁdence.
The M3 Companies have taken this direction, using our expertise in the plan-
ning, entitlement, and execution of master-planned communities from ourlearned knowledge over four decades of work. From developing a 610-acreAmerican Ranch community in Prescott, an 1,100-acre Prescott Lakes commu-nity, and the 2,100-acre Wickenburg Ranch community (all in Arizona), to the2,000-acre American Ranch Sandstone community outside Denver and our6,000-acre community in Eagle, Idaho, we have taken advantage of our entitle-ment knowledge to succeed.
But make no mistake—you will make a lot of mistakes. Everyone does. Cut
your losses short and let your gains run. Your own drive is the only limit to yoursuccess.
The Future
What is the future for someone who specializes in entitling real estate? We cancount on governmental bodies to continue to impede property rights with eachnew law, regulation, ordinance, and environmental mandate. It becomes harderand harder each year to navigate through this mineﬁeld, and there are fewerpeople willing to make the attempt. Yet the demand from development compa-nies and builders for entitled property increases each year: In adversity thereis advantage and opportunity for those willing to pursue entitlements.
And what is the key? Knowledge. It is the knowledge you will gain that will
make you one of the most sought after “properties” in the real estate industry.You can work for yourself, consult for others, or be in an executive positionwith a development company. Entitlements are the future of real estate. Thischapter has given you the tools to create that future for yourself.
Knowledge is your capital when it comes to entitlements. But unlike other
forms of capital such as cash, equity, or debt, your capital can never be taken
away. And it can only grow and help you succeed.
Most important: Your capital is most valuable when the economy is in a re-
cession. Sellers of properties are more receptive to giving you the time to entitleROBERT KIYOSAKI 3699781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 369their property. Lenders who have taken properties back need someone with
the knowledge to prepare their properties for resale. Why? Because you canadd value to property that is losing value in the marketplace. That makes you
indispensable, sought after, and in a very proﬁtable position for yourself.
It takes many months to entitle a piece of property for development or for
resale. Use the downtime of a recession to entitle a property. When the recessionends, as it always does, you will be ready immediately to take advantage of the re-covery because your property is ready for development. It is called great timing .
Friends in High Places During Low Times
During a recession, you can process your application more quickly because the
city staff has very few applications to process. Furthermore, it is more difficult
for political leaders to turn your project down in the face of growing municipal
deficits. Don’t forget, landowners are willing to give you the time to work on entitle-ments. They need you!
My last words of wisdom are these: Be a contrarian. In a recession, people
focus on their jobs, the economy, and the stock market. They rarely see an op-
portunity to take advantage of what only appears to be a dismal situation. Whenno one is investing money, when no one can borrow money, and when equity isdisappearing on properties, keep this in mind: You have the most valuable cap-ital during this period—your knowledge.
Let others spend their time looking backward and protecting their current
declining assets. You will be using your time pursuing the Sleeping Giant ofreal estate proﬁtability: entitlements. It’s time to get going.
W. Scott Schirmer is a managing partner for M3 Companies. M3 Com-
panies’ core competency is developing master-planned communities
that honor and advance the timeless heritage of the West. Schirmer ispresident of Schirmer Ball Company and CEO of SMDI Company. Sincehe began working in Arizona real estate in the late 1960s, he has entitled,acquired, syndicated, ﬁnanced, developed, managed, and brokered real
estate in Arizona, California, Idaho, Illinois, Oklahoma, and Utah. Schirmer and the M3 Com-panies charities are children-based, giving support to Childhelp, The Boys and Girls Club ofScottsdale, SARC, ANOZIRA Foundation, and The Solid Rock Foundation.
370 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 370Tom Wheelwright is one of those people who is not just an expert in a very im-
portant aspect of investing, he is an investor himself who practices what he
preaches. I like to surround myself with people like Tom because they don’t just
talk about what others should do; they actually do what they say. Tom is a CPA—a tax strategist who knows that the government rewards people who know the taxcode and play by its rules—and he is also a real estate investor.
Tom has spent more than twenty-ﬁve years working with sophisticated in-
vestors to help them develop innovative tax, business, and wealth strategies. Tomis a teacher at heart, and even in his early days when he worked for a Big 4 ac-counting ﬁrm, he managed the training for thousands of CPAs. He makes the com-plicated simple, and that is no easy feat because, in order to do this, it takes acomplete understanding of your subject and an ability to boil down the details tothe ones that matter. Tom’s skill comes from his years as a trainer and from hisﬁrm grasp of taxation and tax strategies.
But Tom has inﬂuenced my life in a much more profound way than just through
his knowledge of wealth strategies. If you read my introduction to Chapter 1, Tom’sﬁrst chapter, then you know I mentioned his Mormon faith. Through Tom andothers like him, I have learned much about the beliefs of this faith. His religionhas many important lessons to share with a world that is in ﬁnancial turmoil.21 T om WHEELWRIGHT
The T ax Lien 
Investment Strategy
3719781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 371One lesson that comes from the Mormon faith and that seemed odd before, now
doesn’t seem quite so odd. That lesson is the Mormon practice of storing enoughfood, water, and money to survive for at least one year. Many of my Mormon friendsdo this, and so do my wife, Kim, and I. We put these necessities away in case of eco-nomic disaster, or worse, ﬁnancial collapse. How close did we come in 2008?
We are all used to a world of plenty and don’t think twice about what we would
do for food and other necessities in an emergency. As many of us know, our super-markets only have enough food to last three days. And if you have ever lived in anarea that is hurricane prone, and the forecast is predicting a storm on the way,you know how quickly the most critical supplies are snatched up. Water, bread,canned goods, batteries, and other vital supplies vanish from the store shelves in amatter of hours.
In 2008 the world came very close to becoming a world of collapsed credit
cards. Think about this for a while: What would happen if the world stopped ac-cepting credit cards? What could you buy with only the cash you have on hand,the money in your wallet, the change in that jar? Not much. I believe the worldwould shut down.
Of course I don’t wish for ﬁnancial disaster, but Tom has taught me about
preparation. And being prepared allows me to keep my mind free of worry, to thinkclearly, even as we enter a period of economic chaos, and to seize the opportunities.These are the times when fortunes are made.
Tom has been an inﬂuence to me on many levels, and I honor his integrity. This
chapter and the knowledge he shares is a must read for anyone seizing investmentopportunities now and in the future. I greatly value him personally and profes-sionally. He is a true friend.
—Robert Kiyosaki
If you have even taken a quick glance at the chapter titles in this book, or
considered its sheer size, then you are probably realizing there are as many
ways to invest in real estate as there are models of homes. The key, of course, isto invest in the type of real estate that best suits you and your personal investingpreferences. Your investment preferences may include risk level, tax advantages,and simplicity, among others.
For example, some people prefer investing in single-family homes because they
like the simplicity, and there isn’t a lot of management involved. Others prefercommercial real estate so they have to manage only a few properties and can dealwith business owners as tenants instead of dealing with families. Still others prefer372 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 372to invest in apartment buildings where the loss of a single tenant doesn’t make a
major impact on the overall cash ﬂow from the investment. And then there arethose who prefer to invest in raw land where there are no tenants at all.
So before you begin investing in real estate, take some time to ﬁgure out
which type of real estate is best for you based on your personal investing pref-erences. You are likely to be more successful by doing something you enjoy.And, of course, it makes life a lot more fun!
The question I get most often from investors just starting out in real estate is
how to decide which type of real estate investing is right for them. Again, re-member to focus on your personal investment preferences. For a complete listof the personal investment preferences we review with our clients, go to ourProVision School of Wealth Strategy at www.ProVisionWealth.com/products.
Once you have ﬁgured out your personal investment preferences, it’s time to
ﬁgure out which type of real estate investing most closely matches these pref-erences. This book is a great place to do some initial analysis of the differenttypes of real estate investing.
One of the least known and most lucrative real estate investments is known
as tax lien investing. Some of the best bargains in real estate are found throughthese tax liens. At ProVision, we have several clients who have made millionsof dollars investing in tax liens. Let me start by giving you a brief explanation ofhow tax liens work. Then, we can discuss whether tax lien investing is right foryou and if it is, which tax lien investment strategy might work best.
What’s Tax Lien Investing?
Tax liens are investments made possible by state law. Governments love to usetax money, but they really don’t like being in the tax collection business. Andthey especially don’t like to be bankers. Governments want their money now,so they can balance their budgets. So they have a serious challenge when a tax-payer, for whatever reason, decides not to pay his property taxes on a particularparcel of real estate. In fact, sometimes it takes years to collect the taxes fromthe owner of the property, and sometimes the owner never pays the taxes owed.As much as governments hate being the bank, they hate being property ownerseven more. What they really want is the cash, and they want it now.
So instead of becoming a creditor of the property owner and waiting for the
money until the taxpayer ponies up, many local governments (usually counties)have ﬁgured out how to get their money immediately. It’s called a tax lien. Inthe simplest terms, here’s what happens:ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3739781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 3731.The government assesses taxes on a piece of property, which is called a par-
cel. In most cases, the owner will simply pay the taxes that are due.
2.But what if the owner of the land decides not to pay the taxes on time? Then
what happens?
3.The government puts a lien on the parcel for back taxes.
4.Then the government sells the lien to an investor, such as you or me. The
lien is sold at a public auction with an opening bid made up of the amount of
back taxes and other costs.
5.If the lien is sold at auction, multiple investors bid on the lien. Although
variation exists among tax lien states, there are some general similarities.First, all primary sales must be held in a public auction and ordinary citizenslike you and me may take part in the sale. Some states use a process in whichthe price of the lien is bid up (i.e., increased) based on competition for thelien. In this situation, the price paid for the lien may be bid higher, but theinterest rate earned on the tax lien remains ﬁxed and does not ﬂuctuate dueto the bidding. Other states use a bid down system. In this situation, the in-terest rate earned on a tax lien is bid down by the bidders. The standard in-terest rate on tax liens varies among states but can be as high as 18 percent.
6.The lien earns simple interest based on the standard rate or auction ﬁnal bid
rate.
7 .The interest “accrues” (accumulates) until either the taxpayer or another
lienholder (such as a bank holding a mortgage) ultimately pays the interestand the back taxes to the investor in order to have the lien on his propertyremoved.
8.After a certain period of time if the lien is not paid, the investor can foreclose
against the property and can end up owning the property outright for onlythe price of the back taxes and foreclosure/legal fees.374 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 21.1 Summary of a T ax Lien
Step 1 Property owner does not pay taxes due on the property (parcel) 
Step 2 The government places a lien on the parcel for back taxes 
Step 3 The lien is offered for sale at a fixed interest rate or at auction
Step 4 If lien is sold at auction, multiple investors bid on the interest rate of the lien
Step 5 The lien earns simple interest based on the standard or auction rate
Step 6 The interest accrues until the property owner or another lienholder pays the back taxes
Step 7If the lien is not paid, the investor can foreclose against the property and own the property
for the price of the back taxes9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 374The great thing about foreclosing on a tax lien is that a tax lien supersedes
nearly all other liens. So if you are able to foreclose on a tax lien, you get the
property for the cost of the unpaid taxes, and in the majority of situations, anyother liens are wiped out. Pretty cool, huh? Well, at least it can be in the right
circumstance, but more about that later. In any case, there are several importantsteps to investing in a tax lien, and we are going to take them one at a time.
Step No. 1: Your Tax Lien Strategy
So there are two possible outcomes of investing in a tax lien. First, and mostlikely, is the outcome that you will earn interest at a stated rate that can be ashigh as 18 percent. The other possible outcome is that the lien is never paid off(redeemed) and you get the property. These two outcomes are the basis for thetwo different tax lien investing strategies.
While it may seem to be the luck of the draw whether a tax lien is redeemed
or not, in fact there are several factors that can give a strong indication of whichoutcome is likely to occur. Because of this, anyone investing in tax liens shouldﬁrst decide how tax lien investing ﬁts into his investment strategy. Do you wantthe interest, or is your goal the underlying property? 
You really must decide what you hope to get out of your tax lien investment
up front because this decision will affect everything else you do pertaining totax lien investing. Why? Primarily because the type of property for which youare willing to buy the lien is going to differ based on the interest rate investmentstrategy versus the property acquisition investment strategy. The type of prop-erty owner will also be a factor, since some property owners are more likely toROBERT KIYOSAKI 375
TABLE 21.2 Possible Outcomes
A Y ou earn interest at a stated rate, or
B The lien never gets paid and you get the property
TABLE 21.3 Investment Strategy
Strategy A Strategy B
r I want interest paid r I want the property9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 375pay their liens than others. So let’s look at why you would choose one strategy
over the other.
The Interest Rate Investment Strategy
In actuality, interest rate investing and property acquisition investing are almostcompletely opposite investment strategies. The interest rate investment strategyis a fairly short-term, cash-ﬂow strategy with little or no possibility for long-term growth. This may be a good place to park some cash at high interest rateswhile you are waiting to make another investment. Or you may have accumu-lated a lot of assets and you just want the pure cash ﬂow as “mailbox money”(money you get in the mail with no effort other than the initial investment anda little monitoring). This can also be a good investment strategy for money youhave accumulated in a retirement plan, such as a pension plan, 401(k), or IRA(superannuations or RRSPs for you Australians and Canadians). The interestwill be tax deferred, and there won’t be any real tax or leverage beneﬁts to hold-ing an interest rate tax lien outside of a retirement plan.
Property Acquisition Investment Strategy
A property acquisition investment strategy is completely different from the in-terest rate investment strategy. Rather than looking for quick cash ﬂow, you arehoping for the opportunity to foreclose and own the underlying property for along-term investment. This could be part of a long-term land hold strategy or adevelopment strategy for property that you expect to be in a redevelopmentzone.
While it is possible to do property acquisition investing in a retirement plan,
in most countries there are real tax beneﬁts to holding property outside of a re-tirement plan. It could be, as it is in the United States, that the gain on the saleof the property would be taxed at preferential capital gains rates. Or you maybe able to do a like-kind exchange and not pay taxes at all.376 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 21.4 Interest Rate Investment Strategy 
Considerations
r Short/mid-term investment
r Desire cash flow (mailbox money)
r Little or no possibility for long-term growth
r Good use of extra cash while waiting to make another investment 
r Y ou have retirement money to invest9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 376Furthermore, if the underlying property is improved, you could r eceive de-
preciation beneﬁts from holding the property. Or you may ﬁnd yourself with
signiﬁcant equity in the property, and you may want to reﬁnance to take advan-tage of the leverage opportunities of real estate. These opportunities typicallyare substantially restricted inside a retirement plan. These and other reasonspoint to holding this investment outside of your retirement plan in the eventu-ality that you end up owning the property.  
Step No. 2: Your Tax Lien Investment 
Criteria
Once you have your strategy in place, you can begin creating your criteria for
the tax liens you want to acquire. Let’s look at the interest rate investment andproperty acquisition investment strategies separately.
Interest Rate Investment Strategy Criteria
When you think about investing criteria, think about what’s essential for a spe-ciﬁc investment to meet your standards. What rate of return do you want? Whatlevel of risk are you willing to assume? In the case of tax liens, how much areyou willing to risk that you will end up with the property? How long are youwilling to hold the lien until it is eventually redeemed?  ROBERT KIYOSAKI 377
TABLE 21.5 Property Acquisition Investing Strategy
Considerations
r Long-term investment
r Desire to foreclose and own the property
r Property could be in a redevelopment zone with good appreciation potential
r Like-kind exchange into more desirable investment property is possible
r Depreciation or leverage opportunities
TABLE 21.6
Interest Rate Investing Criteria Your Standards
Rate of Return
Level of Risk
Amount willing to risk to take hold of the property
Length of time to hold property9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 377As with any investing strategy, the clearer your criteria, the easier the in-
vestment process. With clear criteria, you can easily eliminate most of the avail-
able tax liens and concentrate solely on those that meet your speciﬁc needs. Alittle later on in this chapter, we will look at how to determine whether a par-ticular tax lien meets your criteria.
Property Acquisition Investment Strategy Criteria
When your goal is to acquire the underlying property, you start looking at yourcriteria much differently. Here are some of the questions you need to ask yourself:
• How likely are you to be able to foreclose on the property?• What is the likelihood that the owner or another lienholder will pay off the
lien before you can foreclose?
• How many years will you have to wait to foreclose?• What are the property taxes that you will have to pay in the future (before
your foreclosure waiting period is up)?  
And then you have to look at all of the criteria you have for your property in-
vestments, including the following:
• Does your investment strategy call for investing in raw land or improved
property?
• Are you going to develop the underlying property?• If improved, what type of improved property is w ithin your focused invest-
ment strategy?
• Is it industrial property, commercial ofﬁce buildings, multifamily housing,
or single-family homes? 
To be a focused real estate investor, you must be able to focus on a single
type of real estate. This is the only way you can become an expert in a particulartype of property investing. Once you have this focused strategy in place, youcan look at the speciﬁc criteria for your tax lien investing.378 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 21.7
Property Acquisition Investing Criteria Your Standards
Likelihood of foreclosure on the property
Likelihood the owner or other lienholder 
will pay off lien
Y ears you prefer to wait until foreclosure
Property taxes you may have to pay in the future9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 378• What is your criterion for rate of return?
• Do you want the property to cash flow?• And if so, how much cash flow is required?• Do you have a particular location of concentration?• What about the expected appreciation of the property?• What is your maximum holding period for the property?• What tax beneﬁts are you expecting from the property? 
Step No. 3: Evaluating the 
Tax Lien Investment
With your criteria in place, you can now begin looking at tax liens and evaluat-
ing whether they ﬁt within your criteria. Between two weeks and one monthbefore the tax lien auction, the county will release the information on the prop-erties with tax liens that will be available for purchase. Begin your evaluationROBERT KIYOSAKI 379
TABLE 21.8
Criteria for Property Investments
r Raw Land
r Develop the underlying property
r Improved property Type:
r Industrial
r Commercial
r Office Building
r Multifamily Housing
r Single-family Homes
TABLE 21.9 Real Estate Criteria
TYPE OF REAL ESTATE CHOSEN:
Specific Criteria for Tax Lien Investing Your Standard
Rate of return
Cash flow (if so, how much)
Geographic location 
Expected appreciation
Maximum hold period
T ax benefits expected9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 379by determining which of the available tax liens will ﬁt within your investment
strategy.
Interest Rate Investment Strategy Evaluation
Interest rate investors should look for properties that are less likely to be aban-doned by the owner. Properties less likely to be abandoned include:
• improved property• owner-occupied property• property with other liens, such as a mortgage• property that has a lien because the tax bill was sent to the wrong address
Property Acquisition Investment Strategy Criteria
Property acquisition investors should look for liens on properties that are morelikely to be allowed to go to foreclosure, including:
• properties that have been abandoned by the owner• properties where the owner has died, so the property is in probate or has
passed to an estate or trust
• property where ownership of the property is free and clear of other liens• property that has several years of unpaid back taxes• property owned by someone living out of state
Once you have narrowed down your investment possibilities to those that ﬁt
within your strategy of interest rate investment or property acquisition invest-ment, you need to further focus on which liens you should go after in the bidprocess.
If you are an interest rate investor, you’ll want to understand exactly how
the interest rate is applied in the state where you are investing. Once you deter-mine this, ﬁnd liens that are less likely to have multiple bidders or that are lo-cated in a state where the interest rate remains ﬁxed at the auction. In a statewhere the interest rate is “bid down” at auction, look for properties that arelikely to have the tax lien redeemed, but they have some attributes that mightscare away other investors. These liens will retain the highest interest rate be-cause they will have the least amount of interest in the bidding process. Lookfor tax liens with the following attributes:
• The property is located in a remote area of the state• The property is small or an odd shape• The property has other undesirable features380 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 380If you are a property acquisition investor, you’ll want to ﬁnd liens on proper-
ties that you want to own. Begin narrowing down the properties by researching
only those properties that meet your criteria. For example, suppose you wantto invest in raw land, which, by the way, is the most likely property to be avail-able for foreclosure. Suppose also that you want land that is likely to be devel-oped in the near future. In this case, you would want to ﬁnd liens on propertythat
• is near other developed property• is in a redevelopment area• is in an area that will likely be developed in the next few years due to the
growth patterns of the county
• does not have restrictions that could hinder development
A ProVision client purchased a tax lien on a 1.5-acre parcel a few years ago
in a bad part of town. Across the street from the property was a lot of industrialjunk. But the area was on the verge of being redeveloped. There were ten yearsof taxes owed on the property, so the liens were not likely to be redeemed. Andthe client noticed that the owner of the property was an estate. This client pur-chased the tax lien for the current year and then went back to the other taxlienholders and redeemed all of the other tax liens. The total cost of ten yearsof tax liens was $7 ,000.
The client then went to the owner of the property and asked if he wanted
the property. The estate was willing to deed over the property just to get rid ofROBERT KIYOSAKI 381
TABLE 21.10 Summary of Evaluation for Tax Lien Investments
Interest Rate Investment Property Acquisition Investment
PROPERTIES LESS LIKELY TO BE ABANDONED PROPERTIES MORE LIKELY TO FORECLOSE
r Improved property r Abandoned properties
r Owner-occupied property r Death of property owner
r Property with other liens r Property is clear of other liens
r Liens due to tax bill sent to wrong address r Property has several years of back taxes
r Out of state owner
Bid Process
LESS LIKELY TO HAVE MULTIPLE BIDDERS PROPERTIES YOU WANT TO OWN
r Property is in remote area of state r Property near other developed property
r Property is small or odd shaped r Property is in a redeveloped area
r Property has undesirable features r In an area that will likely be developed9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 381it and not have the headache of the tax liens or the cost of a foreclosure. Six
months after purchasing the tax liens, a developer approached the client aboutbuying the property.
The developer wanted to consolidate several parcels of land in the area to do
a large commercial development. But he didn’t want to deal with the legworkof the tax lien process. So, once the liens were all cleared, he approached ourclient and made an offer of $197 ,000 for the property. The result? Our clientmade a proﬁt of $190,000, after owning the property for just six months.
Step No. 4: Due Diligence
Once you have decided which properties ﬁt within your strategy and your crite-ria, it’s time to do the due diligence on the properties. Due diligence is the processof assessing the risks of both the tax lien and the underlying property. At thispoint, you should have already assessed the risk of the lien being redeemed. Butthere are other risks to the lien that you will need to consider. And let’s notforget about the underlying property. You need to assess the risks of that as well.
Lien Risks
Tax lien risks can be separated into two categories: property owner risks andtax lien process risks. Let’s go over each one.
Property Owner Risks
The biggest risk with respect to the property owner is a property owner’s bank-ruptcy. If the property owner ﬁles bankruptcy, you will not be able to forecloseon the lien until after the bankruptcy is resolved. Of course, bankruptcy courtsnormally respect property tax liens and give them a high priority when thebankruptcy is resolved. However, in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy, the bankruptcytrustee could have the tax lien subordinated to administrative expenses. In thiscase, the tax lienholder could become an unsecured creditor and wind up withlittle or nothing. Luckily, there are steps you can take to guard against this.
A very small percentage of properties may have mortgages held by a bank
now administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Whena bank fails due to insolvency (i.e., not enough money), any loans owed to thebank are administered by the FDIC. If a loan administered by the FDIC is at-tached to a property on your list, it could mean delays during the foreclosure.The good news is that it is easy to check for FDIC-held loans. With a few simplesteps, the risk of a delayed foreclosure due to an FDIC-administered lien isquite remote and easily avoidable.382 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 382Another risk is that the owner is in the military. It’s very difﬁcult to foreclose
on an active member of the military. Another difﬁcult owner to deal with is an
owner who lives in a foreign country. In this case, the difﬁculty lies with ﬁndingthe owner and serving him or her with the foreclosure papers. Yet another riskis that a minor or a mentally disabled person owns the property. This couldcause delays in the foreclosure process and additional litigation costs.
Finally, there is the off chance that the lien is on government-owned prop-
erty. Since the government is normally exempt from property tax, once the lienis corrected, the investor will likely receive his/her investment back but maynot receive any interest. Good research will prevent this and other owner prob-lems because you can easily determine the owner of the property and avoidbuying the lien. Researching the owner is not as difﬁcult as it may sound. Theowner of the property is public information that is typically available at thecounty assessor’s ofﬁce. You can then go to the county recorder, county treas-urer, and bankruptcy court to ﬁnd out additional information about the owner,including other liens he may have outstanding and whether he has ﬁled bank-ruptcy. A quick search on the Internet about the owner may also turn up helpfulinformation.
Real Life Story: Research Paid Off
While owning property can be a risk, it can also be a great opportunity. My client,
Ellen, acquired a tax lien a few years ago that was owned by a hotel chain. In her re-search, Ellen discovered that the hotel chain had changed its strategy and no longerwas interested in the community where this property was located. So she purchasedthat tax lien for $7 ,000. Less than three years later, Ellen sold the property for$360,000. In this case, the property owner’s intentions almost assured Ellen of agreat investment so her research about the property owner really paid off.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 383
TABLE 21.11 Lien Risks – Property Owner Risk
Risk 1 Property owner files bankruptcy
Risk 2 Property owned by an active member of the military
Risk 3 Property owned by someone who lives out of the country
Risk 4 Property owned by a minor
Risk 5 Property owned by a mentally disabled person
Risk 6 Property owned by the government9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 383Tax Lien Process Risks
Several risks can arise due to the lien itself. These are risks that typically involve
litigation costs or delays in the foreclosure process that increase the cost of own-ership. They can arise because of disputes over property ownership, dispositionof other liens, and getting clear title tothe property after foreclosure. In ad-dition, there is the risk of too muchsuccess. How is that? What if you suc-cessfully acquire a property that needsa lot of ﬁxing up? Are you prepared toinvest the additional money requiredto get the work done? And will it be inyour best interest? The key to minimizing these risks is evaluating the potentialof the property, quantifying the potential additional costs of litigation or im-proveme nts, and d etermining whether the tax lien meets your criteria, including
the possible additional costs to complete the foreclosure process.
Real Life Story: More Due Diligence Was Due
Andy purchased tax liens against all of the condominium units of an apartment
building. During his due diligence research, Andy had learned that the out-of-stateowner was no longer interested in the property. Andy foreclosed on the property,only to find out that it needed $300,000 of repairs to a building that was worthonly $200,000. More due diligence would have saved Andy from this disaster.
Property Risks
Once you have evaluated the tax lien risks and have concluded that there are a
number of liens that meet your criteria, you can then evaluate the underlyingproperty. Some of the risks to evaluate are as follows:
Environmental Risks
Perhaps the biggest risk in any property investment is that there is an environ-mental hazard that will be expensive to clean up. Reviewing the history of theproperty and contacting the EPA and state department of environmental qualityabout possible environmental problems is essential in any property investment,384 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 21.12 Lien Risks – Tax Lien
Process Risk
Risk 1 Litigation costs
Risk 2 Disputes of ownership
Risk 3 Disposition of other liens9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 384but particularly in a tax lien investment. An environmental problem could be
the very reason that the owner has not paid the taxes.
Value of the property
The most obvious risk, of course, is that the property will not be worth the costto buy the lien (and other tax liens, both previous and subsequent to your lien).Include in your analysis the administrative costs of foreclosing on the propertyand getting clear title to the property.
Step No. 5: Forming Your Team—The Real Key to
Real Estate Investing
At this point, you may be thinking that all of this is just too much work. As I
was writing this, I had the same initial reaction. But remember that you don’thave to do all of the work yourself. In fact, we like to say at ProVision that thethree most expensive words in the English language are, “Do It Yourself.”
While some of you will enjoy the research and the details, others will be
content with a little lower return and a lot less work. The answer to this is tobuild a Tax Lien Team. You can reap the rewards of tax lien investing withoutdoing all of the legwork yourself. Rather, hire others to do the work for you.
You already have determined the criteria for your tax lien investing. And you
know the risks associated with tax liens that you are going to have to considerwith every tax lien investment. You just don’t want to spend all of the time andeffort on the details of going through the various liens and the properties all byyourself.
Remember that there are lots of people who are looking for employment and
are very competent at research and details. I know this; I hire these people my-self, both for my accounting ﬁrm and for my real estate investing.
If you have clear criteria and create good procedures to follow for doing the
due diligence, you can turn it over to someone else to do. I suggest you paythese people primarily based on results, but you can also pay them a smallhourly wage. I like to give my team members large bonuses for success. Let’stake, for example, the tax lien that my friend Jim acquired several years ago.
Jim found a property with twelve years of taxes owed. The property consisted
of eighty acres of raw land located in a ﬂoodplain near a power plant. Mostpeople would pass this property by, but Jim noticed that the property was notfar from developed property and was zoned for industrial use. (Industrial zoningROBERT KIYOSAKI 3859781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 385usually means that just about any buyer could use the property. It’s normally
fairly easy to rezone industrial property to a more conservative use of the prop-erty, such as commercial or residential.)
After doing all of his due diligence, Jim acquired the current year tax lien
and then went to each of the prior lienholders and acquired their liens as well.Because he now owned all of the old tax liens, he could foreclose immediately.The total of the tax liens was $40,000. That’s $500 per acre for property thatwas close to developed property.
A few years after buying the property, a solar energy company came to Jim
and asked to purchase the property. Jim negotiated a price of $9,500 per acrefor a total sales price of $760,000—a proﬁt of $720,000!
The due diligence and research into this tax lien took Jim a lot of time and
effort, which he was happy to do. But suppose he didn’t want to do the workhimself. What if he had hired someone to do the research for him? He mighthave paid this person $10 to $12 per hour plus a bonus when the property sold.Suppose he offered a 10 percent bonus on the increase in value from the totalcost of investment. The researcher would have received a bonus of $72,000.Knowing that this type of bonus was possible, you can bet that the researcherwould have been very diligent in his or her research and would have made sureto ﬁnd only the best properties.
Some of you are thinking, “Wow! What a high price to pay for research.” But
think how many properties you could ﬁnd if you had multiple researchers doingthe work for you. And it really costs you very little. You have a small out-of-pocket cost for the initial wages, but you have no risk for more than that. Yes,you give up 10 percent of the proﬁt, but that’s a small price to pay for 90 percentof the proﬁt that you didn’t have to work for!
Now let me tell you the rest of the story of this property. When Jim sold it,
he did a tax-free exchange for a sale/leaseback on a fast food restaurant location.This property came with a twenty-year lease with options for an additionaltwenty years. It is paying Jim $4,300 per month of lease income. In addition,386 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 21.13 Example of Tax Lien T eam Members
1 Someone to research the available tax liens
2 Someone to identify the tax liens that fall within your tax lien strategy
3 Someone to evaluate the tax liens that fall within your tax lien strategy 
4 Someone to complete the due diligence (risks) on the tax liens that fall within your tax lien strategy9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 386Jim had $80,000 left over from the sale that he put into another piece of land—
all because he found the right tax lien on the right piece of property.
Just think, if Jim had not had to do all of the work himself, how many more
tax liens he could have found and how much more property he could have acquired.  
What other team members do you need? Here is a list of possible positions:
1.Real estate appraiser to determine the value of the underlying real estate
2.Real estate banker/mortgage broker so you can reﬁnance the real estate once
you acquire it
3.Real estate attorney to assist with foreclosure proceedings and other legal
matters throughout the lien process
4.Tax lien auction bidder. If you don’t want to handle the auctions yourself, in
most instances you can outsource so long as you provide proper guidance tothe bidder.
5.Bookkeeper. You will need to keep good track of the properties you acquire
and the costs to acquire each property for tax and investment analysis purposes.
6.Property manager if you plan to acquire improved property
7 .Real estate broker to handle the sale of your acquired real estate
8.Banker to handle ﬁnancial transactions
9. CPA to assist with the tax aspects of tax lien investing and property transactions,
including like-kind exchanges of acquired property for desired property
10.Foreclosure assistant to follow through on all of the details of foreclosing on
tax liens and obtaining clear title
11.Wealth coach and mentor to help you create your tax lien investment strategy
and to keep your investing moving
Step No. 6: Setting Up Tax Lien 
Investment Systems
Like any good investment strategy, tax lien investing should be set up as a busi-
ness. This includes setting up your team in Step No. 5 and determining a goodstrategy. It also includes setting up the systems to make your investing efﬁcientand effective. In order to maximize your investing while minimizing your timeand your risk, consider setting up the following systems:ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3879781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 387Due diligence system
This will include a due diligence checklist, a list of your investment criteria
and reports from your due diligence team members to let you know theirprogress so they can ask you questions.
Investment Reporting System
This will include reports monitoring the progress of the tax lien investing aswell as reports indicating the returns on your investments. There are some goodsoftware packages available to track and monitor your tax lien investments, in-cluding rate of return and deadlines.
Auction System
This includes policies and procedures for your auction bidder to follow whenattending tax lien auctions.
Foreclosure Procedures
Make a complete list of the steps for your foreclosure assistant to follow in be-ginning, handling, and completing the foreclosure process and obtaining cleartitle to the property.
Sales Procedures for Real Estate
Make a complete list of steps for your real estate broker to take in order to mar-ket and sell or exchange your properties.
Now you know about tax lien investing, which is a lucrative way to participate
in real estate. And you have the strategies, steps, and checklists you need tobegin exploring it if you so choose. As I mentioned in the beginning of thischapter, whichever real estate investing opportunity you choose, it should be388 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
TABLE 21.14 Steps for Tax Lien Strategy 
Step 1 Determine Y our T ax Lien Strategy
STRATEGY A  INTEREST RATE INVESTMENT
STRATEGY B  PROPERTY ACQUISITION INVESTMENT
Step 2 Identify Y our T ax Lien Investment Criteria 
Step 3 Evaluate the T ax Lien Investment
Step 4 Complete Y our Due Diligence 
Step 5 Form Y our T ax Lien T eam
Step 6 Set Up Y our T ax Lien Investment System9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 388one that meets your objectives and one you really enjoy. That one factor alone
will increase your chances for success considerably.
Author’s Note
I would like to thank Mark Manoil, Esq., for his assistance with this chapter.Mark is the foremost authority in Arizona for tax lien investing and his book,Arizona Property Tax Liens, was the source of much of the technical informationincluded in this chapter. Mark was also gracious enough to spend some of hisvaluable time giving me his personal insights into tax lien investing.
I would also like to thank Darius Barazandeh, Esq., for his assistance with
the state variations and subtle nuances of tax lien investing. Darius is an expertin the ﬁeld of tax lien investing and his training, Attorney Secrets to Investing in
Tax Liens, covers the subtle yet vital variations among states for those wantingto use a multistate investing strategy.
Ways to Learn More
Please go to www.ProVisionWealth.com/products for more information re-garding the wealth strategy information contained in this chapter.
For more than twenty-ﬁve years, T om Wheelwright has strategically de-
veloped innovative tax, business, and wealth strategies for sophisticated
investors and business owners across the United States and around theworld, resulting in millions of dollars in proﬁts. His goal is to teach peoplehow to create a strategic and proactive approach to wealth that createslasting success. As the founder of ProVision, T om is the innovator of
proactive consulting services for ProVision’s premium clientele, who on average, pay a lotless in taxes and earn much more on their investments. He coaches select clients on theirwealth, business, and tax strategies; lectures on wealth and tax strategies around the world;and is an adjunct professor at Arizona State University.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 3899781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:06 PM  Page 389Some of the happiest days of my life have been spent sitting with Wayne Palmer
in real estate exchange meetings. In the span of just two or three days, a group
of real estate exchangers share information on several hundred investments, and
exchanges get made. These meetings are perfect opportunities for Wayne to usehis innate sense of creativity and his ability to see the opportunities that mostpeople miss. That’s what makes him a master of this forum. Wayne’s ability toconﬁdently navigate the waters of a real estate exchange meeting is nothing shortof genius. For me, exchange meetings are as close to poetry in motion as you canget as an investor.
Wayne introduced me to real estate exchange meetings, and they make me feel
like I’m a starving man at a Chinese buffet. It’s a rush being invited into thesegroups where the sheer power of deal making creativity ﬂows hour after hour. Asa person who is sick and tired of hearing ordinary people say, “I can’t afford it” or“I don’t have any money,” sitting in these exchange meetings is a breath of freshair. They are an escape from the self-imposed ﬁnancially and creatively handi-capped. Here people are making deals happen with little or no money, and theyare doing it all day long. Sitting in a real estate exchange meeting with Wayne is22 Wayne PALMER
Horse Trading
The Original Way to Wealth on the 
Great American Frontier
3909781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 390far more exciting than playing cards or rolling the dice in Las Vegas. It’s the thrill
of the hunt, the challenge of creativity, and the drive of winning all rolled up intoone.
Whenever I am at a dead end, brain dead, and in need of a shot of creativity,
Wayne is the ﬁrst person I call. I can count on him to help me see a deal or a situ-ation in a completely different way. And he doesn’t just tell me what I want tohear. When I call Wayne, I know I will always get honest feedback. He’ll tell me ifthe deal I’m looking at stinks, and he’ll show me ways to creatively—while legally,ethically, and morally—make a good deal into a great one.
Wayne is a great friend and teacher to me. In this chapter, Wayne will teach
you some of what he has taught me. This chapter about exchanges will open youreyes.
—Robert Kiyosaki
When I was a small boy, my father had a
metal sign planted on the side of the
road at the edge of our farmyard that read:
Dad’s story is a classic tale of the American
entrepreneur. He grew up on my grandpa’sfarm during the Great Depression. When hewas a young man, the farm wasn’t proﬁtableenough to support more than one family, sohe was obliged to leave the farm to ﬁnd work.This bothered Dad because he loved the farm,and he especially loved livestock. His dream was to have a place of his own,where he could make a living working with his animals, without having to sellhis time to someone else for money.
When I was a baby, Dad moved our family to California so that he could
search for work. He got a job driving a building materials delivery truck forChambers Hardware in Orange County. At that time, the economy was muchbetter in California than it was in Utah. In the space of two or three years, Dadwas able to pay off all of his own debts as well as the remaining debt onGrandpa’s farm. Being debt free was his ticket out of California and back to therural environment of his youth.
Back in Utah, Dad took a job driving a garbage truck for Salt Lake County.
He despised working for someone else. He was independent by nature andROBERT KIYOSAKI 391
Hay / Horses
Sell or Trade
Val Palmer
254-4768
FIGURE 22.1 Farmyard sign9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 391wanted to be his own man. However, he had a plan and realized that he couldn’t
work for himself without a grubstake to get started. While on the garbage truck,Dad and his crew worked extra hard to complete their route by two o’clock inthe afternoon. In Dad’s book, that left the other half of the day available to pur-sue his own business.
To eliminate rent or mortgage payments, he moved a home from a neighbor-
ing town onto the corner of Grandpa’s farm. From the day we moved into thathouse, it was paid for. Without any debt of any kind, Dad started using his excessincome to purchase assets, just as Rich Dad teaches. In my dad’s world, animalswere assets because he could buy them for one price and sell or trade them fora higher price. Farm commodities such as hay and grain were also assets. Theygenerated cash ﬂow.
He bought hay from local farmers at bulk prices and sold it to horse enthusi-
asts, priced by the bale. He delivered it using his 1956 Ford pickup truck thathad a ﬂat wagon hitched behind. He would buy horses from individuals, cleanthem up, work with them to make them better behaved, and then re-sell themat a premium to those who could afford the classier animals. While doing all ofthis, he also rented land next to our home on the neighboring farm and plantedpotatoes. He had a harvest one year of spuds so spectacular that the entire cropwas contracted by the Country Club Potato Chip factory. In each of these trans-actions, Dad made a modest proﬁt and added it to his business capital. Eachsmall deal brought him closer to getting out of the rat race.
After three years of driving the garbage truck and running his own business
part time, Dad quit his job at the county and bought his own red Ford semirigwith a thirty-two-foot ﬂatbed trailer. He ﬁnally had his own full-time truckingbusiness that would be big enough to support his family. He moved from the Equadrant to the S quadrant within the Rich Dad CASHFLOW Quadrants.
It took me years to understand the power of what Dad had done. If someone
had cash to buy hay or horses, he would accept their cash. However, it eventu-ally became clear to me that Dad understood something that perhaps most busi-nessmen today don’t, which is if entrepreneurs are willing to accept items otherthan cash for their stock in trade, they can often dramatically increase the vol-ume and proﬁtability of the business they do.
My dad was a gifted horse trader. Dad traded hay for horses and cattle for
hay. He traded his trucking services for animals, and he even traded livestockwith old-school grocers and shop owners for food and clothing. When we re-modeled the house, Dad traded hay and livestock for materials, labor, cabinets,392 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 392and the skills of various tradesmen. Why didn’t I see it sooner? After all, barter
was the way business was conducted before modern money was introduced. Ithad always worked, and come to think of it, I suppose it always will.
I probably didn’t see it because I was in the real estate business, not the agri-
cultural business. As the economy faltered in the early 1980s, interest ratessoared and the cash purchase of real estate slowed to a crawl, I started hearingabout a little-known sector of the 1031 Exchange industry known as “exchang-ing,” or “equity marketing.” Either term may be used to describe this industryniche. While the technical aspects of exchanging under the rules of InternalRevenue Code Section 1031 are adeptly covered elsewhere in this book by GaryGorman (see Chapter 17), what I include here will open up an entirely newworld of wealth-building possibilities for anyone who taps into this informationand qualiﬁes himself or herself to play in this arena. Here’s how to do it.
Equity marketing is an alternative way of practicing real estate investment
that rejects the idea that cash is necessary to complete a real estate transaction.Instead, the focus is placed on the equity value of each party’s property and on
exchanging those equities to achieve greater beneﬁts for all. In a traditionalbuy/sell transaction, the emphasis is on how much cash the seller can receiveand how little the buyer can pay. This puts buyer and seller at odds with eachother, “competing” for the same dollars. If Dad had waited for every farmer tosell a horse before the farmer could pay for hay to feed his cows, you can beginto see it would have taken my father much longer to win his independence.Trading the hay for the horse accelerated the process.
Real estate professionals who practice equity marketing are called “equity
marketers” or “exchangors.” In the exchange industry and throughout thischapter, those terms are used interchangeably. Exchangors hold regular meet-ings where they gather together to explore ways that they and their propertiescan be matched with other owners and properties in proﬁtable exchanges.These meetings are hotbeds of opportunity. They constitute one of the most vi-brant and effective marketing forums in the real estate industry.
Perhaps most importantly, because equity marketing doesn’t rely 
on cash, it continues to thrive, even during downturns in the real estate 
industry at large.
Exchangors are often able to continue building wealth while those in other
factions of the industry stagnate during tough times. How important is that TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 3939781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 393advantage over a lifetime of investing? Exchanging can make a world of differ-
ence in one’s net worth over a period of years and protect an investor from thelosses that often take place during a down cycle.
In October of 2005, Robert Kiyosaki was invited to be the keynote speaker at
an equity marketing meeting sponsored by the National Council of Exchangors(NCE), which was held at the historic Brown Palace Hotel in Denver, Colorado.After a few minutes in the room, and seeing a ﬂurry of offers made on propertiesthat were presented for exchange, Robert turned to me with boyish enthusiasmand said, “This is my CASHFLOW game in real life!” Wow, I had never thoughtof it that way, and to my surprise and delight, I realized he was right. I could in-stantly see the correlation:
• The venues where the meetings are held might be compared to CASHFLOW
game boards.
• The bylaws of the organization and its codes of conduct are the rules by
which the game is played.
• The book of opportunities that is published for each exchange meeting is
full of one-page property data sheets that contain essentially the same infor-mation found on CASHFLOW game cards. Some are small deal cards, andsome are large deal cards. There are properties, lease rights, water rights,timber, and even an occasional business opportunity. Some are high-riskdeals, and some are relatively low-risk deals.
• Just as the CASHFLOW game sets the context for teaching the Rich Dad ed-
ucation system, the equity marketing arena provides a context that allowspeople to learn and play the exchange game with others, for real. And likethe Rich Dad Company, NCE and other national exchange groups, such asthe Society of Exchange Counselors (SEC), foster a commitment to lifelonglearning for their members.
Exchange organizations teach real people, in real life, how to get out 
of the rat race, using real estate as the primary vehicle.
As a boy, I went to livestock auctions with my dad where we sold some of
our animals from time to time. Now I go to exchange meetings to trade proper-ties. For the average person, equity marketing may be the most powerful toolthere is for building wealth in real estate in any economy.
Robert quickly sized up equity marketing as an important addition to the
Rich Dad real estate system. In subsequent meetings, he expressed his deepdesire that his students not only learn about money, but also be made aware ofTIP394 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 394avenues for putting their knowledge to work in acquiring real wealth. His vision
is not only to provide quality ﬁnancial education, but to point the students toreal-world tracks they can run on to become wealthy. Robert and I have sinceteamed up around that vision to share the concept of equity marketing withthe Rich Dad community.
The results have been rewarding. Kiyosaki students, already armed with the
Rich Dad philosophy, have used equity marketing tools and formulas to reposi-tion their assets, increase their cash ﬂow, grow their net worth, streamline man-agement commitments, and reduce their taxes, to name but a few of the beneﬁtsthey have realized.
Twelve- Year-Old John Paul
One example of successful equity marketing involved a boy from Texas. Robertasked me if I would consider mentoring then twelve-year-old John Paul Pigéon.John Paul started reading the Rich Dad books at the age of seven and had de-voured the entire Rich Dad library before his twelfth birthday. Following theRich Dad/CASHFLOW pattern, he had started two businesses, had written abook, and had produced a music CD, prior to our meeting. He had a goal to ownhis ﬁrst property before he turned thirteen.
I ﬂew to Dallas/Fort Worth to meet John Paul and his family. The love and
respect shared in the Pigéon home is impressive beyond words. The emphasisthey place on education and the way they work together as a family to securetheir ﬁnancial future is inspiring. I noted John Paul’s single-minded desire tolearn only what actually works in the real world. Even at age twelve, he dis-played little patience for empty theory. I was also astonished that the mind of amere boy could so quickly grasp concepts and retain vocabulary that certainadults sometimes struggle to understand. He had already attained an aptitudeand a passion for learning—two life skills for anyone who wants to excel ﬁnan-cially. It was clear to me that exceptional parenting had produced an extraordi-nary young man who could indeed be coached in business, even as a preteen.
I had dinner with the Pigéon family, along with my friend and partner, John
Spinola, a former president of the NCE. As you might guess, John Paul took toour wealth-building and exchange formulas like a duck takes to water. Hismother was newly licensed in real estate, so we introduced Mrs. Pigéon to eq-uity marketing. Within a year, thirteen-year-old John Paul had realized his goal,acquiring a minority interest for his family in an RV park valued at nearly $1 mil-lion, using only his mother’s commissions as a down payment. He had taken hisROBERT KIYOSAKI 3959781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 395396 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
ﬁrst step toward real estate wealth, thanks to the combined power of the Rich
Dad system, the equity marketing forum, and remarkable parents.
Cooperation Replaces Competition
In an equity marketing transaction, the buyer and seller “cooperatively” seek to
exchange more than the deed to a property. They exchange a package of benefits
that results in a much more profitable transaction for all parties. For example, the
added benefits of an equity marketing exchange may include enhanced tax treat-ment, reduced management duties, lesser or greater leverage (debt), a better lo-cation for both parties, a more favorable property type, or a bigger opportunity forprofit based on the particular talents of each investor. Equity marketing identifieswhat unique needs and capabilities each party has and engineers ways of matchingthem to amplify the benefits of the exchange all around. It is synergy at its finest, atrue win/win.
Turning Lemons into Lemonade
One of the most powerful forms of leverage I have accessed through equity
marketing is the ability to exchange as a way of solving problems in my portfolio.For example, as a lender I made a loan against a four-acre horse property. Theborrower went into default, and I eventually had to ﬁle foreclosure. My loanwas junior to the ﬁrst mortgage, which was also in foreclosure. That meant thatI had to assume the ﬁrst mortgage to protect my position in the property. Iwrote a check to the ﬁrst mortgage holder to satisfy their demands and fore-closed on the borrower. I became the new owner of the property through fore-closure. Following foreclosure, I discovered that the borrowers had left thehome in poor condition. It was going to require signiﬁcant work and expenseon my part if I hoped to get the full value upon sale. I was holding what for mewas a bitter lemon.
Before undertaking the rehab, I presented the home for exchange, priced at
$225,000 and in “as-is” condition, at a local equity marketing meeting. Thatwas a price I wasn’t conﬁdent I could soon command in the buy/sell market,even after ﬁx up. A gentleman in attendance at the meeting said that he thoughthis daughter and son-in-law might be interested in the property. He offered totrade me two lots as a down payment on the home.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 396The ﬁrst parcel was a luxury view lot located ﬁfty miles north of my home
in an older, but stable subdivision of good values. The problem was, it was so
steep that we referred to it as the “billy goat” lot, since nothing but mountaingoats could climb the embankment to the street. It required some special engi-neering to make the lot useable. Having had experience in construction, I wasn’tnervous about the geology of the parcel, but the seller was. I was more nervousabout an empty horse property on which I was servicing a $150,000 mortgage.My vacancy didn’t bother him because his daughter was willing to occupy theproperty.
The second lot was zoned for a duplex and was close to home, but the subdi-
vision in which it was located was nonconforming. That means that the countyof jurisdiction had never fully approved the subdivision, so no building permit
could be issued for any structure on the lot. Consequently, unless the county’sregulations could be satisﬁed, the lot was of little commercial value. It seemedto me that the problem was resolvable, given the investment of some time andperhaps some engineering work, which was necessary to p rove to the county
that the boundaries, placement of utilities, and drainage were all conformingto county standards. I also felt more comfortable with the duplex lot than withthe empty house.
We structured a transaction wherein he traded the two lots to me for a com-
bined value of $75,000, and his son-in-law secured a new mortgage for $150,000,meeting my asking price of $225,000 on the foreclosed home. The exchangebecame the sugar that turned my lemon into lemonade.
Not long after we closed, I was approached by a young couple about buying
the duplex lot. The husband worked in the county planning and zoning depart-ment and had an inside track to secure the needed variances. After the lot wasapproved for a building permit, the couple paid me $50,000 cash for it. I even-tually sold the billy goat lot for $70,000. Consequently, by using an exchange Iwas able to get $120,000 for the equity in the foreclosed home that probablywasn’t immediately worth $75,000 in a cash sale. More sugar, more sweet tastinglemonade!
Benefits Are More Important Than Price
It is not uncommon to realize more than the cash asking price in an exchangebecause equity marketing focuses on more than price. Remember, it focuses onstructuring beneﬁts for both parties. Under the equity marketing system, anowner’s equity, rather than cash, becomes her stock in trade. An exchangor talliesROBERT KIYOSAKI 3979781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 397how much equity an owner has and lists the beneﬁts a new owner could derive
from that equity position. Then potential transactions are explored that mightallow the owner to increase her equity while improving the beneﬁts she receivesfrom it. The beneﬁts become so valuable that there is little motivation on any-one’s part to haggle over price.
In the previous example, the other party’s lots provided me with the beneﬁt
of an immediate upside potential in value if I could overcome certain conditions,namely, the topography of one lot and the zoning status of the other. Althoughthese conditions were a detriment to the existing owner, they were a beneﬁt tome because I had the experience to solve the problems.
My property provided added beneﬁts to the other gentleman, as well. He
found a home for his daughter, and he consolidated equity in lots he no longerwanted into a single property that could provide shelter for his grandkids whilethe property appreciated through upkeep and market forces.
Neither one of us had to go through the hassle of marketing the properties
in the traditional fashion. Rather, we were able to close quickly and move on.The beneﬁts we both received were over and above the mere asking prices ofour respective properties. True synergy was created in the transaction becausewe both solved immediate problems and set ourselves up for greater gains inthe future. I made at least an extra $45,000 by concentrating on the beneﬁtsrather than a cash price.
By working this combination of equity and beneﬁts within the framework of
the equity marketing arena, you can amplify multiple forms of leverage for allparties. Notice in the foregoing example how I was able to leverage my experi-ence in construction and the process of getting zoning entitlements to increasethe value of the lots. The other owner leveraged his daughter’s need for a homeand his son-in-law’s credit to consolidate his equity in one property that theycould ﬁx up and make more valuable. For both parties to the exchange, the eq-uity became ﬂuid, or liquid, without ﬁrst converting it to cash. This is a veryimportant distinction! Equity marketing allows us to spend our equity to acquirea new property without ﬁrst changing it to cash. The equity in each property isliqueﬁed through the power of thought, ideas, talents, knowledge, agreements,networking, and formulas that when knitted together, create a synergistic (big-ger than before) win/win for all parties.
Equity marketing allows us to spend our equity to acquire a new 
property, without first changing it to cash.TIP398 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 398In other words, when we exchange equities, as opposed to engaging in a
mere cash sale, my equity and the new beneﬁts that my property offers you,
plus your equity and the new beneﬁts that your property offers me, equal muchmore for both of us than the stand-alone equities ever could. And it is all ac-complished without ﬁrst having to ﬁnd the cash to do the deal! Imagine the ad-vantage this gives you during times of tight credit or rising interest rates thatundermine traditional ﬁnancing.
Equity Marketing = the Fast Track
If we again liken equity marketing to the CASHFLOW game, you’ll ﬁnd it canbe your path to the so-called fast track, which is exactly what I believe Robertsaw in his ﬁrst exchange meeting. In the exchange forum, just like on the fasttrack in the CASHFLOW game, you are able to move forward faster, earn more,and experience a synergistic multiplying effect. Everything suddenly becomesmore ﬂuid.
Consider the beneﬁts to the two parties in the following story of another ex-
change transaction:
My friend Magi Bird, who is nationally revered as an exceptional instructor
on equity marketing techniques, had some clients who had outgrown theirhome. Mom, dad, three kids, a dog, and a cat had overrun both the house andthe small yard. They needed something bigger but didn’t feel they could afforda larger house payment. They also owned a piece of recreational land in a distantcommunity that they hadn’t seen in seventeen years. Magi suggested they con-sider trading their existing house and the land for a bigger home.
They found a large, two-story home on three acres that was perfect for the
family. The owner of the home was an elderly widower who had recently un-dergone hip surgery. He could no longer tolerate stairs, and being alone, hedidn’t need the extra space. The big yard was a burden on him as well. He des-perately needed a smaller, single-story dwelling.
Magi and her clients made an offer to the old gentleman to trade the family’s
modest one-story house, plus the recreational lot in a straight-across exchangefor the larger home. He accepted their offer. The price of his home equaledthat of the smaller home and the lot combined. Each party moved into a homethat was better suited for their current needs at essentially the same paymentthey had each been paying. The exchange was made solely on the basis of thenonmonetary beneﬁts. The family got a roomier home and a bigger yard withoutROBERT KIYOSAKI 3999781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 399going deeper into debt. They also activated the equity in a lot that had cost
them money for years in property taxes. The elderly man moved into thesmaller, more comfortable home that was safer for him and much easier tomanage. He also received an extra lot in the process that required no upkeep,unlike the big yard he left behind. The extra lot gave him an option to eithersell it to augment his income or keep it and leave it to his heirs at his passing.
Benefits! It’s the benefits in an exchange that are often more important
than the price of the property.
Jim Keller, a ﬁfty-year veteran of the exchange business—one of my personal
mentors and a man for whom I have profound respect—tells the following storyabout completing an exchange for one of his clients, strictly based on beneﬁts.
A couple owned a large home in Incline Village at Lake Tahoe. The couple
divorced and both moved down the mountain to Reno, Nevada. The home wasempty, and the ex-husband was writing checks totaling $8,000 a month in mort-gage payments, taxes, upkeep, and management fees. As his broker, Jim Kellerbrought the man an offer to trade his equity in the home for ﬁfty-two time-shares in Padre Island, Texas. Jim’s client replied, “I don’t want that.”
Jim quickly responded by saying, “Yes, you do, and let me explain why.” Put-
ting his problem into monetary terms, Jim pointed out the reality of a $96,000per year negative cash ﬂow on the home at Incline. The maintenance fees onthe time-shares by contrast were only $14,000 a year. The client immediatelysaw the beneﬁt of reducing his overhead by $82,000 a year on a home he didn’tneed or want. The exchange closed. The subsequent owner tore down the houseto build a new home on the prime Tahoe lot. Jim’s client was almost $7 ,000 amonth better off. What was more important to the client: the price of the vacanthome, or the beneﬁt of saving $7 ,000 a month?
Two-Way, Three-Way, or Multileg 
Exchanges
All of the examples used so far are of two-way exchanges. That is to say that
one party traded their property straight across for another property. While thisis the simplest of exchanges, it presents the added challenge of having to ﬁndsomeone who wants your property and also has what you want. As you mayimagine, that kind of match made in heaven does not always come easily. In-cluded in the format of exchange meetings are one or more methods for dis-TIP400 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 400covering who wants what and how those pairs can be connected to form three-
way or multileg exchanges.
Here is an illustration of an actual transaction that closed recently between
the members of the Salt Lake City, Utah, exchange group.
Mr. Blomquist was seventy-three years old and lived in a multistory house.
He had a degenerative spinal condition that made it increasingly more difﬁcultfor him to walk, climb stairs, and maintain normal mobility. Not long ago, helost his balance and tumbled from the top of a ﬂight of stairs to the bottom.Thankfully, he incurred no serious injury but was shaken by the experience.He realized some changes had to be made. He and Mrs. Blomquist purchased aranch-style home around the corner. They then had two homes and two housepayments. They moved into the new home and put the other home on the mar-ket, without results. Mr. Blomquist came to the local exchange meeting and of-fered the multistory home for trade.
Mrs. Rusche was attending the meeting and offered to trade two condos and
$20,000 in barter credits for the home. Mr. Blomquist didn’t want her condos,so no two-way exchange was possible.
At the same meeting, Mr. Welch presented a parcel of commercial land for
trade, located in a ru ral area and approve d for the construction of storage units.
Mr. Blomquist was interested in the land, but Mr. Welch did not want Mr.Blomquist’s home.
However, Mr. Welch was interested in trading his land for Mrs. Rusche’s
condos and barter credits. Finally, everyone found something they wanted andsomeone who wanted what they offered. Here is how the three-way exchangewas structured:ROBERT KIYOSAKI 401
Value: $160,000
Debt: -$80,000Barter: +$20,000
Equity: $100,000 Mrs. R’s Condos
Value: $100,000
Debt: $ZERO 
Equity: $100,000 Mr. C’s and Mr. W’s 
Land
Value: $310,000
Debt: -$210,000
Equity: $100,000 Mr. B’s House
FIGURE 22.29781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 401Mr. Blomquist took the commercial land, Mr. Welch took the condos with
the barter credits, and Mrs. Rusche got Mr. Blomquist’s house.
Remember, we said exchanging focuses on equity, not on price or cash. Notice
that the equities were all traded in balance at $100,000 each. Also notice that
Mrs. Rusche had only $80,000 equity in her condos, so she had to add some-thing of value to balance. She could have added cash, or she might have added apromissory note payable to Mr. Welch to make up the difference. However, sheoffered barter credits, which can be spent within the barter company systemfor various goods and services from other merchants who accept those credits.The $20,000 in credits together with the $80,000 in equity gave Mrs. Ruschethe $100,000 she needed to balance her part of the exchange.
Now let’s consider the beneﬁts each received over and above the $100,000
in equity.
Mr. Blomquist got rid of the extra house he no longer needed. He reduced
his debt by $210,000 and his monthly outgo by approximately $1,650. He movedhis equity in the house that wasn’t likely to appreciate much over the next yearor so into a development property that he could improve to r apidly increase his
equity. He had no capital gains tax due on the transaction because the home hetraded was his primary residence for at least two of the prior ﬁve years.
Mrs. Rusche got rid of her condos that were far away from her home in ex-
change for a larger, nicer property closer to home. While she took on moredebt, she had someone to lease the home with an option to purchase withintwo years. She got ease of management, less travel, a larger basis that increasedher tax shelter, and the possibility of a sale in two years that will liquefy her eq-uity once again, allowing her to move forward and make another proﬁt. Shepaid no capital gains tax on the sale because the transaction qualiﬁed as an ex-change under IRS Code Section 1031.
Mr. Welch disposed of the land he had been sitting on. He no longer has the
negative cash ﬂow associated with paying the property taxes. He has two condosthat are rented for a positive cash ﬂow. He also has an increase in basis of$80,000 that he can begin to depreciate, thereby providing him with tax shelterthat he didn’t have on the land. He also paid no capital gains tax on the sale be-cause the transaction qualiﬁed as an exchange under IRS Code Section 1031.
Are you beginning to see that the beneﬁts of the exchange are often more
important than price and cash? As Rich Dad often says, “Cash is trash!” Whilewe all like some cash on hand, holding it as the primary motivation when build-ing a real estate portfolio can be much too costly. It is more lucrative to exchangefor a valuable package of beneﬁts. Exchanging beneﬁts grows wealth faster than402 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 402accumulating cash ever could in the same transactions. You see, trading causes
the same acceleration in real estate as it did for my dad when he swapped live-stock and commodities rather than the slower method of waiting for the cashto come along. That is one of the valuable lessons I eventually learned from lifeon the farm.
Other Advantages of Exchange Groups
Relationships
As is the case in so many other arenas in life, it is, in my opinion, the people Ihave met at the exchange groups who make up the most valuable element ofexchanging. I consider it a privilege to associate with a group of several hun-dred people from all across America who, on the whole, live by a code of con-duct that is refreshing in a ﬁnancial world that is frequently rocked by greedand corruption. I can say with some authority that my experience of exchang-ors has been that they are smart, honest, reliable, and dedicated to the re-spectable practice of their trade. I have found a few exceptions to that rule,but that is to be expected I suppose, inasmuch as we are still dealing with hu-man beings.
Tapping into such a network of reliable professionals is one of the unspoken
advantages of afﬁliation with organizations such as NCE and SEC. It drasticallyincreases my potential ﬁeld of operations. I am comfortable investing outsideof my own area, as long as I have exchange friends there. Their presence allowsme to contain the risk that would normally be incurred by venturing too farfrom home. I can call someone in every state in the Union, in almost any com-munity of any size, and get up-to-the-minute information on what is happeningin that area. Such a network allows me to become mobile with my equity. I canenter almost any economy with the conﬁdence that I am making sound deci-sions based on local experience and involvement, and they can do the same inmy town.
More and more, regional markets behave independent of each other, based
on employment trends, government policies, local economics, energy, and evenweather. Instead of having to wait out a downturn in my own market untilthings improve, effectively sitting on the sidelines of the game until an upturn,I can exchange my equity from town to town, state to state, and take advantageof opportunities in micro-markets. I can invest in oil states when energy is hot,agricultural areas when farming is good, and housing when there is localizeddemand. My network of exchangor friends empowers me to capitalize on ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4039781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 403employment trends and to anticipate growth in multiple markets with the steely
conﬁdence that comes from having reliable allies with “boots on the ground”in the area.
As I said, the people I have grown to love and respect and with whom I now
do business through various exchange organizations comprise the biggest ben-eﬁt of being an exchangor. I am honored to number such marvelous people asmy friends and associates. I am a wealthy man, if only by virtue of those associ-ations. Because exchanging is what originally brought me into relationship withRobert and Kim Kiyosaki, I include the entire Rich Dad family when I countmy blessings of these priceless friendships.
The Brilliant Brain Trust
In all of my life’s experience, I have never seen a more potent bunch of brainsgathered in one location than I inevitably see at exchange meetings, as pertain-ing to real estate. One of the activities normally included in a meeting of ex-changors is a problem-solving or brainstorming session. The group intentionallylooks for the most difﬁcult problem, the nastiest, most tangled situation that
presently exists among the attendees. For an hour or so, a discussion ensueswherein anyone who has an idea takes a turn at the microphone and offerstheir experience and possible solutions to the dilemma. The level of creativityand the depth of experience that exudes from some of the minds gathered thereis nothing short of astonishing. I truly cannot put a price tag on the value ofhaving such a brain trust to turn to with difﬁcult situations. Perhaps even moresurprising is the fact that no one in that circle ever asks for anything in returnfor a brilliant idea. Anything anyone can do is offered freely, as part of the ca-maraderie of the club, as it were.
Win/Win
Unlike traditional real estate sales, where competition for listings and buyers isbrisk and often brutal, exchangors operate from a win/win mentality. Everyoneis welcome to participate because the more people and the more propertiespresent in the circle, the more potential transactions exist. Everyone who comesto an exchange meeting for the ﬁrst time is assigned a mentor to make surethey get off to a good start. It is an environment where everybody supportseverybody else. It is common to see arms around the shoulder of the new guyand to hear words of wise instruction and encouragement. Exchangors are afamily, so to speak, and take good care of their own. Sponsoring, mentoring,and championing the new person is a way of life with exchangors. This concern404 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 404for others is perhaps no more apparent than in the many charities that have
been spawned by exchange groups. There are scholarship funds for college-bound kids of high aptitude and modest means. There is an educational fundthat underwrites courses to be taught in the real estate community. And thereare many more private charities directed to local recipients with health prob-lems or other disabilities. Great good radiates from the generous hearts of themembers of these professional groups. I, for one, am proud to be part of the ex-change community.
Joint Ventures
It only follows that after ﬁnding such a capable, trustworthy group of profes-sionals, who gather together to do business, that we would end up building in-vestment teams within the group. Many exchangors are part of such teams thathave in some cases been wildly successful in their investment activities by allo-cating each of their strengths to larger projects of which they each own a share.This is where it really gets fun. “Hanging out” with friends, while making mil-lions together is about as good as it gets. Expect to pay your dues, to be tested,and to prove your self before being invited to participate in any such ventures.
Once you have demonstrated your character and capability, the quantity andquality of the opportunities for joint venturing with other exchangors increasesdramatically.
Education
As I inferred previously, continuing education is a cornerstone of exchanging.Exchangors operate at such a high level of expertise and creativity that theirskills are not easily acquired. There is a structure within each national exchangeorganization to preserve, catalogue, and teach all of the principles and practicesthat make exchanging such a powerful tool for building wealth. Every nationalexchange meeting includes at least one full day of education. The best instruc-tors in the business teach topics in which they personally excel, to advance thecollective competency within the exchange community.
Like professional athletes, those who make big money in exchanging pay a
price to acquire the skills necessary to perform at peak levels. Nothing in thisinformation is meant to give the impression that equity marketing is an easybusiness. Like everything else of value, it requires dedication, education, and agood bit of perspiration to succeed. However, the same effort spent learningand perfecting your practice of exchanging is apt to produce results beyond al-most any other ﬁeld in real estate where you might apply the same effort. AsROBERT KIYOSAKI 4059781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 405406 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
you embark upon your venture into exchanging, please keep this axiom in mind,
“I didn’t say it would be easy; I only said it would be worth it.”
The best of exchangors operate at the top of their game. By comparison,
they have skills in real estate on par with any professional athlete in sports.
They are the crème de la crème of real estate practitioners.
In addition, the groups teach a speciﬁc skill set known as “counseling” to all
exchangors. Counseling is the art of communicating with exchange clients in a
way that familiarizes the client with the new world of possibilities availablethrough exchanging. Counseling educates the client in preparation for the clientto begin approaching transactions in nontraditional ways. This grooms theclients to engage their equities in creating the mutual exchange of beneﬁts out-lined above. Counseling and the preparation of our clients to participate fullyin the exchange process is one of the core tenets of the educational commitmentof the equity marketing community.
Counseling courses promote high-level communication skills and one-on-
one teaching skills. An exchangor expects to handpick a select few clients andto form a long-term mutual commitment to represent them. Lasting bonds offriendship are often formed with clients. To do the best job possible, an ex-changor must know her client’s ﬁnances as well as she knows her own. The ex-change community offers dozens of examples of exchangors who have madetens of millions of dollars for themselves and their clients over a period of afew decades, while living an abundant life in the process, and enjoying beautifulfriendships. Through the education offered by the equity marketing groups,wealth building through real estate becomes a fun and afﬂuent way of life.
When I ﬁrst began attending exchange meetings and heard how lucrative it
could be for anyone who paid attention and worked hard, I wondered if it wastrue. As I looked around me, I saw people well into their seventies and eightieswho were still working. I wondered how it could be so proﬁtable if people whohad been at it for so long couldn’t afford to retire. As I got to know those grandfolks with gray hair, I learned that most of them were indeed wealthy. I realizedthat they continued to come and to do deals because nothing brought themgreater pleasure than making money while associating with their best friends.What are they going to do instead, go golﬁng, or boating? Most of them doplenty of both, and anything else they want to do. I can’t think of any groupTIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 406that enjoys life more than exchangors because they have the means to live their
dreams.
There you have it! While this chapter is only an overview of equity marketing,
it gives you a starting point, a portal to which you can connect. Like my father,if you have a dream to control your own destiny, if you are a fan of the Rich Dadsystem and wish to set foot on a path that has been p roven to build wealth dur-
ing good times and bad, this is your invitation to do so.
On the wall of my private ofﬁce at home hangs a painting of a Palomino stal-
lion, an image of Dad’s all-time favorite horse, “Old Yeller.” On the back of it,scrawled in my dad’s cowboy handwriting, are the words, “For Wayne, whenI’m gone,” penned there to make sure I received it after his death. For me, thepainting is an emblem of the joys of my boyhood, spent at my dad’s side, as wetraveled up and down Utah, Idaho, and Nevada, trading horses and cows, haul-ing hay and learning to be entrepreneurs.
It has been a long and rewarding journey from horse trading to real estate
exchanging. So much of my father lives on in me and in my sons and daughters.He died content and proud of his family. I love him. I miss him. I think he wouldbe happy to know that his story may inspire others to strike out on their own.In his dichotomies, he was both my rich dad and my poor dad. In being both,he taught me great lessons. He gave me much to measure up to and a few thingsto strive to improve. His example presented me with choices similar to thosethat Robert Kiyosaki’s rich dad and poor dad presented to him. I chose to gofor it, to live my entrepreneurial dream! On a crisp January morning a few yearsago, Robert Kiyosaki shared his vision with me of giving people a track to runon, as a means of acquiring real wealth and of accomplishing the Rich Dad mis-sion, which is, “To Elevate the Financial IQ of All Humanity.” Robert asked meto make available to his students the incredible opportunity inherent in equitymarketing. Will reading this chapter be the gateway to your ﬁnancial future?Will plugging into the vibrant exchange community I have described be a meansof accelerating your personal accumulation of wealth? Now that you are armedwith this information, it is entirely up to you and the choice is now yours. Forme and for my family, I choose to grow old with my dear friends, being one ofthose gray-haired rich guys, still doing deals and living my dreams into mygolden years. I choose to be rich in relationships, rich in ﬁnances, rich in health,and rich in wonderful experiences. I choose a rich life. Each of us has the powerto choose for ourselves. What will you choose for yourself?ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4079781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 407Ways to Learn More
www.waynelpalmer.com
www.nce1031.comA soon-to-be published book on real estate formulas, by Wayne Palmer
Wayne Palmer is widely regarded as a master in the creative structuring
of real estate acquisitions and ﬁnancing, using notes and other forms of
real estate paper together with 1031 Equity Marketing formulas. His skillscome from thirty years of daily practice of his trade, as the owner andmanager of National Note of Utah, LC, and several other companies. Hehas been involved in real estate development since 1978 in Utah, Idaho,
Arizona, Hawai’i, and Minnesota. By way of industry credentials, Wayne is a Licensed Princi-pal Real Estate Broker, a Certiﬁed Real Estate Note Appraiser, a Certiﬁed Cash Flow MasterBroker, a Licensed Continuing Education Provider, and holds the Equity Marketing Specialist(EMS) designation with the National Council of Exchangors.
408 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 408Marty De Rito is an expert on retail real estate—shopping centers and retail
properties. As you know by now, there is a difference between residential,
commercial, ofﬁce, raw land, and other niches of real estate investing. When I
want information on retail real estate, Marty is the person I call.
For years, no matter where I would go to in Phoenix, I would see Marty’s com-
pany’s signs—DeRito Partners—everywhere, but I had never met the guy. One ofmy bigger commercial properties is right next to a shopping center that Martymanages. I knew the owner of the property and some of the tenants, but still I hadnever met Marty.
After a while, my imagination began to take over. I pictured that De Rito Part-
ners was an old ﬁrm and that Marty was some old guy who had started the ﬁrmbut was no longer active in the business. Then one day, I met him in the gym andwas surprised to meet a very young person! After talking to him, I realized that thereason I had not run into him was that he is a very busy, ambitious young man.
Today, Marty is taking on some of the biggest and most ambitious retail real
estate projects in Phoenix. He’s got guts. Talking to him is invaluable because hehas insights into the world of business seen only from the world of retail. In otherwords, he focuses on what shoppers are buying and where, along with how wellthe shopper is doing ﬁnancially. When I want to ﬁnd out what is hot and what is23 Marty DE RITO
How to Create Retail Magic: 
A Tale of Two Centers
4099781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 409not with shoppers, Marty is the guy. He has insight into the local economy and
what parts of the city are growing and what parts are dying because he is on thefront lines of consumerism—just by knowing how retailers in the area are doing.This is why Marty’s knowledge is priceless.
—Robert Kiyosaki
In your city or town, I’m sure there is one retail center that is simply the
place to see and be seen. It is the center where people congregate, where
people take their out-of-town guests, where they shop, and where they go forfun. And it is the center that you as an investor might be interested in owningone day, it is the center that you as a developer may want to emulate, and it isthe center that you as a business owner would put at the top of your list whenlooking to lease space. No matter what your interest is in retail centers, thischapter will provide you with experiences and truths that you will want toknow before entering the retail arena.
Generally speaking, centers like the one we are describing are no different
from any other retail center; after all, retail centers are simply a collection ofstores and eating places with parking spaces, signs, and landscaping. But some-how certain centers seem to be the ones that have won the popularity contest.They have become the winners in the battle for the shoppers’ time, attention,and almighty dollar.
In the early days of my career, I admired the great minds who could pull to-
gether such amazing opportunities and then shape them into retail develop-ments that didn’t just hit the mark—they nailed the mark. Heck, they inventedthe mark, and then they nailed it! Now I admire those people even more becauseI know what it takes to make that kind of magic happen. Now I, along with thehelp of my team, have waved the magician’s wand a few times. Experience hastaught me, though, that it takes more than a wand, and there is little magic in-volved. Developing a premier shopping center takes three potent ingredients:
Great relationshipsGreat real estateGreat attention to detail
Now you may be thinking, “Marty, of course it takes those things. I’ve read a
few other chapters in this book, and that seems to be what lots of successful
real estate pros are saying.” Good. I’m glad the other authors are reinforcing410 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 410my message. Great relationships, great real estate, and great attention to detail
are universal truths, and anyone who wants to achieve any level of success inreal estate simply must put every ounce of effort into each one because any twowithout the other isn’t good enough.
In my years, I’ve known real estate pros who have tremendous relationships
with some of the biggest and best retailers. They can get the appointmentswhen no one else can. They have their foot in the door. I’ve seen them havetremendous retail locations—at the p roverbial c orners of Center and Main with
high trafﬁc and plenty of customer potential. But then, I’ve seen them com-pletely blow it when it came to the details. The architecture is off, or the eco-nomics of the center aren’t right or the visibility is impaired or . . . the list goeson and on. It takes excellence in all three of these ingredients for success.
But what does excellence look like when it comes to retail centers? It’s a
very different animal when you compare it to other forms of real estate, and asyou read further in this chapter, you’ll come to see why. So whether you areconsidering venturing into the world of retail centers, thinking about buying aretail center, or even thinking about leasing space in one for a business venture,I’ll show you what excellence means so you can recognize it when you see it.
It has taken me decades to learn what I am sharing with you. I was fortunate
to handle the leasing and sales of hundreds of centers when I was a retail leasingagent at Grubb and Ellis Company and on my own at De Rito Partners, Inc.,and the lesson has cost me plenty. About ten years into my real estate career,approximately seven years after I left Grubb and Ellis Company on good termsto start my own shopping center leasing and development company, I recog-nized a great piece of real estate—the 1-million-square-foot Christown Mall. Itwas more than thirty years old and needed a signiﬁcant rehab to accomplish adrastic change in the tenant mix. My idea was simple. Add large power centerretailers (Walmart, Costco, Target, etc.) into an enclosed mall setting. The pre-vious standard department stores had either left or were leaving to go to thenewer mall near the freeway. But my research showed Christown Mall still hadsigniﬁcant trafﬁc counts on the arterial street, there was a good density of cus-tomers who wanted discount stores, and the existing owner already had Wal-mart in the center but it wanted to expand to a supercenter.
It all sounded like I was well on my way. My mistake was in choosing a partner
to purchase and redevelop the shopping center. The ﬁrm I chose had a net worthat the time that was equal to the size of the transaction. In development, nothingever goes 100 percent right; working through a project takes time, persistence,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4119781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 411and staying power, and by that I mean cash. The minute we hit some major ob-
stacles, my partner wanted out. To make matters worse, when my partner entered the transaction, he sold a portion of his ownership to a “hard money”lender. I didn’t know about it until it was already done. I knew if trouble wereto occur, hard money lenders had no interest in giving me more time to workout the obstacles. Their business plan would be to push me out and force me tolive up to the ﬁnancial guarantees that I had given my partner, who I knew verywell.
The lesson I learned was never enter a partnership if you are the sweat equity
unless your ﬁnancial partner has a signiﬁcant net worth. Find a ﬁnancial partnerwho has a net worth or ﬁnancial means that is at least ﬁve times the opportunity.Additionally, never allow your partner to sell all or a piece of his ownershipwithout your written app roval and/or a ﬁrst right of r efusal. My little mistakes
cost me $7 million dollars in cash.
That was eye-opening to me, and eyes once opened must never close again. I
became far wiser after that, and so will you with every project. But my goalwith this chapter is to make you wiser from the beginning before your money is
on the line. I guarantee you’ll never look at a retail center the same way again,whether you are looking at it as an investment or simply as a shopper. You’ll seeit in a whole new light.
I called this chapter “How to Create Retail Magic: A Tale of Two Centers”
because I will be using two separate centers as examples throughout. The ﬁrstcenter, called Casa Paloma, is one I built from the ground up, and it has beencompleted for about ten years. The second center, the Scottsdale Pavilions, isan acquisition, and we’re in redevelopment right now, but the work was proba-bly about ten years overdue. I chose these two centers for this chapter becausein ways you will come to see, they are living, breathing examples of my threekey ingredients for success: great relationships, great real estate, and great at-tention to detail. Let’s dive in and deﬁne what these mean more speciﬁcally.
Ingredient No. 1: Great Relationships
Years ago, I had the privilege of meeting Mel Simon, the largest owner of retailproperties in the world (NYSE: SPG), and he said something I’ll never forget:“Make a friend today and a deal tomorrow.” Those were profound words, par-ticularly in retail real estate where you may ﬁnd yourself working with thosesame “friends” your entire career, particularly when it comes to leasing spaceto these tenants.412 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 412Unlike some areas of real estate—commercial ofﬁce for example—where you
may do a deal with a tenant company once and then never again, or at best
maybe ﬁve or ten years later, retail real estate is often the opposite. You mayﬁnd yourself doing one leasing deal, two, ﬁve, ten or more a year with a companylike Subway, McDonald’s, or a grocery store, for example. These companies andtheir real estate teams become regular customers, and, like anyone else in sales,I believe our product provides better value and adds to their bottom lines. Inother words, almost on a daily basis, our reputation and our relationships gohand in hand. Weak performance is not an option.
Relationships, I’ve found over the years, come in a variety of ﬂavors.
Relationships with Tenants
I can’t tell you how many times the great relationships I’ve earned with retailerson one project have helped me on another. For instance, at our Casa Palomacenter—a wonderful upscale, mixed-use shopping area—our tenants there ap-preciated us because we created an exceptional property with signiﬁcant re-tailer sales per square foot, and we worked to bring in the best of the bestretailers creating a strong tenant mix.
I can’t tell you how many times the great relationships I’ve earned with
retailers on one project have helped me on another.
Scottsdale Pavilions is a recent acquisition that we have always seen as a
center with huge potential. It had been neglected by its previous owner, andcurrently it is about 20 percent vacant. The retail tenants didn’t like the previ-ous owner very much, but they are beginning to like us a lot because we aremaking a difference. We’re infusing huge dollars into imp rovements that will
make the center more desirable to both retailers and shoppers. And we areworking with them to redeﬁne the right mix of tenants and create signiﬁcantcustomer demand so that everyone can make money. That’s what relationshipsare all about.
This opportunity to completely redeﬁne the tenant mix and remerchandise
the Scottsdale Pavilions is good news for everyone. Guess where we will go toﬁnd new tenants? You got it, to the people and the companies who believe inus, who are partners with us in our other centers, and who are our friends. Ofcourse, there will be retailers we’ve never worked with before in the ScottsdalePavilions, too. Our existing relationships will even help us forge those new re-lationships. We have a ready, willing, and able group of friends who not onlyTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4139781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 413want their own brands to succeed, but they have us as well. And they know that
partnering to create a great tenant mix is one of the ways success happens.
Relationships with Shoppers
Just as it is important to have great relationships with tenants, it’s equally im-portant to foster great relationships with shoppers. In retail, relationships comein the form of giving shoppers what they want. Later we’ll get into the detailsof exactly what that is, but for now, let’s focus on the relationship itself. WhenDe Rito Partners, my Arizona-based company, bought the Scottsdale Pavilions,we knew it had a bad relationship with shoppers. How? Well for starters, busi-ness was dwindling year after year. It was an errand center, meaning it was aplace where shoppers would come to stop at one store and then leave as quicklyas possible.
In retail, the goal is to get the shopper to stay at your center as long as possi-
ble. Think about it; if you stay at a retail center an hour longer than you intended,you’ll probably spend more money. We all do it, either on food or on someluxury that suddenly transformed into a necessity right before our eyes. That’sthe psychology of shopping (there’s more, so keep reading), and each of usbrings it to life every time we enter a Costco, a Saks, or any other retailer. Butgetting people to stay longer isn’t as easy as it may seem. It takes the right com-bination of convenience, entertainment, and ambiance to make it happen.
In retail, the goal is to get the shopper to stay at your center as long 
as possible. Think about it; if you stay at a retail center an hour longer than 
you intended, you’ll probably spend more money.
That’s where relationships come in. Call me a ladies’ man, but I try to have
great relationships with women. No, not in that way, but in the sense that
women comprise two-thirds of all shoppers. With men making up 95 percentof retail center developers, it’s critical that anyone in this business understandwhat women want. Before I began developing Casa Paloma, I asked my wifewhy she was traveling twenty miles north to shop at the retail centers in Scotts-dale, rather than going to the ones closer to where we lived. She looked at mewith an expression that seemed to say, “You don’t know?” and then began toexplain. “The centers here don’t have the right stores. There’s no Banana Re-public, or Chico’s or Ann Taylor. There are no good restaurants and no A.J.’sFine Foods [a higher-end grocery store]. There’s nothing upscale. It’s just moreTIP414 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 414fun to go shopping in Scottsdale and more convenient because there are lots of
other stores nearby that I can stop in to pick up little things here or there.”
“Oh,” I replied, my wheels turning. I know she left thinking, duh, or some
more adult equivalent of that expression, but the truth was I wanted to hearthe truth from her. And then, I asked the same question of her friends. Fromthem I got similar looks and similar answers. That led me to my lifelong rela-tionship with female shoppers, and it’s paid off in big numbers. Casa Palomaremains today one of the top-grossing centers in the state.
The Scottsdale Pavilions, by contrast, had forgotten about its shoppers. It
was a hot property when it ﬁrst opened up twenty years ago, before there wasmuch competition in the area. But then the trade area began to grow. Other re-tail developers began forging relationships with shoppers where the ScottsdalePavilions didn’t bother. Business began to trail off, and before too long theScottsdale Pavilions was in a downward spiral. When I bought the center, oneof the ﬁrst things we did was send a questionnaire to six thousand homes in thesurrounding community. We told our neighbors that we were going to reinvig-orate the center, and if they would kindly tell us what they would want there,we’d give them two free movie tickets. We had a ﬂood of responses, not becauseof the free movie tickets alone, but because people were honored to have beenasked their preferences. It was the beginning of our relationship with the shop-pers in the trade area.
Ingredient No. 2: Great Real Estate
Ah, here it is again. You’re thinking location, location, location. You’ve heardthat before, but in retail, the word “great” means several things beyond just ROBERT KIYOSAKI 415
What Women Want
Women make up two-thirds of all shoppers,
so it’s a good idea to deliver what they want:
• convenience • security
• variety • one-stop shop• atmosphere • the right stores• fun—entertain me • value for their dollar• ample, easy parking • cleanliness9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 415location, and they are critical. They are nonnegotiable. They are the differences
between success and failure, between happy tenants and problem tenants.Here’s my list:
Great Means Visible
Let me say it again: great means visible. Shoppers can shop only in stores thatthey know are there, and that’s all there is to it. A store that is hidden is a storethat is empty. Or a restaurant or a newsstand or a health club or an oil and lubeshop for that matter. Being seen from the street and visible to customers is nu-
mero uno!
A store that is hidden is a store that is empty. Being seen from the
street and visible to customers is numero uno !
One of the classic breaches of this rule happened a number of years ago in
downtown Phoenix. The development was positioned on a busy corner a fewblocks east of the city’s main thoroughfare. It was an expensive center withbeautiful Spanish Mission-style architecture and stucco walls. It was touted as adestination for shoppers downtown and the perfect venue for free community-building events. Add to the project that a very prominent, newsworthy groupof investors were behind the development and you have the makings for a realsuccess, right? Wrong.
The developers forgot two important rules: visibility and shoppers. Allow
me to elaborate. The center was built in an open-air courtyard-style with its fo-cus facing to an inner courtyard on all four sides. From the north/south andthe east/west streets, drivers saw only the sides of the buildings. Sure therewere some signs that faced outward, but they were not prominent and couldn’thave been any more so without compromising the mission feel of the architec-ture. From inside the center, the feel was quite nice, with good intimacy andambiance. But there were a few other problems. First, the center didn’t have ananchor tenant to support its size and draw enough people to the destination.That was a big mistake. The second problem was that too few people ever actu-ally experienced the courtyard ambiance because the center’s design wasn’tinviting. And the third problem was there simply weren’t enough people livingin the trade area to support the businesses that leased there. The economicsdidn’t work.
The center struggled to attract retailers and shoppers, and within a few years
it became ofﬁce space and classrooms. It is a classic example of retail developersTIP416 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 416getting too focused on a vision for a retail center and forgetting the most critical
rule of retail, which is visibility and shoppers.
I see the visibility and shoppers rule broken all the time, and I’ve seen retail-
ers pay the price. Look around and you’ll ﬁnd otherwise successful retail brandsand restaurant concepts unable to make their numbers work because there sim-ply aren’t enough customers walking through their doors. You’ll begin to noticecenters that just churn tenants every two to ﬁve years because no one can last.And you’ll hear shoppers peg centers or speciﬁc storefronts as jinxed becausenothing can ever survive there. I’m sure just as you have the winning centers inyour city or town, you have the centers that just can’t seem to get things going.Nine times out of ten, the problem is visibility.
I admit, the Scottsdale Pavilions has a visibility problem, but thankfully, it is
one that can be corrected. When the center was ﬁrst built, the front of it wasdesigned to be along a soon-to-be constructed freeway on the center’s westside. Large signs and landscaping water features, complete with the annual mi-gration of Canadian geese, ﬂank the west side of the center to this day. Thesigns are very visible, and anyone driving by can’t miss the destination. Soundsgreat, right? The problem is that a few years after the Scottsdale Pavilions wasbuilt, the community had a change of plans and decided to build the freewayon the east side of the center, not the west. So now, the center’s backside is
facing the valuable freeway drivers. And let’s face it, the backside doesn’t havethe water features, it doesn’t have the landscaping, and it certainly doesn’t havethe geese. Our backside is not our best side. So part of the plan is to literallymake over the center so that the back is no longer the back and the visibilityfrom the freeway will be glorious, including new pylon signs.
Great Means the Right Density 
of the Right Shoppers
But all the visibility in the world won’t buy you anything if the right people—
and the right quantity of the right people—aren’t in the vicinity of the center.This is called demographics, and every center lives and dies by the density num-bers. It takes the right number of people within your center’s target demo-graphic to create a winning project.
Retailers, restaurants, etc., are all interested in demographics. They count
rooftops, they look at census numbers, and more, all to arrive at the ideal loca-tion proﬁle for their stores. From the developer’s perspective, density and de-mographics deﬁne which retailers will succeed in a center. For example, at CasaPaloma there was a high density of people who were perfectly suited to upscaleROBERT KIYOSAKI 4179781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 417retail. Our preliminary research showed that. So it made sense for us to skew
the center that way. We were a ﬁt for the higher-end retailers we targeted, andthey were a ﬁt for our shopper demographic. And the right density of thoseshoppers meant we could be conﬁdent that we would have enough trafﬁc.
In some areas, density and demographics dictating the type of center is ob-
vious. For instance, there is no point putting a check cashing service into a cen-ter that is sitting in the midst of million-dollar homes. But some areas are intransition, and the demographic makeup isn’t always obvious. That’s where re-search comes in and plays a critical role. In planning the Scottsdale Pavilionsretail tenant mix, we know the higher-end customer density is there, and wehave identiﬁed a number of demographic needs that are not being served. Ourkey priority will be matching those needs with the center, its retailers, and itscustomers.
Great Means Convenient
My wife and her friends taught me this truth years ago when I was doing myresearch for Casa Paloma. Convenience is everything, and it came up over andover again in the list of what women want in a shopping center. If I sound sexist,I don’t mean to be. Anyone getting into retail needs to always remember thatmost shoppers are women, so let’s just say it: we are catering to women’s needs,not the needs of men.
Convenience to women means several things. It means “on the way” to
somewhere else. The center’s location has to be on the way to or from work,school, the gym, the day care center, the salon, or some other destination. Andbetter yet, if it is on the same side of the road she is traveling, all the better. Askwomen and they will tell you that all things being equal, they are more inclinedto stop at a store on the right side of the street than they are to stop at a storeon the left side of the street. Crossing trafﬁc is an inconvenience and can bedangerous.
Convenience is everything, and it came up over and over again in the 
list of what women want in a shopping center.
Convenient also means easy and ample parking. Searching up and down rows
of cars for a parking space is the last thing shoppers of any gender want to dowhen they are in a hurry; and who isn’t in a hurry today? Shoppers tend to givea center a few chances when it comes to parking, but if the problem persists,shoppers will mentally label the center as “a hassle,” and they won’t come back.TIP418 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 418There are simply too many other choices today, including “stores” on the In-
ternet where parking is never an issue.
At Casa Paloma, we knew shoppers’ feelings about parking, so we made sure
it was plentiful by building more parking than a center typically requires. Buthow many times has plentiful parking been an inconvenience all its own? Some-times an over abundance of parking can cause the parking to be so far awayfrom the store entrance that it is all too easy for shoppers to think, “I’ll do thisanother time.” Parking that is too far away from the store is inconvenient. Know-ing this, when we built Casa Paloma, we built it with a parking conﬁgurationthat extends wide instead of deep in relation to the store fronts. In other words,the walk from a parking spot to the center is a matter of at most twenty yardsversus ﬁfty or more. The perception is we’re convenient, and convenient meansgreat real estate.
Great Means Happening
Another important aspect of great real estate is that it happens to sit in an areathat is vital and alive. That doesn’t mean it needs to be in the nightclub district.What I mean is that great real estate has (or has had) other great real estateprojects happening around it. Take for example the Scottsdale Pavilions. One ofthe reasons I acquired it is because it is sitting right in the middle of two hugedevelopment projects, both of which are compatible to retail. On the east sideis a $450-million casino resort under construction. It will bring convention busi-ness to within a quarter of a mile of the center. On the west, less than two milesaway, is the $1-billion Ritz Carlton Hotel and high-end community slated fordevelopment. Beyond that, commercial ofﬁce space is springing up all around,and the center itself sits on a road currently under construction—translate thatin the process of expansion—to carry a heavy load of east- and westbound trafﬁc.Add this action all up and you have a happening location.
Great real estate has (or has had) other great real estate projects 
happening around it.
This location with all its opportunity seems extraordinary. But sometimes
happening locations are far less obvious. I’ve seen small neighborhood centersbe very happening spots for the right tenant mix. They seem to be where peoplecongregate or where people go to eat out or shop. It’s all relative. Sometimes ahappening center in a small town would be a failure in a bigger city. You canfeel which centers are happening and why they are happening. The key isTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4199781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 419knowing which ones are going to become happening and which ones are going
to stay happening.
We placed Casa Paloma in an area that had higher incomes, lots of families,
strong high-tech employers, along with a strong and growing population density.The trade area wasn’t providing places for these people, or others with similardemographics, to shop and eat. They wanted a high-end grocery store such asA.J.’s Fine Foods and upscale shopping for the family such as Gap, Banana Re-public, and Talbots. Additionally, they wanted higher-end restaurants, whichincluded Z Tejas Grill, Fleming’s Prime Steakhouse, and Roy’s Paciﬁc Rim Cui-sine. Casa Paloma delivered, and the center continues to be a success.
Great Means Affordable
Arizona has some of the most beautiful retail shopping in the world. I’m not bi-ased about this; we simply do. We’re a tourism state, and the Phoenix metroarea is a tourism area, so my opinion stands to reason. We’d better cater to thetourists and provide great experiences, or they will simply take their travel dol-lars elsewhere. There are lots of wonderful travel destinations in this world.
But in an effort to create the most amazing shopping experience, it is easy
for developers to overspend on a project, particularly with today’s buildingcosts. Elaborate building designs, costly façade work, expensive hardscapes andwater features, high-maintenance landscaping, and high-dollar necessities likeparking areas and garages can inﬂate the costs of a retail project very quickly,sometimes to the point where the economics just don’t add up. Here’s what Imean.
For the most part, all developers want to build the most beautiful shopping
center that garners accolades from peers, family, and friends. However, yourcost per square foot must be met by what your target retailers can afford to pay.A retailer whose rent factor, which is ideally less than 10 percent of sales, musthave the appropriate sales volume from “their” customers. If the retailer can’tjustify the sales volume to meet the rent, they will not lease space at your shop-ping center. For us, we start with what we think the retailer can afford in rent,and then we back into what we can spend to develop or redevelop the shoppingcenter.
If cash ﬂow is king, as Robert talks about often in his books, then proﬁtability
is the king royale. Any center with economics that are so out of line that provenretailers cannot turn a proﬁt will not stay in business long. Actually, when thispattern plays out, the center will go bankrupt and a second owner will buy itfor cents on the dollar. Second owners do stand a better chance of getting the420 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 420economics in line because their baseline costs are lower. But sometimes the
damage is done, the shoppers’ patterns have been established elsewhere, andthere’s no turning the center around.
As tempting as it is to want to build or even be a part of the most beautiful
and best center in town, really examine the cost per square foot and sales persquare foot spread. Even if you are looking to lease space, this rule applies. Af-fordability equals success.
As tempting as it is to want to build or even be a part of the most 
beautiful and best center in town, really examine the cost per square foot 
and sales per square foot spread.
Great Means a Superior Tenant Mix
Way back at the beginning of this chapter, I asked if there was a center or two
in your community that just seemed to be the winner. My guess is that at leastone and maybe two came to mind. Well, while all these other great real estaterequirements help make centers successful, the right tenant mix is a big part ofthe magic.
Is it an art, or is it a science? Creating the right tenant mix is as much about
understanding the shoppers’ psyches as it is about discovering the retail options,building the relationships, and knowing how to negotiate the deals. It takes be-ing able to visualize a center before it comes out of the ground or before it is re-vitalized. That’s the art part. I am fortunate to have great people around me,and we all work together to create a vision for a center. It is truly the most ex-citing part of my job and makes all the tough stuff worth it.
Creating the right tenant mix is as much about understanding the shop-
pers’ psyches as it is about discovering the retail options, building the relation-
ships, and knowing how to negotiate the deals. It takes the right mix of storesthat create the highest pedestrian traffic that lead to higher sales.
I mentioned earlier about the importance of keeping shoppers at your center
longer. I always think of Las Vegas when this subject comes up. That’s the key
to success there. The casinos do everything in their power to keep people fromwalking out the door. They offer food, they offer drinks, they have shows, theyhave a variety of games to play, and many of the newer properties have spectac-ular attractions like elaborate gardens, water shows, and nightclubs. If a LasTIP
TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4219781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 421Vegas casino were a retail center, what
I just described would be called “thetenant mix.”
So using a casino as a model, what
does that example say about tenant mixin a retail center? To me, it means mak-ing sure we have the right “something”at the right time for our shoppers. It’snot about having “some thing” for every-one; I don’t want everyone at our cen-
ters. I want only the people the center isdesigned for. But when those right shop-pers are there, I want to satisfy theirevery need. I want to feed them. I wantto entertain them. I want to make thembeautiful. I want to make their lives eas-ier. I don’t want them going to the nextcasino—or retail center—if I can keepthem at mine.
A retail center is about more than
just shopping, and a good tenant mixdelivers it all with a blend of shopping,eating, dining, entertainment, and at-tractions so that even an errand can become a fun excursion. A great exampleis Casa Paloma. It has a fantastic tenant mix that satisﬁes shoppers’ needs all inone location. There’s no need to drive from center to center wasting time, fuel,and effort.
Great Means Attractions
Over the years I have learned I can’t always address every shopper’s needthrough my retail tenants. Sometimes it takes a bigger attraction to make thathappen. And if we think about our Las Vegas casino example again, we knowthat big attractions have the power to keep people engaged longer, sometimesfor hours, and sometimes for days.
We know that big attractions have the power to keep people 
engaged longer.TIP422 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Casa Paloma 
T enant Mix
Great real estate has a superior
tenant mix that satisfies a shop -
 per’s every need.
FoodA.J.’s Fine FoodsCold Stone CreameryZ T ejas GrillPei Wei Asian DinerT omaso’s ItalianFleming’s Prime SteakhouseFashionAnn T aylorBanana RepublicChico’sFrancesca ’s Collections
Coffin & T rout Fine JewelersGap Woman/Gap Body/Gap
Kids/Baby Gap
CONTINUED9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 422I’m proud to say that our new Scot ts -
dale Pavilions acquisition is the home
of the longest-running auto show in theUnited States. Every Saturday, car en-thusiasts come to the center and showoff to other car lovers and spectatorsmore than four hundred of their clas-sics: Camaros, Chargers, Corvettes, Co-bras, and more than a few Mustangs. Itdraws hundreds and hundreds of peo-ple every weekend. That’s an attraction.
The show’s beginnings were humble.
The center’s McDonald’s franchisee, acar buff himself, started bringing histhree collector cars to the center everyweek. They would attract attention,draw people to his restaurant, and in theprocess he would talk with other enthu-siasts when the opportunity arose. Littleby little, this passionate, enterprisingfranchisee began inviting others to bringtheir cars, too. Now the show is a land-mark, and because of it, so is this center.
Alcohol can be an attraction. What do I mean? The Scottsdale Pavilions is
part of a Native American community, which currently doesn’t allow alcohol atretail shopping centers. This makes it very difﬁcult to get sit-down familyrestaurants such as Chili’s or Macaroni Grill. Eating is a form of entertainmentand keeps people shopping longer. The community now recognizes this andrecently voted in favor having alcohol served at these restaurants.
I’ve seen centers offer everything from merry-go-rounds to wade-in foun-
tains (a big attraction in Arizona in July), and everything in between. The keyis ﬁnding the right ﬁt for your target shopper. Is the car show the right ﬁt for ashopping center when it attracts mostly men? Especially since we know womendo most of the shopping? At ﬁrst glance, you may think not. But consider that alot of those men bring the women in their lives along with them to the car show.Some of the women enjoy the car show, while others do their shopping as themen talk cars. The show is actually a terriﬁc attraction for men and womenROBERT KIYOSAKI 423
Paris Paris
T albotsWhite House/Black MarketFurnishingsCreative LeatherRitz CameraShowcase Home EntertainmentSur la T ableGifts and AccessoriesUrbanPaper SoireePersonal ServicesRolf’s SalonAlltelBath & Body WorksCool Cuts 4 KidsPhilosophyPostal AnnexAmerican Laser CenterValley Nails9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 423shoppers alike. It certainly doesn’t hurt McDonald’s or other restaurant busi-
ness either; the show practically surrounds the restaurant.
Another important kind of attraction is architecture. Exceptional design and
architecture will draw people from all over if for nothing else than the experi-ence. Of course, everyone knows a positive experience requires something toremember it by, so most people who visit will buy something, which is the pointof all this. People like to shop, dine, and in today’s world, even run errands inpleasant environments. That’s one of the reasons why at the Scottsdale Pavil-ions, we are embarking upon a major renovation.
Another important kind of attraction is architecture. Exceptional 
design and architecture will draw people from all over if for nothing else 
than the experience.
When the center was built twenty years ago, it was considered aesthetically
pleasing. But after twenty years of neglect, when we bought it, it looked tired
and out of date. The appearance absolutely affected everything, including leas-ing, customer count, and sales. Particularly when newer, more exciting compe-tition popped up during the last boom real estate cycle.
Great architecture can stand the test of time. It can grow better with age,
and it can help you establish your center or business as the place to go withshoppers. That was the case with Casa Paloma. Yes, we have a good tenant mix,but architecturally, the center is a winner. Not only does it look up to date interms of style and color, but there are no ﬂat storefronts. The center itself movesin, it moves out, and each store is separate and distinct architecturally. It is nota long box with window fronts. Why? Because in the science of shopping, whenthe eyes get tired, the eyes leave. We have to keep things interesting. And themore interesting the storefronts are, the more shoppers lose track of how farthey have walked. If I can get a shopper to walk into one more store, they willbuy something. Malls employ this psychology, so why shouldn’t retail centers?
Architecture to a shopping center developer is like store design to a 
retailer. Keep it interesting because when the eyes get tired, the eyes leave.
And speaking of malls, Casa Paloma was able to lock in concrete consumer
shopping patterns before the big regional mall opened up, three years later,about eight miles away. Today, that mall has not impacted our business becausewe serve shoppers’ needs in terms of offerings, and we are more convenient,.TIPTIP424 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 424So whether you are considering investing in a shopping center, looking to
develop a new one, or lease a space for your business, ﬁnd a center that ﬁts the
bill when it comes to this very important second ingredient: great real estate.You will make your life exponentially easier if you do.
Ingredient No. 3: Great Attention 
to Detail
The business of real estate is a detail business. From the very beginning of a
real estate deal to the very end of it and beyond into management and eventualsale, the best real estate is planned and managed to the very last detail all alongthe way. So what does that involve? Well, aside from a long to-do list, for me at-tention to detail is all about time management.
Yes, it is the ability to effectively manage your time, which will allow you the
luxury to pay attention to the details, and there are lots of them. For example, ifthere are ﬁve thousand retailers out there, I can spend ten years meeting themall, or I can spend three. I choose to be efﬁcient with my time and do it in three.That means I need to have more appointments, more meetings than others, andnot waste any time.
Do you know why Napoleon won so many battles? Because, as historians re-
count, he “saw the value of one minute.” For Napoleon it was all about operatingmore efﬁciently than his enemy operated, and he squeezed productivity out ofevery minute. If you can adopt this mind-set, then you will have time for thedetails. If you don’t, you won’t. Not because there aren’t enough hours in a day,days in a week, and weeks in a year, but because in real estate, you are in a raceagainst the clock with just about everything you do. Whether you’re deep intoyour sixty-day due diligence period and must meet your contractual obligations,or you are completing construction on a center and are neck-and-neck with acompetitor down the road, or whether you are working to get your spacesleased, the race is against the clock.
At De Rito Partners, we have a Monday morning development meeting that
lasts three hours. You may say that doesn’t sound like an efﬁcient meeting, butallow me to elaborate. In that meeting we go over each and every developmentproject we have underway, and we clearly deﬁne exactly what we must accom-plish that week and who is responsible for doing it. There is no question aboutour path, and there is no hiding under a rock. Everyone steps up, and everyoneis held accountable. But at the same time, everyone is allowed to do their jobs.It’s a simple process, and it works.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4259781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 425426 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
I believe one of the reasons why the details are so important is that in real
estate development—again, whether you are developing something from the
ground up, buying an existing property, or searching for the right leasing op-portunity—you must be thinking ten years out. You have to look at who theshopper is, what retailers that shopper will want now, and what they will wantten years from now. You have to understand the real estate cycle trends and beable to predict where they will go in the next ﬁve years and in the next tenyears (see Craig Coppola’s chapter in this book). Then you must have the gutsto leap early enough to get the jump on your competition, solid plan in hand.
The List
A book I read many years ago had a long list of everything a developer had todo when developing and managing any kind of real estate project. We haveadopted it as our detail list. Of course, within each of the items on this list aresizeable lists of actions as well. But this will give you the start you need to un-derstand the deﬁnition of the word details . We don’t miss a single one of these
as we plan and execute a retail center project. We talk about them at our Mon-day meetings, and we feel a tremendous sense of accomplishment when we cancross completed items off the list. I see the world in terms of goals, objectives,and accomplishments, and this list is the cornerstone of what we do. Here it isfrom A to almost Z.
The List
Consider this your to-do list for developing and managing a retail real estate
project.
A.Establish your development criteria and objectives
B.Analyze and identify your market
C.Develop and prepare preliminary site plans, concept design, and strategies
D.Oversee the entitlement process, and prepare the legal documents required by
your city or town
E.Establish a construction team, a construction manager, and consultants
F.Perform your preliminary feasibility studies and financial pro formas
G.Negotiate any joint venture agreements, development agreements, and con-
struction loansH.Set up your legal documents such as leases, utility contracts, easements, CC&Rs,
etc.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 426I.Create and maintain your project schedules
J.Develop your construction and operating budgets
K.Negotiate construction contracts and manage the bidding
L.Hire your brokers and manage your marketing/leasing programs
M.Negotiate your consultant contracts
N.Manage your development team regularly
O.Organize and hold on-site construction meetings regularly
P.Manage project accounts payable and watch costs
Q.Approve all invoices and submit for payment through loan draws
R.Review your change orders and lien waivers
S.Develop your monthly joint venture reports complete with financials, marketing,
and budgets
T.Establish your property management plan, and management guidelines/
procedures if self-managingU.Manage tenant turnover, punchlists, and occupancy
V.Select a mortgage company, and negotiate the terms and conditions of the first
loanW.Work with the utility companies and the city or town to secure a certificate of 
occupancyX.Negotiate and manage any sale of the property to a new owner
Y.Be persistent, honest, positive, and work hard
The Result
When you pay attention to detail, the result is a center that works. It’s a center
that feels good to be at and is an enjoyable experience from the moment shop-pers drive in, to the moment they leave. Perhaps you have a center or two likethat in your community. You know the ones that I’m talking about. They arethe ones that are easy to get into. There is no driving ﬁve hundred yards pastthe entrance, making a U-turn to double back, and pulling in. Access is trulyeasy. Convenience is a given from the ﬁrst turn of the wheel.
Another telltale sign that a developer paid attention to detail is good parking.
I can drive into a center and within a moment know whether the developer gotit right. Are there enough spaces so that shoppers aren’t searching and search-ing, wasting time, and causing aggravation? Or is there too much parking, caus-ing a center to lose its intimacy and for shoppers, particularly female shoppers,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4279781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 427to feel insecure at night? These things matter. You can do everything else right,
but botch the parking and you can be in trouble. I could cite pages of othersigns.
Ultimately, the magic all comes from bringing everything together—design,
architecture, shopper needs, tenant mix, convenience, feel, legal aspects, con-struction, parking, the list goes on and on—and ending up with something thatis uniquely suited for the market and the moment. From there, magic becomeslasting by having the foresight and the plan to grow the center into maturity.
I love the complexities of retail real estate, and I love the challenge. This
business taps into every aspect of who you are and every talent you have orthink you have. It confronts your weaknesses head on and forces you to ﬁnd so-lutions and resources to overcome them. It puts you in front of and beside someof the most amazing people in the world who possess talent and perseverancebeyond compare. And in the end all the hard work produces a product that sat-isﬁes people’s needs but, more important, provides the escape and enjoymentthat makes life all it can be. For me, retail centers are more than just bricks andmortar; they can be and often are magic—a magic that requires hard work, in-tegrity, dedication, and a healthy dose of life-long passion.
Ways to Learn More
www.icsc.orgwww.uli.orgwww.ccim.comZeckendorf: An Autobiography of William Zeckendorf, by William ZeckendorfThreshold Resistance: The Extraordinary Career of a Luxury Retailing Pioneer ,
by A. Alfred Taubman
Trump: The Art of the Deal, by Donald J. TrumpTrammell Crow, Master Builder: The Story of America’s Largest Real Estate Em-
pire, by Robert Sobel
Crossing the Road to Entrepreneurship, by Bert L. WolsteinSharing The Wealth: My Story , by Alex Spanos
Maverick Real Estate Investing: The Art of Buying and Selling Properties Like
Trump, Zell, Simon, and the World’s Greatest Land Owners , by Steve Bergsman.428 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 428ROBERT KIYOSAKI 429
Marty De Rito is the CEO of De Rito Partners, Inc., and De Rito Partners
Development, Inc.—brokerage, management and commercial develop-
ment companies based in Phoenix, Arizona. He has more than twentyyears of commercial real estate experience, specializing in the sale, leas-ing, and development of retail properties, including shopping centers andautomotive parks. De Rito has been successful in providing top-quality
aggressive leasing and management expertise combined with conservative developmentexpertise. De Rito Partners, Inc., is the largest retail brokerage company in the state of Arizonabased on the number of exclusive listings. The ﬁrm has thirty retail agents and exclusivelyrepresents and provides leasing services to sixty-two retailer accounts. The company hasleased more than 11 million square feet, and has listed for lease approximately two-hundred-and-thirty shopping centers totaling more than 14 million square feet.
9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 4299781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 430
This page intentionally left blank PART 4
Lessons 
Learned•KIM KIYOSAKI
•DONALD TRUMP
•DONALD TRUMP , JR.
•ERIC TRUMP
•ROBERT KIYOSAKI9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 4319781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 432
This page intentionally left blank What can I say? I got lucky. Kim is beautiful on the outside, and even more
beautiful on the inside. On top of that she has courage and is very smart.
She learns quickly. And I know she did not marry me for my money because when
we met, I did not have any money. What we had was our love and a dream of be-coming a rich couple together.
In 1987 , the stock market crashed. The savings and loan industry went bust,
and the real estate market crashed. This is when I said to Kim, “Now is the time toinvest.”
She often states that, back in the 1980s, she had no idea what investing was, es-
pecially investing in real estate. On top of that, most people around us were cryingthe blues and complaining about the bad economy. Fear and pessimism were every-where. In spite of that, she trusted me, and we began looking at distressed proper-ties.
Our plan was simple. We would buy two houses a year for ten years, which
meant we would have twenty homes to provide us income. She studied, did her re-search, and looked at house after house. Finally she bought her ﬁrst property. Thatinvestment changed her life. Within eighteen months, she had achieved her ten-year goal of twenty properties. She has never looked back. She took to investinglike a duck takes to water.24 Kim KIYOSAKI
What One Property 
Can T each Y ou
4339781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 433434 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Today Kim is an investment partner in more than fourteen hundred rental
units. Even as the economy crashed in 2007 , her properties delivered positive cash
ﬂows while many other real estate investors were losing everything. In fact, herinvestment income went up as more people became renters.
She is, as the title of her book states, a rich woman. But more than money rich,
she is ﬁnancially smart. She is a ﬁnancially independent woman who does notneed a man, or me, to take care of her.
That is why I am so proud of her and love her with all my heart.
—Robert Kiyosaki
It is amazing the number of life lessons as well as the amount of hands-on
knowledge you can learn from one single investment property. I’m not just
talking about your ﬁrst two or three investment properties as you’re startingout; those almost always seem to deliver a steep learning curve. I’m talkingabout the lessons I continue to learn after years of real estate investing. Everyproperty teaches me something new that I didn’t know before. Here is the storyof one property that to this day remains one of my greatest teachers.
Miami, Florida
In 2003 my husband, Robert, and I were in Miami, Florida, attending an in-vestment conference. At one of the breaks during the ﬁrst day, a young real es-tate broker, Matt, introduced himself to us, and we spent a few minutes chatting.Being the good salesman that he was, he couldn’t help but tell us about a realestate property that he had some inside knowledge of. The property was not onthe market, but the two owners were entertaining offers if the buyers were se-rious. My ﬁrst response was understandably skeptical. I didn’t know this guy,and I didn’t know if this was just a hyped-up sales pitch. In any event, it was agood pitch, and we had a couple of hours free that afternoon, so we d rove with
Matt to take a look at this property. Of course, according to Matt, it was the bestdeal he’d seen in years!
About twenty minutes later, we pulled into an attractive strip mall with a
few shops and restaurants. The mall was less than two years old, and somebuildings were still under construction. At one end of the mall was a large healthand ﬁtness club. The building was about thirty-eight-thousand square feet withparking spaces allocated for the club. The property for sale was the buildingoccupied by the one tenant (known as a single-tenant property): the ﬁtness9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 434club. This particular piece of property was a triple-net lease investment. This
means that the tenant—the ﬁtness club—pays the property taxes, insurance,and all repairs and maintenance. There is very little management on the owner’send. It is a very appealing type of investment, given the right terms. We wantedto know more.
The First, of Many, Lessons
One of the ﬁrst things that struck me on this visit was the potential risk. Sincethere is only one tenant, this means that all of our income on the property wouldbe dependent on this one tenant. Therefore, the ultimate key to the success of atriple net, single-tenant investment property is, very simply, the quality of thetenant. Our income, our cash ﬂow, and the value of our property would all de-pend upon the tenant’s ability to pay us every month until the end of the lease.You can see the implications here. With any single-tenant building, you wantto make sure that the tenant is ﬁnancially strong and has a solid business foun-dation. In other words, Microsoft is a quality tenant, Martha’s typewriter repairshop probably is not. The reason why you want an A-list tenant is that if thetenant leaves, so does all your income, and then you’re left with an empty build-ing that was designed for the tenant who is no longer there.
One way to protect yourself from your only tenant vacating your 
property is to set up a reserve account. This is an account that you add to
every month from the cash flow of your property. T o sleep well at night, I’d recommend at least one year of reserves that allows you to pay the mortgage and any expenses associated with the property, while you look for your next better-quality tenant.
The Good and the Bad
With any single-tenant property there is the risk of the tenant moving out early
and leaving the property vacant with no income. However, associated with thatrisk we discovered another risk that was unique to this property. The mallwhere the ﬁtness club was located was adjacent to a gated neighborhood com-munity. Ordinarily, that might be a good thing, but in this case, an agreementbetween the owners of the ﬁtness club building and these neighbors was inforce. The agreement stated that any changes to the building must get approvalTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4359781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 435from the neighbors. What would this mean for us? It meant that if the ﬁtness
club tenant moved out, then the neighbors would control what we were allowedto do with the property. They would control who and what could move in there.The neighbors, not the owner of the property, were in charge. This was a stum-bling block. Of course, Matt, the broker, didn’t see this as much of a problem.Robert and I did, though. If we were to move forward, we would want thisagreement closely reviewed.
On the plus side, this property was in a prime location. It was just around
the corner from a prestigious country club, and it was on a high-trafﬁc mainstreet. The property was newly built, and the ﬁnancials, at ﬁrst glance, madesense. Based on the numbers shown to us, we would receive a healthy cash ﬂowof about 18 percent.
Lesson Learned: The financials given to you by most brokers are 
projected numbers not actual numbers. Projected numbers are typically 
the best-case scenario, and they present a better picture than how the 
property is actually performing.
Matt drove us around so we could get a feel for the area. There was quite a
bit of new construction going on, and the number of people moving into the
area was on an upswing. All good signs. We gathered up all the information hehad and ﬂew home to Phoenix. On the plane trip home, Robert and I discussedthe pros and the cons of the property, at least what we knew of it in the brieftime we had. By the time the plane touched down in Phoenix, we had decidedwe would make an offer on the Miami property and pursue it further.
The next day, I phoned Matt and put in our offer. We went back and forth
with the owners and fairly quickly came to an agreed-upon price. Now the workbegan, otherwise known as the due diligence period. This is when you performa very thorough check of the property to make sure that what you think you’regetting is what you’re actually getting. And this is when my problems began.
From the Beginning
From the outset, this property had challenges. First of all, I live in Phoenix,Arizona. The property is located in Miami, Florida. Phoenix is nearly two thou-sand miles from Miami—quite a distance. There was no way I could just drivedown the street to check on the property. If a problem arose, I’d have to get ona plane, spend all day ﬂying, rent a car, stay overnight in a hotel, and then spendanother day ﬂying home—a lengthy and costly affair.TIP436 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 436Second, this was the ﬁrst triple-net commercial property I had ever pursued.
Most of the properties I owned were apartment buildings with many tenants.
This was a whole new animal in a whole new area. I immediately started tellingmyself how much I didn’t know about this type of deal. And my feet were already
cool from the start. I heard these words repeated in my head, “What if I losemoney? What if I make a mistake? Do I know what I’m getting into?” My self-doubt was strong and loud. Then someone suggested, “You should hire an at-torney to review the agreement.” “Aha!” I thought. “That will solve myproblems.” So I got a referral for an attorney in Tucson, Arizona, and I hiredhim.
That decision led to my next problem, which I didn’t understand was a prob-
lem until later. The lawyer I had hired was not a real estate attorney; he was abusiness attorney. He understood contracts but didn’t understand a real estateinvestment. There is a big difference.
So the due diligence continued on. Now my attorney was talking to their at-
torney. And neither attorney thought the other knew what he was talkingabout. They didn’t like each other. They did not respect each other. Whatevermy attorney suggested, their attorney rejected, simply because it was my at-torney’s idea. And whatever their attorney recommended, my attorney saidno to for the same reason. We were getting nowhere quickly, and the fees weremounting.
My attorney, being from Arizona, began arguing on issues that were not rel-
evant to this Florida property. It was as if they were bickering over what reme-dies we’d have in place if a blizzard hit Honolulu—highly unlikely. Our attorneywanted guarantees on absolutely every single thing that could possibly gowrong.
Lesson Learned: Out of this ordeal came a real estate (and business)
rule that I now follow closely: Do not allow an attorney to negotiate your deal
for you. An attorney’s job is to point out potential problems, and options tothose problems, and then it’s up to you to decide what to do. It’s up to you to negotiate the deal.
On a Plane
My attorney lesson was a major one. This back-and-forth dogﬁght went on for
three months, and we did not even have an agreement yet! All we had was anagreed-upon purchase price. That was all. My attorney would call me everyTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4379781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 437day with a new wrinkle in the deal. Finally, after weeks and weeks of this, Robert
and I decided we needed to get on a plane and go meet face-to-face with theowners to work out the ﬁnal four or ﬁve issues that were still unresolved.
We ﬂew to Miami, rented a car, drove to the property, and sat down with the
owners to discuss the ﬁnal points. Within thirty minutes, all issues were re-solved and agreed to. It was that fast when we met buyer-to-seller (another les-son learned). The seller went back to his attorney to draw up the ﬁnal contract.Robert and I ﬂew home. I called my attorney and explained what we agreed toand that a new agreement was on the way.
The new agreement arrived, and every point we and the seller had agreed to
in our conversation was different than we had discussed. Had the seller or theseller’s attorney revised the deal points? I didn’t know. The two attorneys wenthead-to-head once more. This whole process was not just frustrating, it wasexhausting.
The Phone Call
We had been working on this deal for three months, and there was still noagreement. Just when we thought we had the ﬁnal issue resolved, a new onewould appear. We’d take one step forward and then two steps backward. Wouldwe ever close this deal?
Then my answer came.It was 10 p.m. on a Thursday, and Robert was out of town. The phone rang. It
was Matt, the broker. “The deal is off the table,” he said.
“What?” I responded. “What do you mean it’s off the table?”Matt went on, “The owner decided it’s just been too difﬁcult, and he’s pulling
the property off the market. He’s going to hold on to it for now.”
I was stunned. “But we’ve been working on this for months! How can he just
walk away?”
“He just did.” Matt said. “I’ll stay in touch since I’m sure there’s another
good deal out there. Bye.”
I hung up the phone, and I sat in silence for what seemed an hour. It was
probably ﬁve minutes. “I know how I can save this deal,” I said to myself. “I’llcall the owner and talk to him directly.” Not paying attention to the time differ-ence I phoned the property owner; and thank goodness he was a late-night guybecause he answered the phone. He graciously spoke with me about his decisionfor about ﬁfteen minutes, but it became clear that I was not going to change hismind. We said our good-byes, wished each other well, and hung up the phone.438 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 438What the Hell Happened?
Again, I was stunned, and now I could feel the anger building inside of me. I
thought to myself, “I have spent months on this one deal. I’ve ignored everyother deal that’s come to me. What a waste of time! Flying back and forth, allthe phone calls, all the arguments, all the time! And to end up with nothing!”
Then, still fuming, I started to ask myself some questions: “Why did I hire a
Tucson attorney for a Florida property? Why didn’t I call Dan and Steven, mytwo friends who understand this kind of deal? Why did I act as if I know nothingabout real estate? I know how to put a real estate deal together. Why did I let itdrag out for so long? Why didn’t I just talk to the owner, instead of going throughattorneys?”
“What was I so afraid of?”My anger was now near explosion. At ﬁrst, my anger was directed at the
owner for pulling out of the deal. I was furious with my attorney. I was furiouswith their attorney. I was mad at Matt for not holding the deal together. Butthen the truth hit me. My real anger wasn’t at any of them. My anger was withmyself. The truth was, the owner, the attorneys, and the broker didn’t causethis deal to fall apart, I let this deal fall apart. Why? Because I was afraid Iwould screw up. I was afraid I would make a huge mistake and I’d lose ourmoney. This was the biggest deal I had done up to this point. We were going toput $1.5 million cash into this deal. “What if I lost it?” I kept asking myself.
The bottom line is that I didn’t trust myself. I didn’t trust what I knew to get
this deal done. After ﬁfteen years of doing real estate deals I still didn’t trust
myself. And that’s what really set me off because I didknow what to do. At that
moment, I knew exactly what I should have done to get this deal closed, and Ididn’t do it. Why? Because I let fear take over. I let my own fear beat me. Istepped up to the line, and I quit. At that exact moment I knew that I quit, andI was furious with myself.
Now What?
By now it was about one in the morning. I don’t even know if I was talkingsilently to myself or if I was yelling out loud. I was nearly psychotic by thistime. I don’t even know how I got from the living room of my house to my homeofﬁce in a separate building, but there I was standing in my ofﬁce. I glanced atmy desk, and on the corner was a stack of real estate investment offerings. I be-gan to calm down. One of the things that upset me so much was the amount ofROBERT KIYOSAKI 4399781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 439time I spent on this deal only to wind up with nothing, when there were proba-
bly several other investments I could have been pursuing. I picked up the pileof pro formas, each with a description and some ﬁnancial information on aproperty, and I started to look through them. Most of the properties were apart-ment buildings since that is primarily what I invest in, and the brokers I dealtwith knew what I was looking for.
Then I came across an offer that made me smile. Craig Coppola, a commercial
real estate broker in Phoenix who has since become a very good friend andcontributor to this book, had presented this particular property to me when heheard about the Miami property I was looking at. But I was too engrossed withthat time-consuming deal to pay attention to what he was showing me. At thetime, I ﬁgured he was just looking to make a commission. Now that my mindhad cleared enough to see what was in front of me, I recalled some of his con-versation: “You should take a look at this property. Better deal. In Phoenix.” Ispent the next hour with my calculator, reviewing this offering and writingdown questions. I went to sleep that night with one all-important question onmy mind, the answer to which had to be “yes.”
The Morning After
I knew that Craig was an early riser. He’s very driven and is always one of thetop commercial brokers in Arizona. At 7 a.m. I called his cell phone. “Hello,this is Craig.” he answered.
“Hi Craig. It’s Kim Kiyosaki,” I replied.“Hey Kim. What can I do for you?” he asked.Then I asked the all-important question, “Craig, remember that property
you talked with me about when I was looking to buy the Miami property?”
“Yes. I remember you weren’t too interested,” he reminded me.I held my breath and asked, “Is it still available?”Craig responded, “That was months ago. They never actively listed it. They
only wanted to talk to truly serious buyers. Are you interested in it?”
“I am,” is all I said.“Seriously interested?” he asked.“Very seriously,” I replied.“Let me call them and see what the status is. I’ll call you back as soon as I
talk with them,” he replied.
“Thanks, Craig. The sooner, the better,” I said anxiously.The next thirty minutes seemed like forever. I had my cell phone by my side440 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 440every second, glancing at it every few minutes. Finally, my phone rang, and I
saw it was Craig. “Hi, Craig. Did you get ahold of them?” I impatiently asked.
“I did,” he said.“And?” I asked holding my breath.“It’s still available. It’s not on the market, but they will consider a serious 
offer.”
I took a deep breath, more of a heavy sigh of relief. “Are you still there, Kim?”
Craig asked.
“I’m here,” I answered. “How much are they asking?”“Their price is $7 .2 million,” he replied.“What’s it worth?” I asked.Craig laughed. “Honestly, I think it’s worth at least $7 .2 million. I still love
this deal.”
I was elated.“Craig, tell them I’ll give them full price, $7 .2 million.”Craig asked, “Do you want any special terms such as subject to you obtaining
ﬁnancing or speciﬁc terms of the due diligence period?”
I replied with conﬁdence, “No. Full price. We have our due diligence period,
and if all is as they say it is, we’ll close in sixty days.”
Craig questioned, “That’s it?”“That’s it,” I said.
It’s a New Deal
Craig called me back less than an hour later. “It’s done,” he said. “Now it’s timeto get to work. I have to ask you, though, when I ﬁrst showed you this deal youwanted nothing to do with it. Why are you so conﬁdent about this propertynow? What changed?”
I explained, “Craig, for the past three months I have been pursuing this health
club building in Miami. I know more than I ever wanted to know about thistype of property. I’ve learned about the business itself, about what’s importantto obtain ﬁnancing, as well as what’s an issue and what’s not an issue related toa health club property. So even though the Miami deal fell apart, I realized Iwas simply paying my dues.”
I laughed and continued, “Craig, the beauty of this Phoenix property is that
it is a health club, almost identical to the Florida property. The purchase priceis less, and the amount of down payment is less than the Miami deal. Plus thecash ﬂow is greater in percentage and in actual dollars. But the most ironicROBERT KIYOSAKI 4419781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 441thing of all is that instead of being located in Miami, this property is four blocks
from my house! I think I know this area pretty well.”
Sometimes your best opportunities are, literally, right around the corner.
The Closing
We spent the next two months going through our due diligence, putting to-gether the ﬁnancing, and drawing up the agreement. In sixty days, the deal wasclosed without a lot of effort. Today that Phoenix property is one of the best-performing properties I own. Had I not gone through the process—the drama,the headaches, and the learning—of the Miami property, I would have nevernoticed this Phoenix property, and I would not be enjoying the wonderful cashﬂow this property delivers.
The biggest win for me out of this entire process was learning that the reason
I lost the Miami property was because of my own fear. It was my own fear thatcaused most of the stumbling blocks to getting this deal done. I could blameeveryone else, but in reality it was my own fear that was to blame: fear of makingmistakes, fear of losing money, fear of looking stupid, all of it. When I dug alittle deeper, I came to the conclusion that, yes, I probably will make mistakes,and I may lose money, and maybe I’ll look like an idiot if things go sideways.But the fact is, I know how to do a real estate deal, and if I do my homework, domy due diligence, get good terms and ﬁnancing, and dot the i’s and cross the t’s,then my chance of success is pretty good.
My greatest win from the Miami deal is that it eliminated 95 percent of my
fear regarding real estate investing. No longer would my emotions get in theway. I could now focus on the facts and the creativity often needed to make areal estate deal work. It reminded me of what I do know and that I will alwayslearn more.
The Property That Keeps on Teaching
And, today, I have learned more. There are several other lessons this whole sit-uation taught me. Here are a few more behind-the-scenes stories.
Money? What Money?
Have you ever said to yourself, “That ( ﬁll in the blank) is too expensive. I can’t
afford it.” And you walk away somewhat relieved that you don’t have to put442 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 442yourself in the uncomfortable position of buying something that will stretch
your limits. I understand. I’ve done the same thing many times. The problemis, when it comes to real estate, if you automatically say, “I can’t afford it,” youtake yourself right out of the deal . . . and it may be an exceptionally good dealyou’re walking away from.
One of many things I’ve learned from Robert’s Rich Dad is that instead of
saying “I can’t afford it,” ask yourself “How can I afford it?” By asking yourselfthat question, it forces your mind to think. And it’s amazing the number of so-lutions you will come up with. So that’s what I do with almost every real estateI pursue.
There was a time when I was just beginning in the world of real estate in-
vesting when I simply did not have the money because Robert and I were build-ing our business, and we were broke. We barely had enough money to pay thebills—actually we didn’t even have that much. So if we were going to purchaserental properties we had to get creative, we had to come up with inventive ways
to ﬁnance our down payments.
Today, when I come across a good real estate deal, Robert and I rarely have
the money we need—not because we’re broke but because our money is alwaysinvested. It would be easy to say “I don’t have the money” and pass on the prop-erty, but it’s more challenging and makes me smarter if I have to ﬁgure out howto come up with the money that I need.
That was exactly the case with the health and ﬁtness club property. I pursued
the property ﬁrst. Once I decided that I intended to purchase the property, onlythen did I begin to ﬁgure out how we were going to come up with the down
payment. On the Phoenix property, the time frame was short from the time Isaid, “I’ll take it!” to the day we actually closed. I had only about two weeks tocreate the cash funding needed.
Lesson Learned: When it comes to a single-tenant commercial property,
not only is the buyer concerned about the quality of the tenant, but the lender
is even more cautious.
Fitness clubs, in general, at the time were not considered grade-A tenants
simply because of the number of clubs that had gone out of business throughout
the years. The industry as a whole had a lower ranking when seen through theeyes of a lender because they were viewed as a higher-risk tenant. Because ofthis, the lender required an even greater down payment than an apartment build-ing lender might require. So not only did I not have the money for the typicalTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4439781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 443down payment, but also I had to come up with an additional 10 percent to get
this deal done.
The deal did get done. The down payment was a combination of cash we
had on hand, a loan from our business, and a third private-party loan. The loanswere just that, loans paying interest. No equity in the property was given up forthese loans. One of the two loans has since been paid back, and the other willbe paid off shortly. The rent on this property has increased annually as per theagreement, so every year the cash ﬂow has increased, the cash-on-cash returnon our investment has increased, and the overall value of the property has in-creased. It is an outstanding performing property.
Yet, when all the papers were signed, the cash changed hands, and we took
ownership of this property, I made one more unbelievable mistake.
The REALLY Big Mistake
As we were leaving the law ofﬁce where the closing took place, Craig, the broker,reminded me of something I had forgotten. He said, “Just to let you know, I toldyou several weeks ago that the seller of this property you just bought owns theexact same property in a location up north. It’s still on the market if you want tomake an offer.” After all I went through in the past few months, and then scram-bling to ﬁnd the funding for this property, I was just so relieved to get the dealclosed that I laughed at him and without thinking said, “Not right now, Craig.I’m tapped out. I can’t afford it.” And that was a very big and costly mistake.
Instead of taking a step back and looking at the opportunity in front of me, I
fell into the “I can’t afford it” trap and let a fantastic opportunity slip throughmy ﬁngers. Had I taken the time and asked myself, “How can I afford it?” andput my mind to work, today instead of one great-performing health club prop-
erty I could have two great-performing properties. It was a costly, but priceless,
lesson.
An Attorney C ANBe Your Friend
Yes, we’ve all heard the countless lawyer jokes:
How can you tell when a lawyer is lying? His lips are moving.What’s the difference between a dead dog in the road and a dead lawyer inthe road? There are skid marks in front of the dog.Why don’t sharks attack lawyers? Professional courtesy .444 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 444I’ve met my share of attorneys who are the cause of these jokes. They are the
ones who give lawyers, as a whole, a bad name and reputation. The two attor-
neys handling the Miami property did absolutely nothing to give me a warmand fuzzy feeling toward attorneys. But out of every bad deal comes somethinggood. And in this case the good was our Scottsdale attorney, Chuck Lotzar, whois also a contributor to this book.
Robert and I had met Chuck earlier through a mutual friend of ours. Chuck
is a business attorney with a great deal of real estate experience. Because theﬁtness club property I was purchasing is a single-tenant property, the leaseagreement between the property owner and the tenant must be very tight. Forthat reason, we brought Chuck on board to review and give us his expertise onthe agreement.
Chuck made some necessary revisions in the agreement, and we all con-
curred, but then he brought up a crucial point that I was not aware of. Remem-ber earlier when I mentioned that with a single-tenant commercial propertythe quality of your tenant is number one? As far as I could see, the tenant was alarge, well-known, national ﬁtness club chain. But that’s not what the leaseagreement stated. Chuck red-ﬂagged this and brought it to our attention.
The tenant on the lease had a similar name to the national chain but was an
Arizona entity. The lease we were looking at had listed a subsidiary of the na-tional chain as the lessee, not the national chain itself. I asked Chuck what thatmeant and why it was important. He asked me, “This being a single-tenantproperty in a forty-four-thousand-square-foot building, sitting on 5.2 acres,what’s your biggest concern?”
“Simple,” I responded. “My biggest concern is that the tenant might move
out before his lease is up.”
“Exactly,” he replied. “If your lease is with a small Arizona subsidiary and
they wanted to break their lease, they could simply declare bankruptcy andwalk away. Right?”
“Yes,” I answered.He continued, “For a national chain to walk away from this lease, they have
to declare bankruptcy of their entire chain. They cannot say these ﬁve proper-ties are bankrupt but these two hundred are not. They would have to walk awayfrom alltheir properties. You want the national chain as the lessee for your
protection against something like that happening.”
“Lesson learned,” I concluded.Chuck had to untangle the original lease agreement and then rework it, all
the while getting all parties to consent to the changes necessary to make thisROBERT KIYOSAKI 4459781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 445deal work for us. It wasn’t an easy task, but he got it done . . . and in the short
time allotted.
That’s the beneﬁt of having excellent legal advice and expertise. Chuck is
not inexpensive, but he is worth his weight in gold. As a result of Chuck’s dili-gence and know-how, he increased the value of our property well beyond whatit would have been. So I’m happy to say that my respect and appreciation forthe legal profession has been renewed. Yes, an attorney can be your friend.
Lesson Learned: When legal advice is needed on a real estate 
transaction, seek out a well-qualified expert. And don’t be afraid to pay 
well for it. Cheap advice is usually just that: cheap. And in my experience,whenever I go cheap it ends up costing me more in the long run.
Patience, a Virtue . . . and an Ongoing Lesson
This same property, to this day continues to teach me lessons I have yet to learn.
So even though this property was purchased in 2004, my learning continues ina very good way.
The latest is that this property is adjacent to three commercially zoned prop-
erties. They are all older buildings on land that could be added to our existing5.2 acres to make a much larger property. So if any of these properties becomeavailable, we will naturally be interested in pursuing them. There is one prop-erty in particular that is of most interest to us.
Knowing that was our long-term plan from the start, we offered Craig an eq-
uity position in the property in exchange for managing any problems or issuesthat might arise and, more importantly, for keeping us abreast of what’s hap-pening with the adjoining properties.
People often ask why some of the best real estate deals seem to come to us
ﬁrst. My answer is pretty straightforward: We offer more to those we workwith. It may be in the form of a higher commission, equity in the property, orsolving a problem to help get the deal closed. Relationships, not the transaction,are the key to sound business. People who focus only on the transaction, gettingthe lowest price, paying the least in commissions, reneging on an agreement inorder to get more money, etc., typically do not have strong relationships withthose who have access to the best deals. If people are a pain to work with, oth-erwise known as “high maintenance,” then sooner or later people will stopworking with them, and the deal ﬂow will dry up. Our brokers and real estateTIP446 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 446partners have become our good friends because we all trust one another, and
we all want one another to succeed and make a lot of money. We are in the rela-tionship for the longterm.
Still Patient
Craig has patiently been building relationships with the owners of these ad-joining properties. He’s candidly shared our interest in their properties, andthey have openly been keeping Craig up to date on their plans. Again, it comesdown to relationships. Many business people think you have to keep all yourplans and desires close to the vest, that it’s best not to reveal too much and sneakup on them at the last minute. That’s a lot of work, keeping things so secretive.
When it comes to real estate, it’s not rocket science. The property has a cer-
tain value—the buyer knows it, and the seller knows it. Every property has var-ious uses. For example, an apartment building can be turned into individualcondominiums or a hotel. A two-story ofﬁce building could possibly become afour- or eight-story ofﬁce building. The building could be torn down and some-thing new could be put up in its place. What exactly the buyer has planned maynot be revealed, but both parties know what the options are. So I prefer to beup-front, when possible, and get to know the seller and what his or her needsare. It makes for a better negotiation and much less stress.
Because of Craig’s work, Robert and I now have a very pleasant relationship
with the owners of the adjacent property. There is no hidden agenda. Theyknow we want to buy their property. We talk openly about it. They also knowwe’re not emotionally attached to it, and we’ll pay a price that makes good busi-ness sense. The owners have no need to sell right now. The property delivers astrong cash ﬂow to them. We understand that. This is where patience comesin. We’ve been watching these properties for about four years, and we’ll con-tinue to do so until the opportune moment arrives.
Lesson Learned: Sometimes the pieces have to come together, 
and you just can’t force that. Y ou must wait patiently.
The Present vs. the Future
Oftentimes, the key with real estate is not so much what’s happening today butwhat you see coming in the future. This is where studying the market, watchingTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4479781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 447and understanding the trends, and on-going learning gives you the upperhand.
By not understanding these things, your real estate investment could becomeone big fat liability, instead of the asset you had intended.
Look at what happened to so many investors in the subprime 2007 and 2008
real estate ﬁasco. They weren’t paying attention to the signs, and it ended upcosting them dearly. Why? As the market was surging and prices were soaring,many people thought the prices would just continue up. So they paid well overvalue for the properties with generally one of these three scenarios in mind:
1. They would buy the property and turn around quickly and sell it for a higher
price (also known as ﬂipping property).
2. They would buy a rental property and assume that housing prices would get
so expensive that people could not afford to buy a home and rentals wouldbe very attractive. Demand for rentals would increase, and so would the rents.
3. They would buy a rental property, such as an apartment house, convert it to
condos, and sell them off individually for a big proﬁt.
Those strategies were all based on the then-present situation remaining thesame with prices continuing to increase. They were dealing with the presentknowledge and ignoring the signs of future trends and situations.
For example, my friend Ken McElroy, who is Robert’s and my investment
partner on several apartment buildings, said to me about two years before thiscurrent economical disaster came to be, “Kim, get ready for the market to turn.Housing prices are about to come down.”
“Why do you say that?” I asked.“Because,” he said, “something just doesn’t make sense when a husband and
wife walk into our leasing ofﬁce and ﬁll out an application to rent an apartment.
We turn them down because their income is too low to qualify for the rentthey’d have to pay. But then they walk across the street to a condo complex,and with the same income ﬁgures they miraculously qualify to buy a condowith payments twice as high as our rent! This cannot go on for long.” So Kenwas already preparing for this mortgage crisis two years before it occurred be-cause of a trend he saw occurring with his own properties.
The Three P’s: Patience, Preparation, and Profitz
Where patience pays off best is not to be patient just for patience’s sake, but whenyou see the future trend unfolding and are preparing to take advantage of it.448 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 448My neighbor Peter in Hawai’i taught me about patience when he explained
how he purchased a beautiful oceanfront house on the lot next to his residence.
Peter understands real estate, and he understand trends. He’s lived in Hawai’iall his life, and he’s seen the ups and downs of the market there.
The house next door to his was purchased by a gentleman from Japan, at a
time when the Japanese were buying up a lot of Hawaiian real estate. He paidtop dollar for this house. The house sat empty for years. One day, Peter noticeda for-sale sign on the house and called the real estate agent. He discovered thatthe owner was facing some tough ﬁnancial times and needed to sell the house.Of course, the house was listed for more than he paid for it. What the ownerdidn’t realize, which Peter did, is that the Hawai’i market had started on adownturn, and prices were just beginning to fall. So he waited. Peter realizedthat by waiting he risked the possibility of losing the property to someone whowas willing to pay the asking price, but knowing the values of Hawaiian real es-tate and foreseeing prices falling even further, he was willing to take that risk.
It wasn’t long before he saw the words “price reduced” on the for-sale sign.
He called the agent. The price was still too high. He waited. He watched. An-other price reduction followed. He still waited. Finally, after about two years,the price came down to within striking range. He called the agent and made hisoffer. The offer was accepted. His patience paid off.
The Future of Our Property
I don’t know if we’ll end up purchasing any of the three properties adjacent tothe property we own. That depends on the price, the terms, the market at thetime, and the owner’s wants and needs. But we are in position should that op-portunity arise. Patience has already paid off to some degree simply becausethose properties are worth quite a bit less today than they were a couple ofyears ago. We prepare today for the future that we anticipate tomorrow.
In Summary
When it comes to real estate investing, the learning never stops. That’s one ofthe beauties of being an active investor, hands-on, controlling the investment,closely involved, versus a passive investor whereby you simply turn your moneyover to a so-called ﬁnancial experts and hope and pray they know what they’redoing. The active investor is constantly learning, growing, and most importantly,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4499781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 449getting smarter about money. The passive investor, by putting the money in
someone else’s hands and walking away, learns nothing.
When the real estate market changes, it forces us to get smarter and more
creative in order to use the changes to our advantage. Every property is a teacherto me in some way. If I learn my lessons well, I get a high grade. If I don’t, it’s alow grade. And my grade is determined by my primary reason for becoming areal estate investor: cash ﬂow —my two favorite words in the world of investing.
Kim Kiyosaki began her real estate investing career in 1989 with the pur-
chase of a small, two-bedroom, one-bath rental property in Portland, Ore-gon. T oday Kim’s real estate holdings include over 1200 apartment units,commercial properties, and land, and she continues adding to her prop-erty portfolio. With a passion for educating women about money and in-vesting, Kim draws on a lifetime of experience in business, real estate,
and investing in her mission to support ﬁnancial education. She is a sought-after speaker,television and radio talk show guest, the host of a PBS Rich Woman show, as well as a colum-
nist for WomanEntrepreneur.com. She is a self-made millionaire and a happily married (butﬁercely independent) woman. Her ﬁrst book, Rich Woman: A Book on Investing for Women,hit the BusinessWeek best-seller list the month it was released and has held a spot there for
the past eleven months. Rich Woman is a best seller in Mexico, South Africa, India, Australia,
New Zealand, and across Europe. Kim has used the international forum of the Rich Dadbrand to showcase the startling statistics related to women and money, and through Rich
Woman and www.richwoman.com, she has created a community where women can learn
and grow and seek their own ﬁnancial security and independence.
450 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 450Much of the world has heard or seen The Apprentice , Donald Trump’s long-
running television program. By writing a book together, I have had the
beneﬁt of being sort of an apprentice to Donald. Spending time writing Why We
Want You to Be Rich: Two Men One Message , I learned a lot about him person-
ally, his business philosophy, his real estate philosophy, and why he is as successfulas he is.
—Robert Kiyosaki
My First Big Deal
I was still in college when I did my ﬁrst big deal. I spent my spare time in collegereading the listings of federally ﬁnanced housing projects that were in foreclo-sure. I knew my colleagues might be reading the sports pages, but real estatetruly was my focus even then, so I would devote my time to studying everythingI could to learn about it.
One day I came across Swifton Village, which was in Cincinnati, Ohio. It was
in big trouble with eight hundred, out of twelve hundred, vacant apartments.The developers had faltered. The government had foreclosed, and it wasn’tlooking too good. In fact, it was a mess. It was such a mess that there were noother bidders.25 Donald J. TRUMP
In the Beginning . . . 
4519781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 451This did not discourage me because I saw it as a big opportunity. I presented
the situation at Swifton Village to my father, and we bought it together for less
than $6 million. The project had cost $12 million two years earlier. We got amortgage for what we paid, plus about $100,000 that we used to ﬁx up theproperty, which it badly needed. In translation, this means we got this projectwithout putting down any of our own money, and it would be possible, fromthe rent proceeds, to cover the mortgage.
As a college student, I found this to be very exciting stuff. I knew it’d be a
challenge, and it was, but my enthusiasm was there because I could so clearlysee a success coming out of it. I had done enough research to know it had greatpotential—potential as well as immediate problems.
This complex had a reputation for having “rent runners”—tenants who would
rent a trailer and in the middle of the night would pile their belongings into itand disappear. This happened on a regular basis, so I realized an immediate ac-tion would be for me to hire someone for 24/7 patrol, which I did.
The other thing that had to be addressed quickly was the state of the build-
ings themselves. Disrepair is one thing, dilapidation is another, and this complexhad a high proportion of both conditions. We estimated it would require at least$800,000 to make an effective difference. One good thing is that we were al-lowed to increase the rents immediately, which we found much easier to do inCincinnati than in New York.
The buildings were red brick, and we put white shutters on all the windows,
which made a huge difference aesthetically. We ﬁxed up the grounds. We re-placed the very unattractive aluminum front doors on the apartments withwhite colonial doors, which, combined with the shutters, made a big difference.We didn’t take shortcuts, but we made sure our improvements would be no-ticeable, and they were. Swifton Village had a new look, and people were im-pressed. We ran ads in the Cincinnati papers, and in less than a year it wascompletely rented.
We soon realized that we needed a permanent project manager. This was a
big complex, and we’d already been through a few who hadn’t worked out. I ﬁ-nally found a guy who has left a permanent impression on my memory. He wasa con man from the inside out. He didn’t try to hide that fact, and he had closeto zero social skills. He was insulting, brash, and as politically incorrect as youcould possibly be. But I noticed that he had the ability to get things done, to getthem done quickly, and that he was effective as a property manager. The otherguys I had might be more likeable or more honest, but they were not as compe-452 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 452ROBERT KIYOSAKI 453
tent when it came to their job. I had to keep my eye on this particular guy, but
in the long run it was worth it to have the complex running well.
This property became a great success, and it didn’t require me to be there
very often. The property manager ran the place well, and there were no morerent runners. All was well until a few years later when I visited and spoke witha tenant who had become a friend. He told me that the neighborhood hadchanged, and that I should get out. Swifton Village was fully rented, and therewere no complaints about the management, but I respected his insights enoughto spend a few days in Cincinnati and check it out for myself.
I discovered that he was right. It was quickly becoming a very rough neigh-
borhood. I decided to put Swifton Village up for sale, and it didn’t take long toﬁnd a buyer. We sold it for $12 million—$6 million more than we had paid for ita few years earlier. For a ﬁrst deal, it was a good one, and I learned some greatlessons about human nature in the process. I also learned that foreclosureswere not going to be my niche—but this ﬁrst venture helped to fund my ultimategoal, which was to be a developer in Manhattan and to build my own buildings.I wasn’t dabbling—my focus was intact.
Another lesson was the importance of delivering quality. I made sure the
buildings were clean, safe, and well presented. We didn’t have marble ﬂoors orgold ﬁxtures, but the simple steps of making the grounds appealing, along withthe addition of white shutters and attractive front doors went a long way to es-tablishing my name with excellence. That’s something to always keep in mind,whether your name is on the building or not. Learn to distinguish yourself ineverything you do.
Arriving in Manhattan
Starting out in Manhattan was deﬁnitely a challenge. One big New York realestate guy was quoted as saying, “Trump has a great line of s—t, but where arethe bricks and mortar?” It wasn’t exactly a warm welcome, but at least I knewwhat I was up against. Looking back, I think perhaps they didn’t know whothey were up against. I’m the guy who would eventually write Never Give Up
and actually mean it. I’m still here and going stronger than ever.
That wasn’t the case in the early 1970s. I was a newcomer, and the city was
in debt. I even heard people talking about the city going bankrupt. It wasn’t anurturing environment for a budding developer. But my focus was so clear thatI wasn’t discouraged. I knew there were still opportunities even in a so-called9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 453terrible market. In fact, it was a terrible market at that time. But my determina-
tion was such that I refused to give in to the facts and continued to work myway around them. There was no place like Manhattan—and I intended to stay.
My ﬁrst real estate interests in the city were the abandoned railyards along
the Hudson River, at 34th Street and 60th Street, which was about one hundredacres. I then tried to convince the city that the site for the new convention cen-ter (now known as the Jacob Javits Center) should be built where it is on West34th Street, instead of where the city wanted to build it, all the way downtownin Battery Park. As I said in my ﬁrst book in 1987 , The Art of the Deal, “We won
by wearing everyone else down. We never gave up . . .” in referring to this 1977battle. In 1978, the city ﬁnally decided to build on West 34th Street, which wasa victory for me.
However, the city and state decided they would oversee the job. My offer to
manage it was rejected, and as a result they went close to $700 million overbudget. A lot of money was wasted, and today we are seeing how quickly thecenter has deteriorated. But at the time, I focused myself on the far more excit-ing prospect of the 60th Street railyards that I had. I wanted to make it a resi-dential haven that faced the Hudson River. I knew I’d face a lot of oppositionthere, between zoning and the adjacent community, as well as from a city that454 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Quotable Quotes by Donald Trump
“Big problems can equal big opportunities.”
“If you don’t have major problems, you’re probably not doing something major.”“Adversity is a fact of life. Accept that, and you will be prepared.”“Business is an art, whether it’s real estate or anything else. T reat it that way by de-
veloping your technique, being tenacious, and remaining passionate.”
“My father’s four-step formula is one I’ve always used because it works: get in, get
it done, get it done right, and get out.”
“When you are confronted with a problem, ask yourself this question: Is this a blip,
or is it a catastrophe? That will align your thoughts and your reactions to wherethey should be.”
“Reaping and sowing are directly related, but you need to know which comes first.”“Resilience is part of the survival of the fittest formula—make sure you remain
adaptable.”
“Real estate has a way of evening itself out. There are always ups and downs, and
that’s a fact, not an aberration.”
“Don’t depend on anyone else for providing your financial security.”9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 454was in ﬁnancial crisis. It was in 1979 that I allowed my option on the 60th Street
railyards to expire—but somehow I knew I’d be involved with them again later,which has proven to be true. Tru mp Place now proudly stands on those former
yards, and is still being completed, almost thirty years later. But that’s anotherstory.
During this time with the railyard property, I was still looking around at
other opportunities in Manhattan. The old Commodore Hotel, which was situ-ated next to Grand Central Station, was having a hard time of it. The wholearea was having a hard time, in fact, and it looked like it. It had become acrummy neighborhood that everyone tried to avoid—certainly much differentthan it is today.
I set out to try to acquire the Commodore Hotel and change it for the better.
Once again, I wasn’t met with great enthusiasm. Even my father said, “Buyingthe Commodore at a time when even the Chrysler Building is in bankruptcy islike ﬁghting for a seat on the Titanic.” He was well aware of the risk involved.
While I was aware of the risk, I also saw it as a way to get the city back to a
ﬂourishing condition, not just limping along, which is what was happening.The neighborhood had become dilapidated, and this was a good way to get itback on track again, along with providing some jobs. There are always severalways to view a situation, and it’s a good idea to have your vision intact enoughto withstand opposition.
At the time that I was interested in going into negotiations for the hotel, they
owed $6 million in back taxes, had recently spent $2 million in renovations(which was obviously not enough), and they wanted out. In order to purchasethe hotel for $10 million, I would need a tax abatement from the City of NewYork, ﬁnancing, and a commitment from an experienced hotel company. In ad-dition, I would have to structure a deal with other interested parties, and thatwas certain to be complex. Complicated is an understatement for this situation,and it took several years of negotiating to work it all out.
One of the ﬁrst things I did was to ﬁnd a designer who knew what I wanted
to do and had the same enthusiasm for the project. I found a young architectnamed Der Scutt who was a perfect ﬁt—he understood what I wanted to do,which was to wrap the building and make it a reﬂecting façade for the buildingssurrounding it. It might have been premature to ﬁnd a designer before I knewthe deal would even go through, but I’m a strong believer in following your vi-sion and working from there. I also had a compatriot in vision who believed inmy plans as vividly as I did.
I also needed to ﬁnd an operator, one with a lot of experience. I realized that
a lot of big hotel chains had a presence in New York, but the one that I liked theROBERT KIYOSAKI 4559781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 455most, the Hyatt, didn’t. I called to see if they were interested, and they were.
We made a deal quickly and announced it to the press in May of 1975. So I had ahotel partner.
What was left was still monumental—I needed to get ﬁnancing and a tax
abatement from the city. I decided to hire a real estate broker who was in hissixties and had a lot of experience. I was twenty-seven at the time, and I thoughthaving a broker on board would look good, which it did. With an architect, ahotel partner, and an experienced broker lined up, I was ready to go for it.
We hit a brick wall, and fast. Without ﬁnancing, the city wasn’t about to con-
sider a tax abatement. Without a tax abatement, the banks weren’t very inter-ested in ﬁnancing. It was a classic catch-22 situation. While discussing this, wedecided we’d bring up the obviously hurting and decaying city and hopefullymake the bankers feel guilty for looking the other way when we were obviouslytrying to do something constructive. Well, that didn’t work. But we kept trying,and we ﬁnally found a bank that appeared to be interested.
After spending many hours of time and effort with them, one guy suddenly
just changed his mind. He brought up ridiculous and unimportant issues andwas obviously trying to kill the deal. We tried everything, but he was set in anegative groove and couldn’t be convinced to change his mind.
It was at this point that I wanted to give up. Literally, I was worn out. It was
my lawyer, George Ross, who convinced me to keep trying, and he made it clearthat I’d already spent so much time on this project that I shouldn’t just walkaway from it. So I decided to approach the city, even without ﬁnancing, to ex-plain the situation. It was clear that the Hyatt Hotel organization was enthusi-astic about coming to New York, and they’d do a great job, but the costs werejust too high. We needed a break on property taxes or nothing would be done. Ialso pointed out how the new hotel could work as a catalyst for sparking up thewhole Grand Central area into renovation and rejuvenation.
It worked. The city agreed, and it was a deal that would make us partners,
and a deal that would beneﬁt everyone. I would receive a property tax abate-ment for forty years, and I would buy the Commodore for $10 million, with $6million going to the city for back taxes. Then I would sell the hotel to the cityfor one dollar, and they would lease it back to me for ninety-nine years. As a re-sult, we got ﬁnancing from two institutions.
None of this was easy, and when I look back I realize I had great fortitude to
hang in there for so long. But it was worth it. The Hyatt at Grand Central startedthe revitalization of the whole area, and today it’s a thriving and beautiful hubof New York City. The hotel itself reﬂects the architecture of the area in the456 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 456four exterior walls of mirrors that replaced the formerly dingy façade of the
Commodore. This project did not have my name on it, but I can tell you thatevery detail mattered. The quality was there, the vision was there, and the re-sults are still there.
T en Small Steps to Big Success
1. Find out what you love to do. T rust yourself enough to find out what is best for
you, and what you’re best at doing. For great success, you need great passion, butmake sure it’s well directed.2. Learn everything you can about what you’re doing: Be an expert.3. Ask yourself questions. For example, ask yourself, “Is there anyone else who cando this better than I can?” It’s another way of saying know yourself, and know yourcompetition. That can simplify things quickly.4. Know the world. See the world as an emerging market. Study it—daily. That’s arequirement, not an elective.5. Focus, and make sure it’s a 100 percent focus—nothing less.6. Know your own blind spots. Ask yourself, “What am I pretending not to see?”7 . Set the bar high—do the best you possibly can.8. Think positively. Zap negativity immediately. Focus on the solution, not theproblem.9. Be persistent, tenacious, and alert—every single day. Get this momentum goingdaily and don’t let up.10. Never give up. Never, never give up—that is the best advice I can give you.
Donald Trump is the chairman and president of the T rump Organization,
a privately held company in New Y ork. The T rump Organization encom-passes global real estate development and global licensing, sales andmarketing, property management, golf course development, entertain-ment, product licensing, and brand development. In a departure from hisreal estate acquisitions, he is a best-selling author; produces and stars in
the television reality show The Apprentice; and partners with NBC T elevision Network in theownership and broadcast rights for Miss Universe, Miss USA, and Miss T een USA pageants.He is the archetypal businessman—a deal maker without peer and an ardent philanthropist.
ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4579781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 457Donald Trump Jr.
Don Trump Jr.’s father and I are the same age. The famous Donald Trump,
one of the greatest celebrity real estate developers in the world, is a valued
friend and mentor to me. Having Donald Trump as a coauthor and friend has
been one of the greatest blessings in my life. Another blessing has been getting toknow Donald’s two sons, Don Jr. and Eric.
One night, Donald Trump and I were guests at the Quill Awards, an evening
similar to the Academy Awards, but rather than recognizing Hollywood stars, theQuill Awards recognizes great authors. Donald Trump and I were there to presentthe award to the best business author.
At the awards dinner, I got to sit next to Don Trump Jr. and his gorgeous wife.
For some reason, our discussion got around to the subject of big game hunting. Atthat dinner, I found out that Don Jr. along with his brother, Eric, is not only ahunter, but a gun collector, just like me. Now I know that guns and hunting arenot politically correct subjects. So it was refreshing to ﬁnd a young man, actuallytwo, who shared the same passion in life, a subject I tend to be secretive about—even to my wife, Kim, who is an animal rights activist and person who is not par-ticularly fond of guns. Kim, like Donald Trump, prefers the golf course to the wilds.26Donald TRUMP Jr. 
and Eric TRUMP
What Is the Most Important
Thing Y ou’ve Learned from Y ourFather About Real Estate?
4589781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 458ROBERT KIYOSAKI 459
Over the years, I have gone hunting with Don Jr. and Eric a number of times
and have gotten to know them personally. They have it all. They are rich, famous,
good looking, and perfect gentlemen. They are not spoiled brats as many rich kidsare. They are driven, smart, experienced, and market savvy. I learn a lot aboutreal estate and life on every hunting trip we take together.
Their father and mother can be very proud of these two young men.
—Robert Kiyosaki
This simple statement seems so obvious, but I am always amazed by the
number of people who miss out on incredible opportunities because they’re
too afraid to simply ask. Ultimately, these people fear rejection. They are afraidof the word “no.” They are either shy, weak, or too proud to ask for somethingor to negotiate the things they want in life. The world of real estate is no placefor people who ﬁt this description. So here’s your chance to buck up.
In life and in business you never get anything you don’t ask for: 
always negotiate!
Shrinking from the task of negotiating, by being afraid of simply asking for
what they want, people from all walks of life, not just real estate, miss a funda-mental opportunity to do what all great business people try to do: buy goods orservice at a better price. I learned from my father at a very early age that inbusiness you must take advantage of every easy opportunity. He didn’t sit medown and explain this lesson. Rather it was one that took me two summers ofvery hard work to ﬁgure out.
My ﬁrst job was as a dock attendant at a marina we owned as part of what
was at the time Trump’s Castle Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. I was four-teen years old and living away from home for two months tying down boats,and hooking up electrical and water systems and anything else that I could bepersuaded to do for minimum wage plus tips. Everyone should work for tips atsome point in their life. Nothing puts life, service, and work ethic into suchclear perspective as that. Working for tips was a great lesson in and of itself.
After two summers of dock work, it was time for me to start working as a
landscaper at one of our properties. The position had a lot more responsibilityand required more skill. I ran tractors, I operated chainsaws, and I performedthe hard labor required to keep the property looking pristine. I was makingTIP9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 459minimum wage at this job, too, but there were no tips from the drunken boaters
who occasionally let a twenty slip through their hands. My salary was minimumwage and nothing more.
At ﬁrst, I said nothing about the pay structure of this job. I didn’t want to
seem greedy, and I suppose I was too proud to ask for more money. But towardthe end of summer, I ﬁnally went to my father and asked him why I had notgotten a raise when I took this more skilled position. Especially since the tipcomponent of my salary was now nonexistent. His answer was very simple,“You did not get a raise because you did not ask for one. Why would I pay youmore than you were willing to work for?” Well, that did it for me. It was a hardlesson, and one that in hindsight seems so obvious. But the bottom line wasthat I had let my emotions, my fears, and my pride get in the way of what Iwanted to achieve.
Since then, I always make a conscious effort to never put myself in the same
position again. The hard work that summer didn’t bother me, but I felt like Ihad wasted an entire summer working a job that paid minimum wage when Icould have been earning more if I had only asked for it. That lesson has stuckwith me to this day.
As is often the case, the hardest lessons are the best lessons, and my summer
as a minimum wage landscaper certainly drove the message home. Thankfully,
I learned it before the stakes got too high. If you’re going to lose income, it’s al-ways better to do it when playing with low numbers. Learn your lessons like Idid, before too many zeros get into the mix.
I no longer let the fear of “no” overpower me. Instead, I make a game of ne-
gotiations. Here’s how I play it, and you can do it, too. At every opportunity, Iask for, negotiate, and almost always get something above and beyond where Istarted. To me anytime I save a few dollars or get an extra “something” thrownin—whatever that “something” may be that I am asking for—I have created ad-ditional value. And here’s a universal truth: Creating value is what business isall about!
When it comes to real estate and life in general, don’t be afraid to ask. The
worst that can happen is that the person you ask says, “No.” And in that case,you’re no worse off than you were when you started. Asking is quick, it takestwo seconds, and believe it or not, good businesspeople expect it. By simplyasking, you give yourself and everyone else the time and the opportunity to putthemselves in a better ﬁnancial position and add value. Even if you get thedreaded “no” at ﬁrst, it’s not so bad. Sure, you may not get exactly what you460 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 460wanted, but often you can split the difference and end up somewhere in the
middle with each side giving a little and getting a little. That’s the power of ne-gotiation. Even in that scenario, you end up ahead.
The reality that I learned all too well is to just keep asking and pushing. No
one in his right mind will refuse to sell you something at his original price sim-ply because you tried to buy it cheaper. The worst case scenario is that you endup exactly where you started. Eventually, you will come to realize that hearing“no” is not the worst thing in the world after all. It becomes part of the game,and hearing “no” actually makes it easier for you to ask in the future.
Eventually, you’ll get bolder. You’ll discover when you ask for something
egregious that you think the other person can’t possibly deliver, often the com-promised position ends up more in your favor than you could have ever hopedfor. In some cases the person may agree to your crazy question and take thebait, hook, line, and sinker. When playing the game, try not to fall out of yourchair when this happens (and it will) because the last thing you want is theother person to realize is that he made a mistake. He may try to renegotiate fora better deal, leaving you snatching defeat from the jaws of victory.
The same holds true if a seller gives you a quote that you ﬁnd completely
thrilling. Don’t accept the proposal as is. Go through the exercise of back-and-forth negotiation. Even after the back-and-forth seems to be over, ask him to doa bit better just so he feels he got the most out of you. It’s how the game isplayed, and it will ensure the deal closes. There will be time for exuberance,but it is not when you are at the table. Practice restraint so the other personfeels they got the best of you, not the other way around. Do that and you set thetone for future negotiations, and you set yourself up to win again and again andagain.
Finally, the more you ask, the easier it becomes to ask in the future. Hearing
“no” becomes no big deal. You’ll ﬁnd the habit of asking and the skill of pushingcreates a positive cycle of circumstances that can create beneﬁts for you andthe projects you apply the techniques to. Try to negotiate at every opportunity,I mean every opportunity. You’ll be surprised where you’ll ﬁnd results. I eventry negotiating at retail stores. When the regular clerk who is checking me outsays, “No,” I ask to speak to his manager. Do this and you’re almost guaranteeda 10 percent break if you push a bit. Sounds crazy? Try it and see. A 10 percentsavings is 10 percent earned.
When you build up conﬁdence in your negotiation techniques, become ﬂex-
ible in how you argue your points, and can adjust your style, you’ll ﬁnd the ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4619781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 461462 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
negotiating game becomes easier. Give it a go; you have nothing to lose and a
lot to gain.
Donald Trump Jr. is an innovator and leader in today’s young business
world. As an executive vice president at the T rump Organization, Donald
Jr. works in tandem with his siblings Ivanka and Eric to expand the com-pany’s real estate, retail, commercial, and hotel interests nationally andinternationally. His extensive real estate development experience, rigor-ous education, and inherent business sense add a level of detail and
depth to the management of all current and future T rump projects. In addition to his real es-tate interests, Donald Jr. is an accomplished and sought-after speaker and has been featuredas an advisor on the highly acclaimed NBC show The Apprentice.
Eric Trump
Iam afraid to say my wife, Kim, is in love with Eric Trump. While she is very
fond of Ivanka and Donald Trump Jr. Eric has a special place in her heart. She
loves him because he is an especially kind person—just like her—and good-looking.
He is the youngest of three children, just like Kim who is the youngest of threedaughters. While all three Trump children have that celebrity magic, to Kim, Ericis special.
One of the most memorable times in my life was when Don Jr. and Eric invited
me to hunt pheasants at their club, an hour out of New Y ork City. At the time, Idid not really know the two young men. Spending the day in the mud and the cold,slogging through knee-high water, and chasing pheasants with dogs, let me knowhow truly special and unique they are. I got to see them outside of the high-rise of-ﬁces next to the Plaza Hotel and Central Park on Fifth Avenue.
One of the ﬁrst things I noticed is both young men shoot and collect the same
antique shotguns I collect. They are old shotguns—about seventy-ﬁve years old—from Belgium made by Francotte, a family of gunmakers few people have heard of.
The next thing I noticed was how kind and respectful Eric and his brother were
to everyone. They were not snobbish or arrogant. They were not even phony gen-tlemen. They were truly kind and respectful. It did not matter if the people weremembers of the club or workers of the club, all people were treated with the samewarmth and respect.
9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 462Later, as we drove back to New Y ork City, we stopped by an old village inn, pos-
sibly two hundred years old, to have a meal. Again, both young men went out of
their way to greet and say hello to the staff of the restaurant. While the patronsgawked and stared at the two young celebrities, Eric and his brother went behindthe counter into the kitchen to say hello to the kitchen staff. I gained a new level ofrespect for each of them on that day. Their kindness is extraordinary.
In 2008, I invited both young men to a private island in the chain of Hawaiian
Islands for a hunt. As we drove to the helicopter pad, Eric was texting his sister,Ivanka, a special family recipe. When I asked him if he knew how to cook, he andhis brother chimed in saying, “Of course.” When I asked them how they learned tocook, both young men explained that they saw their family service staff as servantsfor their mom and dad, not servants for them. Rather than become spoiled kidswho expected to be waited upon by their parents’ servants, they learned to cookand take care of themselves and each other. I can say that all three children trulylove each other.
Today, I see all three kids as incredible role models for the next generation, just
as their dad and mom were role models for my generation. It is with personalgratitude that my life’s work has put me in contact with the Trump family and thepeople of the Trump Organization.
—Robert Kiyosaki
For as long as I can remember, every morning started out the same way. I
would make my way to my father’s bedroom before school and kiss him
goodbye. As I was leaving, he would always say, “And remember, Eric, nevertrust anyone.” These certainly are not the words you typically hear a father sayto a son who is heading off to kindergarten, and the true meaning of the wordsdidn’t quite resonate until adulthood. Today, however, as I grow our business,my father’s lesson is more relevant than ever.
I ﬁrst learned the meaning of my father’s words from my older brother, Don,
who is not only my best friend, but also a mentor to me to this day. After school,Don would always suggest that we trade the coins in our piggybanks: I wouldhappily exchange my quarters for several of his shiny pennies, thinking thatthe quantity I was receiving far outweighed the actual value of my coins. Oneday, I walked into my father’s room with my pile of pennies to show him what agreat investment I had just made. Noticing how Don was conning his littlebrother, my father looked at me, explained the concept of value versus quantity,ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4639781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 463and exclaimed, “Eric, what did I tell you? Never trust anyone!” Suddenly, I re-
membered his daily admonition.
Today, as executive vice president of Development and Acquisitions for the
Trump Organization, I encounter situations on a daily basis that make me reﬂecton my father’s words and advice. I’ve realized that self-reliance is a businessper-son’s most essential tool. Take one particular instance. I was negotiating a mu-tual partnership to bring an ultra-exclusive restaurateur into one of our projects.After months of tedious negotiations, the night before we intended to sign thedeal, I learned, through a slip-up made by one of the restaurateur’s architects,that they had been instructed to build a restaurant far exceeding all our agreed-upon budgets.
Shocked by the dishonesty and fraudulent intentions exhibited by my would-
be partner, I immediately cut off all negotiations and ended the deal. I am aﬁrm believer that everything happens for a reason, and despite being upset overmonths of wasted efforts, today I have a smile on my face knowing we madethe right decision, went with a different restaurateur, and now own the mostsuccessful restaurant in the city.
In a similar instance, my father knew a successful businessman who pledged
to donate $40 million, to be paid in four equal installments, to his alma mater.After paying the ﬁrst two installments, the businessman ran into severe ﬁnancialdifﬁculties and asked the college for additional time in which to pay the re-maining $20 million. Instead of being grateful for the $20 million that it hadreceived, the college sued this man for both nonperformance and breach of hiscontractual obligations. Eventually, this individual was forced to ﬁle for bank-ruptcy and, though he ultimately made a full ﬁnancial recovery and was able tocome back even stronger than before, he vowed to never give another cent tothe college.
I have been fortunate to have lived a privileged life and am sincerely grateful
for my family, education, and upbringing. However, make no mistake that withthis lifestyle I also faced difﬁcult challenges. It is human nature to be enviousof what other people have, however oftentimes such envy creates a variety ofrationalizations for bad behavior. As a child, you do not necessarily see or knowthat you are privileged or underprivileged, and therefore you can be an easytarget for people who may have ill intentions. That was me. But my father’swords helped me to see the world as it is and learn that people usually act intheir own self interest, even to the detriment of others at times.
This belief is a ﬁne line to walk because I typically like to give people the
beneﬁt of the doubt but, as I grow older, I often tend to expect the worst from464 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 464ROBERT KIYOSAKI 465
people so I can avoid being taken by surprise or being disappointed. It is an un-
fortunate, but necessary stance. However, it gives me a new appreciation andinsight into what my father was trying to instill in me as a young child: Dis-cernment comes with experience.
In business and in life there is simply one reality: There are good people and
bad. There always have been and always will be. The simple lesson to learn istrust yourself, not others, keep your head out of the clouds, and you will alwayssucceed.
As an executive vice president of Development and Acquisitions for the
T rump Organization, Eric Trump is actively involved in all aspects of real
estate development, both nationally and internationally. From the initialacquisitions and development partnership to the ﬁnal design, construc-tion, sales, and marketing functions, he plays a pivotal role in T rump proj-ects around the world. Eric appears as a keynote speaker for real estate
conferences nationwide, as well as in various press outlets such CNBC, Fox, NBC, and theNew York Post . Along with his work with the T rump Organization, he works fervently to aid
children in need, having started the Eric T rump Foundation for St. Jude Children’s Hospital.
9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 465For years I have traveled the world, speaking on entrepreneurship and in-
vesting. My intent is to highlight the importance of ﬁnancial education
and how ﬁnancial education is essential to ﬁnancial freedom and ﬁnancial se-
curity. When asked what I personally invest in, I say, “I became ﬁnancially in-dependent investing in real estate.”
Regardless of where I am—the United States, Australia, South Africa, Eu-
rope, or Asia—or to whom I am speaking—rich or poor—what I hear back aresimilar responses to the idea of investing in real estate. Here are a few choicecomments:
“I don’t want to ﬁx toilets.”“I don’t have any money.”“I don’t have the time.”“Real estate is risky.”“What if I lose money?”“You can’t do what you do here.”It is my opinion these responses are simply excuses. Excuses that mask a
deeper, darker, hidden, unexpressed reality. In my opinion, most people whouse these excuses are:
1.Not educated in real estate.
2.Lazy.27 Robert KIYOSAKI
Overcoming the Fear 
of Failing
4669781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 4663.Afraid of failing.
4.All of the above.
I say this because most people want to be ﬁnancially free. Most people would
love to have ﬁnancial security. Most people would love to have money comingin regardless of whether they worked or not. Many people would love to stopworking and do something they really wanted to do.
To me, real estate represents freedom. Real estate means control over my
life and my future. I am not depending upon a retirement plan ﬁlled with stocks,bonds, and mutual funds—investments that someone else manages. I want con-trol of my ﬁnancial destiny.
This is why when I hear such excuses as “I don’t have any money” or “I don’t
want to ﬁx toilets.” I know these excuses are just that. I know people are lookingat the journey, not the destination. A friend of mine has two sayings about thishuman failing. His ﬁrst saying is, “Everyone wants to go to heaven, but no onewants to die.” His second, “Many people will not start the journey until all thelights are green.”
Unfortunately, too many people allow their excuses to get between
them and the life they would love to live.
Unfortunately, too many people allow their excuses to get between them and
the life they would love to live. Rather than look beyond real estate, looking atwhat becoming a real estate investor can do for their lives, most people areblinded by their own excuses. They see what they are afraid of rather than whatthey want in life. Fear and laziness blur their vision, limiting the boundary oftheir lives.
The following are my points of view regarding the four excuses.
Excuses of the Poor
Excuse No. 1: No Education
Most people are smart enough to invest in real estate. Investing in real estate isnot that tough. Anyone who has bought a home or rented a place to live has in-vested in real estate. So investing in real estate is not tough. Making money inreal estate is another matter. Making money in real estate takes real, real estateeducation.
When I speak of making money in real estate, I am speaking of cash ﬂow .
Cash ﬂow is income coming in every month, regardless of whether I work orTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4679781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 467not. I am not talking about capital gains . When people say their house has ap-
preciated in value, or they ﬂipped a property—buying low, ﬁxing it up, and sell-
ing it—they are speaking of capital gains. There is a tremendous differencebetween cash ﬂow and capital gains. In my opinion, capital gains are easier toachieve than cash ﬂow. Achieving sustainable cash ﬂow requires a higher degreeof ﬁnancial education. The good news is you do not have to go to college forfour years to get this education. A three-day seminar is sufﬁcient, if it is a goodseminar. The Rich Dad Company offers beginning and advanced courses in realestate investing.
In 1997 , when Rich Dad Poor Dad was published, I wrote about the difference
between assets and liabilities. My rich dad’s deﬁnitions were simple: assets put
money in your pocket and liabilities take money from your pocket. In the book I
stated, “Your house is not an asset. It is a liability.” In other words, for mostpeople, their biggest real estate investment, their house, cash ﬂows out, not in.I received hate mail for years because of this one point. After the subprimemess, massive foreclosures, and declining home values, millions of people nowrealize that real estate can be either an asset or liability.
For most people, their home is a liability, even if the mortgage is paid off.
Most homes are liabilities because most homes do not produce any income.Most homes cost money: for insurance, property tax, repairs, and other ex-penses. If a person sells his or her home and the sale puts money in that person’spocket, at that moment the home is an asset. Until then, it is a liability.
T o be financially free, your real estate must produce income in good 
or bad economies. Once you learn to do that, you are free for life. This is why 
a little financial education is important.
Excuse No. 2: Laziness
Laziness is a personal matter. I know I am lazy. I battle the lazy boy inside of
me on a daily basis. For example, when I wake up, I know I should go to thegym, but the lazy boy says, “Oh, you can exercise tomorrow. Why not make acup of coffee and read the paper.” By the age of two, most people are experts atmaking excuses.
When I hear people say, “I don’t want to ﬁx toilets” or “I don’t have enough
money,” I know these are excuses from a lazy person because I use the sameexcuses. When I hear someone repeat to me the same excuses I use myself, Iwant to say, “What makes you think I want to ﬁx toilets?” or “What makes youTIP468 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 468think I have money?” But what I really want to say is, “It’s because I don’t want
to ﬁx toilets, and it’s because I want to have a lot of money, that’s why I investin real estate.”
Rich dad often said, “Many lazy people are hard-working people.” At ﬁrst, I
did not understand what he meant. As I got older, I began to understand hiswords more clearly. Growing older, I also found it easier to be busy at workthan it was to do what I needed to do. Today, I still use excuses such as, “I’mbusy” or “I have too much work to do” or “I need a break.” Today, I meet manyhard-working people, hiding behind the curtain of hard work, yet deep down,they are too lazy to get rich. So they invent an excuse.
When I was in high school, my poor dad often said to me, “I can’t go to your
football game because I’ve got work to do.” He never attended a game in thethree years I played high school football. He also said the same thing aboutbecoming rich or at least ﬁnancially free. He was always busy. In my opinion,he often used hard work as an excuse to hide from life. He was a good, hard-working, high-income, poor man.
My rich dad was a rich man because he did not work hard for money. Instead,
he worked hard at having his money work hard for him. The harder his moneyworked, the more money he made, and the more free time he had. The morefree time he had, the more money he made.
This drove my poor dad crazy. My poor dad o ften called people like my rich
dad, “The idle rich.” Rather than have his money work hard, my poor dad puthis money in the bank. My poor dad believed in saving money. This drove myrich dad crazy. He would say, “Your father works hard because his money islazy. All your dad’s money does is sit in the bank. I come along, borrow yourdad’s money, buy a piece of real estate, and put your dad’s money to work forme.”
Professional education is all about learning to work for money. Financial
education is all about learning to have money work for you. So the question is,
“Who works harder? Y ou, or your money?”
Excuse No. 3: Fear of failing
Fear is often a combination of lack of education and laziness. The acronym
F.E.A.R. stands for False Evidence Appearing Real. Because of fear, many peoplesee only what can go wrong. Due to lack of education, they cannot see what cango right.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4699781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 469When I am asked, “How does a person overcome the fear of failing?” I simply
reply, “Get some education, gain some experience, ﬁnd a mentor, and get off
your butt.” In other words, imp rove your v ision. See what most people cannot
see. See the opportunities most people cannot see because of fear. See the des-tination and the journey.
One of the reasons I have a team of advisors when I invest is simply 
that each person sees something different. After listening to what each 
person has to say, I then make up my mind.
Most great investments are right in front of you. The problem is seeing them.
The reason most investments are hard to see is that great investments are seen
with your mind, not your eyes. Years ago, I wanted to buy a piece of ranch-land.My dream was to build a remote mountain cabin in the woods. I also wanted itfor free. After challenging my mind, I went looking for my dream. A few monthslater, I came across a spectacular piece of property. It was approximately eightyacres, including an old rock house built in the 1880s. The asking price was$115,000. I believe I put $10,000 down—with the terms of no interest and nopayments—and asked for one year to pay off the balance. After ﬁxing the house,I subdivided the property, sold thirty acres with the house for approximately$215,000. I put some money, about $75,000, net in my pocket and still have theﬁfty free acres today.
After the transaction was completed, a neighbor who lived in a remote cabin
a few miles away came by and was upset that I made money and got ﬁfty acresfor free. She had watched the property for years, but did nothing. She had asimilar idea but failed to buy the property because she was afraid of failing.“What would you have done if you had failed?” she asked. “What if the propertyhad not sold?”
“I still would have had my dream,” I replied. “It would not have been for
free, yet I would still have my dream.”
“But what if you had failed?” she demanded.Taking a deep breath I replied, “I knew that if things did not work out, I
would have been creative and tried something else. Every failure would havemade me smarter and eventually more successful. You can fail only if you donothing.”
She looked back at me and said, “And I did nothing, so I failed.”Shrugging my shoulders, I said softly, “I leave that decision up to you.”TIP470 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 470ROBERT KIYOSAKI 471
The Deadliest Word
One of the most deadly words in the English language is the word “try.” When
someone says they will “try” to do something, I know they will probably not do
it. There is a world of difference between the statements, “I will try to do it” and “I
will do it.” The difference between the two statements is the word “commitment.”
My favorite way of describing the word commitment comes from the following
question and answer:
Question: What is the difference between bacon and eggs?
Answer: The chicken is involved but the pig is committed.
If you want to become financially free, don’t be a chicken. Get committed. Forbid
yourself from using the word “try.” Y ou either will or you won’t.
The Power of Education
About twenty years ago, I took a simple two-day course on creative ﬁnancing. I
believe I paid about $350 for the program. I think lunch was included. If ithadn’t been for that course, I would not have seen the free land opportunity.My neighbor, who did not take the course, could not see what I saw. All shecould see was failure.
As most of us know, we are in the Information Age. The problem is, there is
too much information. The reason education is important is that educationtrains our brains to selectively take in information and turn information intomeaning. Due to a lack of real estate education, my neighbor was overwhelmedwith information, most of it negative. Her brain was not trained to focus, processinformation, and turn it into positive meaning. That is why a little real estateeducation can be priceless.
Rich People and Cowards
Fear is a very powerful human emotion. How we handle fear determines if webecome rich people or cowards. When it comes to money, fear turns most people
into cowards.
Is it okay to have fear? While fear causes most people to do nothing, fear
causes other people to take action. Since I do not want to fail and lose money, Itake real estate education classes and read books on real estate. I did it twenty9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 471years ago, and I am still learning today. That is why I could ask my brain to ﬁnd
me a piece of land that I didn’t have to pay for, and why I continue to invest to-day. Buying the eighty acres, or any investment, I still have fear. I still fear losing.I just use my fear to take action and get smarter. I know that if things do not goright, I will use my creative mind and gain wisdom in the process. Many peopleuse the fear of failing as a reason to do nothing.
Fear causes most people to do nothing; fear causes other people
to take action. I still have fear. I still fear losing. I just use my fear to take 
action and get smarter.
Then there are people who attend real estate classes, study hard, and they
still let fear stop them. One reason is due to analysis paralysis. That means they
study too much. When it comes time to put their money on the line, the cowardin them chimes in and gives them all the reasons why the deal will not work.Just before they sign the papers, Chicken Little pops into their head and beginsto shout, “The sky is falling! The sky is falling!”
Just as I battle the lazy boy in me, I also do battle with my own resident
Chicken Little. One of the beauties of real estate is that you have time to think.There have been many times that I have found a piece of property, put in an of-fer, had the offer accepted, and then I began my research—a process known asdue diligence. It is during this due diligence period, a period that can be asshort as a week or as long as six months, that I bring in my team of advisors andmentors. When I make the ﬁnal decision either to buy or back out, I make it asa member of a calm, rational, educated, and experienced team—like the teamwho contributed to this book.
Due diligence periods do not guarantee success. There can still be unforeseen
problems. If a problem arises, again I call on a team to assist me with problemsolving, and it is that problem solving that increases my wisdom, wisdom that Ican use on the next investment. At minimum, even if I lose some money, I willbe smarter than someone who did nothing. It is with this philosophy that I in-vest, in spite of my fear.
Excuse No. 4: All of the Above
All of us are human. All of us need more education. All of us can be lazy. All ofus are afraid of failing. The difference between all of us begins with all of thetraits that make us human. The difference between all of us begins with howwe address our excuses.TIP472 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 472The following are some of the ways I personally address the four excuses.
Addressing Excuse No. 1: No Real Estate Education
My ﬁnancial education began with the game of Monopoly. Rich dad would play
that game with his son and me, over and over again. When I asked him why weplayed the game so often he said, “Because the formula for great wealth is foundin this game.” Most of us know the formula, which is this: Four green housesturns into one red hotel. At the age of nine, I realized that I could be rich if Ifollowed this simple formula and turned a game into real life.
To show us the game being played in real life, rich dad took his son and me
to see his green houses. Ten years later, when I was nineteen, rich dad boughthis red hotel on Waikiki Beach.
When I returned to Hawai’i from the Vietnam War, I asked my rich dad how
I could get started in real estate. His reply was, “First get educated. I’ve takenyou as far as I can go. You need to take the next step.” A month later, I waswatching television and saw an infomercial for a real estate course. I purchasedthe course for $385, which was a fortune at the time, since I made only about$600 a month as a Marine Corps pilot.
It was after the course ended that my real education began. Everything the
instructor taught us came true. He said, “The ﬁrst problems you will run intoare real estate agents. Most real estate agents are salespeople, not investors.They would not know a good investment from a bad one.” This is true today.For months, all I heard from real estate agents is, “You can’t do that. Thosedeals do not exist.”
The next thing the instructor said was, “Find a mentor, someone who did in-
vest in real estate.” Since my rich dad was already my mentor, I went immedi-ately to him. Rich dad’s ﬁrst words were, “How can I teach you something untilyou do something?”
“How can I teach you something until you do 
something?” —RICH DAD
For the next few months, I drove around in my spare time, looking at prop-
erties, talking to real estate agents, ﬁnally doing something as my rich dad hadsuggested. After I ﬁnally put an offer in on a property, I ran back to rich dadand proudly showed him the offer. As you can already guess, he ripped it topieces. Although it was painful to ﬁnd out how little I knew, that experiencewas priceless because I was ﬁnally doing something.TIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4739781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 473The deal I brought him was a low down payment deal. The problem was I
lost money every month; it was a negative cash ﬂow investment. Rich dad’s les-
son was, “How many investments can you afford if you lose money everymonth?”
Obviously, my reply was, “Not many.”His next question was, “Why do you want to pay money to lose money?”“Because the real estate agent said the price would go up and I would make
my money back,” I replied.
“Will the real estate agent guarantee that?” rich dad asked.“I don’t know,” I replied. “He just said I would make a lot of money when I
sold it.”
“Will he guarantee that?” asked rich dad again.“I don’t know,” I replied again.He then said, “Rather than lose money, how many investments can you afford
if you make money every month?”
Thinking for awhile, I replied hesitantly, “As many as I can ﬁnd?”Rich dad smiled and said, “Go out and ﬁnd investments you can make money
on. Never bring me an investment that you pay to lose money on. Never bet ona property going up in value.”
It was back to the streets. As rich dad said, “How can I teach you something
until you do something?” I was beginning to learn something.
My next lesson was learning to handle discouragement. As time dragged on,
I became more and more discouraged. Everything was too expensive or wouldhave cost too much money in repairs. Dragging my tail between my legs, I wentback to rich dad for some sympathy, and as you can guess, he gave me none.
When I complained about not having enough money, rich dad just laughed.
His lesson was, “When you ﬁnd an investment that makes money, you will ﬁndthe money.”
A month later, I found a one-bedroom, one-bath condominium on the island
of Maui, one block from a gorgeous white sand beach. I was excited that I ﬁnallyfound a great investment. I bought three of them, with credit cards and sellerﬁnancing. Each month, I made a net $25 per unit. I was making money, not los-ing money. Rich dad was correct. When you ﬁnd a great investment, you willﬁnd the money.
When you find a great investment, you will find 
the money. —RICH DADTIP474 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 474For your information, even if $25 does not sound like much, it is one of four
sources of income. In real estate, the four sources of income are:
1.Cash ﬂow. In this example I was making $25 a month.
2.Amortization. Each month, a little bit of my loan was being paid off. If I
held the property to the end of the mortgage, technically my tenants would
have paid off my mortgage.
3.Depreciation. Accounting and tax rules allow me to depreciate my property,
which means I am making money but it looks like I am losing money. I ammaking money because I am legally allowed to pay less in taxes. So this ismoney coming in because less money is paid out in taxes. It is also known asphantom cash ﬂow.
4.Appreciation. This is the price of the unit going up in value. Appreciation is
also known as capital gains. Most people invest for appreciation. During thelast real estate boom, ﬂippers were buying and then selling for a proﬁt. Thisis investing for appreciation (capital gains).
These four sources of income are also known I.R.R.—an internal rate of return.Being able to see these four different incomes gives me a lot more conﬁdence.
As I said earlier, I don’t invest for appreciation, I invest for cash ﬂow. In
fact, one of the reasons why I do not like to ﬂip property is that I like all fourof these income opportunities and it takes such a long time to ﬁnd a greatproperty.
Another reason why I do not like to ﬂip a property is that I can gain access to
my appreciation without selling the property. For example, let’s say I buy aproperty for $200,000 and a few years later it goes to $300,000. Rather thansell the property, I would rather borrow out the equity and continue to let thetenant pay for my second mortgage. Obviously, I borrow only if my rent cancover the increase in monthly payments.
I learned the hard way about selling or ﬂipping a property. Here’s the story.
More Than Fixing a Toilet
I wish I could say my education was complete after I bought the three units.Little did I know that the next phase of education was about to begin, an edu-cation in property management. After owning the three condos for a fewmonths, the septic system on the entire development burst, and the sewagerun-off ran into one of my condos. Next on my real estate education curriculumROBERT KIYOSAKI 4759781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 475was how to deal with developers, homeowners associations, lawyers, and a
smelly rental unit.
My ﬁrst plumbing problem was a much bigger than ﬁxing a toilet.
Selling Out of the Problem
The good news is, even though I was losing money because the tenants movedout, the Maui real estate market was taking off. A real estate agent, the verytype of person I was warned to be wary of in my real estate course, offered me$48,000 per unit. Since my base cost was only $18,000 a unit, my gross capitalgains would be about $30,000 a unit. The money and the septic system went tomy head. I sold.
Immediately after I sold and put the money in my pocket, the real estate
agent sold the units for $65,000 a unit a few weeks later. The lessons werepiling up. I made money, but I was really losing money. The septic system causedme to think emotionally rather than rationally.
In real estate investor terms, the septic system made me a perfect candidate
for another investor. I became known as a “don’t wanter.” A don’t wanter issomeone who does not want their property. They want out. They are emotionaland irrational. Soon after the subprime mortgage mess hit in 2007 , the marketwas ﬁlled with don’t wanters. Great investors love don’t wanters. If you wantto become rich, look for don’t wanters, and then look at the real estate theydon’t want.
The Bigger Problem and 
Better Lesson
Another lesson I gained from that ﬁrst experience is this: “If just starting out,
make sure the real estate is less than an hour’s drive away.” Since these proper-ties were on another island, when there was a problem I had to take time offfrom work, drive to the airport, park my car, take a ﬂight, rent a car, drive anhour to the property, work on the problem, and then hurry back home, missinga day’s work. That was expensive. Today, I can handle properties far away, butwhen I was just starting out, I should have found a property as close to home aspossible, less than an hour’s drive away. After you have purchased at least tenproperties, because each property will have a new lesson, then you can startexpanding your operational radius.476 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 476More Properties—More Problems—
More Money
Next on my educational curriculum were capital gains taxes. Selling the three
units put a lot of money in my pocket, and I spent it. The next year, I found outwhat capital gains taxes were. I had made money, and now I had tax problems.I found out that the government tax collectors do not like excuses.
Every property comes with different problems and different lessons. Each
lesson caused me to seek further education and gain more real life experience.This is how I got smarter, wiser, and richer. I got richer by failing. I found outthat people who do not fail also do not succeed.
I got richer by failing. I found out that people who do not 
fail also do not succeed.
Today, my wife, Kim, and I own approximately ﬁfteen hundred apartment
units and earn more money in a month than most people earn in years. Whilethe education and experiences have not stopped, the ﬁnancial rewards havegone up. Even during the subprime mortgage crisis, our properties have con-tinued to do well. No matter how tough times get, most people want a roof overtheir heads.
As far as mentors go, the real estate professionals in this book are our men-
tors. Whenever Kim and I have a question, these are the people we call. Simplysaid, our education never ends because the problems and challenges we facenever end.
So how does one overcome the fear of failing? My answer is grow up. Since
failing is part of learning, start with baby steps. Babies crawl before they walkand walk before they run. Babies fall many times during the learning process.That is why it is good that babies are short when they start out. They do nothave far to fall.
Our educational system makes two big mistakes when teaching people. The
ﬁrst mistake is that it punishes students for making mistakes. If you make nomistakes, you are an A student. If you make too many mistakes you are labeleda failure. This is why so many people who did well in school do not do well inreal life. The second mistake is that in school, you have to take tests on yourown. If you cooperate with your classmates during test time it is called cheating.One of the reasons I make more money than many A students is because I makeTIPROBERT KIYOSAKI 4779781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 477478 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
more mistakes and I cheat—meaning that I cooperate. This book is written by
the people I cooperate with at test time.
How to Find Great Advisors and Mentors
Aquestion I am often asked is, “How do I find great advisors and mentors?” My
reply is, “In fairy tales and in real life, you kiss many frogs before you find a
prince or princess, so start kissing.”
One valuable lesson I have learned is, “In every bad deal I meet good people.”
For example, I was working on a deal with a person who talked like and looked like
he knew what he was doing. “Joe,” (not his real name), had the credentials and thediplomas. Then the deal we were working on went bad, and his true personality, hisdark side, came out. The good thing was that I met Ken McElroy through theprocess. I do not know where “Joe” is today, but Ken and I have become greatfriends and have gone on to make millions of dollars together.
T oday, I am not afraid of deals going bad because I know that through bad deals
I meet good people. In other words, when deals go bad, the true character—thegood or the bad in a person—comes out from behind the curtain.
How Do You Overcome the Fear 
of Failing?
Here are ten things you can do right now:
1.Take classes or read books before starting. If you have no money, go to the
library. Remember, your mind is your greatest asset. Invest in that ﬁrst.
2.Avoid taking advice from losers. Stay away from people who say that some-
thing cannot be done. Be aware of real estate sales people who give invest-
ment advice but who do not invest in real estate.
3.Find mentors, people who have already gone to where you want to go.
4.Look at a minimum of one hundred investments before buying anything.
Take a new route home from work and look at different neighborhoods. Jogor ride a bike in new neighborhoods. Observe if neighborhoods are changing,going up, or going down. Talk to people who live in the area to ﬁnd out whatis going on. Once you ﬁnd an area you are interested in, become a ﬁve-blockexpert. Become the smartest person in one square mile. When you begin tosee investments that make money, the money will ﬁnd you.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 4785.Start small. Know that you will make mistakes. My rich dad often said,
“When someone does something to make a killing, they get killed.” Invest in
property less than an hour from where you live.
6.Stay humble. When people make money, they often get cocky. When people
get cocky, they make foolish mistakes. It is through humility and humor, be-ing able to laugh at our successes as well as our failures, that we learn best.In other words, don’t take yourself too seriously. The septic system blowingup and ﬂowing into my ﬁrst condo still causes me to laugh. Today, I am cau-tious about investing in anything that is downhill from something else. Today,I do know exactly what rolls downhill!
7 .Dream big. The only difference between my ﬁrst investment and my invest-
ments today are zeros. My dream was not real estate. My dream was ﬁnancialfreedom, and each property, good or bad, was a stepping-stone to that dream.
8.Remember, the world is ﬁlled with hard-working poor people. Many peo-
ple today are slaves to money. Today, many people will have to work formoney all their lives. So, every day, remind yourself not to be one of them.Work hard at having your money work hard for you so you do not have towork hard for money.
9.There are no perfect investments. Each investment comes with problems.
Each investment will challenge you. Each investment will teach you some-thing new. If you do nothing , you learn nothing . If you learn nothing, you re-
main poor. So remember, the only way you can fail is to fail to do something.
10.And no, I do not ﬁx toilets. If I knew how to ﬁx toilets, I would, so I never
learned how to ﬁx them. Instead, I learned how to hire and ﬁre professionalssuch as real, real estate agents, accountants who know the tax advantages ofinvesting in real estate, mortgage bankers who personally invest in real estate,lawyers who understand real estate law, property managers who love takingcare of property, contractors whose passion is building or ﬁxing real estate,and other specialists whose business is to be the best at the business of realestate. So I do not know how to ﬁx toilets, or how to do accounting or realestate law, but I do know who does.
As the years go on, you will get smarter and so will your team of professional
advisors. Ultimately, real estate is not your asset. Real estate alone does notmake anyone rich. Investing in real estate offers you the opportunity to getsmarter. It is your education, good and bad experiences, lessons learned, wis-dom that comes with time, and your team, a team like my team that contributedto this book, that will ultimately become your greatest assets.ROBERT KIYOSAKI 4799781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 479If you do not have enough money for an investment, remind yourself
that if you do not solve that problem, you will have money problems all your
life. My rich dad said, “If you can solve the problem of not having money , you
willhave more money for life.” Henry Ford said, “Thinking is the hardest work
there is. That’s why so few people engage in it.”
The reason there are more poor people than rich people is that it is 
easier to say, “I can’t afford it,” rather than ask the question, “How can I afford
it?” The moment you ask yourself the question, “How can I afford it?” yourmost important asset, your mind, goes to work. If you use the excuse, “I can’tafford it,” your mind goes back to sleep and you get back to working hard as a slave to money.
So please do not allow the fear of failing to come between you and your ﬁnan-
cial freedom . Failing is essential to success.
If you do nothing ,you learn nothing . If you learn nothing, you remain
poor. So remember, the only way you can fail is to fail to do something.TIP
TIP
TIP480 THE REAL BOOK OF REAL ESTATE
Real Life Story: Why Waste a Priceless Mistake?
During this last real estate bubble, a friend bought one property, flipped it, and
made some money. That first easy success went to his head. He now thought
he was Donald T rump’s long lost brother. As the property bubble continued to in-
flate, he went on a buying spree, buying properties in Las Vegas, Miami, San Fran-cisco, Mexico, London, and Phoenix. T oday he is bankrupt and blames real estatefor his problems. His problem was he knew only one type of market, a market bub-ble. He now knows what a real estate bust looks like. Since he blames real estaterather than himself, he has not learned much. He has wasted priceless mistakes.He fails to learn that it is after the bubble bursts that the real, real estate investorscome out, and the real killings are made. The killings are made from foolish investorswho got killed.9781593155322_3-4:real estate_new  3/25/09  4:07 PM  Page 480Absolute triple net lease,
264
Abundance
of capital, 144
mindset for, 146
Accessibility
buildings and, 270customer impacted by
location and, 270
land and, 358–359location and customer,
212
See also Nonvehicular
access; Right of access;Visibility
Accountability, 146Accountant, 181
responsibilities of, 37
Accounting
bookkeeping accuracy
and, 15
consistency in, 16due diligence and, 
231–232
importance of, 13for investing, 13–14online banking for, 17purposeful, 14–15
Action, 338–339The Advanced Guide to Real
Estate Investing(McElroy), 72
Agreements, 13
neighbors and, 436for partnerships, 312See also Purchase agree-
ment
AIA. SeeAmerican Institute
of Architects (AIA)form B181
Air travel, 58
ALTA Builders/Lenders
survey, 361
Ambition, 307Amenities, 271American Institute of Ar-
chitects (AIA) formB181, 40
Americans with Disabilities
Act, 271
Amortization, 475Animals, 357–358as assets, 392trading, 392–393
Apartment development
entitlement and, 355–356uniqueness in, 73
Appointed boards, 349–350Appraisal, 140
due diligence and, 
230–231
See also Chattel appraisal
Appreciation
bonus of, 186defining, 475See also Forced 
appreciation
Arbitration
for disputes, 165litigation compared to,
165–166
Arbitrators, 165Archeological study, 365Architect
contracts for, 40costs and, 39–40design/construction and,
40–41
481Index97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 481development and, 80
experience and, 37–38as leader, 236role of, 38working relationship
with, 39
See also Landscape ar-
chitect
Arizona Property Tax Liens
(Manoil), 389
The Art of the Deal (Trump,
Donald), 454
Asset classes
commercial real estate
and guidelines for, 102
commercial real estate
and options for, 98
real estate cycles of, 103types of, 100–102
Asset protection
C corporation v. LLC for,
113–115, 114–115 (fig.)
fraud avoidance in, 
129–131, 130 (fig.)
insurance agents and,
109–110
insurance and, 110joint tenancy problems
for, 111
land trusts and, 120–121,
120–121 (fig.)
learn more about, 132living trusts and, 118–119LLCs and, 24offshore strategies and,
116–117 (fig.), 116–118
strategy for, 110–111Sutton and, 108–109tenants in common v.
TiC/LLC for, 112
tips for, 131
Asset segregation
internal liabilities shield
with, 125
for LLC, 124–125, 
124–125 (fig.)
Assets
animals as, 392liability compared to, 468
Attorney, 387
challenges of, 30importance of, 446jokes about, 444negotiating problems
with, 437
real estate attorney com-
pared to, 32–33
relationship with, 
445–446
See also Real estate 
attorney
Attorney Secrets to Investing
in Tax Liens(Barazandeh), 389
Attractions, 422–424Auctions, 374
tax liens and, 388See also Tax lien auction
bidder
Auto shows, 423–424
Background checks, 283,
285
Bad faith litigation, 109
Banks
financing and, 259loans and, 84See also Online banking
Barazandeh, Darius, 389Bays, Bernie, 209
biography of, 169–170working relationship
with, 152
Be A Real Estate Millionaire
(Graziosi), 327
Beer, Joe, 179Bid process, 380–381, 381
(table)
Bird, Magi, 399BLM. SeeBureau of Land
Management
Bookkeeping, 387
accounting and accurate,
15chart of accounts for, 15data entry and, 16frequency and, 17journal entries and, 16
Borrower financial informa-
tion, 140
Borrowing
capital and, 138loan package’s impor-
tance for, 139
paying back for, 141viability of, 138–139
Brown, Roberta, 216Brown, Steve, 216Budget
design and, 39–40due diligence and, 33project manager and, 83See also Costs
Buffett, Warren, 2, 182
talent of, 61–62team of, 62–63
Builders
befriending, 353–354entitlement and, 354–355planning and, 362truths about, 355
Buildings
accessibility and, 270drive guide for, 99 (fig.)efficiency of, 270evaluating, 96, 98quality of, 270See also Commercial of-
fice buildings
Bureau of Land Manage-
ment (BLM), 362
Business
of Finney, 200investing treated like, 8operating, 218–220real estate formula as,
200
tax liens as, 387
Business plan
composing
, 85
questions for creating,
254–255482 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 482risks and, 255
writing, 147
Buyer
lease option benefits,
seller v., 314–315, 315(table), 318 (table)
lease option possibilities
for, 316
planning and, 362private financing bene-
fits for, 64–65
seller meeting face-to-
face with, 438
truths about, 355
Buying by acre, selling by
foot
for land, 178–179“musts do’s” for, 180
Buying, selling compared 
to, 174
C corporation, 24
asset protection, LLC
compared to, 113–115,114–115 (fig.)
rentals, mistakes with, 25taxes and, 113
Callaway, Joanne, 242Cap rate, 19, 19 (table)
property value and, 
282
ratio analysis and, 20role of, 193sales price from NOI
and, 193–194
Capital
abundance of, 144accountability and, 146attracting, 146–148borrowing for, 138capitalism and, 135–136emotion impacting, 145entity structure and, 143fundraising questions
for, 142
gaining, 136–137importance of, 134international flow of,
144–145
knowledge as, 356, 369private, 68recession and, 370saving to accumulate, 137sources of, 259time and, 143
Capital gains, 186
cash flow compared to,
467–468
Capitalism, 135–136Cash
equity marketing and,
397–398
exchanging and, 
402–403
Cash flow, 475
capital gains compared
to, 467–468
projections and, 206property value and, 263
CASHFLOW Quadrant, 137
time saved with, 8
The CASHFLOW Quadrant
(Kiyosaki), 149
Cash flow target, 9CASHFLOW 101, 8, 136, 394
strategy and, 12
Cash-on-cash return, 444
defining, 193time and, 192–193
Casinos, 421–422CC&R. SeeCovenants, Con-
ditions and Restric-tions
Cell phones, 59Cemeteries
heritage and, 210projected sales for, 209–
210
Charging order, 121
LLC/LP and, 122–123state variances with, 123
Chart of accounts, 15Chattel appraisal, 26–27City council, 350–351approaching, 368
City officials, 93
meetings of, 349
Civil engineer, 181
challenges with, 41–42contracts for, 41responsibilities of, 41, 
80
Clason, George S., 137Classified sections, 336College, 149Commercial office build-
ings, 100–101
must have’s for, 247
Commercial real estate, 89
asset class guidelines for,
102
asset class options for, 98definition of, 188first impressions and,
244
interior designer for,
244–245
lifecycle costs for, 245See also Retail commer-
cial space; Shoppingcenters
Commingling funds, 
300–301
Commission, 312–313Communication
construction and, 82habitual, 147
Community
development and, 76–77fast-food restaurants im-
pacted by, 205–206
Oakes improving, 184See also Senior living
communities
Comparison reports, 21, 22
(table)
Competition, 330
cooperation replacing,
396
Compromising, 320Concessions, 320Constraints report, 365INDEX 48397815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 483Construction
architect and, 40–41
communication and, 82contracts for, 81risks/costs in, 51scheduling for, 82team for, 81–83See also General contrac-
tors; Short-term con-struction loan
Contingent fee, 35Contracts
architect and, 40civil engineer and, 41construction and, 81dispute prevention with,
155–156
phased, 40“specific performance”
and, 157–158
understanding, 156
Control
ownership v., 359properties and, 368
Convenience, 418–419Cooperation, 396Coppola, Craig, 36
biography of, 107 , 275Kiyosaki, Kim, working
with, 440–442
lessons taught by, 89, 262organization of, 90sports and, 90–91
Core competencies, 147Cost plus a fixed fee con-
tract, 81
Cost segregation, 26–27Costs
of arbitrators, 165architect and, 39–40construction risks and,
51
of development, 78–79general contractors and,
50–51, 83
of land trusts, 128of litigation, 167of litigation lawyers, 162of LLC, 126of market study, 231of mediation, 164physical review and, 
225
property conditions 
report and, 230
of property manage-
ment, 284–285
of property management
company, 288
for real estate attorney,
35
real esta te broker and,
361–362
shopping centers, 
leasing impacted by,420–421
tax lien risks with, 384–
385
of taxes, 293See also Lifecycle costs;
Projected expenses
Counseling, 406Counting heads, 207County plans, 347Covenants, Conditions 
and Restrictions(CC&R), 358
Cowards, 471–472Creativity
in leasing, 265location and, 212–213OPM and, 308Palmer and, 53–54, 
133–134, 390–391
Credit checks, 283
costs and, 285
Credit collapse, 5, 371Credit report, 140Curb appeal, 238, 270
importance of, 243
Cure date, 332Current wealth, 10, 10
(table)
Customer
internet for researching,
268location and accessibility
for, 212
location and conven-
ience for, 213–214
multifamily housing,
questions for, 242–243
Dalton, Kim
biography of, 250working relationship
with, 233–234
Data entry, 16De Rito, Marty
ambition of, 409biography of, 429economic insight of,
409–410
lessons learned by, 
411–412
Deals
analyzing, 201exit strategies and, 
217–218
Graziosi’s first, 328–329introspection for, 
202–203
land, analyzing, 220location mistakes in 
analyzing, 213
management and, 215objectivity for analyzing,
204–205
as parachutes, 217–218patience for, 203perfection and, 202personal guarantees and,
217–218
travel problems for man-
agement of, 215–217
“will the dogs like it?” for
analyzing, 204–206
See also Franchise deals;
Problem deals
Debt
private financing and, 65repaying, 138484 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 4841031 exchange and, 
304–305
See also Foreclosures
Deed restrictions, 361
Deficiency judgment, 332Demographics
investing and favorable,
196
properties and, 195–196shopping center, density
and, 417–418
Depreciation
defining, 475tax laws with, 26–27
Depreciation deduction,
294
Design
architect and, 40–41budget and, 39–40environment impacting,
245–246
impact of, 249renovating and, 246resources for, 250senior living communi-
ties and, 243–244
shoppers impacted by,
424
shopping centers and,
424–425
sustainable, 247–248trends and, 244–246See also Interior design
Details
defining, 426parking and, 427real estate list of, 
426–427
shopping centers and,
425–426
success in, 427–428
Developers
befriending, 353–354entitlement and, 
354–355
truths about, 355
Development
architect and, 80community and, 76–77costs of, 78–79evaluating, 72financing and, 84flat sites and, 78general contractors and,
80–81
of green buildings, 248from ground up, 72–73hurdles for, 357–359location and, 76–77for long term, 74–75market niche basics for,
75
of multifamily project, 77with NIMBYs, 363planning commissions
and, 357
property management
company and, 83–84
risks in, 87school districts and, 356selling v. operating in, 74team for, 79–80title company and, 83utility companies and, 79vision with clarity for,
73–74
wells and, 366See also Apartment 
development; Propertyowned for develop-ment; Utility develop-ment fees
Direct response marketing,
330
Disclosure, 147Disputes
arbitration for, 165avoiding, 153, 161compromising for, 163contracts preventing,
155–156
handling, 161lawyers preventing, 155legal due diligence for,
160–161
litigation for, 166–167litigation lawyers con-
sultancy for, 161–162
mediation for, 164–165online litigation checks
for avoiding, 158
problem deals and, 
159–160
problem people and,
158–159
quitting and, 167–168real estate broker and,
154
resolving, 169risks of, 153settlements for, 167–169working out, 162–163
Documentation, for taxes,
27
Drainage report, 365Dreamlining, 10, 10 (fig.)Drive guide
for buildings, 99 (fig.)for neighborhood envi-
ronment, 97 (fig.)
Driving
for mastering your uni-
verse, 91–93
real estate discoveries
with, 174
Dual representation, 36–37Duck, George, 7Due diligence, 472
accounting and, 231–232appraisal and, 230–231budget and, 33defining, 160, 223environmental study
and, 229
with hazardous sub-
stance site assessmentengineer, 43–44
hesitation in, 437lawyers and, 155, 227legal review and, 
226–227
location and, 76luck and, 228market study for, 231
INDEX 48597815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 485physical review for, 224
property conditions 
report for, 229–230
property management
company for, 224–225
real estate and, 31real estate attorney 
and, 33
tax laws and, 174–175,
231–232
tax liens and, 382, 388team and, 32, 223–224third party reports 
review for, 229
title company and, 228title review for, 
227–228
See also Legal due 
diligence
Easements, 42
right of access and, 
361
Economics
De Rito’s insight into,
409–410
exchange and, 56food chain in, 136hospitality asset class
impacted by, 102
land and, 177
Education
action creating, 473–474exchange groups and,
405–406
excuses and, 467–468of McPherson, 252–253power of, 471of Sheets, 307of Trump, Donald, Jr.,
460
of Wheelwright, 6, 372
Efficiency
of buildings, 270team impacting, 14
Electrical engineer, 80Electronic document 
transfer, 59
Emotion
capital and, 145recorded messages and,
333–334
Encroachments, 43Energy flow, 241–242Engagement letter, 35Entertainment, 25–26Entitlement
apartment development
and, 355–356
applying for, 366best-case scenarios, 368builders and, 354–355county plans, ordinances
and, 347
defining, 175developers and, 354–355future of, 369–370knowledge and, 347 , 354,
356
mistakes/learning and,
369
patience and, 352political relationships
for, 347–348
politics and, 342–343process of, 175profit and, 346–347 , 357seller benefits with, 
359–360
1031 exchange and, 360timetables for, 352–353
Entity structure
capital and, 143overview, 24 (table)taxes and, 24–25
Environment
design impacted by, 245–
246
tax lien risks with, 384–
385
Environmental engineer, 44Environmental study, 140
due diligence with, 229
Ephemeralization, 58Equity
benefits combining with,
398
defining, 63–64securities laws for rais-
ing, 141
types of, 64See also Private financ-
ing; “Sum of talent andequity”
Equity marketing
benefits of, 399–400cash and, 397–398example of, 395–396knowledge and, 394–395leverage and, 396–397opportunity of, 407process of, 393resources for, 408See also Exchanging
Equity value, 393Erhardt, Elizabeth, 196–197Escrow, 361Escrow officer/title agent
role of, 45talent of, 46
Estate planning, 118Ethics, 5, 371
See also Morality
Excellence, 411Exchange
economics and, 56in nature, 57wealth and, 56–57
Exchange groups
brain trust in, 404counseling and, 406education and, 405–406enjoyment in, 406–407joint ventures in, 405win/win mentality in,
404–405
working relationships in,
403–404
See also National Council
of Exchangors; Societyof Exchange Coun-selors 486 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 486Exchanging, 393
benefits of, 400
cash and, 402–403multi-leg, 401–402, 401
(fig.)
recession and, 393–394resources for, 408two-way, 400–401
Exchangors
as family, 404–405meetings of, 393skills of top, 406
Excuses
education and, 467–468investing and, 466–467laziness and, 468–469
Executive summary, 139Existing home, 239–240Exit strategies, 61
deals and, 217–218establishing, 147importance of, 256options for, 257team aiding, 257–258
Expansion, 104Experience
architect and, 37–38importance of, 252management and, 141mastering your universe
with, 106
of McElroy, 278–280mortgage broker and, 47property management
and, 280–281
real estate and, 253risks and, 256trust and, 464–465
FAA. SeeFederal Aviation
Administration (FAA)review
Failure
ambition and, 307fear of, 469–470, 
478–479learning from, 442success from, 329, 477
Fast-food restaurants
counting heads for loca-
tion of, 207
franchise deals for, 
201–202
location/community im-
pacting, 205–206
projected expenses for,
207–208
underestimation in,
204–205
FDIC. SeeFederal Deposit
Insurance Corpora-tion
Fear, 439
of failure, 469–470, 
478–479
investing and, 442, 467as motivation, 472of rejection, 459
Feasibility experts, 181Federal Aviation Adminis-
tration (FAA) review,366
Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC),382
Financial disaster, 5, 371
See also Credit collapse
Financial goals, 9Financing
banks and, 259basic steps for obtaining,
254–256
choices in, 255common sense and, 261development and, 84fundamentals of, 252mortgage broker aiding,
259–260
personal resources and,
313–314
properties as, 309–310real estate broker’s com-
mission and, 312–313
repair credits and, 313seller and, 308–309See also Other People’s
Money; Refinancing
Financing activities, 18Finder ads, 331
example of, 335–336
Finder strategies
example of, 335–336pre-foreclosure investing
and, 331–332
Finney, John
biography of, 221business of, 200
First impressions
commercial real estate
and, 244
selling and, 240–241
Fitness clubs, 443–444Fix-and-flip
“held for resale” and, 
298
tax laws and, 25
Fixed price contract, 81Flat sites, 78Flipping
challenges with, 187considerations for, 324negotiating and, 321problems with, 475–476risks of, 1See also Fix-and-flip
Food supplies, 5, 371Forced appreciation, 185Ford, Henry, 480Foreclosures, 323
defining, 330–331do’s and don’ts for, 
338–339
reasons for, 332resources for, 339–340tax liens and, 381–382,
388
See also Pre-foreclosure
investing
Form driven code section,
296
Formulas
for real estate, 54–55INDEX 48797815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 487of real estate as business,
200
for wealth, 55, 66, 69–70
45-day identification 
period, 298–299
Franchise deals
for fast-food restaurants,
201–202
pro forma numbers for,
206–207
Franklin, Benjamin, 67 , 
223
Fraud
asset protection, avoid-
ing, 129–131, 130(fig.)
title insurance protect-
ing from, 45
victims of, 301–302
Free rent, 269
Fundraising, 142Furnishing
rentals and, 243unoccupied homes and,
241–242
Gambling, 1Gap areas, 43“Garbage in, garbage out,”
206
avoiding, 208, 210
Gates, Bill, 182General contractors, 181
costs and, 50–51, 83development and, 80–81hiring, 49, 238insurance and, 82performance and pay-
ment bond and, 50
responsibilities of, 50value of, 238–239
Generosity, 6, 372Gorman, Gary
biography of, 305working relationship
with, 293
Graffiti, 94Graziosi, Dean
biography of, 340childhood of, 327first deal of, 328–329skill set of, 326
Green buildings
benefits of, 248–249defining, 247development of, 248permitting for, 249
Greenspan, Alan, 342GRM. SeeGross Rent Multi-
pliers
Gross lease, 264Gross Rent Multipliers
(GRM), 194
Guaranteed maximum price
contract, 81
Hance, Margaret, 346Hazardous substance site
assessment engineer
due diligence with, 
43–44
liability and, 44–45
Health care asset class, 
101
“Held for resale”
defining, 297–298fix-and-flip and, 298
Hill, Napoleon, 198Hiring
of environmental engi-
neer, 44
of general contractors,
49, 238
of leasing agent/advisor,
274
of mortgage broker, 46,
260
for property manage-
ment, 287–288
of qualified intermedi-
ary, 301–302
of real estate attorney, 
34team and, 258of 1031 exchange inter-
mediary, 49
Home Staging: The Winning
Way to Sell Y ourHouse for More Money(Schwarz), 242
Horowitz, Mark, 348–349Horse trading, 392–393Hospitality asset class, 102How to Use Limited Liability
Companies and Limited Partnerships(Sutton), 123
Humility, 479Hypersupply, 105
Iacocca, Lee, 141
Immigrants, 58Income taxes
reducing, 22–23travel, meals, and 
entertainment for, 25–26
Industrial spaces, 101Information line, 333–334Insurance
asset protection and, 
110
general contractors 
and, 82
insurance agent select-
ing, 47–48
title company and, 45transfer title, notifying,
129
vendors and, 363See also Title insurance
Insurance agent
asset protection and,
109–110
insurance selection 
with, 47–48
loans and, 47
Integrity, 146–147Interest, 374488 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 488Interest rate investing
considerations with, 376,
376 (table)
criteria for, 377–378, 377
(table)
evaluating, 380, 381
(table)
Interior design
importance of good,
233–234
staging compared to, 234
Interior designer
for commercial real 
estate, 244–245
role of, 237
Internal liabilities shield,
125
Internal rate of return
(IRR), 475
Internal Revenue Service
(IRS)
taxes and rules of, 117
(fig.), 297
1031 exchange and, 295–
296
Internet, 59
customer research with,
268
investing with, 323–324
neighbors and, 345pre-foreclosure investing
utilizing, 336–337
Introspection, 202–203Investing (real estate)
accounting for, 13–14as business, 8competition and, 330demographics favorable
for, 196
do’s and don’ts for, 
321–322, 322 (table)
excuses against, 466–467fear and, 442, 467in foreclosures, 323importance of, 1internet for, 323–324learning from, 449–450learning to control, 2marketing and, 329–330options in, 372–373patience and, 447personal trust and, 439properties for, 187real estate market 
fluctuations and, 324–325
relationships and, 
446–447
reporting and, 17risks of, 2short sale and, 323strategy for, 9tax liens, criteria for, 377taxes and, 22–23team building for, 12–13,
196–197
travel and, 476undervalued properties
for beginners in, 188
vision and, 253, 447–448See also Flipping; Inter-
est rate investing; Personal investmentpreferences; Pre-foreclosure investing;Property acquisitioninvesting; Tax liens
Investing activities, 18Investment criteria, 12, 
12 (table)
Investment niche, 11Investment property, 294
1031 exchange and, 
296–298
Investors
finding, 310–311partnerships compared
to, 311
real estate broker as, 
313
IRC Section 1031 transac-
tion, 48–49
IRR. SeeInternal rate of 
return
IRS. SeeInternal Revenue
ServiceJoint tenancy, 111Joint ventures, 405Journal entries, 16Jump-Start Game Plan,
356–357
Keller, Jim, 400Kelso, Louis, 136Kiyosaki, Kim, 404
biography of, 450Coppola working with,
440–442
Lotzar working with,
445–446
strategy of, 433–434
Kiyosaki, Robert, 68, 148,
185, 236, 277 , 287 , 404
Wheelwright’s friend-
ship with, 7
Knowledge
applying, 338–339as capital, 356, 369entitlement and, 347 ,
354, 356
equity marketing and,
394–395
success from, 280–281
Kranz, Gene, 146Kroc, Ray, 200
Land
accessibility and, 
358–359
buying by acre, selling 
by foot for, 178–179
deal analysis for, 220
economics of, 177hands on approach for,
180
important questions for,
182
as real estate for 1031 
exchange, 298INDEX 48997815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 489subdivision of, 176–177
vision for, 179
Land trusts
asset protection and,
120–121, 120–121 (fig.)
costs of, 128LLC and, 121transfer title to, 128–129
Landscape architect, 
237–238
Laundry rooms
strategy for, 284trends in, 38
Lawyers
dispute prevention and,
155
due diligence and, 155,
227
permitting/zoning and,
180
See also Litigation
lawyers
Layout, 269–270Laziness, 468–469Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design(LEED), 247–248
Lease option
buyer v. seller benefits
in, 314–315, 315 (table),318 (table)
buyer/seller possibilities
for, 316
defining, 314example of, 316–317profit form, 317resources for, 319risks and, 315
Leasing
challenges of, 268–269creativity for, 265location and, 271–272marketing and, 265–266ownership and, 271parking and, 270pricing and, 267–268property management’s
importance in, 263resources for, 274–275as selling, 266–267shopping centers, cost
impacting, 420–421
tenants and types of,
264
term length and, 269variables in, 269–272vision for, 267
Leasing agent/advisor
hiring, 274location knowledge of,
273
personal rapport with,
273
working relationship
with, 272–273
LEED. SeeLeadership in
Energy and Environ-mental Design
Legal due diligence, 160–161Legal review, 226–227Lender’s survey, 362–363Letter of intent (LOI)
multiple offers and, 
320–321
purchase of agreement
based on, 361
purpose of, 360
Leverage
equity marketing and,
396–397
properties and, 192real estate, power of, 7–8See also Negative lever-
age
Leveraged buyout, 307–308Levine, Bill, 177Liability
assets compared to, 468hazardous substance 
site assessment engi-neer and, 44–45
increasing, 16
Lifecycle costs, 245Limited liability company
(LLC)
asset protection and, 24asset protection, C cor-
poration v., 113–115,114–115 (fig.)
asset protection, tenants
in common v. TiCwith, 112
asset segregation for,
124–125, 124–125 (fig.)
charging order and, 
122–123
costs of, 126land trusts and, 121living trusts and, 120LP compared to, 121–122transfer title to, 126–128,
127 (fig.)
See also How to Use Lim-
ited Liability Compa-nies and LimitedPartnerships; Series
LLCs
Limited partnership
(LP), 113
charging order and, 
122–123
LLC compared to, 
121–122
See also How to Use 
Limited Liability Companies and Limited Partnerships
Lincoln, Abe, 177Listening, 320Litigation
arbitration compared to,
165–166
costs of, 167disputes and, 166–167See also Online litigation
checks
Litigation lawyers
costs of, 162disputes and, 161–162
Living trusts
asset protection and,
118–119
LLC and, 120490 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 490probate avoidance and,
119–120
LLC. SeeLimited liability
company
Loan package
borrowing, importance
of, 139
preparing, 139–141
Loans
background check for, 
86
banks and, 84
difficulties with, 46insurance agent and, 47qualifying for, 85–86short-term v. long-term,
86–87
single-tenant property
and, 443
See also Private lenders
Loan-to-value ratios
(LTVs), 65
Location
challenges with, 211counting heads for fast-
food restaurants and,207
creativity for, 212–213customer accessibility
and, 212
customer convenience
and, 213–214
deal analysis mistakes
with, 213
development and, 76–77due diligence for, 76fast-food restaurants im-
pacted by, 205–206
graffiti impacting, 94leasing agent/advisor,
knowledge of, 273
leasing and, 271–272mistakes in choosing, 214observing, 91–92obstructions and, 
208–209
shopping centers and,
415–416shopping centers im-
pacted by vitality of,419–420
LOI. SeeLetter of intent
Long Term Occupancy
(LTO), 104
Long-term lease, 217–218
“out” for, 218
Lotzar, Chuck
biography of, 52Kiyosaki, Kim, working
with, 445–446
working relationship
with, 29–30
LP . SeeLimited partnership
LTO. SeeLong Term Occu-
pancy
LTVs. SeeLoan-to-value 
ratios
Luck
due diligence and, 228property management
and, 286
Lump sum contract, 81
Management
of deals, 215
importance of, 239travel problems for deals
and, 215–217
See also Project manager;
Property management;Property managementcompany
Manoil, Mark, 389Maps, 140Mardian, Robert, Jr., 213Market needs
important questions for,
181–182
product creation and, 175
Market niche
development basics of,
75
understanding, 76
Market study, 231for marketing, 267
Marketing
investing and, 329–330leasing and, 265–266market study for, 267pre-foreclosure invest-
ing, strategy for, 337(fig.)
See also Equity market-
ing
Mastering your universe
driving for, 91–93experience and, 106in real estate, 91
Math, 178–180Mathis, Ann, 7McCallister, Ross
biography of, 88working relationship
with, 71–72
McCune, Walker, 176McElroy, Ken, 71–72
biography of, 289experience of, 278–280vision of, 448working relationship
with, 276–277
McPherson, Scott D.
biography of, 232, 261education of, 252–253wisdom of, 222–223,
251–252
Meals, 25–26
Mechanical engineer, 80
Mediation
cos
ts of, 164
for disputes, 164–165process of, 163
Mediator, 163–165Mentors, 473
finding, 478
Metrics, 17Mice, 357–358Mission, 10–11Mixed use real estate, 188MLS. SeeMultiple Listing
Service
Monetary wealth, 56INDEX 49197815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 491Money, perceptions of, 
56–57
See also Other People’s
Money
Morality, 331
Mormon values, 5, 371Mortgage broker
challenges facing, 46–47experience and, 47financing with, 259–260hiring, 46, 260
Motivation, 327Multifamily asset class, 100Multifamily housing
customer questions for,
242–243
preparing, 243
Multiple Listing Service
(MLS), 312
Multiple offers
LOI and, 320–321strategy of, 320
National Council of Ex-
changors (NCE), 394
NCE. SeeNational Council
of Exchangors
Negative leverage, 20Negotiating
attorney, problems with,
437
compromising for, 320flipping and, 321importance, 319, 459improving, 362power of, 460–461selling and, 321
Neighborhood groups
befriending, 352politics and, 349–350
Neighborhoods
changes in, 95–96downhill, 94drive guide for, 97 (fig.)evaluating, 96, 98observing, 92rezoning, input from, 179warning signs for declin-
ing, 96
See also Community
Neighbors
agreements favoring, 436complaints of, 344history and, 344–345influence evolution of,
343–344
internet and, 345politics and, 345–346presenting plans to, 366properties, impact of, 343talking to, 367See also “Not in My Back
Yard”
Net lease, 264Net operating income
(NOI), 20
occupancy and, 283–284other revenue opportu-
nities for, 284
property management
and, 281
property value and, 
282–283
rentals and, 282–283sales price from cap rate
and, 193–194
NIMBY’s. See“Not in My
Back Yard”
NOI. SeeNet operating 
income
Nonessential contingencies,
320
Nonvehicular access, 43“Not in My Back Yard”
(NIMBY’s), 344
befriending, 352–353development with, 363
Oakes, Curtis
biography of, 199community improve-
ment of, 184personal story of, 
186–187
Objectivity, 204–205Obstructions, 208–209Occupancy, 283–284Offshore strategies
asset protection and,
116–117 (fig.), 116–118
real estate and, 115–116taxes and, 115
180-day replacement 
period, 300
O’Neill, Tip, 345Online banking, 17Online litigation checks, 
158
Online valuation services,
310
On-site superintendent, 
82
Operating
activities, 18development, selling v.,
74
Operating statement, 140OPM. SeeOther People’s
Money
Opportunity
challenges with, 59filter for, 60–61immigrants and, 58modern conveniences
and, 58–59
in USA, 57–58
Ordinances, 347Other People’s Money
(OPM), 138
creativity and, 308leveraged buyout and,
307–308
risk and, 144
Ownership
control v., 359tax liens, researching,
383
tax liens, risks for, 
382–383, 383 (table)492 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 492Palmer, Wayne
biography of, 70, 151, 408
childhood of, 134–135,
391–392
creativity of, 53–54, 
133–134, 390–391
on father’s legacy, 407success story of, 149–150trust and, 54, 391
Parking
details and, 427leasing and, 270shopping centers and,
418–419
Partnerships, 24
advice for, 311–312agreements for, 312investors compared to,
311
mistakes with, 412
“Path of growth,” 93Patience
for deals, 203entitlement and, 352investing and, 447real estate market and,
95
Trump, Donald and,
456–457
vision and, 448–449
Pay raises, 460PEI. SeeProfessional Edu-
cation Institute
Performance, 278, 282
See also “Specific per-
formance”
Performance and payment
bond, 50
Permanent loan, 87Permitting
green buildings and, 249lawyers for, 180
Perseverance, 169Personal guaranties, 
217–218
Personal investment prefer-
ences, 373
Personal residence, 294Phase I hazardous sub-
stance site contamina-tion study, 44–45, 364
Phase II study, 44–45, 
364
Phased contracts, 40Physical review
costs and, 225due diligence and, 224
Pigéon, Jean Paul, 
395–396
Planning commissions
development density
and, 357
motives of, 351politics and, 350
Planning staff, 349Polish, Joe, 326Politics
appointed boards/neigh-
borhood groups in,349–350
as career, 345city council in, 350–351defining, 349entitlement and, 
342–343
entitlement, relation-
ships in, 347–348
importance of under-
standing, 342
neighbors influencing,
345–346
planning commissions
in, 350
planning staff in, 349promises and, 348real estate and, 341–342time/tact in, 351utilizing, 368
Positive cash flow, 192Power, 338–339Preferred residential zon-
ing, 176
Pre-foreclosure investing
classified sections and,
336example for, 338finder strategies for, 
331–332
homeowner attraction
for, 334–335
Internet used for, 
336–337
marketing strategy for,
337 (table)
morality and, 331recorded messages and,
333
referrals and, 337–338resources for, 339–340
Pricing, 267–268
See also Fixed price 
contract; Guaranteedmaximum price contract; Sales price
Privacy, 120–121Private capital, 68Private financing
buyer benefits for, 64–65debt and, 65defining, 64example for, 66seller benefits for, 65
Private lenders, 84Private notes, 64–65Pro forma numbers, 
206–207
Probate avoidance, 119–120Problem deals
disputes and, 159–160problem people and, 160
Problem people
disputes and, 158–159problem deals and, 160rentals and, 283
Problem property
identifying, 189–190property management
mistakes with, 279–280
upside of, 185
Problems
asset protection, joint
tenancy and, 111INDEX 49397815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 493dealing with, 197–198
profit from, 185, 199
Product creation
important questions for,
181–182
market needs and, 175
Professional Education 
Institute (PEI), 306
Profit
entitlement and, 346–
347 , 357
lease option and, 317from problems, 185, 199projections and, 206tax liens and, 373
Proforma, 140Project manager
budget and, 83permanent, 452role of, 82
Projected expenses, 
207–208
Projected sales
cemeteries and, 209–210importance of, 207
Projections, 140Properties
classes of, 188–189control and, 368criteria/analysis for, 192demographics and, 
195–196
financing with, 309–310GRM and, 194investing, finding good,
187
leverage and, 192neighbor’s impact on,
343
positive cash flow and,
192
resources for valuing,
310
S. W . O. T. analysis for,
194
tax lien risks with, 
384–385
taxes, types of, 2941031 exchange, identify-
ing, 299
tenant types in, 188trends and, 194–195types of, 188See also Investment
property; Problemproperty; Single-tenant property; Undervalued properties
Property acquisition invest-
ing
considerations for, 
376–377 , 377 (table)
criteria for, 378, 378
(table)
evaluating, 380–381, 381
(table)
Property conditions report
costs of, 230due diligence and, 
229–230
Property management
costs and, 284–285experience aiding, 
280–281
hiring for, 287–288importance of, 277–278,
288–289
leasing, importance of,
263
luck and, 286misunderstandings
about, 277
NOI and, 281problem property, mis-
takes in, 279–280
resources for, 289systems for, 286travel challenges for, 436“triple threat” of, 281
Property management 
company
costs of, 288development and, 83–84due diligence with, 224–
225importance of, 226, 271trust and, 287
Property owned for devel-
opment, 294
Property report, 22 (table)Property value
cap rate and, 282cash flow and, 263NOI and, 282–283performance determin-
ing, 278, 282
ProVision, 28Pulley, Robert, 203–205, 208Purchase agreement, 361
Qualified intermediary, 299
commingle funds and,
300–301
hiring, 301–302
1031 exchange, laws
with, 300
Quality, 453Quickbooks, 15–16Quill Awards, 458
Rates, for rentals, 269
Ratio analysis
cap rate for, 20common, 19 (table)importance of, 19ROI for, 20–21
Real estate
animals and, 357–358as business formula, 
200
details list for, 426–
427
driving to discover, 
174
due diligence period 
for, 31
experience and, 253formula for, 54–55freedom through, 467494 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 494importance of, 1–2
income sources in, 475leverage and, 7–8mastering your universe
in, 91
math for, 178–180offshore strategies and,
115–116
politics and, 341–342risk minimization in, 
52, 232
starting challenges for,
177–178
stocks compared to, 
310
tax laws favoring, 23tax liens, criteria for
choosing, 378, 379(table)
1031 exchange, land as,
298
See also Commercial 
real estate; Deals; De-velopment; Disputes;Investing; Mixed usereal estate; Residentialreal estate
Real estate attorney
attorney compared to,
32–33
costs and, 35due diligence with, 33hiring, 34role of, 34
Real estate broker
costs and, 361–362disputes and, 154financing with commis-
sion of, 312–313
as investor, 313real estate market fluctu-
ations and, 37
role of, 36
Real estate cycle
asset classes and, 103expansion and, 104hypersupply in, 105phases of, 104 (fig.)recession in, 105recovery phase of, 
103–104
Real estate market
future of, 322–323investing in any, 324–325patience and, 95real estate broker, fluctu-
ations in, 37
vision and direction of,
94–95
See also Market niche
Receipts, 27Recession
capital and, 370exchanging and, 393–394real estate cycle and, 105
Recorded messages
emotions and, 333–334pre-foreclosure invest-
ing, using, 333
questions for, 335strategy for, 334
Recovery, 103–104Referrals, 13
pre-foreclosure investing
and, 337–338
for team, 237
Refinancing, 303–304Rejection, 459Relationships
attorney and, 445–446investing and, 446–447longevity in, 412in politics and entitle-
ment, 347–348
of shoppers in shopping
centers, 414–415
of tenants in shopping
centers, 413–414
See also Working rela-
tionship
Remedies, 157–158Renovating, 246“Rent runners,” 452Rentals
furnishing, 243NOI and, 282–283problem people and, 283rates for, 269S corporation/C corpo-
ration mistakes with,25
Repair credits, 313Reporting
for investing, 17seller given, 360See also Comparison 
reports; Constraintsreport; Credit report;Drainage report; Property conditionsreport; Ratio analysis;Soils report; Statementof cash flow; Title report
Reserve accounts, 435Residential real estate, 89
types of, 188
Retail commercial space,
100
Return on investment
(ROI), 19, 19 (table)
ratio analysis and, 20–21tax laws and, 22
Rezoning
important questions for,
181–182
neighborhood input for,
179
process of, 175wealth creation and, 176
Rich Dad Poor Dad
(Kiyosaki, Robert), 7 ,72
Rich Woman: A Book on In-
vesting for Women(Kiyosaki, Kim), 450
The Richest Man in Babylon
(Clason), 137
Right of access, 361Right of reinstatement, 332Right of survivorship, 111Risk profile, 61Risks
business plan and, 255
INDEX 49597815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 495construction costs and,
51
development and, 87
of disputes, 153experience with, 256of flipping, 1of investing, 2lease option and, 315multifamily asset class
and, 100
OPM and, 144real estate, minimizing,
52, 232
reserve accounts mitigat-
ing, 435
retail commercial space
and, 100
single-tenant property
and, 435
of stocks, 222, 251tax lien process and, 384,
384 (table)
tax liens and ownership,
382–383, 383 (table)
tax liens,
properties/costs/envi-ronment and, 384–385
team, identifying, 31triple net lease and, 437
ROI. SeeReturn on invest-
ment
Ross, George, 456
S corporation, 24
rentals, mistakes with, 25
S. W . O. T. analysis, 194
Sales price, 193–194Saving, 137Scheduling, 82Schirmer, W . Scott
biography of, 370foresight of, 341–342
School districts, 355
development, impor-
tance of, 356
Schwarz, Barb, 242SEC. SeeSecurities and Ex-
change Commission;Society of ExchangeCounselors
Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC),143
Securities laws, 141
consul for, 142–143
Self storage spaces, 101Self-reliance, 464Seller
buyer meeting face-to-
face with, 438
entitlement benefiting,
359–360
financing with, 308–309lease option benefits,
buyer v., 314–315, 315(table), 318 (table)
lease option possibilities
for, 316
private financing bene-
fits for, 65
reports given to, 360trust and, 319
Selling
buying compared to, 174development, operating
v., 74
of existing home with
staging, 239–240
first impressions and,
240–241
leasing and, 266–267negotiating and, 321premature, 220tax liens and, 388unoccupied homes and,
241
Senior living communities,
243–244
Series LLCs, 126Settlements
disputes and, 167–169perseverance for, 169
Sheets, Carlton H.
biography of, 325education of, 307working relationship
with, 306
Shoppers
design impacting, 424goals for, 414shopping center rela-
tionships with, 414–415
shopping center visibil-
ity for, 416–417
Shopping centers
attractions and, 422–424casinos compared to,
421–422
convenience and, 
418–419
costs impacting leasing
for, 420–421
demographics and den-
sity impacting, 417–418
design for, 424–425details impacting, 
425–426
excellence in, 411keys to, 410–411location and, 415–416location vitality impact-
ing, 419–420
parking and, 418–419resources for, 428shopper relationships
with, 414–415
success with, 410tenant mix’s importance
to, 421–422
tenant relationships in,
413–414
visibility/shoppers focus
for, 416–417
women and, 415
Short sale, 323Short-term construction
loan, 86–87
Short-term property, 294Shultz, Mel
biography of, 183496 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 496vision of, 173
Signage, 271
Simon, Mel, 412Single-tenant property,
434–435
loans and, 443risks of, 435
Society of Exchange 
Counselors (SEC), 394
Soil experts, 181Soils report
importance of, 364purpose of, 363
Sole proprietorship, 24“Specific performance”
contracts and, 157–158limiting, 158
Speculating, 1Speed
private capital and, 68talent and, 68wealth, importance of, 
67
working relationships
and, 68–69
Spinola, John, 395Staging
importance of, 241interior design com-
pared to, 234
resources for, 242selling existing home
and, 239–240
tips for successful, 240
Statement of cash flow
composing, 18–19example, 18 (table)misconceptions 
regarding, 17
Stocks
real estate compared 
to, 310
risks of, 222, 251
Strategy
for asset protection, 
110–111
cash flow target and, 9CASHFLOW 101, incor-
porating, 12
current wealth deter-
mined for, 10, 10 (table)
financial goals and, 9imagine step for, 9for investing, 9investment criteria for,
12, 12 (table)
investment niche for, 11of Kiyosaki, Kim, 
433–434
with laundry rooms, 284mission, values, vision
for, 10–11
of multiple offers, 320pre-foreclosure invest-
ing, marketing and, 337(table)
for recorded messages,
334
tax liens and, 375–376,
375 (table), 388–389,388 (table)
for taxes, 23–24See also Finder strategies
Structural engineer, 80Subcontractors, 82Sub-prime mortgage disas-
ter, 222
Success
assumptions about, 
198–199
details and, 427–428failure for, 329, 477knowledge yielding,
280–281
Palmer’s story of, 
149–150
realities of, 199shopping centers and,
410
small steps to, 457team and, 197
“Sum of talent and equity”
(T+E), 61–62
Surveyor
gap areas and, 43role of, 42–43
Sutton, Garrett
asset protection and,
108–109
biography of, 132
Systems, 286
Table of contents, 140
Tact, 351Tahbazof, Sia, 196–197Taking title, 111–112Talent
attractiveness of, 148of Buffett, 61–62of mediator, 163–164speed and, 68team building with, 
62–63
See also “Sum of talent
and equity”
“Taw,” 134–135Tax laws
depreciation and, 26–27due diligence with, 
174–175, 231–232
fix and flip and, 25Real estate and, 23ROI and, 22transfer title and, 
127–128
Wheelwright’s knowl-
edge of, 6, 372
See also 1031 exchange
Tax lien auction bidder, 387Tax liens
auctions and, 388bid process and, 380–
381, 381 (table)
as business, 387due diligence and, 382,
388
evaluating, 379–380foreclosures and, 
381–382, 388
investing, criteria for, 
377INDEX 49797815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 497outcomes of, 375 (table)
ownership, research 
for, 383
process of, 373–374profit of, 373real estate choices, 
criteria for, 378, 379(table)
risks with ownership in,
382–383, 383 (table)
risks with process in,
384, 384 (table)
risks with
properties/costs/envi-ronment in, 384–385
selling and, 388strategy with, 375–376,
375 (table), 388–389,388 (table)
summary of, 374 (table)team for, 385–387 , 386
(table)
See also Arizona Property
Tax Liens (Manoil); 
Attorney Secrets to Investing in Tax Liens(Barazandeh); Interestrate investing; Prop-erty acquisition investing
Taxes
C corporation and, 113costs of, 293documentation and, 27entity structure and, 
24–25
investing and, 22–23IRS rules for, 117 (fig.),
297
offshore strategies and,
115
property types and, 294strategy for, 23–241031 exchange interme-
diary and, 48
1031 exchange, refinanc-
ing to pay no, 303–304
See also Income taxesT+E. See“Sum of talent and
equity”
Team
of Buffett, 62–63composing, 30, 256–257for construction, 81–83for development, 79–80due diligence and, 32,
223–224
efficiency with, 14engagement letter for
members of, 35
exit strategies with, 
257–258
familiarity with, 33hiring, 258importance of, 29–30,
223, 236
investing, building, 
12–13, 196–197
referrals for, 237risk identification for, 31selecting, 234–235successful approach for,
197
talent for, 62–63for tax liens, 385–387 ,
386 (table)
Three Rules of the Game
for, 31–32
tips for building, 13of venders, 356See also Accountant; Ar-
chitect; Civil engineer;Escrow officer/titleagent; General con-tractors; Hazardoussubstance site assess-ment engineer; Insur-ance agent; Interiordesigner; Landscapearchitect; Mortgagebroker; Real estate attorney; Real estatebroker; Surveyor; 1031exchange intermediary
Technology, 68
See also Cell phones; Internet
1031 exchange
45-day identification 
period for, 298–299
180-day replacement 
period for, 300
big picture of, 305debt and, 304–305entitlement and, 360investment property and,
296–298
IRS and, 295–296land as real estate for, 298process of, 295properties identified for,
299
purpose of, 294–295qualified intermediary
laws with, 300
rules of, 296taxes, refinancing and,
303–304
time and, 303title holding require-
ment for, 302–303
vacation homes and, 297
1031 exchange intermediary
hiring, 49taxes and, 48
Tenants
evaluating, 96–97 , 435fitness clubs as, 443–444improve ments and, 269
lease types and, 264properties, types of, 188shopping centers, 
relationships with, 413–414
shopping centers, 
superior mix of, 421–422
Tenants in common, 112Tenants in common (TiC),
112
Think and Grow Rich (Hill),
198
Third party reports review,
229
498 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 498Three Rules of the Game,
31–32
TiC. SeeTenants in common
Time
capital and, 143
CASHFLOW Quadrant 
saving, 8
cash-on-cash return and,
192–193
enemy of, 69importance of utilizing,
425
politics, tact and, 3511031 exchange and, 303urban revitalization
projects and, 93
wasting, 438–439See also Speed
Timetables, 352–353Title company, 43
development and, 83due diligence and, 228insurance and, 45
Title holding, 302–303Title insurance, 45Title report, 141
reviewing, 361
Title review, 227–228Tolkien, J. R. R., 347Trading, 1Traffic calming measures, 43Transfer title
insurance and, 129land trust and, 128–129LLC and, 126–128, 127
(fig.)
tax laws and, 127–128
Travel, 25–26
deal management prob-
lems with, 215–217
investing and, 476property management
challenges with, 436
See also Air travel
Trends
design and short-lived,
244–246
properties and, 194–195spotting, 195
Triple net lease, 264
defining, 435risks with, 437
“Triple threat,” 281Trump, Donald, 139, 185
biography of, 457first deal of, 451–453learning from, 451Manhattan arrival of,
453–456
patience of, 456–457on quality, 453quotable quotes of, 454
Trump, Donald, Jr.
biography of, 462education of, 460hunting and, 458–459
Trump, Eric, 458
biography of, 465respect and, 462responsibility of, 463
Trust
experience and, 
464–465
investing and personal,
439
lessons in, 463–464listening and, 320Palmer and, 54, 391property management
company and, 287
seller and, 319
Undervalued properties
investing beginners and,
188
reflections on search 
for, 191
searching for, 189–191tips for finding, 190
Unoccupied homes
furnishing for, 241–242selling, 241
Urban revitalization 
projects, 93Use of funds statement, 141Utility companies, 79Utility development fees, 
365
Vacation homes, 297Value-added approach
benefit of, 185practicing, 187
Values, 10–11Vendors, 354
insurance and, 363team of, 356
Visibility, 416–417Vision, 10–11
development and clear,
73–74
investing and, 253, 
447–448
for land, 179leasing and, 267of McElroy, 448patience and, 448–449real estate market and,
94–95
of Shultz, 173
Water, 358Wealth
defining, 55–56exchange and, 56–57formula for, 55, 66, 
69–70
rezoning creating, 176speed’s importance to
creating, 67
See also Current wealth;
Monetary wealth
Wealth coach, 21, 387Wells, 358
development, checking
for, 366
Wheelwright, Tom
biography of, 28, 389INDEX 49997815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 499education of, 6, 372
ethics of, 5, 371Kiyosaki, Robert’s,
friendship with, 7
tax laws and, 6, 372
“Will the dogs like it?” 
204–206
Wills, 118Women
auto shows and, 423–424convenience and, 418shopping centers and,
415Word-processing software,
59
Work, 7Working relationship
with architect, 39with Bays, 152with Dalton, 233–234in exchange groups,
403–404
with Gorman, 293importance of, 30with leasing agent/
advisor, 272–273with Lotzar, 29–30with McCallistaer, 71–72with McElroy, 276–277Sheets and, 306speed and, 68–69
Worst-case scenarios, 61
Zoning, 180
See also Rezoning500 INDEX97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 500Chapter 1, “The Business of Real Estate,” copyright © 2009 by Tom Wheelwright is used 
by permission of the author.
Chapter 2, “A Real Estate Attorney’s View of Assembling and Managing Your Team,” 
copyright © 2009 by Charles W . Lotzar is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 3, “The Way to Exotic Wealth,” copyright © 2009 by Wayne Palmer is used by 
permission of the author.
Chapter 4, “Proﬁts from the Ground Up,” copyright © 2009 by Ross McCallister is used 
by permission of the author.
Chapter 5, “Master Your Universe,” copyright © 2009 by Craig Coppola is used by 
permission of the author.
Chapter 6, “10 Rules for Real Estate Asset Protection,” copyright © 2009 by Garrett Sutton
is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 7 , “Of Marbles and Capital,” copyright © 2009 by Wayne Palmer is used by 
permission of the author.
Chapter 8, “How to Avoid and Handle Real Estate Disputes,” copyright © 2009 by Bernie
Bays is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 9, “Buy by the Acre, Sell by the Foot: Understanding Real Needs, Financial Logic,
and Asking Questions,” copyright © 2009 by Mel Shultz is used by permission of the
author.
Chapter 10, “It’s All About Adding Value,” copyright © 2009 by Curtis Oakes is used by 
permission of the author.Credits
50197815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 501Chapter 11, “Analyzing the Deal, or Adventures in Real Estate,” copyright © 2009 by John
Finney is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 12, “Real Estate Due Diligence,” copyright © 2009 by Scott McPherson is used by
permission of the author.
Chapter 13, “Creating Value from the Inside Out,” copyright © 2009 by Kim Dalton is used
by permission of the author.
Chapter 14, “Financing for Real Estate Investors,” copyright © 2009 by Scott McPherson is
used by permission of the author.
Chapter 15, “Lease It and Keep It Leased,” copyright © 2009 by Craig Coppola is used by
permission of the author.
Chapter 16, “The Perils of Careless Property Management,” copyright © 2009 by Ken
McElroy is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 17 , “Getting from A to B Without Paying Taxes,” copyright © 2009 by Gary Gorman
is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 18, “No Down Payment,” copyright © 2009 by Carleton Sheets is used by 
permission of the author.
Chapter 19, “Marketing: Your Ticket to Finding and Proﬁting from Foreclosures,” copyright
© 2009 by Dean Graziosi is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 20, “The Sleeping Giant of Real Estate Proﬁtability,” copyright © 2009 by W . Scott
Schirmer is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 21, “The Tax Lien Investment Strategy,” copyright © 2009 by Tom Wheelwright is
used by permission of the author.
Chapter 22, “Horse Trading: The Original Way to Wealth on the Great American Frontier,”
copyright © 2009 by Wayne Palmer is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 23, “How to Create Retail Magic: A Tale of Two Centers,” copyright © 2009 by
Marty De Rito is used by permission of the author.
Chapter 24, “What One Property Can Teach You,” copyright © 2009 by Kim Kiyosaki is
used by permission of the author.
Chapter 25, “In the Beginning . . . ,” copyright © 2009 by Donald Trump is used by 
permission of the author.
Chapter 26, “What Is the Most Important Thing You’ve Learned From Your Father 
About Real Estate?” copyright © 2009 by Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump is used 
by permission of the authors.502 CREDITS97815931553222_RM:real estate_new  3/25/09  3:53 PM  Page 502