 
All Men Are Brothers 
(Life & thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi as told in his own words)  
 
Compiled & Edited by : Krishna Kripalani 
 
Int
roduction by :  Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 40/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
PUBLISHER'S NOTE  
(Indian Edition)  
We 
have great pleasure in issuing this cheap edition of the UNESCO's 
publication, All Men Are Brothers . It is a selection from the writings of 
Mahatma Gandhi compiled for the UNESCO, for presenting in one handy 
volume, the life and thoughts of the Mahatma as told in his own words. The 
UNESCO publication is in English, to be followed by French and Spanish 
editions. 
As all know, copyright in Gandhiji's writings vests in the Navajivan Trust. 
Therefore the UNESCO, through the Government of India had approached the 
Trust for permission to publish their selections from Gandhiji's writings in book 
form. The Trust had very gladly given them this permission. Accordingly, the 
book was out by the end of 1958 and has by now run into four impressions. 
The Navajivan Trust thought that a cheap edition for readers in India, of this 
important publication from Gandhiji's writings, might be a welcome thing, and 
hence the Trust approached the UNESCO for permitting the issue of a cheap 
edition in English and in Indian languages also, with Dr. Radhakrishnan's 
Introduction. The UNESCO has kindly granted us this permission. Hence this 
issue of the book for Indian readers. 
The Trust thanks the UNESCO for this permission. The book is entirely a reprint 
of the UNESCO publication minus the interesting pictures it contains. We have 
given only one picture as frontispiece, which has made it possible for us to 
reduce the price appreciably. 
30D10D1960 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  
FOREWORD  
(Unesco Edition) 
At its ninth session, which was held in New Delhi in N ovember 1956, the Unesco 
General Conference adopted, on the proposal of the Delegation of Uruguay, a 
resolution authorizing 'the DirectorDGeneral to arrange for the publication of a 
book containing selections from Gandhi's thoughts preceded by a study of his 
personality'. 
The General Conference wished thus to provide an opportunity for Unesco to 
pay homage to both the person and the writings of a man whose spiritual 
influence has extended throughout the entire world. 
The texts have been selected to appeal to a wide public and are intended to 
illustrate and make better known the different aspects of Gandhi's personality 
and writings. 
H. E. Sir Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan, ViceDPresident of India, has kindly accepted 
to write a short introduction which describes the main features of the 
Mahatma's philosophy and his influence in furthering friendship and 
understanding between peoples. 
Unesco is greatly indebted to H. E. Sir Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan for his highly 
valuable coDoperation, as well as to those Indian authorities who collaborated 
in the preparation of this book. 
Special tribute is also paid to Shri K. R. Kripalani, Secretary of Sahitya 
Akademi, for his highly competent assistance. 
It is planned that the present publication in English will be followed by French 
and Spanish editions. 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  
INTRODUCTION  
S. Radhakrishnan  
A g
reat teacher appears once in a while. Several centuries may pass by without 
the advent of such a one. That by which he is known is his life. He first lives 
and then tells others how they may live likewise. Such a teacher was Gandhi. 
These selections from his speeches and writings compiled With great care and 
discrimination by Shri Krishna Kripalani will give the reader some idea of the 
workings of Gandhi's mind, the growth of his thoughts and the practical 
techniques which he adopted. 
Gandhi's life was rooted in India's religious tradition with its emphasis on a 
passionate search for truth, a profound reverence for life, the ideal of nonD
attachment and the readiness to sacrifice all for the knowledge of God. He 
lived his whole life in the perpetual quest of truth: 'I live and move and have 
my being in the pursuit of this goal.' 
A life which has no roots, which is lacking in depth of background is a 
superficial one. There are some who assume that when we see what is fight we 
will do it. It is not so. Even when we know what is right it does not follow that 
we will choose and do right. We are overborne by powerful impulses and do 
wrong and betray the light in us. 'In our present state we are, according to the 
Hindu doctrine, only partly human; the lower part of us is still animal; only the 
conquest of our lower instincts by love can slay the animal in us.' It is by a 
process of trial and error, selfDsearch and austere discipline that the human 
being moves step by painful step along the road to fulfillment. 
Gandhi's religion was a rational and ethical one. He would not accept any belief 
which did not appeal to his reason or any injunction which did not commend to 
his conscience. 
If we believe in God, not merely with our intellect but with our whole being, 
we will love all mankind without any distinction of race or class, nation or 
religion. We will work for the unity of mankind. 'All my actions have their rise 
in my inalienable love of mankind.' 'I have known no distinction between All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5 relatives and strangers, countrymen and foreigners, white and coloured, Hindus 
and Indians of other faiths whether Mussalmans, Parsees, Christians or Jews. I 
may say that my heart has been incapable of making any such distinctions.' 'By 
a long process of prayerful discipline I have ceased for over forty years to hate 
anybody.' All men are brothers and no human being should be a stranger to 
another. The welfare of all, Sarvodaya , should be our aim. God is the common 
bond that unites all human beings. To break this bond even with our greatest 
enemy is to tear God Himself to pieces. There is humanity even in the most 
wicked1. 
This view leads naturally to the adoption of nonDviolence as the best means for 
solving all problems, national and international. Gandhi affirmed that he was 
not a visionary but a practical idealist. NonDviolence is meant not merely for 
saints and sages but for the common people also. 'NonDviolence is the law of 
our species, as violence is the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in the 
brute and he knows no law but that of physical might. The dignity of man 
requires obedience to a higher law ―to the strength of the spirit.' 
Gandhi was the first in human history to extend the principle of nonDviolence 
from the individual to the social and political plane. He entered politics for the 
purpose of experimenting with nonDviolence and establishing its validity. 
'Some friends have told me that truth and nonDviolence have no place in 
politics and worldly affairs. I do not agree. I have no use for them as a means 
of individual salvation. Their introduction and application in everyday life has 
been my experiment all along.' 'For me, politics bereft of religion are absolute 
dirt, ever to be shunned. Politics concerns nations and that which concerns the 
welfare of nations must be one of the concerns of a man who is religiously 
inclined, in other words, a seeker after God and Truth. For me God and Truth 
are convertible terms, and if anyone told me that God was a God of untruth or 
a God of torture I would decline to worship Him. Therefore, in politics also we 
have to establish the Kingdom of Heaven.' 
In the struggle for India's independence, he insisted that we should adopt 
civilized methods of nonDviolence and suffering. His stand for the freedom of All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6 India was not based on any hatred for Britain. We must hate the sin but not the 
sinner. 'For me patriotism is the same as humanity. I am patriotic because I am 
human and humane. I will not hurt England or Germany to serve India.' He 
believed that he rendered a service to the British in helping them to do the 
right thing by India. The result was not only the liberation of the Indian people 
but an increase in the moral resources or mankind. 
In the present nuclear context, if we wish to save the world, we should adopt 
the principles of nonDviolence. Gandhi said: 'I did not move a muscle, when I 
first heard that an atom bomb had wiped out Hiroshima. On the contrary I said 
to myself: "Unless now the world adopts nonDviolence, it will spell certain 
suicide for mankind".' In any future conflict we cannot be certain that neither 
side will deliberately use nuclear weapons. We have the power to destroy in 
one blinding flash all that we have carefully built up across the centuries by our 
endeavour and sacrifice. By a campaign of propaganda we condition men's 
minds for nuclear warfare. Provocative remarks fly about freely. We use 
aggression even in words; harsh judgments, illDwill, anger, are all insidious 
forms of violence. 
In the present predicament when we are not able to adjust ourselves to the 
new conditions which science has brought about, it is not easy to adopt the 
principles of nonDviolence, truth and understanding. But on that ground we 
should not give up the effort. While the obstinacy of the political leaders puts 
fear into our hearts, the common sense and conscience of the peoples of the 
world give us hope. 
With the increased velocity of modern changes we do not know what the world 
will be a hundred years hence. We cannot anticipate the future currents of 
thought and feeling. But years may go their way, yet the great principles 
of satya  and ahimsa , truth and nonDviolence, are there to guide us. They are 
the silent stars keeping holy vigil above a tired and turbulent world. Like 
Gandhi we may be firm in our conviction that the sun shines above the drifting 
clouds. 
We live in an age which is aware of its own defeat and moral coarsening, an 
age in which old certainties are breaking down, the familiar patterns are tilting All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 and cracking. There is increasing intolerance and embitterment. The creative 
flame that kindled the great human society is languishing. The human mind in 
all its baffling strangeness and variety produces contrary types, a Buddha or a 
Gandhi, a Nero or a Hitler. It is our pride that one of the greatest figures of 
history lived in our generation, walked with us, spoke to us, taught us the way 
of civilized living. He who wrongs no one fears no one. He has nothing to hide 
and so is fearless. He looks everyone in the face. His step is firm, his body 
upright, and his words are direct and straight. Plato said long ago: 'There 
always are in the world a few inspired men whose acquaintance is beyond 
price.' 
S. Radhakrishnan 
New Delhi 
15 August 1958 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  
01. AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL 
 
It is not my purpose to attempt a real autobiography. I simply want to tell the 
story of my numerous experiments with truth, and as my life consists of nothing 
but those experiments, it is true that the story will take the shape of an 
autobiography. But I shall not mind, if every page of it speaks only of my 
experiments. (AMG, 4) 
 
My experiments in the political field are now known, not only to India, but to a 
certain extent to the 'civilized' world. For me, they have not much value; and 
the title of 'Mahatma' that they have won for me has, therefore, even less. 
Often the title has deeply pained me; and there is not a moment I can recall 
when it may be said to have tickled me. But I should certainly like to narrate 
my experiments in the spiritual field which are known only to myself, and from 
which I have derived such power as I possess for working in the political field. If 
the experiments are really spiritual, then there can be no room for selfDpraise. 
They can only add to my humility. The more I reflect and look back on the 
past, the more vividly do I feel my limitations. (AMG, 4) 
 
What I want to achieve ―what I have been striving and pining to achieve these 
thirty years― is selfDrealization, to see God face to face, to attain Moksha . I 
live and move and have my being in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of 
speaking and writing, and all my ventures in the political field, are directed to 
this same end. But as I have all along believed that what is possible for one is 
possible for all, my experiments have not been conducted in the closet, but in 
the open; and I do not think that this fact detracts from their spiritual value. 
There are some things which are known only to oneself and one's Maker. These 
are clearly incommunicable. The experiments I am about to relate are not 
such. But they are spiritual, or rather moral; for the essence of religion is All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 morality. (AMG, 4D5) 
 
Far be it from me to claim any degree of perfection for these experiments. I 
claim for them nothing more than does a scientist who, though he conducts his 
experiments with the utmost accuracy, forethought and minuteness, never 
claims any finality about his conclusions, but keeps an open mind regarding 
them. I have gone through deep selfDintrospection, searched myself through 
and through, and examined and analyzed every psychological situation. Yet I 
am far from claiming any finality or infallibility about my conclusions. One 
claim I do indeed make and it is this. For me they appear to be absolutely 
correct, and seem for the time being to be final. But at every step I have 
carried out the process of acceptance or rejection and acted accordingly. 
(AMG, 5) 
 
My life is one indivisible whole, and all my activities run into one another, and 
they all have their rise in my insatiable love of mankind. (SB, 45) 
 
The Gandhi's belong to the Bania  caste and seem to have been originally 
grocers. But for three generations, from my grandfather, they have been prime 
ministers in several Kathiawad States. . . My grandfather must have been a man 
of principle. State intrigues compelled him to leave Porbandar, where he was 
a Diwan , and to seek refuge in Junagadh. There he saluted the Nawab  with the 
left hand. Someone, noticing the apparent discourtesy, asked for an 
explanation, which was given thus: 'The right hand is already pledged to 
Porbandar.' (AMG, 11) 
 
My father was a lover of his clan, truthful, brave and generous, but shortD
tempered. To a certain extent he might have been even given to carnal 
pleasures. For he married for the fourth time when he was over forty. But he 
was incorruptible and had earned a name for strict impartiality in his family as 
well as outside. (AMG, 12) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10 The outstanding impression my mother has left on my memory is that of 
saintliness. She was deeply religious. She would not think of taking her meals 
without her daily prayers. . .She would take the hardest vows and keep them 
without flinching. Illness was no excuse for relaxing them. (AMG, 12D13) 
 
Of these parents I was born at Porbandar.....I passed my childhood in 
Porbandar. I recollect having been put to school. It was with some difficulty 
that I got through the multiplication tables. The fact that I recollect nothing 
more of those days than having learnt, in company with other boys, to call our 
teacher all kinds of names, would strongly suggest that my intellect must have 
been sluggish, and my memory raw. (AMG, 14) 
 
I used to be very shy and avoided all company. My books and my lessons were 
my sole companions. To be at school at the stroke of the hour and to run back 
home as soon as the school closed ―that was my daily habit. I literally ran back 
because I could not bear to talk to anybody. I was even afraid lest anyone 
should poke fun at me. (AMG, 15) 
 
There is an incident which occurred at the examination during my first year at 
the high school and which is worth recording. Mr. Giles, the Educational 
Inspector, had come on a visit of inspection. He had set us five words to write 
as a spelling exercise. One of the words was 'kettle'. I had miss pelt it. The 
teacher tried to prompt me with the point of his boot, but I would not be 
prompted. It was beyond me to see that he wanted me to copy the spelling 
from my neighbour's slate, for I had thought that the teacher was there to 
supervise us against copying. The result was that all the boys, except myself, 
were found to have spelt every word correctly. Only I had been stupid. The 
teacher tried later to bring this stupidity home to me, but without effect. I 
never could learn the art of 'copying'. (AMG, 15D16) 
 
It is my painful duty to have to record here my marriage at the age of thirteen. 
As I see youngsters of the same age about me who are under my care, and think All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11 of my own marriage, I am inclined to pity myself and to congratulate them on 
having escaped my lot. I can see no moral argument in support of such a 
preposterously early marriage. (AMG, 18) 
 
I do not think it [marriage] meant to me anything more than the prospect of 
good clothes to wear, drum beating, marriage processions, rich dinners and a 
strange girl to play with. The carnal desire came later. (AMG, 19) 
 
And oh! That first night. Two innocent children all unwittingly hurled 
themselves into the ocean of life. My brother's wife had thoroughly coached me 
about my behavior  on the first night. I do not know who had coached my wife. 
I have never asked her about it, nor am I inclined to do so now. The reader may 
be sure that we were too nervous to face each other. We were certainly too 
shy. How was I to talk to her, and what was I to say? The coaching could not 
carry me far. But no coaching is really necessary in such matters....... We 
gradually began to know each other, and to speak freely together. We were the 
same age. But I took no time in assuming the authority of a husband. (AMG, 21) 
 
I must say I was passionately fond of her. Even at school I used to think of her, 
and the thought of nightfall and our subsequent meeting was ever haunting me. 
Separation was unbearable. I used to keep her awake till late in the night with 
my idle talk. If with this devouring passion there had not been in me a burning 
attachment to my duty, I should either have fallen prey to disease and 
premature death, or have sunk into a burdensome existence. But the appointed 
tasks had to be got through every morning, and lying to anyone was out of 
question. It was this last thing that saved me from many a pitfall. (AMG, 23D24) 
 
I had not any high regard for my ability. I used to be astonished whenever I won 
prizes and scholarships. But I very jealously guarded my character. The least 
little blemish drew tears from my eyes. When I merited, or seemed to the 
teacher to merit, a rebuke, it was unbearable for me. I remember having once 
received corporal punishment. I did not so much mind the punishment, as the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12 fact that it was considered my desert. I wept piteously. (AMG, 26D27) 
 
Amongst my few friends at the high school I had, different times, two who 
might be called intimate. One of these friendships.......I regard as a tragedy in 
my life. It lasted long. I formed it in the spirit of a reformer. (AMG, 31) 
 
I have seen since that I had calculated wrongly. A reformer cannot afford to 
have close intimacy with him whom he seeks to reform. True friendship is an 
identity of souls rarely to be found in this world. Only between like natures can 
friendship be altogether worthy and enduring. Friends react on one another. 
Hence in friendship there is very little scope for reform. I am of opinion that all 
exclusive intimacies are to be avoided; for man takes in vice far more readily 
than virtue. And he who would be friends with God must remain alone, or make 
the whole world his friend. I may be wrong, but my effort to cultivate an 
intimate friendship proved a failure. (AMG, 31D32) 
 
This friend's exploits cast a spell over me. He could run long distances and 
extraordinarily fast. He was an adept in high and long jumping. He could put up 
with any amount of corporal punishment. He would often display his exploits to 
me and, as one is always dazzled when he sees in others the qualities that he 
lacks himself, I was dazzled by this friend's exploits. This was followed by a 
strong desire to be like him. I could hardly jump or run. Why should not I also 
be as strong as he? (AMG, 32D33) 
 
I was a coward. I used to be haunted by the fear of thieves, ghosts and 
serpents. I did not dare to stir out of doors at night. Darkness was a terror to 
me. It was almost impossible for me to sleep in the dark, as I would imagine 
ghosts coming from one direction, thieves from another and serpents from a 
third. I could not therefore bear to sleep without a light in the room. (AMG, 33) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13 My friend know all these weaknesses of mine. He would tell me that he could 
hold in his hand live serpents, could defy thieves and did not believe in ghosts. 
And all this was, of course, the result of eating meat. (AMG, 33) 
 
All this had its due effect on me......It began to grow on me that meatDeating 
was good, that it would make me strong and daring, and that, if the whole 
country took to meatDeating, the English would be overcome. (AMG, 33) 
 
Whenever I had occasion to indulge in these surreptitious feasts, dinner at 
home was out of question. My mother would naturally ask me to come and take 
my food and want to know the reason why I did not wish to eat. I would say to 
her 'I have no appetite today; there is something wrong with my digestion'. It 
was not without compunction that I devised these pretexts. I knew I was lying, 
and lying to my mother. I also knew that if my mother and father came to know 
of my having become a meatDeater, they would be deeply shocked. This 
knowledge was gnawing at my heart. 
Therefore I said to myself: Though it is essential to eat meat, and also essential 
to take up food 'reform  ' in the country, yet deceiving and lying to one's fat her 
and mother is worse than not eating meat. In their lifetime, therefore, meatD
eating must be out of the question. When they are no more and I have found 
my freedom, I will eat meat openly, but until that moment arrives I will abstain 
from it. 
This decision I communicated to my friend, and I have never since gone back to 
meat. (AMG, 36) 
 
My friend once took me to a brothel. He sent me in with the necessary 
instructions. It was all preDarranged. The bill had already been paid. I went 
into the jaws of sin, but God in His infinite mercy protected me against myself. 
I was almost struck blind and dumb in this den of vice. I sat near the woman on 
her bed, but I was tongueDtied. She naturally lost patience with me, and 
showed the door, with abuses and insults. I then felt as though my manhood All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14 had been injured, and wished to sink into the ground for shame. But I have 
ever since given thanks to God for having saved me. I can recall four more 
similar incidents in my life, and in most of them my good fortune, rather than 
any effort on my part, saved me. From a strictly ethical point of view, all these 
occasions must be regarded as moral lapses; for the carnal desire was there, 
and it was as good as the act. But from the ordinary point of view, a man who 
is saved from physically committing sin is regarded as saved. And I was saved 
only in that sense. (AMG, 37) 
 
As we know that man often succumbs to temptation, however much he may 
resist it, we also know that Providence often intercedes and saves him in spite 
of himself. How all this happens ―how far a man is free and how far a creature 
of circumstances― how far freeDwill comes into play and where fate enters on 
the scene ―all this is a mystery and will remain a mystery. (AMG, 37) 
 
One of the reasons of my differences with my wife was undoubtedly the 
company of this friend. I was both a devoted and jealous husband, and this 
friend fanned the flame of my suspicions about my wife. I never could doubt 
his veracity. And I have never forgiven myself the violence of which I have been 
guilty in often having pained my wife by acting on his information. Perhaps only 
a Hindu wife could tolerate these hardships, and that is why I have regarded 
woman as an incarnation of tolerance. (AMG, 38) 
 
The canker of suspicion was rooted out only when I understood ahimsa  in all its 
bearings. I saw then the glory of brahmacharya  and realized that the wife is 
not the husband's bond slave, but his companion and his helpmate, and an 
equal partner in all his joys and sorrows― as free as the husband to choose her 
own path. Whenever I think of those dark days of doubts and suspicions, I am 
filled with loathing of my folly and my lustful cruelty, and I deplore my blind 
devotion to my friend. (AMG, 38) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15 From my sixth or seventh year up to my sixteenth I was at school, being taught 
all sorts of things except religion. I may say that I failed to get from the 
teachers what they could have given me without any effort on their part. And 
yet I kept on picking up things here and there from my surroundings. The term 
'religion' I am using in its broadest sense, meaning thereby selfDrealization or 
knowledge of self. (AMG, 47) 
 
But one thing took deep root in me ―the conviction that morality is the basis of 
things, and that truth is the substance of all morality. Truth became my sole 
objective. It began to grow in magnitude every day, and my definition of it also 
has been ever widening. (AMG, 50D51) 
 
I regard untouchability as the greatest blot on Hinduism. This idea was not 
brought home to me by my bitter experiences during the South African 
struggle. It is not due to the fact that I was once an agnostic. It is equally 
wrong to think that I have taken my views from my study of Christian religious 
literature. These views date as far back as the time when I was neither 
enamoured of, nor was acquainted with, the Bible or the followers of the Bible. 
I was hardly yet twelve when this idea had dawned on me. A scavenger named 
Uka, an untouchable, used to attend our house for cleaning latrines. Often I 
would ask my mother why it was wrong to touch him, why I was forbidden to 
touch him. If I accidentally touched Uka, I was asked to perform ablutions, and 
though I naturally obeyed, it was not without smilingly protesting that 
untouchability was not sanctioned by religion, that it was impossible that it 
should be so. I was a very dutiful and obedient child and so far as it was 
consistent with respect for parents, I often had tussles with them on this 
matter. I told my mother that she was entirely wrong in considering physical 
contact with Uka as sinful. (MT, II, 47D48) 
 
I passed the matriculation examination in 1887. (AMG, 52) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16 My elders wanted me to pursue my studies at college after the 
matriculation. There was a college in Bhavnagar as well as in Bombay, and as 
the former was cheaper, I decided to go there and joined the Samaldas 
College. I went, but found myself entirely at sea. Everything was difficult. I 
could not follow, let alone taking interest in, the professors' lectures. It was no 
fault of theirs. The professors in that college were regarded as firstDrate. But I 
was so raw. At the end of the first term, I returned home. (AMG, 52) 
 
A shrewd and learned Brahmin, an old friend and adviser of the 
family.....happened to visit us during my vacation. In conversation with my 
mother and elder brother, he inquired about my studies. Learning that I was at 
Samaldas College, he said: 'The times are changed.....I would far rather that 
you sent him to England. My son Kevalram says it is very easy to become a 
barrister. In three years' time he will return. Also expenses will not exceed four 
to five thousand rupees. Think of that barrister who has just come back from 
England. How stylishly he lives! He could get the diwanship for the asking. I 
would strongly advise you to send Mohandas to England this very year. (AMG, 
52D53) 
 
My mother was sorely perplexed......Someone had told her that young men got 
lost in England. Someone else had said that they took to meat; and yet another 
that they could not live there without liquor. 'How about all this?' she asked 
me. I said: 'Will you not trust me? I shall not lie to you. I swear that I shall not 
touch any of those things. If there were any such danger, would Joshiji let me 
go?'........I vowed not to touch wine, women and meat. This done, my mother 
gave her permission. (AMG, 54) 
 
Before the intention of coming to London for the sake study was actually 
formed, I had a secret design in my mind of coming here to satisfy my curiosity 
of knowing what London was. (CWMG, I, 3) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17 At the age of eighteen I went to England......Everything was strange ―the 
people, their ways, and even their dwellings. I was a complete novice in the 
matter of English etiquette and continually had to be on my guard. There was 
the additional inconvenience of the vegetarian vow. Even the dishes that I 
could eat were tasteless and insipid. I thus found myself between Scylla and 
Charybdis. England I could not bear, but to return to India was not to be 
thought of. Now that I had come, I must finish the three years, said the inner 
voice. (AMG, 63) 
 
The landlady was at a loss to know what to prepare for me......The friend (A 
gentlemen with whom he stayed in Richmond for a month.) continually 
reasoned with me to eat meat, but I always pleaded my vow and then 
remained silent......One day the friend began to read to me Bentham's Theory 
of Utility . I was at my wits' end. The language was too difficult for me to 
understand. He began to expound it. I said: 'Pray excuse me. These abstruse 
things are beyond me. I admit it is necessary to eat meat. But I cannot break 
my vow. I cannot argue about it.' (AMG, 64D65) 
 
I would trot ten or twelve miles each day, go into a cheap restaurant and eat 
my fill of bread, but would never be satisfied. During these wanderings I once 
hit on a vegetarian restaurant in Farringdon Street. The sight of it filled me 
with the same joy that a child feels on getting a thing after its own heart. 
Before I entered I noticed books for sale exhibited under a glass window near 
the door. I saw among them Salt's Plea for Vegetarianism . This I purchased for 
a shilling and went straight to the dining room. This was my first hearty meal 
since my arrival in England. God had come to my aid. 
I read Salt's book from cover to cover and was very much impressed by it. From 
the date of reading this book, I may claim to have become a vegetarian by 
choice. I blessed the day on which I had taken the vow before my mother. I had 
all along abstained from meat in the interests of truth and of the vow I had 
taken, but had wished at the same time that every Indian should be a meatD
eater, and had looked forward to being one myself freely and openly some day, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18 and to enlisting others in the cause. The choice was now made in favour of 
vegetarianism, the spread of which henceforth became my mission. (AMG, 66D
67) 
 
A convert's enthusiasm for his new religion is greater than that of a person who 
is born to it. Vegetarianism was then a new cult in England, and likewise for 
me, because, as we have seen, I had gone there a convinced meatDeater, and 
was intellectually converted to vegetarianism later. Full of the neophyte's zeal 
for vegetarianism, I decided to start a vegetarian club in my locality, 
Bayswater. I invited Sir Edwin Arnold, who lived there, to be viceDpresident. 
Dr. OldDfield who was editor of The Vegetarian became president. I myself 
became the secretary. (AMG, 79D80) 
 
I was elected to the Executive Committee of the Vegetarian Society, and made 
it a point to attend every one of its meetings, but I always felt tongueD
tied......Not that I never felt tempted to speak. But I was at a loss to know how 
to express myself......This shyness I retained throughout my stay in England. 
Even when I paid a social call the presence of half a dozen or more people 
would strike me dumb. (AMG, 81D82) 
 
I must say that, beyond occasionally exposing me to laughter, my constitutional 
shyness has been no disadvantage whatever. In fact I can see that, on the 
contrary, it has been all to my advantage. My hesitancy in speech, which was 
once an annoyance, is now a pleasure. Its greatest benefit has been that it has 
taught me the economy of words. (AMG, 84) 
 
There was a great exhibition at Paris in 1890. I had read about its elaborate 
preparation, and I also had a keen desire to see Paris. So I thought I had better 
combine two things in one and go there at this juncture. A particular attraction 
of the exhibition was the Eiffel Tower, constructed entirely of iron, and nearly 
1,000 feet high. There were of course many other things of interest, but the 
tower was the chief one, inasmuch as it had been supposed till then that a All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19 structure of that height could not safely stand. (AMG, 101) 
 
I remember nothing of the exhibition excepting its magnitude and variety. I 
have fair recollection of the Eiffel Tower as I ascended it twice or thrice. There 
was a restaurant on the first platform, and just for the satisfaction of being 
able to say that I had had my lunch at a great height, I threw away seven 
shillings on it. 
The ancient churches of Paris are still in my memory. Their grandeur and their 
peacefulness are unforgettable. The wonderful construction of Notre Dame and 
the elaborate decoration of the interior with its beautiful sculptures cannot be 
forgotten. I felt then that those who expended millions on such 
divine cathedrals could not but have the love of God in their hearts. (AMG, 101) 
 
I must say a word about the Eiffel Tower. I do not know what purpose it serves 
today. But I then heard it greatly disparaged as well as praised. I remember 
that Tolstoy was the chief among those who disparaged it. He said that the 
Eiffel Tower was a monument of man's folly, not of his wisdom. Tobacco, he 
argued, was the worst of all intoxicants, inasmuch as a man addicted to it was 
tempted to commit crimes which a drunkard never dared to do; liquor made a 
man mad, but tobacco clouded his intellect and made him build castles in the 
air. The Eiffel Tower was one of the creations of a man under such influence. 
There is no art about the Eiffel Tower. In no way can it be said to have 
contributed to the real beauty of the exhibition. Men flocked to see it and 
ascended it as it was a novelty and of unique dimensions. It was the toy of the 
exhibition. So long as we are children we are attracted by toys, and the tower 
was a good demonstration of the fact that we are all children attracted by 
trinkets. That may be claimed to be the purpose served by the Eiffel Tower. 
(AMG, 102) 
 
I passed my examinations, was called to the Bar on the tenth of June 1891, and 
enrolled in the High Court on the eleventh. On the twelfth I sailed home. (AMG, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20 105) 
 
My elder brother had built high hopes on me. The desire for wealth and name 
and fame was great in him. He had a big heart, generous to a fault. This, 
combined with his simple nature, had attracted to him many friends, and 
through them he expected to get me briefs. He had also assumed that I should 
have a swinging practice and had, in that expectation, allowed the household 
expenses to become topDheavy. He had also left no stone unturned in preparing 
the field for my practice. (AMG, 115) 
 
But it was impossible for me to get along in Bombay for more than four or five 
months, there being no income to square with the everDincreasing expenditure. 
This was how I began life. I found the barrister's profession a bad job ―much 
show and little knowledge. I felt a crushing sense of my responsibility. (AMG, 
118) 
 
Disappointed, I left Bombay and went to Rajkot where I set up my own office. 
Here I got along moderately well. Drafting applications and memorials brought 
me in on an average Rs. 300 a month. (AMG, 123) 
 
In the meantime a Meman firm from Porbandar wrote to my brother making the 
following offer: 'We have business in South Africa. Ours is a big firm, and we 
have a big case there in the Court, our claim being £40,000. It has been going 
on for a long time. We have engaged the services of the best vakils  and 
barristers. If you sent your brother there, he would be useful to us and also to 
himself. He would be able to instruct our counsel better than ourselves. And he 
would have the advantage of seeing a new part of the world, and of making 
new acquaintances.' (AMG, 128) 
 
This was hardly going there as a barrister. It was going as a servant of the firm. 
But I wanted somehow to leave India. There was also the tempting opportunity All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21 of seeing a new country, and of having new experience. Also I could send £105 
to my brother and help in the expenses of the household. I closed with the 
offer without any haggling, and got ready to go to South Africa. (AMG, 129) 
 
When starting for South Africa I did not feel the wrench of separation which I 
had experienced when leaving for England. My mother was now no more. I had 
gained some knowledge of the world and of travel abroad, and going from 
Rajkot to Bombay was no unusual affair. 
This time I only felt the pang of parting with my wife. Another baby had been 
born to us since my return from England. Our love could not yet be called free 
from lust, but it was getting gradually purer. Since my return from Europe, we 
had lived very little together; and as I had now become her teacher, however 
indifferent, and helped her to make certain reforms we both felt the necessity 
of being more together, if only to continue the reforms. But the attraction of 
South Africa rendered the separation bearable. (AMG, 130) 
 
The port of Natal is Durban also known as Port Natal. Abdulla Sheth was there 
to receive me. As the ship arrived at the quay and I watched the people coming 
on board to meet their friends, I observed that the Indians were not held in 
much respect. I could not fail to notice a sort of snobbishness about the 
manner in which those who knew Abdulla Sheth behaved towards him, and it 
stung me. Abdulla Sheth had got used to it. Those who looked at me did so with 
a certain amount of curiosity. My dress marked me out from other Indians. I 
had a frockDcoat and a turban. (AMG, 134) 
 
On the second or third day of my arrival, he took me to see the Durban court. 
There he introduced me to several people and seated me next to his attorney. 
The magistrate kept staring at me and finally asked me to take off my turban. 
This I refused to do and left the court. (AMG, 135) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22 On the seventh or eighth day after my arrival, I left Durban (for Pretoria). A 
first class seat was booked for me......The train reached Maritzburg, the 
capital of Natal, at about 9 p.m. Beddings used to be provided at this station. A 
railway servant came and asked me if I wanted one. 'No,' said I, 'I have one with 
me.' He went away. But a passenger came next, and looked me up and down. 
He saw that I was a 'colored' man. This disturbed him. Out he went and came in 
again with one or two officials. They all kept quiet, when another official came 
to me and said, 'Come along, you must go to the van compartment.' 
'But I have a first class ticket,' said I. 
'That doesn't matter,' rejoined the other. 'I tell you, you must go to the van 
compartment.' 
'I tell you, I was permitted to travel in this compartment at Durban, and I insist 
on going on in it.' 
'No, you won't', said the official. 'You must leave this compartment, or else I 
shall have to call a police constable to push you out.' 
'yes, you may. I refuse to get out voluntarily.' 
The constable came. He took me by the hand and pushed me out. My luggage 
was also taken out. I refused to go to the other compartment and the train 
steamed away. I went and sat in the waiting room, keeping my handDbag with 
me, and leaving the other luggage where it was. The railway authorities had 
taken charge of it. 
It was winter, and winter in the higher regions of South Africa is severely cold. 
Maritzburg being at a high altitude, the cold was extremely bitter. My overcoat 
was in my luggage, but I did not dare to ask for it lest I should be insulted 
again, so I sat and shivered. There was no light in the room. A passenger came 
in at about midnight and possibly wanted to talk to me. But I was in no mood to 
talk. 
I began to think of my duty. Should I fight for my rights or go back to India, or 
should I go on to Pretoria without minding the insults, and return to India after 
finishing the case? It would be cowardice to run back to India without fulfilling 
my obligation. The hardship to which I was subjected was superficial ―only a All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23 symptom of the deep disease of colour prejudice. I should try, if possible to 
root out the disease and suffer hardships in the process. Redress for wrongs I 
should seek only to the extent that would be necessary for the removal of the 
colour prejudice. 
So I decided to take the next available train to Pretoria. (AMG, 140D41) 
 
My first step was to call a meeting of all the Indians in Pretoria and to present 
to them a picture of their condition in the Transvaal. (AMG, 157) 
 
My speech at this meeting may be said to have been the first public speech in 
my life. I went fairly prepared with my subject, which was about observing 
truthfulness in business. I had always heard the merchants say that truth was 
not possible in business. I did not think so then, nor do now. Even today there 
are merchant friends who contend that truth is inconsistent with business. 
Business, they say, is a very practical affair, and truth a matter of religion; and 
they argue that practical affairs are one thing, while religion is quite another. 
Pure truth, they hold, is out of the question in business, one can speak it only 
so far as is suitable. I strongly contested the position in my speech and 
awakened the merchants to a sense of their duty, which was twofold. Their 
responsibility to be truthful was all the greater in a foreign land, because the 
conduct of a few Indians was the measure of that of the millions of their 
fellowDcountrymen. (AMG, 157D58) 
 
The consequences of the regulation regarding the use of footpaths were rather 
serious for me. I always went out for a walk through President Street to an 
open plain. President Kruger's house was in this street ―a very modest, 
unostentatious building, without a garden, and not distinguishable from other 
houses in its neighborhood. The houses of many of the millionaires in Pretoria 
were far more pretentious, and were surrounded by gardens. Indeed President 
Kruger's simplicity was proverbial. Only the presence of a police patrol before 
the house indicated that it belonged to some official. I nearly always went All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24 along the footpath past this patrol without the slightest hitch or hindrance. 
Now the man on duty used to be changed from time to time. Once one of these 
men without giving me the slightest warning, without even asking me to leave 
the footpath, pushed and kicked me into the street. I was dismayed. Before I 
could question him as to his behaviour, Mr. Coates, who happened to be 
passing the spot on horse, back, hailed me and said: 
'Gandhi, I have seen everything. I shall gladly be your witness in court if you 
proceed against the man. I am very sorry you have been so rudely assaulted.' 
'You need not be sorry,' I said. 'What does the poor man know? All coloured 
people are the same to him. He no doubt treats Negroes just as he has treated 
me. I have made it a rule not to go to court in respect of any personal 
grievance. So I do not intend to proceed against him.' (AMG, 162D63) 
 
The incident deepened my feeling for the Indian settlers. ....I thus made an 
intimate study of the hard condition of the Indian settlers, not only by reading 
and hearing about it, but by personal experience. I saw that South Africa was 
no country for a selfDrespecting Indian, and my mind became more and more 
occupied with the question as to how this state of things might be improved. 
(AMG, 163D64) 
 
The year's stay in Pretoria was a most valuable experience in my life. Here it 
was that I had opportunities of learning public work and acquired some 
measure of my capacity for it. Here it was that the religious spirit within me 
became a living force, and here too I acquired a true knowledge of legal 
practice. (AMG, 165) 
 
I realized that the true function of a lawyer was to unite parties riven asunder. 
The lesson was so indelibly burnt into me that a large part of my time during 
the twenty years of practice as a lawyer was occupied in bringing about private 
compromises of hundreds of cases. I lost nothing thereby ―not even money, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25 certainly not my soul. (AMG, 168) 
 
The heart's earnest and pure desire is always fulfilled. In my own experience I 
have often seen this rule verified. Service of the poor has been my heart's 
desire, and it has always thrown me amongst the poor and enabled me to 
identify myself with them. (AMG, 190) 
 
I had put in scarcely three or four months' practice, and the Congress (Natal 
Indian Congress organized by Gandhi to agitate against the Bill in the Natal 
Legislative Assembly to disfranchise Indians) also was still in its infancy, when a 
Tamil man in tattered clothes, head gear in hand, two front teeth broken and 
his mouth bleeding, stood before me trembling and weeping. He had been 
heavily belabored by his master. I learnt all about him from my clerk, who was 
a Tamilian. Balasundaram― as that was the visitor’s name ―was serving his 
indenture under a wellDknown European resident of Durban. The master, 
getting angry with him, had lost self control, and has beaten Balasundaram 
severely, breaking two of his teeth. 
 
I sent him to a doctor. In those days only white doctors were available. I 
wanted a certificate from the doctor about the nature of the injury 
Balasundaram had sustained. I secured the certificate, and straightaway took 
the injured man to the magistrate, to whom I submitted his affidavit. The 
magistrate was indignant when he read it, and issued a summons against the 
employer. (AMG, 190D91) 
 
Balasundaram's case reached the ears of every indentured labourer, and I came 
to be regarded as their friend. I hailed this connection with delight. A regular 
stream of indentured labourers began to pour into my office, and Igor the best 
opportunity of learning their joys and sorrows. (AMG, 191D92) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26 It has always been a mystery to me how men can feel themselves honoured by 
the humiliation of their fellowDbeings. (AMG, 192) 
 
If I found myself entirely absorbed in the service of the community, the reason 
behind it was my desire for selfDrealization. I had made the religion of service 
my own, as I felt that God could be realized only through service. And service 
for me was the service of India, because it came to me without my seeking, 
because I had an aptitude for it. I had gone to South Africa for travel, for 
finding an escape from Kathiawar intrigues and for gaining my own livelihood. 
But as I have said, I found myself in search of God and striving for selfD
realization. (AMG, 197) 
 
Hardly ever have I know anybody to cherish such loyalty as I did to the British 
Constitution. I can see now that my love of truth was at the root of this loyalty. 
It has never been possible for me to simulate loyalty or, for that matter, any 
other virtue. The National Anthem used to be sung at every meeting that 
I attended in Natal. I then felt that I must also join in the singing. Not that I 
was unaware of the defects in British rule, but I thought that it was on the 
whole acceptable. In those days I believed that British rule was on the whole 
beneficial to the ruled. 
The colour prejudice that I saw in South Africa was, I thought, quite contrary to 
British traditions, and I believed that it was only temporary and local. I 
therefore vied with Englishmen in loyalty to the throne. With careful 
perseverance I learnt the tune of the 'national anthem' and joined in the 
singing whenever it was sung. Whenever there was an occasion for the 
expression of loyalty without fuss or ostentation, I readily took part in it. 
Never in my life did I exploit this loyalty, never did I seek to gain a selfish end 
by its means. It was for me more in the nature of an obligation, and I rendered 
it without expecting a reward. (AMG, 212) 
 
By now I had been three years in South Africa. I had got to know the people 
and they had got to know me. In 1896 I asked permission to go home for six All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27 months, for I saw that I was in for a long stay there. I had established a fairly 
good practice, and could see that people felt the need of my presence. So I 
made up my mind to go home, fetch my wife and children, and then return and 
settle out there. (AMG, 205) 
 
This was my first voyage with my wife and children ....I believed, at the time 
of which I am writing, that in order to look civilized, our dress and manners 
had as far as possible to approximate to the European standard. Because, I 
thought, only thus could we have some influence, and without influence it 
would not be possible to serve the community .... I therefore determined the 
style of dress for my wife and children .... The Parsis used then to be regarded 
as the most civilized people amongst Indians, and so, when the complete 
European style seemed to be unsuited, we adopted the Parsi style ....In the 
same spirit and with even more reluctance they adopted the use of knives and 
forks. When my infatuation for these signs of civilization wore away, they gave 
up the knives, and forks. After having become long accustomed to the new 
style, it was perhaps no less irksome for them to return to the original mode. 
But I can see today that we feel all the freer and lighter for having cast off the 
tinsel of 'civilization'. (AMG, 229D30) 
 
The ship cast anchor in the port of Durban on the eighteenth or nineteenth of 
December. (AMG, 231) 
 
Our ship was ordered to be put in quarantine until the twentyDthird day of our 
sailing from Bombay. But this quarantine order had more than health reasons 
behind it. 
The white residents of Durban had been agitating for our repatriation, and the 
agitation was one of the reasons for the order..... The real object of the 
quarantine was thus to coerce the passengers into returning to India by 
somehow intimidating them or the agent company. For now threats began to be 
addressed to us also: 'If you do not go back, you will surely be pushed into the 
sea. But if you consent to return, you may even get your passage money back.' I All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28 constantly moved amongst my fellow passengers cheering them up. (AMG, 232D
33) 
 
At last ultimatums were served on the passengers and me. We were asked to 
submit, if we would escape with our lives. In our reply the passengers and I 
both maintained our right to land at Port Natal, and intimated our 
determination to enter Natal at any risk. 
At the end of twentyDthree days the ships were permitted to enter the harbor 
and orders permitting the passengers to land were passed. (AMG, 235) 
 
As soon as we landed, some youngsters recognized me and shouted 'Gandhi, 
Gandhi'. About half a dozen men rushed to the spot and joined in the 
shouting.... As we went ahead, the crowd continued to swell, until it became 
impossible to proceed further.... Then they pelted me with stones, brickbats 
and rotten eggs. Someone snatched away my turban, whilst others began to 
batter and kick me. I fainted and caught hold of the front railings of a house 
and stood there to get my breath. But it was impossible. They came upon me 
boxing and battering. The wife of the Police Superintendent, who knew me, 
happened to be passing by. The brave lady came up, opened her parasol, 
though there was no sun then, and stood between the crowd and me. This 
checked the fury of the mob, as it was difficult for them to deliver blows on 
me without harming Mrs. Alexander. (AMG, 236D37) 
 
The late Mr. Chamberlain, who was then Secretary of State for the Colonies, 
cabled asking the Natal Government to prosecute my assailants. Mr. Escombe 
sent for me, expressed his regret for the injuries I had sustained, and said: 
'Believe me, I cannot feel happy over the least little injury done to your person 
.... If you can identify the assailants, I am prepared to arrest and prosecute 
them. Mr. Chamberlain also desires me to do so.' 
To which I gave the following reply: All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29 'I do not want to prosecute anyone. It is possible that I may be able to identify 
one or two of them, but what is the use of getting them punished? Besides, I do 
not hold the assailants to blame. They were given to understand that I had 
made exaggerated statements in India about the whites in Natal and 
calumniated them. If they believed these reports, it is no wonder that they 
were enraged. The leaders and, if you will permit me to say so, you are to 
blame. You could have guided the people properly, but you also believed 
Reuter and assumed that I must have indulged in exaggeration. I do not want to 
bring anyone to book. I am sure that, when the truth becomes known, they will 
be sorry for their conduct.' (AMG, 239D40) 
 
On the day of landing, as soon as the yellow flag was lowered, a representative 
of The Natal Advertiser  had come to interview me. He had asked me a number 
of questions, and in reply I had been able to refute every one of the charges 
that had been leveled against me..... This interview and my refusal to 
prosecute the assailants produced such a profound impression that the 
Europeans of Durban were ashamed of their conduct. The press declared me to 
be innocent and condemned the mob. Thus the lynching ultimately proved to 
be a blessing for me, that is, for the cause. It enhanced the prestige of the 
Indian community in South Africa and made my work easier. (AMG, 241) 
 
My profession progressed satisfactorily, but that was far from satisfying me... I 
was still ill at ease. I longed for some humanitarian work of a permanent 
nature... So I found time to serve in the small hospital. This meant two hours 
every morning, including the time taken in going to and from the hospital. This 
work brought me some peace. It consisted in ascertaining the patient's 
complaints, laying the facts before the doctor and dispensing the prescriptions. 
It brought me in close touch with suffering Indians, most of them indentured 
Tamil, Telugu or North Indian men. 
The experience stood me in good stead, when during the Boer War I offered my 
services for nursing the sick and wounded soldiers. (AMG, 249D50) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30 The birth of the last child put me to the severest test. The travail came on 
suddenly. The doctor was not immediately available, and some time was lost in 
fetching the midwife. Even if she had been on the spot, she could not have 
helped delivery. I had to see through the safe delivery of the baby. (AMG, 250) 
 
I am convinced that for the proper upbringing of children the parents ought to 
have a general knowledge of the care and nursing of babies. At every step I 
have seen the advantages of my careful study of the subject. My children would 
not have enjoyed the general health that they do today, had I not studied the 
subject and turned my knowledge to account. We labour under a sort of 
superstition that the child has nothing to learn during the first five years of its 
life. On the contrary the fact is that the child never learns in after life what it 
does in its first five years. The education of the child begins with conception. 
(AMG, 250D51) 
 
The couple who realize these things will never have sexual union for the 
fulfillment of their lust, but only when they desire issue. I think it is the height 
of ignorance to believe that the sexual act is an independent function 
necessary like sleeping or eating. The world depends for its existence on the 
act of generation, and as the world is the playground of God and a reflection of 
His glory, the act of generation should be controlled for the ordered growth of 
the world. He who realizes this will control his lust at any cost, equip himself 
with the knowledge necessary for the physical, mental and spiritual wellDbeing 
of his progeny, and give the benefit of that knowledge to posterity. (AMG, 251) 
After full discussion and mature deliberation I took the vow (of brahmacharya ) 
in 1906. I had not shared my thoughts with my wife until then, but only 
consulted her at the time of taking the vow. She had no objection. But I had 
great difficulty in making the final resolve. I had not the necessary strength. 
How was I to control my passions? The elimination of carnal relationship with 
one's wife seemed then a strange thing. But I launched forth with faith in the 
sustaining power of God. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31 As I look back upon the twenty years of the vow, I am filled with pleasure and 
wonderment. The more or less successful practice of selfDcontrol had been 
going on since 1901. But the freedom and joy that came to me after taking the 
vow had never been experienced before 1906. Before the vow I had been open 
to being overcome by temptation at any moment. Now the vow was a sure 
shield against temptation. (AMG, 256) 
 
But if it was a matter of everDincreasing joy, let no one believe that it was an 
easy thing for me. Even when I am past fiftyDsix years, I realize how hard a 
thing it is. Every day I realize more and more that it is like walking on the 
sword's edge, and I see every moment the necessity for eternal vigilance. 
Control of the palate is the first essential in the observance of the vow. I found 
that complete control of the palate made the observance very easy, and so I 
now pursued my dietetic experiments not merely from the vegetarian's but also 
from the brahmachari's point of view. (AMG, 257) 
 
I know it is argued that the soul has nothing to do with what one eats or drinks, 
as the soul neither eats nor drinks; that it is not what you put inside from 
without, but what you express outwardly from within, that matters. There is no 
doubt some force in this. But rather than examine this reasoning, I shall 
content myself with merely declaring my firm conviction that, for the seeker 
who would live in fear of God and who would see Him face to face, restraint in 
diet both as to quantity and quality is as essential as restraint in thought and 
speech. (AMG, 334) 
 
I had started on a life of ease and comfort, but the experiment was short lived. 
Although I had furnished the house with care, yet it failed to have any hold on 
me. So no sooner had I launched forth on that life, than I began to cut down 
expenses. The washerman's bill was heavy, and as he was besides by no means 
noted for his punctuality, even two to three dozen shirts and collars proved 
insufficient for me. Collars had to be changed daily and shirts, if not daily, at 
least every alternate day. This meant a double expense which appeared to me All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32 unnecessary. So I equipped myself with a washing outfit to save it. I bought a 
book on washing, studied the art and taught it also to my wife. This no doubt 
added to my work, but its novelty made it a pleasure. 
I shall never forget the first collar that I washed myself. I had used more starch 
than necessary, the iron had not been made hot enough, and for fear of 
burning the collar I had not pressed it sufficiently. The result was that, though 
the collar was fairly stiff, the superfluous starch continually dropped off it. I 
went to court with the collar on, thus inviting the ridicule of brother barristers, 
but even in those days I could be impervious to ridicule. (AMG, 261) 
 
In the same way, as I freed myself from slavery to the washerman, I threw off 
dependence on the barber. All people who go to England learn there at least 
the art of shaving, but none, to my knowledge, learn to cut their own hair. I 
had to learn that too. I once went to an English hairDcutter in Pretoria. He 
contemptuously refused to cut my hair. I certainly felt hurt, but immediately 
purchased a pair of clippers and cut my hair before the mirror. I succeeded 
more or less in cutting the front hair, but I spoiled the back. The friends in the 
court shook with laughter. 
'What's wrong with your hair, Gandhi? Rats have been at it?' 
'No. The white barber would not condescend to touch my black hair,' said I, 'so I 
preferred to cut it myself no matter how badly.' 
The reply did not surprise the friends. 
The barber was not at fault in having refused to cut my hair. There was every 
chance of his losing his custom, if he should serve black men. (AMG, 262D63) 
 
When the war [Boer] was declared, my personal sympathies were all with the 
Boers but I believed then that I had yet no right, in such cases, to enforce my 
individual convictions. I have minutely dealt with the inner struggle regarding 
this in my history of the Satyagraha  in South Africa, and I must not repeat the 
argument here. I invite the curious to turn to those pages. Suffice it to say that 
my loyalty to the British rule drove me to participation with the British in that All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33 war. I felt that, if I demanded rights as a British citizen, it was also my duty, as 
such, to participate in the defense of the British Empire. I held then that India 
could achieve her complete emancipation only within and through the British 
Empire. So I collected together as many comrades as possible, and with very 
great difficulty got their services accepted as an ambulance corps. (AMG, 264) 
 
Thus service of the Indians in South Africa ever revealed to me new 
implications of truth at every stage. Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more 
and more fruit the more you nurture it. The deeper the search in the mine of 
truth the richer the discovery of the gems buried there, in the shape of 
openings for an ever greater variety of service. (AMG, 268) 
 
Man and his deed are two distinct things. Whereas a good deed should call 
forth approbation and a wicked deed disapprobation, the doer of the deed, 
whether good or wicked, always deserves respect or pity as the case may be. 
'Hate the sin and not the sinner' is a precept which, though easy enough to 
understand is rarely practised, and that is why the poison of hatred spreads in 
the world. 
This ahimsa  is the basis of the search for truth. I am realizing every day that 
the search is vain unless it is founded on ahimsa  as the basis. It is quite proper 
to resist and attack a system, but to resist and attack its author is tantamount 
to resisting and attacking oneself. For we are all tarred with the same brush, 
and are children of one and the same Creator, and as such the divine powers 
within us are infinite. To slight a single human being is to slight those divine 
powers, and thus to harm not only that being but with him the whole world. 
(AMG, 337) 
 
A variety of incidents in my life have conspired to bring me in close contact 
with people of many creeds and many communities, and my experience with all 
of them warrants the statement that I have known no distinction between 
relatives and strangers, countrymen and foreigners, white and coloured, Hindus 
and Indians of other faiths, whether Mussalmans, Parsis, Christians or Jews. I All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34 may say that my heart has been incapable of making any such distinctions. 
(AMG, 338) 
 
I am not a profound scholar of Sanskrit. I have read the Vedas and 
the Upanishads only in translations. Naturally, therefore, mine is not a 
scholarly study of them. My knowledge of them is in no way profound, but I 
have studied them as I should do as a Hindu and I claim to have grasped their 
true spirit. By the time I had reached the age of twentyDone, I had studied 
other religions also. 
There was a time when I was wavering between Hinduism and Christianity. 
When I recovered my balance of mind, I felt that to me salvation was possible 
only through the Hindu religion and my faith in Hinduism grew deeper and more 
enlightened. 
But even then I believed that untouchability was not part of Hinduism; and 
that, if it was, such Hinduism was not for me. (MT, II, 49) 
 
I understand more clearly today what I read long ago about the inadequacy of 
all autobiography as history. I know that I do not set down in this story all that I 
remember. Who can say how much I must give and how much omit in the 
interest of truth? And what would be the value in a court of law of the 
inadequate ex parte  evidence being tendered by me of certain events in my 
life? If some busybody were to crossDexamine me on the chapters already 
written, he could probably shed much more light on them, and if it were a 
hostile critic's crossDexamination, he might even flatter himself for having 
shown up 'the hollowness of many of my pretensions'. 
I therefore wonder for a moment whether it might not be proper to stop 
writing these chapters. But so long as there is no prohibition from the voice 
within, I must continue the writing. I must follow the sage maxim that nothing 
once begun should be abandoned unless it is proved to be morally wrong. 
(AMG, 342) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35 In the very first month of Indian Opinion  (A journal founded by Gandhi in South 
Africa), I realized that the sole aim of journalism should be service. The 
newspaper press is a great power, but just as an unchained torrent of water 
submerges whole countryside's and devastates crops, even so an uncontrolled 
pen serves but to destroy. If the control is from without, it proves more 
poisonous than want of control. It can be profitable only when exercised from 
within. If this line of reasoning is correct, how many of the journals in the 
world would stand the test? But who would stop those that are useless? And 
who should be the judge? The useful and the useless must, like good and evil 
generally, go on together, and man must make his choice. (AMG, 349) 
 
This [ Unto This Last ] was the first book of Ruskin I had ever read. During the 
days of my education I had read practically nothing outside textbooks, and 
after I launched into active life I had very little time for reading. I cannot 
therefore claim much book knowledge. However, I believe I have not lost much 
because of this enforced restraint. On the contrary, the limited reading may be 
said to have enabled me thoroughly to digest what I did read. Of these books, 
the one that brought about an instantaneous and practical transformation in 
my life was Unto This Last . I translated it later into Gujarati, entitling 
it Sarvodaya  (the welfare of all). 
I believe that I discovered some of my deepest convictions reflected in this 
great book of Ruskin, and that is why it so captured me and made me transform 
my life. A poet is one who can call forth the good latent in the human breast. 
Poets do not influence all alike, for everyone is not evolved in an equal 
measure. (AMG, 364D65) 
 
Even after I thought I had settled down in Johannesburg, there was to be no 
settled life for me. Just when I felt that I should be breathing in peace, an 
unexpected event happened. The papers brought the news of the outbreak of 
the Zulu 'rebellion' in Natal. I bore no grudge against the Zulus, they had 
harmed no Indian. I had doubts about the 'rebellion' itself. But I then believed 
that the British Empire existed for the welfare of the world. A genuine sense of All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36 loyalty prevented me from even wishing ill to the Empire. The rightness or 
otherwise of the 'rebellion' was therefore not likely to affect my decision. Natal 
had a Volunteer Defense Force, and it was open to it to recruit more men. I 
read that this force had already been mobilized to quell the 'rebellion'. (AMG, 
383) 
 
On reaching the scene of the 'rebellion' I saw that there was nothing there to 
justify the name of 'rebellion'. There was no resistance that one could see. The 
reason why the disturbance had been magnified into a rebellion was that a Zulu 
chief had advised nonDpayment of a new tax imposed on his people, and had 
assagaied a sergeant who had gone to collect the tax. At any rate my heart was 
with the Zulus, and I was delighted, on reaching headquarters, to hear that our 
main work was to be the nursing of the wounded Zulus. The medical officer in 
charge welcomed us. He said the white people were not willing nurses for the 
wounded Zulus, that their wounds were festering, and that he was at his wits' 
end. He hailed our arrival as a godsend for those innocent people, and he 
equipped us with bandages, disinfectants, etc., and took us to the improvised 
hospital. The Zulus were delighted to see us. White soldiers used to peep 
through the railings that separated us from them and tried to dissuade us from 
attending to the wounds. And as we would not heed them, they became 
enraged and poured unspeakable abuse on the Zulus. (AMG, 384) 
 
The wounded in our charge were not wounded in battle. A section of them had 
been taken prisoners as suspects. The general had sentenced them to be 
flogged. The flogging had caused severe sores. These, being unattended to, 
were festering. The others were Zulu friendlies. Although these had badges 
given them to distinguish them from the 'enemy' they had been shot at by the 
soldiers by mistake. (AMG, 385) 
 
The Zulu 'rebellion' was full of new experiences and gave me much food for 
thought. The Boer War had not brought home to me the horrors of war with 
anything like the vividness that the 'rebellion' did. This was no war but a manDAll Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37 hunt, not only in my opinion, but also in that of many Englishmen with whom I 
had occasion to talk. To hear every morning reports of soldiers' rifles exploding 
like crackers in innocent hamlets, and to live in the midst of them was a trial. 
But I swallowed the bitter draught, especially as the work of my Corps 
consisted only in nursing the wounded Zulus. I could see that but for us the 
Zulus would have been uncared for. This work, therefore, eased my 
conscience. (AMG, 386) 
 
I was anxious to observe brahmacharya  in thought, word and deed, and equally 
anxious to devote the maximum time to the Satyagraha  struggle and fit myself 
for it by cultivating purity. I was therefore led to make further changes and to 
impose greater restraints upon myself in the matter of food. The motive for the 
previous changes had been largely hygienic, but the new experiments were 
made from a religious standpoint. 
Fasting and restriction in diet now played a more important part in my life. 
Passion in man is generally coDexistent with a hankering after the pleasures of 
the palate. And so it was with me. I have encountered many difficulties in 
trying to control passion as well as taste, and I cannot claim even now to have 
brought them under complete subjection. I have considered myself to be a 
heavy eater. What friends have thought to be my restraint has never appeared 
to me in that light. If I had failed to develop restraint to the extent that I have, 
I should have descended lower than the beasts and met my doom long ago. 
However, as I had adequately realized my shortcomings, I made great efforts to 
get rid of them, and thanks to this endeavour I have all these years pulled on 
with my body and put in with it my share of work. (AMG, 391) 
 
I began with a fruit diet, but from the standpoint of restraint I did not find 
much to choose between a fruit diet and a diet of food grains. I observed that 
the same indulgence of taste was possible with the former as with the latter, 
and even more, when one got accustomed to it. I therefore came to attach 
greater importance to fasting or having only one meal a day on holidays. And if All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38 there was some occasion for penance or the like, I gladly utilized it too for the 
purpose of fasting. 
But I also saw that, the body now being drained more effectively, the food 
yielded greater relish and appetite grew keener. It dawned upon me that 
fasting could be made as powerful a weapon of indulgence as of restraint. Many 
similar later experiences of mine as well as of others can be adduced as 
evidence of this startling fact. I wanted to improve and train my body, but as 
my chief object now was to achieve restraint and a conquest of the palate, I 
selected first one food and then another, and at the same time, restricted the 
amount. But the relish was after me, as it were. As I gave up one thing and 
took up another, this latter afforded me a fresher and greater relish than its 
predecessor. (AMG, 391D92) 
 
Experience has taught me, however, that it was wrong to have dwelt upon the 
relish of food. One should eat not in order to please the palate, but just to 
keep the body going. When each organ of sense subserves the body and through 
the body the soul, its special relish disappears, and then alone does it begin to 
function in the way nature intended it to do. 
Any number of experiments is too small and no sacrifice is too great for 
attaining this symphony with nature. But unfortunately the current is nowadays 
flowing strongly in the opposite direction. We are not ashamed to sacrifice a 
multitude of other lives in decorating the perishable body and trying to prolong 
its existence for a few fleeting moments, with the result that we kill ourselves, 
both body and soul. (AMG, 392D93) 
 
My first experience of jail life was in 1908. I saw that some of the regulations 
that the prisoners had to observe were such as should be voluntarily observed 
by a brahmachari  that is, one desiring to practice selfDrestraint. Such, for 
instance, was the regulation requiring the last meal to be finished before 
sunset. Neither the Indian nor the African prisoners were allowed tea or coffee. 
They could add salt to the cooked food if they wished, but they might not have All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39 anything for the mere satisfaction of the palate. (AMG, 398) 
 
Ultimately these restrictions were modified, though not without much 
difficulty, but both were wholesome rules of selfDrestraint. Inhibitions imposed 
from without rarely succeed, but when they are selfDimposed, they have a 
decidedly salutary effect. So, immediately after release from jail, I imposed on 
myself the two rules. As far as was then possible I stopped taking tea, and 
finished my last meal before sunset. Both these now require no effort in the 
observance. (AMG, 398) 
 
Fasting can help to curb animal passion, only if it is undertaken with a view to 
selfDrestraint. Some of my friends have actually found their animal passion and 
palate stimulated as an afterDeffect of fasts. That is to say, fasting is futile 
unless it is accompanied by an incessant longing for selfDrestraint. (AMG, 406) 
 
Fasting and similar discipline is, therefore, one of the means to the end of selfD
restraint, but it is not all, and if physical fasting is not accompanied by mental 
fasting, it is bound to end in hypocrisy and disaster. (AMG, 406) 
 
On Tolstoy Farm (Tolstoy Farm and the Phoenix Colony were the two 
settlements or ashrams  founded by Gandhi in South Africa where he and his coD
workers lived a life of selfDdiscipline and service) we made it a rule that the 
youngsters should not be asked to do what the teachers did not do, and 
therefore, when they were asked to do any work, there was always a teacher 
coDoperating and actually working with them. Hence whatever the youngsters 
learnt, they learnt cheerfully. (AMG, 409) 
 
Of textbooks, about which we hear so much, I never felt the want. I do not 
even remember having made much use of the books that were available. I did 
not find it at all necessary to load the boys with quantities of books. I have 
always felt that the true textbook for the pupil is his teacher. I remember very All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40 little that my teachers taught me from books, but I have even now a clear 
recollection of the things they taught mc independently of books. 
Children take in much more and with less labour through their ears than 
through their eyes. I do not remember having read any book from cover to 
cover with my boys. But I gave them, in my own language, all that I had 
digested from my reading of various books, and l dare say they are still carrying 
a recollection of it in their minds. It was laborious for them to remember what 
they learnt from books, but what I imparted to them by word of mouth they 
could repeat with the greatest case. Reading was a task for them, but listening 
to me was a pleasure, when I did not bore them by failure to make my subject 
interesting. And from the questions that my talks prompted them to put, I had 
a measure of their power of understanding. (AMG, 411D12) 
 
Just as physical training was to be imparted through physical exercise, even so 
the training of the spirit was possible only through the exercise of the spirit. 
And the exercise of the spirit entirely depended on the life and character of 
the teacher. The teacher had always to be mindful of his p's and q's, whether 
he was in the midst of his boys or not. (AMG, 414) 
 
It would be idle for me, if I were a liar, to teach boys to tell the truth. A 
cowardly teacher would never succeed in making his boys valiant, and a 
stranger to selfDrestraint could never teach his pupils the value of selfD
restraint. I saw, therefore, that I must be an eternal objectDlesson to the boys 
and girls living with me. They thus became my teachers, and I learnt I must be 
good and live straight if only for their sakes. I may say that the increasing 
discipline and restraint I imposed on myself at Tolstoy Farm was mostly due to 
those wards of mine. 
One of them was wild, unruly, given to lying, and quarrelsome. On one 
occasion he broke out most violently. I was exasperated. I never punished my 
boys, but this time I was very angry. I tried to reason with him. But he was 
adamant and even tried to overreach me. At last I picked up a ruler lying at 
hand and delivered a blow on his arm. I trembled as I struck him. I dare say he All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41 noticed it. This was an entirely novel experience for them all. The boy cried 
out and begged to be forgiven. He cried not because the beating was painful to 
him; he could, if he had been so minded, have paid me back in the same coin, 
being a stoutly built youth of seventeen; but he realized my pain in being 
driven to this violent resource. Never again after this incident did he disobey 
me. But I still repent that violence. I am afraid I exhibited before him that day 
not the spirit, but the brute, in me. 
I have always been opposed to corporal punishment. I remember only one 
occasion on which I physically punished one of my sons. I have therefore never 
until this day been able to decide whether I was right or wrong in using the 
ruler. Probably it was improper, for it was prompted by anger and a desire to 
punish. Had it been an expression only of my distress, I should have considered 
it justified. But the motive in this case was mixed. (AMG, 414D15) 
 
Cases of misconduct on the part of the boys often occurred after this, but I 
never resorted to corporal punishment. Thus in my endeavour to impart 
spiritual training to the boys and girls under me, I came to understand better 
and better the power of the spirit. (AMG, 415) 
 
In those days I had to move between Johannesburg and Phoenix. Once when I 
was in Johannesburg I received tidings of the moral fall of two of the inmates 
of the ashram. News of an apparent failure or reverse in 
the Satyagraha struggle would not have shocked me, but this news came upon 
me like a thunderbolt. The same day I took the train for Phoenix. (AMG, 418) 
 
During the journey my duty seemed clear to me. I felt that the guardian or 
teacher was responsible, to some extent at least, for the lapse of his ward or 
pupil. So my responsibility regarding the incident in question became clear to 
me as daylight. My wife had already warned me in the matter, but being of a 
trusting nature, I had ignored her caution. I felt that the only way the guilty 
parties could be made to realize my distress and the depth of their own fall 
would be for me to do some penance. So I imposed upon myself a fast for seven All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42 days and a vow to have only one meal a day for a period of four months and 
a half. (AMG, 418D19) 
 
My penance pained everybody, but it cleared the atmosphere. Everyone came 
to realize what a terrible thing it was to be sinful, and the bond that bound me 
to the boys and girls became stronger and truer. (AMG, 419) 
 
I never resorted to untruth in my profession, and....a large part of my legal 
practice was in the interest of public work, for which I charged nothing beyond 
outDofDpocket expenses, and these too I sometimes met myself.... As a student 
I had heard that the lawyer's profession was a liar's profession. But this did not 
influence me, as I had no intention of earning either position or money by 
lying.... My principle was put to the test many a time in South Africa. Often I 
knew that my opponents had tutored their witnesses and if I only encouraged 
my client or his witnesses to lie, we could win the case. But I always resisted 
the temptation. I remember only one occasion, when, after having won a case, 
I suspected that my client had deceived me. In my heart of hearts I always 
wished that I should win only if my client's case was right. In fixing my fees I do 
not recall ever having made them conditional on my winning the case. Whether 
my client won or lost, I expected nothing more nor less than my fees. 
I warned every new client at the outset that he should not expect me to take 
up a false case or to coach the witnesses, with the result that I built up such a 
reputation that no false cases used to come to me. Indeed some of my clients 
would keep their clean cases for me, and take the doubtful ones elsewhere. 
(AMG, 443D44) 
 
During my professional work it was also my habit never to conceal my 
ignorance from my clients or my colleagues. Wherever I felt myself at sea, I 
would advise my client to consult some other counsel. This frankness earned 
me the unbounded affection and trust of my clients. They were always willing 
to pay the fee whenever consultation with senior counsel was necessary. This All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43 affection and trust served me in good stead in my public work. (AMG, 449) 
 
At the conclusion of the Satyagraha  struggle in 1914, I received Gokhale's 
instruction to return home via London... War was declared on the fourth of 
August. We reached London on the sixth. (AMG, 421D23) 
 
I felt that Indians residing in England ought to do their bit in the war. English 
students had volunteered to serve in the army, and Indians might do no less. A 
number of objections were taken to this line of argument. There was, it was 
contended, a world of difference between the Indians and the English. We 
were slaves and they were masters. How could a slave coDoperate with the 
master in the hour of the latter's need? Was it not the duty of the slave, 
seeking to be free, to make the master's need his opportunity? This argument 
failed to appeal to me then. I knew the difference of status between an Indian 
and an Englishman, but I did not believe that we had been quite reduced to 
slavery. I felt then that it was more the fault of individual British officials than 
of the British system, and that we could convert them by love. If we would 
improve our status through the help and coDoperation of the British, it was our 
duty to win their help by standing by them in their hour of need. Though the 
system was faulty, it did not seem to me to be intolerable as it does today. But 
if, having lost my faith in the system, I refuse to coDoperate With the British 
Government today, how could those friends then do so, having lost their faith 
not only in the system but in the officials as well? (AMG, 424D25) 
 
I thought that England's need should not be turned into our opportunity, and 
that it was more becoming and farsighted not to press our demands while the 
war lasted. I therefore adhered to my advice and invited those who would 
enlist as volunteers. (AMG, 425) 
 
All of us recognized the immorality of war. If I was not prepared to prosecute 
my assailant, much less should I be willing to participate in a war, especially 
when I knew nothing of the justice or otherwise of the cause of the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44 combatants. Friends of course knew that I had previously served in the Boer 
War, but they assumed that my views had since undergone a change. 
As a matter of fact the very same line of argument that persuaded me to take 
part in the Boer War had weighed with me on this occasion. It was quite clear 
to me that participation in war could never be consistent with ahimsa . But it is 
not always given to one to be equally clear about one's duty. A votary of truth 
is often obliged to grope in the dark. (AMG, 427) 
 
By enlisting men for ambulance work in South Africa and in England, and 
recruits for field service in India, I helped not the cause of war, but I helped 
the institution called the British Empire in whose ultimate beneficial character 
I then believed. My repugnance to war was as strong then as it is today; and I 
could not then have and would not have shouldered a rifle. But one's life is not 
a single straight line; it is a bundle of duties very often conflicting. And one is 
called upon continually to make one's choice between one duty and another. As 
a citizen not then, and not even now, a reformer leading an agitation against 
the institution of war, I had to advise and lead men who believed in war but 
who from cowardice or from base motives, or from anger against the British 
Government, refrained from enlisting. I did not hesitate to advise them that so 
long as they believed in war and professed loyalty to the British constitution 
they were in duty bound to support it by enlistment.... I do not believe in 
retaliation, but I did not hesitate to tell the villagers near Bettia four years ago 
that they who knew nothing of ahimsa  were guilty of cowardice in failing to 
defence the honour of their womenfolk and their property by force of arms. 
And I have not hesitated....only recently to tell the Hindus that if they do not 
believe in outDandDout ahimsa  and cannot practise it they will be guilty of a 
crime against their religion and humanity if they failed to defend by force of 
arms the honour of their women against a kidnapper who chooses to take away 
their women. And all this advice and my previous practice I hold to be not only 
consistent with my profession of the religion of ahimsa  outDandDout, but a 
direct result of it. To state that noble doctrine is simple enough; to know it and 
to practise it in the midst of a world full of strife, turmoil and passions is a task All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45 whose difficulty I realize more and more day by day. And yet the conviction too 
that without it life is not worth living is growing daily deeper. (SB, 167D68) 
 
There is no defence for my conduct weighed only in the scales of ahimsa , I 
draw no distinction between those who wield the weapons of destruction and 
those who do Red Cross work. Both participate in war and advance its cause. 
Both are guilty of the crime of war. But even after introspection during all 
these years, I feel that in the circumstances in which I found myself I was 
bound to adopt the course I did both during the Boer War and the Great 
European War and for that matter the soDcalled Zulu 'Rebellion' of Natal in 
1906. 
Life is governed by a multitude of forces. It would be smooth sailing, if one 
could determine the course of one's actions only by one general principle 
whose application at a given moment was too obvious to need even a moment's 
reflection. But I cannot recall a single act which could be so easily determined. 
Being a confirmed war resister I have never given myself training in the use of 
destructive weapons in spite of opportunities to take such training. It was 
perhaps thus that I escaped direct destruction of human life. But so long as I 
lived under a system of government based on force and voluntarily partook of 
the many facilities and privileges it created for me, I was bound to help that 
government to the extent of my ability when it was engaged in a war unless I 
nonDcoDoperated with that government and renounced to the utmost of my 
capacity the privileges it offered me. Let me take an illustration. I am a 
member of an institution which holds a few acres of land whose crops are in 
imminent peril from monkeys. I believe in the sacredness of all life and hence I 
regard it a breach of ahimsa  to inflict any injury on the monkeys. But I do not 
hesitate to instigate and direct an attack on the monkeys in order to save 
crops. I would like to avoid this evil. I can avoid it by leaving or breaking up the 
institution. I do not do so because I do not expect to be able to find a society 
where there will be no agriculture and therefore no destruction of some life. In 
fear and trembling, in humility and penance, I therefore participate in the 
injury inflicted on the monkeys, hoping some day to find a way out. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46 Even so did I participate in the three acts of war. I could not, it would be 
madness for me to sever my connections with the society to which I belong. 
And on those three occasions I had no thought of nonDcoDoperating with the 
British Government. My position regarding the government is totally different 
today and hence I should not voluntarily participate in its wars and I should risk 
imprisonment and even the gallows if I was forced to take up arms or otherwise 
take part in its military operations. But that still does not solve the riddle. If 
there was a national government, whilst I should not take any direct part in any 
war I can conceive occasions when it would be my duty to vote for the military 
training of those who wish to take it. For I know that all its members do not 
believe in nonDviolence to the extent I do. It is not possible to make a person or 
a society nonDviolent by compulsion. 
NonDviolence works in a most mysterious manner. Often a man's actions defy 
analysis in terms of nonDviolence; equally often his actions may wear the 
appearance of violence when he is absolutely nonDviolent in the highest sense 
of the term and is subsequently found so to be. All I can then claim for my 
conduct is that it was in the instances cited actuated in the interests of nonD
violence. There was no thought of sordid national or other interest. I do not 
believe in the promotion of national or any other interest. I do not believe in 
the promotion of national or any other interest at the sacrifice of some other 
interest. 
I may not carry my argument any further. Language at best is but a poor 
vehicle for expressing one's thoughts in full. For me nonDviolence is not a mere 
philosophical principle. It is the rule and the breath of my life. I know I fail 
often, sometimes consciously, more often unconsciously. It is a matter not of 
the intellect but of the heart. True guidance comes by constant waiting upon 
God, by utmost humility, selfDabnegation, by being ever ready to sacrifice one's 
self. It's practice requires fearlessness and courage of the highest order. I am 
painfully aware of my failings. 
But the Light within me is steady and clear, there is no escape for any of us 
saves through truth and nonDviolence. I know that war is wrong, is an 
unmitigated evil. I know too that it has got to go. I firmly believe that freedom All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47 won through bloodshed or fraud is no freedom. Would that all the acts alleged 
against me were found to be wholly indefensible rather than that by any act of 
mine nonDviolence was held to be compromised or that I was ever thought to be 
in favour of violence or untruth in any shape or form! Not violence, not untruth 
but nonDviolence, Truth is the law of our being. (SB, 168D70) 
 
I am conscious of my own limitations. That consciousness is my only strength. 
Whatever I might have been able to do in my life has proceeded more than 
anything else out of the realization of my own limitations. (SB, 214) 
 
I am used to misrepresentation all my life. It is the lot of every public worker. 
He has to have a tough hide. Life would be burdensome if every 
misrepresentation has to be answered and cleared. It is a rule of life with me 
never to explain misrepresentations except when the cause required 
correction. This rule has saved much time and worry. (SB, 214) 
 
The only virtue I want to claim is truth and nonDviolence. I lay no claim to 
superhuman powers. I want none. I wear the same corruptible flesh that the 
weakest of my fellow beings wears and am liable to err as any. My services 
have many limitations, but God has up to now blessed them in spite of the 
imperfections. 
For, confession of error is like a broom that sweeps away dirt and leaves the 
surface cleaner than before. I feel stronger for my confession. And the cause 
must prosper for the retracing. Never has man reached his destination by 
persistence in deviation from the straight path. (MT, II, 113) 
 
The mahatma I leave to his fate. Though a nonDcoDoperator I shall gladly 
subscribe to a Bill to make it criminal for anybody to call me mahatma and to 
touch my feet. Where I can impose the law myself, at the ashram , the practice 
is criminal. (MT, II, 340) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48 The time has now come to bring these chapters to a close... My life from this 
point onward has been so public that there is hardly anything about it that 
people do not know... My life has been an open book. I have no secrets and I 
encourage no secrets. (AMG, 614; see also MM, 4) 
 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there is no other God than 
Truth. And if every page of these chapters does not proclaim to the reader that 
the only means for the realization of Truth is ahimsa , I shall deem all my labour 
in writing these chapters to have been in vain. And, even though my efforts in 
this behalf may prove fruitless, let the readers know that the vehicle, not the 
great principle, is at fault. (AMG, 615) 
 
Ever since my return to India I have had the experiences of the dormant 
passions lying hidden within me. The knowledge of them has made me feel 
humiliated though not defeated. The experiences and experiments have 
sustained me and given me great joy. But I know that I have still before me a 
difficult path to traverse. I must reduce myself to zero. So long as a man does 
not of his own free will put himself last among his fellow creatures, there is no 
salvation for him. Ahimsa is the farthest limit of humility. (AMG, 616) 
 
I have become literally sick of the adoration of the unthinking multitude. I 
would feel certain of my ground if I was spat upon by them. Then there would 
be no need for confession of Himalayan and other miscalculations, no 
retracing, no reDarranging. (MM, 7) 
 
I have no desire for prestige anywhere. It is furniture required in courts of 
kings. I am a servant of Mussalman, Christians, Parsis and Jews as I am of 
Hindus. And a servant is in need of love, not prestige. That is assured to me so 
long as I remain a faithful servant. (MM, 8) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49 Somehow or other I dread a visit to Europe and America. Not that I distrust the 
peoples of these great continents any more than I distrust my own, but I 
distrust myself. I have no desire to go to the West in search of health or for 
sightseeing. I have no desire to deliver public speeches. I detest being lionized. 
I wonder if I shall ever again have the health to stand the awful strain of public 
speaking and public demonstrations. If God ever sent me to the West, I should 
go there to penetrate the hearts of the masses, to have quiet talks with the 
youth of the West and have the privilege of meeting kindred spirits ―lovers of 
peace at any price save that of truth. 
But I feel that I have as yet no message to deliver personally to the West. I 
believe my message to be universal but as yet I feel that I can best deliver it 
through my work in my own country. If I can show visible success in India, the 
delivery of the message becomes complete. If I came to the conclusion that 
India had no use for my message, I should not care to go elsewhere in search of 
listeners even though I still retained faith in it. If I ventured out of India, I 
should do so because I have faith, though I cannot demonstrate it to the 
satisfaction of all, that the message is being received by India, be it ever so 
slowly.  
Thus whilst I was hesitatingly carrying on the correspondence with friends who 
had invited me, I saw that there was need for me to go to Europe, if only to 
see Romain Rolland. Owing to my distrust of myself over a general visit, I 
wanted to make my visit to that wise man of the West the primary cause of my 
journey to Europe. I, therefore, referred my difficulty to him and asked him in 
the frankest manner possible whether he would let me make my desire to meet 
him the primary cause of my visit to Europe. He says that in the name of truth 
itself, he will not think of letting me go to Europe if a visit to him is to be the 
primary cause. He will not let me interrupt my labors here for the sake of our 
meeting. Apart from this visit I felt within me no imperative call. I regret my 
decision but it seems to be the correct one. For whilst there is no urge within 
to go to Europe, there is an incessant call within for so much to do here. (MT, 
II, 417) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50 I hold myself to be incapable of hating any being on earth. By a long course of 
prayerful discipline, I have ceased for over forty years to hate anybody. I know 
this is a big claim. Nevertheless, I make it in all humility. But I can and do hate 
evil wherever it exists. I hate the system of government that the British people 
have set up in India. I hate the ruthless exploitation of India even as I hate 
from the bottom of my heart the hideous system of untouchability for which 
millions of Hindus have made themselves responsible. But I do not hate the 
domineering Englishmen as I refuse to hate the domineering Hindus. I seek to 
reform them in all the loving ways that are open to me. (SB, 150) 
 
Some days back a calf having been maimed lay in agony in the ashram . 
Whatever treatment and nursing was possible was given to it. The surgeon 
whose advice was sought in the matter declared the case to be past help and 
past hope. The suffering of the animal was so great that it could not even turn 
its side without excruciating pain. 
In these circumstances I felt that humanity demanded that the agony should be 
ended by ending life itself. The matter was placed before the whole ashram . At 
the discussion, a worthy neighbor vehemently opposed the idea of killing even 
to end pain. The ground of his opposition was that one has no right to take life 
which one cannot create. His argument seemed to me to be pointless here. It 
would have point, if the taking of life was actuated by selfDinterest. Finally in 
all humility but with the clearest of convictions I got in my presence a doctor 
kindly to administer the calf a quietus by means of a poison injection. The 
whole thing was over in less than two minutes. 
I knew that public opinion especially in Ahmedabad would not approve of my 
action and that it would read nothing but himsa in it. But I know too that 
performance of one's duty should be independent of public opinion. I have all 
along held that one is bound to act according to what to one appears to be 
right, though it may appear wrong to others. And experience has shown that 
that is the only correct course. That is why the poet has sung: 'The pathway of 
love is the ordeal of fire, the shrinkers turn away from it.' The pathway 
of ahimsa , that is, of love, one has often to tread all alone. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51 The question may legitimately be put to me: Would I apply to human beings the 
principle I have enunciated in connection with the calf? Would I like it to be 
applied in my own case? My reply is 'Yes'; the same law holds good in both the 
cases. The law, 'as with one so with all', admits of no exceptions, or the killing 
of the calf was wrong and violent. In practice, however, we do not cut short 
the sufferings of our ailing dear ones by death because, as a rule, we have 
always means at our disposal to help them and they have the capacity to think 
and decide for themselves. But supposing that in the case of an ailing friend, I 
am unable to render any aid and recovery is out of the question and the patient 
is lying in an unconscious state in the throes of agony, then I would not see 
any himsa  in putting an end to his suffering by death. 
Just as a surgeon does not commit himsa  but practices the purest ahimsa  when 
he wields his knife, one may find it necessary, under certain imperative 
circumstances, to go a step further and sever life from the body in the interest 
of the sufferer. It may be objected that whereas the surgeon performs his 
operation to save the life of the patient, in the other case we do just the 
reverse. But on a deeper analysis it will be found that the ultimate object 
sought to be served in both the cases is the same, namely, to relieve the 
suffering soul within from pain. In the one case you do it by severing the 
diseased portion from the body, in the other you do it by severing from the soul 
the body that has become an instrument of torture to it. In either case it is the 
relief of the soul from pain that is aimed at, the body without the life within 
being incapable of feeling either pleasure or pain. Other circumstances can be 
imagined in which not to kill would spell himsa , while killing would be ahimsa . 
Suppose, for instance, that I find my daughter, whose wish at the moment I 
have no means of ascertaining, is threatened with violation and there is no way 
by which I can save her, then it would be the purest form of ahimsa  on my part 
to put an end to her life and surrender myself to the fury of the incensed 
ruffian. 
The trouble with our votaries of ahimsa  is that they have made of ahimsa  a 
blind fetish and put the greatest obstacle in the way of the spread of 
true ahimsa  in our midst. The current ―and, in my opinion, mistaken ―view All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52 of ahimsa  has drugged our conscience and rendered us insensible to a host of 
other and more insidious forms of himsa  like harsh words, harsh judgments, ill 
will, anger, spite and lust of cruelty; it has made us forget that there may be 
far more himsa  in the slow torture of men and animals, the starvation and 
exploitation to which they are subjected out of selfish greed, the wanton 
humiliation and oppression of the weak and the killing of their selfDrespect that 
we witness all around us today, than in mere benevolent taking of life. Does 
anyone doubt for a moment that it would have been far more humane to have 
summarily put to death those who in the infamous lane of Amritsar were made 
by their tortures to crawl on their bellies like worms? If anyone desires to 
retort by saying that these people themselves today feel otherwise, that they 
are none the worse for crawling, I shall have no hesitation in telling him that 
he does not know even the elements of ahimsa . There arise occasions in a 
man's life when it becomes his imperative duty to meet them by laying down 
his life; not to appreciate this fundamental fact of man's estate is to betray an 
ignorance of the foundation of ahimsa . For instance, a votary of truth would 
pray to God to give him death to save him from a life of falsehood. Similarly a 
votary of ahimsa  would on bent knees implore his enemy to put him to death 
rather than humiliate him or make him do things unbecoming the dignity of a 
human being. As the poet has sung: 'The Way of the Lord is meant for heroes, 
not for cowards.' 
It is this fundamental misconception about the nature and the scope of ahimsa , 
this confusion about the relative values, that is responsible for our mistaking 
mere nonDkilling for ahimsa  and for the fearful amount of himsa that goes on in 
the name of ahimsa  in our country. (MT, II, 421D23) 
 
Truth to me is infinitely dearer than the 'mahatmaship', which is purely a 
burden. It is my knowledge of my limitations and my nothingness which has so 
far saved me from the oppressiveness of 'mahatma ship'. I am painfully aware 
of the fact that my desire to continue life in the body involves me in 
constant himsa , that is why I am becoming growingly indifferent to this 
physical body of mine. For instance, I know that in the act of respiration I All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53 destroy innumerable invisible germs floating in the air. I But I do not stop 
breathing. The consumption of vegetables involves himsa  but I cannot give 
them up. Again, there is himsa  in the use of antiseptics yet I cannot bring 
myself to discard the use of disinfectants like the kerosene, to rid myself of the 
mosquito pest and the like. I suffer snakes to be killed in the ashram  when it is 
impossible to catch and put them out of harm's way. I even tolerate the use of 
the stick to drive the bullocks in the ashram . Thus there is no end 
of himsa  which I directly and indirectly commit. And now I find myself 
confronted with this monkey problem. Let me assure the reader that I am in no 
hurry to take the extreme step of killing them. In fact I am not sure that I 
would at all be able finally to make up my mind to kill them. But I cannot 
promise that I shall never kill the monkeys even though they may destroy all 
the crop in the ashram . If as a result of this confession of mine, friends choose 
to give me up as lost I would be sorry, but nothing will induce me to try to 
conceal my imperfections in the practice of ahimsa . All I claim for myself is 
that I am ceaselessly trying to understand the implications of great ideals 
like ahimsa  and to practice them in thought, word and deed and that not 
without a certain measure of success, as I think. But I know that I have a long 
distance yet to cover in this direction. (MT, II, 425D26) 
 
I am a poor mendicant. My earthly possessions consist of six spinning wheels, 
prison dishes, a can of goat's milk, six homespun loinDcloths and towels, and my 
reputation which cannot be worth much. (To the customs official at Marseilles, 
11 September 1931.) (MT, III, 142) 
 
When I found myself drawn into the political coil, I asked myself what was 
necessary for me, in order to remain untouched by immorality, by untruth, by 
what is known as political gain. I came definitely to the conclusion that, if I 
had to serve the people in whose midst my life was cast and of whose 
difficulties I was a witness from day to day, I must discard all wealth, all 
possession. 
I cannot tell you with truth that, when this belief came to me, I discarded All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54 everything immediately. I must confess to you that progress at first was slow. 
And now, as I recall those days of struggle, I remember that it was also painful 
in the beginning. But, as days went by, I saw that I had to throw overboard 
many other things which I used to consider as mine, and a time came when it 
became a matter of positive joy to give up those things. One after another 
then, by almost geometric progression, things slipped away from me. And, as I 
am describing my experiences, I can say a great burden fell off my shoulders, 
and I felt that I could now walk with ease and do my work also in the service of 
my fellow men with great comfort and still greater joy. The possession of 
anything then became a troublesome thing and a burden. 
Exploring the cause of that joy, I found that if I kept anything as my own, I had 
to defend it against the whole world. I found that there were many people who 
did not have the thing, although they wanted it; and I would have to seek 
police assistance also if some hungry famine stricken people, finding me in a 
lonely place, wanted not only to divide the thing with me but to dispossess me. 
And I said to myself: if they want it and would take it, they do so not from any 
malicious motive, but they would do it because theirs was a greater need than 
mine. 
And I said to myself: possession seems to me to be a crime; I can only possess 
certain things when I know that others, who also want to possess similar things 
are able to do so. But we know― every one of us can speak from 
experience―that such a thing is an impossibility. Therefore, the only thing that 
can be possessed by all is nonDpossession, not to have anything whatsoever. Or, 
in other words, a willing surrenders.... Therefore, having that absolute 
conviction in me, such must be my constant desire that this body also may be 
surrendered at the will of God, and while it is at my disposal, must be used not 
for dissipation, not for selfDindulgence, not for pleasure, but merely for service 
and service the whole of your waking hours. And if this is true with reference 
to the body, how much more with reference to clothing and other things that 
we use? 
And those who have followed out this vow of voluntary poverty to the fullest 
extent possible―to reach absolute perfection is an impossibility, but the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55 fullest possible for a human being ―those who have reached the ideal of that 
state, testify that when you dispossess yourself of everything you have, you 
really possess all the treasures of the world. (From an address delivered at the 
Guild Hall, London, on 27 September 1931.) (MT, III, 155D57) 
 
From my youth upward I learnt the art of estimating the value of scriptures on 
the basis of their ethical teaching. Miracles had no interest for me. The 
miracles said to have been performed by Jesus, even if I had believed them 
literally, would not have reconciled me to any teaching that did not satisfy 
universal ethics. Somehow, words of religious teachers have for me, as I 
presume for the millions, a living force which the same words uttered by 
ordinary mortals do not possess. 
Jesus, to me, is a great world teacher among others. He was to the devotees of 
his generation no doubt 'the only begotten son of God'. Their belief need not be 
mine. He affects my life no less because I regard him as one among the many 
begotten sons of God. The adjective 'begotten' has a deeper and possibly a 
grander meaning than its spiritual birth. In his own times he was the nearest to 
God. 
Jesus atoned for the sins of those who accepted his teachings, by being an 
infallible example to them. But the example was worth nothing to those who 
never troubled to change their own lives. A regenerate outgrows the original 
taint, even as purified gold outgrows the original alloy. 
I have made the frankest admission of many sins, But I do not carry their 
burden on my shoulders. If I am journeying godward, as I feel I am, it is safe 
with me. For I feel the warmth of the sunshine of His presence. My austerities, 
fasting and prayers are, I know, of no value, if I rely upon them for reforming 
me. But they have an inestimable value, if they represent, as I hope they do, 
the yearnings of a soul, striving to lay his weary head in the lap of his Maker. 
(MT IV, 93) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56 An English friend has been at me for the past thirty years trying to persuade me 
that there is nothing but damnation in Hinduism and I must accept Christianity. 
When I was in jail I got from separate sources no less than three copies of Life 
of Sister Therese, in the hope that I should follow her example and accept 
Jesus as the only begotten son of God and my Savior. I read the book 
prayerfully but I could not accept even St. Therese's testimony. I must say I 
have an open mind, if indeed at this stage and age of my life I can be said to 
have an open mind on this question. Anyway, I claim to have an open mind in 
this sense that if things were to happen to me as they did to Saul before he 
became Paul, I should not hesitate to be converted. But today I rebel against 
orthodox Christianity, as I am convinced that it has distorted the message of 
Jesus. He was an Asiatic whose message was delivered through many media and 
when it had the backing of a Roman emperor, it became an imperialist faith as 
it remains to this day. Of course, there are noble but rare exceptions, but the 
general trend is as I have indicated. (MT, IV, 95) 
 
My mind is narrow. I have not read much literature. I have not seen much of 
the world. I have concentrated upon certain things in life and beyond that I 
have no other interests. (MT, VI, 356) 
 
I have not the shadow of a doubt that any man or woman can achieve what I 
have, if he or she would make the same effort and cultivate the same hope and 
faith. (SB, 216) 
 
I fancy I know the art of living and dying nonDviolently. But I have yet to 
demonstrate it by one perfect act. (MGP, II, 475) 
 
There is no such thing as 'Gandhism' and I do not want to leave any sect after 
me. I do not claim to have originated any new principle or doctrine. I have 
simply tried in my own way to apply the eternal truths to our daily life and 
problems. There is, therefore, no question of my leaving any code like the code 
of Manu. There can be no comparison between that great lawDgiver and me. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57 The opinions I have formed and the conclusions I have arrived at are not final, I 
may change them tomorrow. I have nothing new to teach the world. Truth and 
nonDviolence are as old as the hills. All I have done is to try experiments in 
both on as vast a scale as I could do. In doing so, I have sometimes erred and 
learnt by my errors. Life and its problems have thus become to me so many 
experiments in the practice of truth and nonDviolence. By instinct, I have been 
truthful, but not nonDviolent. As a Jain muni once rightly said, I was not so 
much a votary of ahimsa , as I was of truth, and I put the latter in the first 
place and the former in the second. For, as he put it, I was capable of 
sacrificing nonDviolence for the sake of truth. In fact, it was in course of my 
pursuit of truth that I discovered nonDviolence. Our scriptures have declared 
that there is no dharma  higher than truth. But nonDviolence, they say, is the 
highest duty. The word dharma , in my opinion, has connotations as used in the 
two aphorisms. 
Well, all my philosophy, if it may be called by that name, is contained in what I 
have said. But, you will not call it 'Gandhism'; there is no 'ism' about it. And no 
elaborate literature or propaganda is needed about it. The scriptures have 
been quoted against my position, but I have held faster than ever to the 
position that truth may not be sacrificed for anything whatsoever. Those who 
believe in the simple truths I have laid down can propagate them only by living 
them. People have laughed at my spinning wheel, and an acute critic observed 
that when I died the wheels would serve to make the funeral pyre. That, 
however, has not shaken my firm faith in the spinning wheel. How am I to 
convince the world by means of books that the whole of my constructive 
programme is rooted in nonDviolence? My life alone can demonstrate it. (MT, IV, 
66D67) 
 
You have given me a teacher in Thoreau, who furnished me through his essay 
on the 'Duty of Civil Disobedience' scientific confirmation of what I was doing in 
South Africa. Great Britain gave me Ruskin, whose Unto This Last transformed 
me overnight from a lawyer and city dweller into a rustic living away from 
Durban on a farm, three miles from the nearest railway station; and Russian All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58 gave me in Tolstoy a teacher who furnished a reasoned basis for my nonD
violence. Tolstoy blessed my movement in South Africa when it was still in its 
infancy and of whose wonderful possibilities I had yet to learn. It was he who 
had prophesied in his letter to me that I was leading a movement which was 
destined to bring a message of hope to the downDtrodden people of the earth. 
So you will see that I have not approached the present task in any spirit of 
enmity to Great Britain and the West. After having imbibed and assimilated the 
message of Unto This Last , I could not be guilty of approving fascism or Nazism, 
whose cult is suppression of the individual and his liberty. (MT, VI, 177) 
 
I have no secrets of my own in this life. I have owned my weaknesses. If I were 
sensually inclined, I would have the courage to make the confession. It was 
when I developed detestation of the sensual connection even with my own wife 
and had sufficiently tested myself that I took the vow of brahmacharya  in 1906, 
and that for the sake of better dedication to the service of the country. From 
that day, began my open life.... And from that day when I 
began brahmacharya , our freedom began. My wife became a free woman, free 
from my authority as her lord and master, and I became free from my slavery 
to my own appetite which she had to satisfy. No other woman had any 
attraction for me in the same sense that my wife had. I was too loyal to her as 
husband and too loyal to the vow I had taken before my mother to be slave to 
any other woman. But the manner in which my brahmacharya  came to me 
irresistibly drew me to woman as the mother of man.... My brahmacharya  knew 
nothing of the orthodox laws governing its observance. I framed my own rules 
as occasion necessitated. But I have never believed that all contact with 
woman was to be shunned for the due observance of brahmacharya . That 
restraint which demands abstention from all contact, no matter how innocent, 
with the opposite sex is a forced growth, having little or no vital value. 
Therefore, the natural contacts for service were never restrained. And I found 
myself enjoying the confidence of many sisters, European and Indian, in South 
Africa. And when I invited the Indian sisters in South Africa to join the civil 
resistance movement, I found myself one of them. I discovered that I was All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59 specially fitted to serve the womankind. To cut the ―for me enthralling―story 
short, my return to India found me in no time one with India's women. The easy 
access I had to their hearts was an agreeable revelation to me. Muslim sisters 
never kept purdah before me here, even as they did not in South Africa. I sleep 
in the ashram  surrounded by women, for they feel safe with me in every 
respect. It should be remembered that there is no privacy in the 
Segaon Ashram . 
If I were sexually attracted towards women, I have courage enough, even at 
this time of life, to become a polygamist. I do not believe in free love ―secret 
or open. Free open love I have looked upon as dog's love. Secret love is besides 
cowardly. (MT, V, 241D42) 
'You have failed to take even your son with you,' wrote a correspondent. 'May it 
not, therefore, be well for you to rest content with putting your own house in 
order?' 
This may be taken to be a taunt, but I do not take it so. For the question had 
occurred to me, before it did to anyone else. I am a believer in previous births 
and rebirths. All our relationships are the result of the samskaras we carry from 
our previous births. God's laws are inscrutable and are the subject of endless 
search. No one will fathom them. 
This is how I regard the case of my son. I regard the birth of a bad son to me as 
the result of my evil past, whether of this life or previous. My first son was 
born, when I was in a state of infatuation. Besides, he grew up whilst I was 
myself growing and whilst I knew myself very little. I do not claim to know 
myself fully even today, but I certainly know myself better than I did then. For 
years he remained away from me, and his upbringing was not entirely in my 
hands. This is why, he has always been at a loose end. His grievance against me 
has always been that I sacrificed him and his brothers at the altar of what I 
wrongly believed to be the public good. My other sons have laid more or less 
the same blame at my door, but with a good deal of hesitation, and they have 
generously forgiven me. My eldest son was the direct victim of 
experiments―radical changes in my life ―and so he cannot forget what he 
regards as my blunders. Under the circumstances I believe I am myself the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60 cause of the loss of my son, and have, therefore, learnt patiently to bear it. 
And yet, it is not quite correct to say that I have lost him. For it is my constant 
prayer that God may make him see the error of his ways and forgive me my 
shortcomings, if any, in serving him. It is my firm faith that man is by nature 
going higher, and so I have not at all lost the hope that, some day, he will wake 
up from his slumber and ignorance. Thus, he is part of my field of the 
experiments in nonDviolence. When or whether I shall succeed, I have never 
bothered to know. It is enough for my satisfaction that I do not slacken my 
efforts in doing what I know to be my duty. (MT, V, 378D79) 
 
I read a newspaper cutting sent by a correspondent to the effect that a temple 
has been erected where my image is being worshipped. This I consider to be a 
gross form of idolatry. The person who has erected the temple has wasted his 
resources by misusing them, the villagers who are drawn there are misled, and 
I am being insulted in that the whole of my life has been caricatured in that 
temple. The meaning that I have given to worship is distorted. The worship of 
the charkha lies in plying it for a living, or as a sacrifice for ushering in swaraj . 
Gita is worshipped not by a parrotDlike recitation but by following its teaching. 
Recitation is good and proper only as an aid to action according to its teaching. 
A man is worshipped only to the extent that he is followed not in his 
weaknesses, but in his strength. Hinduism is degraded when it is brought down 
to the level of the worship of the image of a living being. No man can be said 
to be good before his death. After death too, he is good for the person who 
believes him to have possessed certain qualities attributed to him. As a matter 
of fact, God alone knows a man's heart. And hence, the safest thing is not to 
worship any person, living or dead, but to worship perfection which resides 
only in God, known as Truth. The question then certainly arises, as to whether 
possession of photographs is not a form of worship, carrying no merit with it. I 
have said as much before now in my writings. Nevertheless, I have tolerated 
the practice, as it has become an innocent though a costly fashion. But this 
toleration will become ludicrous and harmful, if I were to give directly or 
indirectly the slightest encouragement to the practice above described. It All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61 would be a welcome relief, if the owner of the temple removed the image and 
converted the building into a spinning centre, where the poor will card and 
spin for wages, and the others for sacrifice and all will be wearers of khaddar . 
This will be the teaching of the Gita in action, and true worship of it and me. 
(MT, VII, 100) 
 
My imperfections and failures are as much a blessing from Cod as my success 
and my talents, and I lay them both at His feet. Why should He have chosen 
me, an imperfect instrument, for such a mighty experiment? I think He 
deliberately did so. He had to serve the poor dumb ignorant millions. A perfect 
man might have been their despair. When they found that one with their 
failings was marching on towards ahimsa , they too had confidence in their own 
capacity. We should not have recognized a perfect man if he had come as our 
leader, and we might have driven him to a cave. May be he who follows me will 
be more perfect and you will be able to receive his message. (MGP, II, 801) 
 
I did not move a muscle, when I first heard that an atom bomb had wiped out 
Hiroshima. On the contrary I to myself, 'Unless now the world adopts nonD
violence, it will spell certain suicide for mankind.' (MGP, II, 808) 
 
I do not sit in judgment upon the world for is many misdeeds. Being imperfect 
myself and needing toleration and charity, I tolerate the world's imperfections 
till I find or create an opportunity for fruitful expostulation. (MT, I, 285) 
 
When I have become incapable of evil and when nothing harsh or haughty 
occupies, be it momentarily, my thoughtDworld, then, and not till then, my 
nonDviolence will move all the hearts of all the world. (MGP, II, 800) 
 
If one has completely merged oneself with Him, he should be content to leave 
good and bad, success and failure to Him and be careful for nothing. I feel I 
have not attained that state, and, therefore, my striving is incomplete. (MGP, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62 II, 453) 
 
There is a stage in life when a man does not need even to proclaim his thoughts 
much less to show them by outward action. Mere thoughts act. They attain that 
power. Then it can be said of him that his seeming inaction constitutes his 
action.... My striving is in that direction. (MGP, II, 463) 
 
I would love to attempt an answer to a question which has been addressed to 
me from more than one quarter of the globe. It is: How can you account for the 
growing violence among your own people on the part of political parties for the 
furtherance of political ends? Is this the result of the thirty years of nonDviolent 
practice for ending the British rule? Does your message of nonDviolence still 
hold good for the world? I have condensed the sentiments of my correspondents 
in my own language. 
In reply I must confess my bankruptcy, not that of nonDviolence. I have already 
said that the nonDviolence that was offered during the past thirty years was 
that of the weak. Whether it is a good enough answer or not is for the others to 
judge. It must be further admitted that such nonDviolence can have no play in 
the altered circumstances. India has no experience of the nonDviolence of the 
strong. It serves no purpose for me to continue to repeat that the nonDviolence 
of the strong is the strongest force in the world. The truth requires constant 
and extensive demonstration. This I am now endeavoring to do to the best of 
my ability. What if the best of my ability is very little? May I not be living in a 
fool's paradise? Why should I ask the people to follow me in the fruitless 
search? These are pertinent questions. My answer is quite simple. I ask nobody 
to follow me. Everyone should follow his or her own inner voice. If he or she 
has no ears to listen to it, he or she should do the best he or she can. In no 
case, should he or she imitate others sheeplike. 
One more question has been and is being asked. If you are certain that India is 
going the wrong way, why do you associate with the wrongdoers? Why do you 
not plough your own lonely furrow and have faith that if you are right, your 
erstwhile friends and your followers will seek you out? I regard this as a very All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63 fair question. I must not attempt to argue against it. All I can say is that my 
faith is as strong as ever. It is quite possible that my technique is faulty. There 
are old and tried precedents to guide one in such a complexity. Only, no one 
should act mechanically. Hence, I can say to all my counselors that they should 
have patience with me and even share my belief that there is no hope for the 
aching world except through the narrow and straight path of nonDviolence. 
Millions like me may fail to prove the truth in their own lives, that would be 
their failure, never of the eternal law. (MT, VIII, 22D23) 
 
The partition has come in spite of me. It has hurt me. But it is the way in which 
the partition has come that has hurt me more. I have pledged myself to do or 
die in the attempt to put down the present conflagration. I love all mankind as 
I love my own countrymen, because God dwells in the heart of every human 
being, and I aspire to realize the highest in life through the service of 
humanity. It is true that the nonDviolence that we practiced was the nonD
violence of the weak, i.e., no nonDviolence at all. But I maintain that this was 
not what I presented to my countrymen. Nor did I present to them the weapon 
of nonDviolence because they were weak or disarmed or without military 
training, but because my study of history has taught me that hatred and 
violence used in howsoever noble a cause only breed their kind and instead of 
bringing peace jeopardize it. Thanks to the tradition of our ancient seers, sages 
and saints, if there is a heritage that India can share with the world, it is this 
gospel of forgiveness and faith which is her proud possession. I have faith that 
in time to come, India will pit that against the threat of destruction which the 
world has invited upon itself by the discovery of the atom bomb. The weapon 
of truth and love is infallible, but there is something wrong in us, its votaries, 
which has plunged us into the present suicidal strife. I am, therefore, trying to 
examine myself. (MGP, II, 246) 
 
I have passed through many an ordeal in my life. But perhaps this is to be the 
hardest. I like it. The fiercer it becomes, the closer is the communion with God 
that I experience and the deeper grows my faith in His abundant grace. So long All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64 as it persists, I know it is well with me. (MGP, II, 246) 
 
If I were a perfect man, I own, I should not feel the miseries of neighbours as I 
do. As a perfect man I should take note of them, prescribe a remedy, and 
compel adoption by the force of unchallengeable Truth in me. But as yet I only 
see as through a glass darkly and therefore have to carry conviction by slow 
and laborious processes, and then, too, not always with success... I would be 
less human if, with all my knowledge of the avoidable misery pervading the 
land... I did not feel with and for all the suffering of the dumb millions of 
India. (MGP, II, 324) 
 
I want to declare to the world that, whatever may be said to the contrary, and 
although I might have forfeited the regard and even the trust of many in the 
West―and I bow my head low― but even for their friendship or their love, I 
must not suppress that voice within, call it conscience, call it the prompting of 
my inner basic nature. There is something within me impelling me to cry out 
my agony. I have known exactly what it is. That something in me which never 
deceives me tells me now: 'You have to stand against the whole world although 
you may have to stand alone. You have to stare the world in the face although 
the world may look at you with bloodDshot eyes. Do not fear. Trust that little 
thing in you which resides in the heart and says: Forsake friends, wife, all; but 
testify to that for which you have lived and for which you have to die.' (MM, 16) 
My soul refuses to be satisfied so long as it is a helpless witness of a single 
wrong or a single misery. But it is not possible for me, a weak, frail, miserable 
being, to mend every wrong or to hold myself free of blame for all the wrong I 
see. The spirit in me pulls one way, the flesh in me pulls in the opposite 
direction. There is freedom from the action of these two forces but that 
freedom is attainable only by slow and painful stages. I cannot attain freedom 
by a mechanical refusal to act, but only by intelligent action in a detached 
manner. This struggle resolves itself into an incessant crucifixion of the flesh so 
that the spirit may become entirely free. (MGP, II, 324) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65 I believe in the message of truth delivered by all the religious teachers of the 
world. And it is my constant prayer that I may never have a feeling of anger 
against my traducers, that even if I fall a victim to an assassin's bullet, I may 
deliver up my soul with the remembrance of God upon my lips. I shall be 
content to be written down an impostor if my lips utter a word of anger or 
abuse against my assailant at the last moment. (MGP, II, 101) 
 
Have I that nonDviolence of the brave in me ? My death alone will show that. If 
someone killed me and I died with prayer for the assassin on my lips, and God's 
remembrance and consciousness of His living presence in the sanctuary of my 
heart, then alone would I be said to have had the nonDviolence of the brave. 
(MGP, I, 327) 
 
I do not want to die....of a creeping paralysis of my faculties― a defeated man. 
An assassin's bullet may put an end to my life. I would welcome it. But I would 
love, above all, to fade out doing my duty with my last breath. (MGP, I, 562) 
I am not aching for martyrdom, but if it comes in my way in the prosecution of 
what I consider to be the supreme duty in defence of the faith I hold... I shall 
have earned it. (MM, 9) 
 
Assaults have been made on my life in the past, but God has spared me till 
now, and the assailants have repented for their action. But if someone were to 
shoot me in the belief that he was getting rid of a rascal, he would kill not the 
real Gandhi, but the one that appeared to him a rascal. (MM, 9) 
 
If I die of a fingering illness, nay even by as much as a boil or a pimple, it will 
be your duty to proclaim to the world, even at the risk of making people angry 
with you, that I was not the man of God that I claimed to be. If you do that it 
will give my spirit peace. Note down this also that if someone were to end my 
life by putting a bullet through me ―as someone tried to do with a bomb the 
other day―and I met his bullet without a groan, and breathed my last taking All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66 God's name, then alone would I have made good my claim. (This was uttered on 
the night of 29 January 1948, less than twenty hours before he was shot.) 
(MGP, II, 766) 
 
If anybody tried to take out my body in a procession after I died, I would 
certainly tell them ―if my corpse could speak ―to spare me and cremate me 
where I had died. (MGP, II, 417) 
 
After I am gone, no single person will be able completely to represent me. But 
a little bit of me will live in many of you. If each puts the cause first and 
himself last, the vacuum will to a large extent be filled. (MGP, II, 782) 
 
I do not want to be reborn. But if I have to be reborn, I should be born an 
untouchable, so that I may share their sorrows, sufferings, and affronts leveled 
at them, in order that I may endeavour to free myself and them from that 
miserable condition. (SB, 238) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  
02. RELIGION AND TRUTH 
 
By 
religion, I do not mean formal religion, or customary religion, but that 
religion which underlies all religions, which brings us face to face with our 
Maker. (MM, 85) 
 
Let me explain what I mean by religion. It is not the Hindu religion which I 
certainly prize above all other religions, but the religion which transcends 
Hinduism, which changes one's very nature, which binds one indissolubly to the 
truth within and whichever purifies. It is the permanent element in human 
nature which counts no cost too great in order to find full expression and which 
leaves the soul utterly restless until it has found itself, known its Maker and 
appreciated the true correspondence between the Maker and itself. (SB, 223) 
 
I have not seen Him, neither have I known Him. I have made the world's faith in 
God my own, and as my faith is ineffaceable, I regard that faith as amounting 
to experience. However, as it may be said that to describe faith experience is 
to tamper with truth, it may perhaps be correct to say that I have no word for 
characterizing my belief in God. (MG, 341) 
 
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that pervades everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this unseen power which makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. 
It transcends the senses. But it is possible to reason out the existence of God to 
a limited extent. (MM, 21) 
 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me is everDchanging, everD
dying, there is underlying all that change a Living Power that is changeless, 
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves, and reDcreates. That informing 
Power or Spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely through the senses All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68 can or will persist, He alone is. (MM, 22) 
 
And is this Power benevolent or malevolent? I see it as purely benevolent. For I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, in the midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme God. (MM, 22) 
 
I know, too, that I shall never know God if I do not wrestle with and against evil 
even at the cost of life itself. I am fortified in the belief by my own humble and 
limited experience. The purer I try to become the nearer to God I feel myself 
to be. How much more should I be near to Him when my faith is not a mere 
apology, as it is today, but has become as immovable as the Himalayas and as 
white and bright as the snows on their peaks? (MM, 22) 
 
This belief in God has to be based on faith which transcends reason. Indeed, 
even the soDcalled realization has at bottom an element of faith without which 
it cannot be sustained. In the very nature of things it must be so. Who can 
transgress the limitations of his being? I hold that complete realization is 
impossible in this embodied life. Nor is it necessary. A living immovable faith is 
all that is required for reaching the full spiritual height attainable by human 
beings. God is not outside this earthly case of ours. Therefore, exterior proof is 
not of much avail, if any at all. We must ever fail to perceive Him through the 
senses, because He is beyond them. We can feel Him, if we will but withdraw 
ourselves from the senses. The divine music is incessantly going on within 
ourselves, but the loud senses drown the delicate music, which is unlike and 
infinitely superior to anything we can perceive or hear with our senses. (MM, 
22D23) 
 
But He is no God who merely satisfies the intellect, if He ever does. God to be 
God must rule the heart and transform it. He must express Himself in even the 
smallest act of His votary. This can only be done through a definite realization 
more real than the five senses can ever produce. Sense perceptions can be, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69 often are, false and deceptive, however real they may appear to us. Where 
there is realization outside the senses it is infallible. It is proved not by 
extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character of those 
who have felt the real presence of God within. Such testimony is to be found in 
the experiences of an unbroken line of prophets and sages in all countries arid 
climes. To reject this evidence is to deny oneself. (SB, 9) 
 
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and morality; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is above and beyond all these. 
God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheist.... He transcends 
speech and reason .... He is a personal God to those who need His personal 
presence. He is embodied to those who need His touch. He is the purest 
essence. He simply is to those who have faith. He is all things to all men. He is 
in us and yet above and beyond us .... He is longDsuffering. He is patient but He 
is also terrible..... With Him ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is ever 
forgiving for He always gives us the chance to repent. He is the greatest 
democrat the world knows, for He leaves us 'unfettered' to make our own 
choice between evil and good. He is the greatest tyrant ever known, for He 
often dashes the cup from our lips and under the cover of free will leaves us a 
margin so wholly inadequate as to provide only mirth for Himself.... Therefore 
Hinduism calls it all His sport. (MGP, I, 421D422) 
 
To see the universal and allDpervading spirit of Truth face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a man who aspires after 
that cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. That is why my devotion to 
truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest 
hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has nothing 
to do with politics do not know what religion means. (AMG, 615) 
 
Identification with everything that lives is impossible without selfDpurification; 
without selfDpurification the observance of the law of ahimsa  must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who is not pure of heart. SelfDAll Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70 Purification therefore must mean purification in all walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to 
the purification of one's surroundings. (AMG, 615D16) 
 
But the path of selfDpurification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity 
one has to become absolutely passionDfree in thought, speech and action; to 
rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment mad 
repulsion. I know that I have not in me as yet that triple purity, in spite of 
constant, ceaseless striving for it. That is why the world's praise fails to move 
me, indeed it very often stings me. To conquer the subtle passions seems to me 
to be far harder than the physical conquest of the world by the force of arms. 
(AMG, 616) 
 
I am but a poor struggling soul yearning to be wholly good― wholly truthful and 
wholly nonDviolent in thought, word and deed; but ever failing to reach the 
ideal which I know is true. It is a painful climb, but the pain of it is a positive 
pleasure to me. Each step upward makes me feel stronger and fit for the next. 
(SB, 8) 
 
I am endeavouring to see God through service of humanity, for I know that God 
is neither in heaven, nor down below, but in every one. (MM, 24) 
 
Indeed religion should pervade every one of our actions. Here religion does not 
mean sectarianism. It means a belief in ordered moral government of the 
universe. It is not less real because it is unseen. This religion transcends 
Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, etc. It does not supersede them. It harmonizes 
them and gives them reality. (SB, 224) 
 
Religions are different roads converging to the same point. What does it matter 
that we take different roads, so long as we reach the same goal ? In reality, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71 there are as many religions as there are individuals. (SB, 224) 
 
If a man reaches the heart of his own religion, he has reached the heart of the 
others too. (SB, 225) 
 
So long as there are different religions, every one of them may need some 
distinctive symbol. But when the symbol is made into a fetish and an 
instrument of proving the superiority of one's religion over other's, it is fit only 
to be discarded. (SB, 225) 
 
After long study and experience, I have come to the conclusion that (1) all 
religions are true; (2) all religions have some error in them; (3) all religions are 
almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, in as much as all human beings 
should be as dear to one as one's own close relatives. My own veneration for 
other faiths is the same as that for my own faith; therefore no thought of 
conversion is possible. (SB, 226D27) 
 
God has created different faiths just as He has the votaries thereof. How can I 
even secretly harbour the thought that my neighbor's faith is inferior to mine 
and wish that he should give up his faith and embrace mine? As a true and loyal 
friend, I can only wish and pray that he may live and grow perfect in his own 
faith. In God's house there are many mansions and they are equally holy. (SB, 
228) 
 
Let no one even for a moment entertain the fear that a reverent study of other 
religions is likely to weaken or shake one's faith in one's own. The Hindu system 
of philosophy regards all religions as containing the elements of truth in them 
and enjoins an attitude of respect and reverence towards them all. This of 
course presupposes regard for one's own religion. Study and appreciation of 
other religions need not cause a weakening of that regard; it should mean All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72 extension of' that regard to other religions. (SB, 226) 
 
It is better to allow our lives to speak for us than our words. God did not bear 
the Cross only 1,900 years ago, but He bears it today, and He dies and is 
resurrected from day to day. It would be poor comfort to the world if it had to 
depend upon a historical God who died 2,000 years ago. Do not then preach the 
God of history, but show Him as He lives today through you. (SB, 227D28) 
 
I do not believe in people telling others of their faith, especially with a view to 
conversion. Faith does not admit of telling. It has to be lived and then it 
becomes selfDpropagating. (SB, 228) 
 
Divine knowledge is not borrowed from books. It has to be realized in oneself. 
Books are at best an aid, often even a hindrance. (SB, 228) 
 
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great religions of the world. I believe 
that they are all GodDgiven, and I believe that they were necessary for the 
people to whom these religions were revealed. And I believe that, if only we 
could all of us read the scriptures of the different faiths from the standpoint of 
the followers of those faiths, we should find that they were at the bottom all 
one and were all helpful to one another. (MM, 84) 
 
Belief in one God is the cornerDstone of all religions. But do not foresee a time 
when there would be only one religion on earth in practice. In theory, since 
there is one God, there can be only one religion. But in practice, no two 
persons I have known have had the same identical conception of God. 
Therefore, there will, perhaps, always be different religions answering to 
different temperaments and climatic conditions. (MM, 84) 
 
I believe that all the great religions of the world are true more or less. I say 
'more or less' because I believe that everything the human hand touches, by All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73 reason of the very fact that human beings are imperfect, becomes imperfect. 
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it is indescribable, 
untranslatable. I do believe that it is possible for every human being to become 
perfect even as God is perfect. It is necessary for us all to aspire after 
perfection, but when that blessed state is attained, it becomes indescribable, 
indefinable. And, I, therefore, admit, in all humility, that even the Vedas, the 
Koran and the Bible are imperfect word of God and, imperfect beings that we 
are, swayed to and fro by a multitude of passions, it is impossible for us even 
to understand this word of God in its fullness. (MM, 82) 
 
I do not believe in the exclusive divinity of the Vedas. I believe the Bible, the 
Koran and the Zend Avesta, to be as much divinely inspired as the Vedas. My 
belief in the Hindu scriptures does not require me to accept every word and 
every verse as divinely inspired..... I decline to be bound by any interpretation, 
however learned it may be, if it is repugnant to reason or moral sense. (MM, 
86) 
 
Temples or mosques or churches... I make no distinction between these 
different abodes of God. They are what faith has made them. They are an 
answer to man's craving somehow to reach the Unseen. (MM, 96) 
 
The prayer has saved my life. Without it, I should have been a lunatic long ago. 
I had my share of the bitterest public and private experiences. They threw me 
in temporary despair. If I was able to get rid of that despair, it was because of 
prayer. It has not been a part of my life as truth has been. It came out of sheer 
necessity, as I found myself in a plight where I could not possibly be happy 
without it. And as time went on, my faith in God increased, and more 
irresistible became the yearning for prayer. Life seemed to be dull and vacant 
without it. I had attended the Christian service in South Africa, but it had 
failed to grip me. I could not join them in it. They supplicated God, I could not; 
I failed egregiously. I started with disbelief in God and prayer, and until at a 
late stage in life I did not feel anything like a void in life. But at that stage, I All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74 felt that as food is indispensable for the body, so was prayer indispensable for 
the soul. In fact food for the body is not so necessary as prayer for the soul. For 
starvation is often necessary to keep the body in health, but there is no such 
thing as prayer starvation. You cannot possibly have a surfeit of prayer. Three 
of the greatest teachers of the world ―Buddha, Jesus and Mohammed ―have 
left unimpeachable testimony, that they found illumination through prayer and 
could not possibly live without it. Millions of Hindus, Mussalmans and Christians 
find their only solace in life in prayer. Either you call them liars or selfDdeluded 
people. I will say that this 'lying' has a charm for me, a truthDseeker, if it is 
'lying' that has given me that mainstay or staff of life without which I could not 
live for a moment. In spite of despair staring me in the face on the political 
horizon, I have never lost my peace. In fact, I have found people who envy my 
peace. That peace comes from prayer. I am not a man of learning, but I humbly 
claim to be a man of prayer. I am indifferent as to the form. Everyone is a law 
unto himself in that respect. But there are some well marked roads, and it is 
safe to walk along the beaten tracks, by the ancient teachers. I have given my 
personal testimony. Let everyone try and find that as a result of daily prayer he 
adds something new to his life. (MT, III, 139D40) 
 
Man's ultimate aim is the realization of God, and all his activities, political, 
social and religious, have to be guided by the ultimate aim of the vision of God. 
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a necessary part of the 
endeavour simply because the only way to find God is to see Him in His 
creation and be one with it. This can only be done by service of all. And this 
cannot be done except through one's country. I am a part and parcel of the 
whole, and I cannot find Him apart from the rest of the humanity. My 
countrymen are my nearest neighbours. They have become so helpless, so 
resourceless, so inert that I must concentrate on serving them. If I could 
persuade myself that I should find Him in a Himalayan cave I would proceed 
there immediately. But I know that I cannot find Him apart from humanity. 
(MT, IV, 108D09) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75 It is a tragedy that religion for us means today nothing more than restrictions 
on food and drink, nothing more than adherence to a sense of superiority and 
inferiority. Let me tell you that there cannot be any grosser ignorance than 
this. Birth and observance of forms cannot determine one's superiority and 
inferiority. Character is the only determining factor. God did not create men 
with the badge of superiority or inferiority; no scripture which labels a human 
being as inferior or untouchable because of his or her birth can command our 
allegiance, it is a denial of God and Truth which is God. (MT, III, 343) 
 
It is my conviction that all the great faiths of the world are true, are GodD
ordained and that they serve the purpose of God and of those who have been 
brought up in those surroundings and those faiths. I do not believe that the 
time will ever come when we shall be able to say there is only one religion in 
the world. In a sense, even today there is one fundamental religion in the 
world. But there is no such thing as a straight line in nature. Religion is one 
tree with many branches. As branches, you may say religions are many, but as 
tree, religion is only one. (MT, III, 300) 
 
Supposing a Christian came to me and said he was captivated by the reading 
of Bhagavat  and so wanted to declare himself a Hindu, I should say to him: 'No. 
What Bhagavat  offers, the Bible also offers. You have not made the attempt to 
find it out. Make the attempt and be a good Christian.' (MT, IV, 121) 
 
I do not conceive religion as one of the many activities of mankind. The same 
activity may be governed by the spirit either of religion or of irreligion. There 
is no such thing for me therefore as leaving politics for religion. For me every, 
the tiniest, activity is governed by what I consider to be my religion. (DM, 138) 
 
There can be no manner of doubt that this universe of sentient beings is 
governed by a Law. If you can think of Law without its Giver, I would say that 
the Law is the LawDgiver, that is God. When we pray to the Law we simply 
yearn after knowing the Law and obeying it. We become what we yearn after. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76 Hence the necessity for prayer. Though our present life is governed by our 
past, our future must by that very law of cause and effect be affected by what 
we do now. To the extent therefore that we feel the choice between two or 
more courses we must make that choice. 
Why evil exists and what it is are questions which appear to be beyond our 
limited reason. It should be enough to know that both good and evil exist. And 
as often we can distinguish between good and evil, we must choose the one 
and shun the other. (DM, 227D28) 
 
Those who believe in God's guidance just do the best they can and never worry. 
The sun has never been known to suffer from overstrain and yet who slaves 
with such unexampled regularity as he! And why should we think that the sun is 
inanimate? The difference between him and us may be that he has no choice, 
we have a margin, no matter how precarious it may be. But no more 
speculation of this sort. Suffice it for us that we have his brilliant example in 
the matter of tireless energy. If we completely surrender to His will and really 
become ciphers, we too voluntarily give up the right of choice and then we 
need no wear and tear. (BM, 171) 
 
Yes, there are subjects where reason cannot take us far and we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith then does not contradict reason but transcends it. Faith is 
a kind of sixth sense which works in cases which are without the purview of 
reason. Well then, given these three criteria, I can have no difficulty in 
examining all claims made on behalf of religion. Thus to believe that Jesus is 
the only begotten son of God is to me against reason, for God can't marry and 
beget children. The word 'son' can only be used in a figurative sense. In that 
sense everyone who stands in the position of Jesus is a begotten son of God. If 
a man is spiritually miles ahead of us, we may say that he is in a special sense 
the son of God, though we are all children of God. We repudiate the 
relationship in our lives, where as his life is a witness to that relationship. (MT, 
IV, 167D68) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77 God is not a person..... God is the force. He is the essence of life. He is pure 
and undefiled consciousness. He is eternal. And yet, strangely enough, all are 
not able to derive either benefit from or shelter in the allDpervading living 
presence. 
Electricity is a powerful force. Not all can benefit from it. It can only be 
produced by following certain laws. It is a lifeless force. Man can utilize it if he 
labours hard enough to acquire the knowledge of its laws. 
The living force which we call God can similarly be found if we know and follow 
His law leading to the discovery of Him in us. (MGP, I, 599) 
 
To seek God one need not go on a pilgrimage or light lamps and burn incense 
before or anoint the image of the deity or paint it with red vermilion. For He 
resides in our hearts. If we could completely obliterate in us the consciousness 
of our physical body, we would see Him face to face. (MGP, II, 247) 
 
No search is possible without some workable assumptions. If we grant nothing, 
we find nothing. Ever since its commencement, the world, the wise and the 
foolish included, has proceeded upon the assumption that if we are, God is, 
and that, if God is not, we are not. And since belief in God is coDexistent with 
the humankind, existence of God is treated as a fact more definite than the 
fact that the sun is. This living faith has solved a large number of puzzles of 
life. It has alleviated our misery.  It sustains us in life, it is our solace in death. 
The very search for Truth becomes interesting and worthwhile, because of this 
belief. But search for Truth is search for God. Truth is God. God is, because 
Truth is. We embark upon the search, because we believe that there is Truth 
and that it can be found by diligent search and meticulous observance of the 
wellDknown and wellDtried rules of search. There is no record in history of the 
failure of such search. Even the atheists who have pretended to disbelieve in 
God have believed in Truth. The trick they have performed is that of giving God 
another, not a new, name. His names are legion. Truth is the crown of them 
all. 
What is true of God is true, though in a less degree, of the assumption of the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78 truth of some fundamental moralities. As a matter of fact, they are implied in 
the belief in God or Truth. Departure from these has landed the truants in 
endless misery. Difficulty of practice should not be confused with disbelief. A 
Himalayan expedition has also its prescribed conditions of success. Difficulty of 
fulfilling the conditions does not make the expedition impossible. It only adds 
interest and zest to the search. Well, this expedition in search of God or Truth 
is infinitely more than numberless Himalayan expeditions and, therefore, much 
more interesting. If we have no zest for it, it is because of the weakness of our 
faith. What we see with our physical eyes is more real to us than the only 
Reality. We know that the appearances are deceptive. And yet we treat 
trivialities as realities. To see the trivialities as such is half the battle won. It 
constitutes more than half the search after Truth or God. Unless we disengage 
ourselves from these trivialities, we have not even the leisure for the great 
search, or is to be reserved for our leisure hours? (MT, III, 359D60) 
 
There are innumerable definitions of God, because His manifestations are 
innumerable. They overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment stun 
me. But I worship God as Truth only. I have not yet found Him, but I am seeking 
after Him. I am prepared to sacrifice the things dearest to me in pursuit of this 
quest. Even if the sacrifice demanded be my very life, I hope I may be 
prepared to give it. But as long as I have not realized this Absolute Truth so 
long must I hold by the relative truth as I have conceived it. (AMG, 6) 
 
Often in my progress I have had faint glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and 
daily the conviction is growing upon me that He alone is real and all else is 
unreal. Let those, who wish, realize how the conviction has grown upon me; let 
them share my experiments and share also my conviction if they can. The 
further conviction has been growing upon me that whatever is possible for me 
is possible even for a child, and I have sound reasons for saying so. The 
instruments for the quest of Truth are as simple as they are difficult. They may 
appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and quite possible to an 
innocent child. The seeker after truth should be humbler than the dust. (AMG, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79 6D7) 
 
If we had attained the full vision of Truth, we would no longer be mere 
seekers, but have become one with God, for Truth is God. But being only 
seekers, we prosecute our quest, and are conscious of our imperfection. And if 
we are imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived by us must also be imperfect. 
We have not realized religion in its perfection, even as we have not realized 
God. Religion of our conception, being thus imperfect, is always subject to a 
process of evolution. And if all faiths outlined by men are imperfect, the 
question of comparative merit does not arise. All faiths constitute a revelation 
of Truth, but all are imperfect, and liable to error. Reverence for other faiths 
need not blind us to their faults. We must be keenly alive to the defects of our 
own faith also, yet not leave it on that account, but try to overcome those 
defects. Looking at all religions with an equal eye, we would not only not 
hesitate, but would think it our duty, to blend into our faith every acceptable 
feature of other faiths. 
Even as a tree has a single trunk, but many branches and leaves, so there is one 
true and perfect Religion, but it becomes many, as it passes through the human 
medium. The one Religion is beyond all speech. Imperfect men put it into such 
language as they can command, and their words are interpreted by other men 
equally imperfect. Whose interpretation is to be held to be the right one? 
Everybody is right from his own standpoint, but it is not impossible that 
everybody is wrong. Hence the necessity of tolerance, which does not mean 
indifference to one's own faith, but a more intelligent and purer love for it. 
Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as far from fanaticism as the North 
Pole from the South. True knowledge of religion breaks down the barriers 
between faith and faith. (SB, 225) 
 
I believe that we can all become messengers of God, if we cease to fear man 
and seek only God's Truth. I do believe I am seeking only God's Truth and have 
lost all fear of man. (MM, 23) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80 I have no special revelation of God's will. My firm belief is that He reveals 
Himself daily to every human being, but we shut our ears to the 'still small 
voice'. We shut our eyes to the 'pillar of fire' in front of us. (MM, 23) 
 
I must go.... with God as my only guide. He is a jealous Lord. He will allow no 
one to share His authority. One has, therefore, to appear before Him in all 
one's weakness, emptyDhanded and in a spirit of full surrender, and then He 
enables you to stand before a whole world and protects you from all harm. 
(MM, 24) 
 
If I did not feel the presence of God within me, I see so much of misery and 
disappointment every day that I would be a raving maniac and my destination 
would be the Hooghli. (MM, 24) 
 
In a strictly scientific sense God is at the bottom of both good and evil. He 
directs the assassin's dagger no less than the surgeon's knife. But for all that 
good and evil are, for human purposes, from each other distinct and 
incompatible, being symbolical of light and darkness, God and Satan. (MM, 27) 
 
I am surer of His existence than of the fact that you and I are sitting in this 
room. Then I can also testify that I may live without air and water but not 
without Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that cannot kill me. But blast my 
belief in God, and I am dead. You may call this a superstition, but I confess it is 
a superstition that I hug, even as I used to do the name of Rama in my 
childhood when there was any cause of danger or alarm. That was what an old 
nurse had taught me. (MM, 27) 
 
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in 
us. God demands nothing less than complete selfDsurrender as the price for the 
only real freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself he 
immediately finds himself in the service of all that lives. It becomes his delight All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81 and his recreation. He is a new man, never weary of spending himself in the 
service of God's creation. (MM, 30) 
 
There are moments in your life when you must act, even though you cannot 
carry your best friends with you. The 'still small voice' within you must always 
be the final arbiter when there is a conflict of duty. (MM, 33) 
 
I could not live for a single second without religion. Many of my political friends 
despair of me because they say that even my politics are derived from religion. 
And they are right. My politics and all other activities of mine are derived from 
my religion. I go further and say that every activity of a man of religion must 
be derived from his religion, because religion means being bound to God, that 
is to say God rules your every breath. (MM, 70) 
 
For me, politics bereft of religion are absolute dirt, ever to be shunned. 
Politics concern nations and that which concerns the welfare of nations must 
be one of the concerns of a man who is religiously inclined, in other words, a 
seeker after God and Truth. For me God and Truth are convertible terms, and 
if anyone told me that God was a God of untruth or a God of torture, I would 
decline to worship Him. Therefore, in politics also we have to establish the 
Kingdom of Heaven. (MM, 70) 
 
I could not be leading a religious life unless I identified myself with the whole 
of mankind, and that I could not do unless I took part in politics. The whole 
gamut of man's activities today constitutes an indivisible whole. You cannot 
divide social, economic, political and purely religious work into watertight 
compartments. I do not know any religion apart from human activity. It 
provides a moral basis to all other activities which they would otherwise lack, 
reducing life to a maze of 'sound and fury signifying nothing'. (MM, 71) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82 It is faith that steers us through stormy seas, faith that moves mountains and 
faith that jumps across the ocean. That faith is nothing but a living, wideD
awake consciousness of God within. He who has achieved that faith wants 
nothing. Bodily diseased, he is spiritually healthy; physically poor, he rolls in 
spiritual riches. (MM, 80) 
 
The forms are many, but the informing spirit is one. How can there be room for 
distinctions of high and low where there is this all embracing fundamental 
unity underlying the outward diversity? For that is a fact meeting you at every 
step in daily life. The final goal of all religions is to realize this essential 
oneness. (MM, 78) 
 
In my early youth I was taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known as 
the one thousand names of God. But these one thousand names of God were by 
no means exhaustive. We believe, and I think it is the truth, that God has as 
many names as there are creatures. Therefore, we also say that God is 
nameless, and since God has many forms, we consider Him formless, and since 
He speaks through many tongues, we consider Him to be speechless and so on. 
And, so, when I came to study Islam, I found Islam too had many names of God. 
I would say with those who say 'God is Love', God is Love. But deep down in me 
I used to say that though God may be Love, God is Truth above all. If it is 
possible for the human tongue to give the fullest description of God, I have 
come to the conclusion that God is Truth. Two years ago I went a step further 
and said that Truth is God. You will see the fine distinction between the two 
statements, 'God is Truth' and 'Truth is God'. I came to that conclusion after a 
continuous and relentless search after truth which began fifty years ago. I then 
found that the nearest approach to truth was through love. But I also found 
that love has many meanings in the English language and that human love in 
the sense of passion could become a degrading thing. I found too that love in 
the sense of ahimsa  had only a limited number of votaries in the world. But I 
never found a double meaning in connection with truth and even atheists had 
not demurred to the necessity of power of truth. But in their passion for All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83 discovering truth, atheists have not hesitated to deny the very existence of 
God―from their own point of view rightly. It was because of this reasoning 
that I saw that rather than say that God is Truth, I should say that Truth is God. 
Add to this the great difficulty, that millions have taken the name of God and 
in His name committed nameless atrocities. Not that the scientists very often 
do not commit atrocities in the name of Truth. Then there is another thing in 
Hindu philosophy, namely, God alone is and nothing else exists, and the same 
truth you see emphasized and exemplified in the kalma  of Islam. And there you 
find it clearly stated that God alone is, and nothing else exists. In fact, the 
Sanskrit word for truth is a word which literally means that which exists, sat. 
For these and many other reasons, I have come to the conclusion that the 
definition―Truth is God―gives me the greatest satisfaction. And when you 
want to find Truth as God, the only inevitable means is love, that is, nonD
violence, and since I believe that ultimately the means and ends are 
convertible terms, I should not hesitate to say that God is love. (MT, III, 176D
77) 
 
From the standpoint of pure Truth, the body too is a possession. It has been 
truly said that desire for enjoyment creates bodies for the soul. When this 
desire vanishes, there remains no further need for the body, and man is free 
from the vicious cycle of births and deaths. The soul is omnipresent; why 
should she care to be confined within the cageDlike body, or do evil and even 
kill for the sake of that cage? We thus arrive at the ideal of total renunciation, 
and learn to use the body for the purposes of service so long as it exists, so 
much so that service, and not bread, becomes with us the staff of life. We eat 
and drink, sleep and wake, for service alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us 
real happiness and the beatific vision in the fullness of time. (SB, 17) 
 
What... is Truth? A difficult question; but I have solved it for myself by saying 
that it is what the voice within tells you. How then, you ask, different people 
think of different and contrary truths? Well, seeing that the human mind works 
through innumerable media and that the evolution of the human mind is not All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84 the same for all, it follows that what may be truth for one may be untruth for 
another, and hence those who have made these experiments have come to the 
conclusion that there are certain conditions to be observed in making those 
experiments..... It is because we have at the present moment everybody 
claiming the right of conscience without going through any discipline 
whatsoever that there is so much untruth being delivered to a bewildered 
world. All that I can in true humility present to you is that Truth is not to be 
found by anybody who has not got an abundant sense of humility. If you would 
swim on the bosom of the ocean of Truth you must reduce yourself to a zero. 
(MM, 17) 
 
Truth resides in every human heart, and one has to search for it there, and to 
be guided by truth as one sees it. But no one has a right to coerce others to act 
according to his own view of truth. (MM, 19D20) 
 
Life is an aspiration. Its mission is to strive after perfection, which is selfD
realization. The ideal must not be lowered because of our weaknesses or 
imperfections. I am painfully conscious of both in me. The silent cry daily goes 
out to Truth to help me to remove these weaknesses and imperfections of 
mine. (MM, 20) 
 
There can be no room for untruth in my writings, because it is my unshakable 
belief that there is no religion other than truth and because I am capable of 
rejecting aught obtained at the cost of truth. My writings cannot but be free 
from hatred towards any individual because it is my firm belief that it is love 
that sustains the earth. There only is life where there is love. Life without love 
is death. Love is the reverse of the coin of which the obverse is truth. It is my 
firm faith....that we can conquer the whole world by truth and love. (MM, 21) 
 
I am devoted to none but Truth and I owe no discipline to anybody but truth. 
(MM, 23) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85 Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and Beauty and Goodness will then be 
added unto you. That is what Christ really taught in the Sermon on the Mount. 
Jesus was, to my mind, a supreme artist because he saw and expressed Truth; 
and so was Muhammad, the Koran being the most perfect composition in all 
Arabic literature ―at any rate, that is what scholars say. It is because both of 
them strove first for Truth that grace of expression naturally came in and yet 
neither Jesus nor Muhammad wrote on Art. That is the Truth and Beauty I crave 
for, live for, and would die for. (MM, 38) 
 
As regards God it is difficult to define Him; but the definition of truth is 
deposited in every human heart. Truth is that which you believe to be true at 
this moment, and that is your God. If a man worships this relative truth, he is 
sure to attain the Absolute Truth, i.e. God, in course of time. (DM, 249D50) 
 
I know the path. It is straight and narrow. It is like the edge of a sword. I 
rejoice to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God's word is: 'He who strives never 
perishes.' I have implicit faith in that promise. Though, therefore, from my 
weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose faith but hope that I shall see 
the Light when the flesh has been brought under perfect subjection, as some 
day it must. (MM, 12) 
 
I am but a seeker after Truth. I claim to have found a way to it. I claim to be 
making a ceaseless effort to find it. But I admit that I have not yet found it. To 
find Truth completely is to realize oneself and one's destiny, i.e., to become 
perfect. I am painfully conscious of my imperfections, and therein lies all the 
strength I possess, because it is a rare thing for a man to know his own 
limitations. (MM, 13) 
 
I am in the world feeling my way to light 'amid the encircling gloom'. I often err 
and miscalculate..... My trust is solely in God. And I trust men only because I 
trust God. If I had no God to rely upon, I should be, like Timon, a hater of my All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86 species. (MM, 13) 
 
I am not a 'statesman in the garb of a saint'. But since Truth is the highest 
wisdom, sometimes my acts appear to be consistent with the highest 
statesmanship. But, I hope I have no policy in me save the policy of Truth 
and ahimsa . I will not sacrifice Truth and ahimsa  even for the deliverance of 
my country or religion. That is as much as to say that neither can be so 
delivered. (MM, 1) 
 
It seems to me that I understand the ideal of truth better than that of ahimsa , 
and my experience tells me that if I let go my hold of truth, I shall never be 
able to solve the fiddle of ahimsa  .... In other words, perhaps, I have not the 
courage to follow the straight course. Both at bottom mean one and the same 
thing, for doubt is invariably the result of want or weakness of faith. 'Lord, give 
me faith' is, therefore, my prayer day and night. (MM, 5) 
 
In the midst of humiliation and soDcalled defeat and a tempestuous life, I am 
able to retain my peace, because of an underlying faith in God, translated as 
Truth. We can describe God as millions of things, but I have for myself adopted 
to formula―Truth is God . (MM, 10) 
 
I claim to have no infallible guidance or inspiration. So far as my experience 
goes, the claim to infallibility on the part of a human being would be 
untenable, seeing that inspiration too can come only to one who is free from 
the action of opposites, and it will be difficult to judge on a given occasion 
whether the claim to freedom from pairs of opposites is justified. The claim to 
infallibility would thus always be a most dangerous claim to make. This, 
however, does not leave us without any guidance whatsoever. The sumDtotal of 
the experience of the sages of the world is available to us and would be for all 
time to come. Moreover, there are not many fundamental truths, but there is 
only one fundamental truth which is Truth itself, otherwise known as NonDAll Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87 violence. Finite human beings shall never know in its fullness Truth and Love 
which is in itself infinite. But we do know enough for our guidance. We shall 
err, and sometimes grievously, in our application. But man is a selfDgoverning 
being, and selfDgovernment necessarily includes the power as much to commit 
errors as to set them right as often as they are made. (MM, 15) 
 
I may be a despicable person, but when Truth speaks through me I am 
invincible. (MM, 23) 
 
I have in my life never been guilty of saying things I did not mean ―my nature is 
to go straight to the heart and if often I fail in doing so for the time being, I 
know that Truth will ultimately make itself heard and felt, as it has often done 
in my experience. (MM, 20) 
 
I am a humble but very earnest seeker after Truth. And in my search, I take all 
fellowDseekers in uttermost confidence so that I may know my mistakes and 
correct them. I confess that I have often erred in my estimates and 
judgements. ....And inasmuch as in every case I retraced my steps, no 
permanent harm was done. On the contrary, the fundamental truth of nonD
violence has been made infinitely more manifest than it ever has been, and the 
country has in no way been permanently injured. (MM, 20) 
 
I see and find beauty in Truth or through Truth. All Truth, not merely true 
ideas, but truthful faces, truthful pictures or songs are highly beautiful. People 
generally fail to see beauty in Truth, the ordinary man runs away from and 
becomes blind to the beauty in it. Whenever men begin to see beauty in Truth, 
then true art will arise. (MM, 37) 
 
To a true artist only that face is beautiful which, quite apart from its exterior, 
shines with the truth within the soul. There is ... no beauty apart from Truth. 
On the other hand, Truth may manifest itself in forms which may not outwardly All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88 beautiful at all. Socrates, we are told, was the most truthful man of his time, 
and yet his features are said to have been the ugliest in Greece. To my mind he 
was beautiful because all his life was a striving after Truth, and may remember 
that this outward form did not prevent Phidias from appreciating the beauty of 
Truth in him, though as an artist he was accustomed to see beauty in outward 
forms also. (MM, 38) 
 
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect Truth so long as we are imprisoned 
in this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in our imagination. We cannot, 
through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body, see face to face Truth 
which is eternal. That is why in the last resort one must depend on faith. (SB, 
9) 
 
I lay claim to nothing exclusively divine in me. I do not claim prophetship. I am 
but a humble seeker after Truth and bent upon finding it. I count no sacrifice 
too great for the sake of seeing God face to face. The whole of my activity 
whether it may be called social, political, humanitarian or ethical is directed to 
that end. And as I know that God is found more often in the lowliest of His 
creatures than in the high and mighty, I am struggling to reach the status of 
these. I cannot do so without their service. Hence my passion for the service of 
the suppressed classes. And as I cannot render this service without entering 
politics, I find myself in the them. Thus I am no master, I am but a struggling, 
erring, humble servant of India and, therethrough, of humanity. (SB, 46D47) 
 
There is no religion higher than Truth and Righteousness. (SB, 223) 
 
True religion and true morality are inseparably bound up with each other. 
Religion is to morality what water is to the seed that is sown in the soil. (SB, 
223) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89 I reject any religious doctrine that does not appeal to reason and is in conflict 
with morality. I tolerate unreasonable religious sentiment when it is not 
immoral. (SB, 223) 
 
As soon as we lose the moral basis, we cease to be religious. There is no such 
thing as religion overriding morality. Man for instance cannot be untruthful, 
cruel and incontinent and claim to have God on his side. (SB, 223) 
 
Our desires and motives may be divided into two classes ―selfish and unselfish. 
All selfish desires are immoral while the desire to improve ourselves for the 
sake of doing good to others is truly moral. The highest moral law is that we 
should unremittingly work for the good of mankind. (SB, 223) 
 
If any action of mine claimed to be spiritual is proved to be impracticable it 
must be pronounced to be a failure. I do believe that the most spiritual act is 
the most practical in the true sense of the term. (SB, 224) 
 
Scriptures cannot transcend reason and truth. They are intended to purify 
reason and illuminate truth. (SB, 229) 
 
Error can claim no exemption even if it can be supported by the scriptures of 
the world. (SB, 229) 
 
An error does not become truth by reason of multiplied propagation, nor does 
truth become error because nobody sees it. (SB, 229) 
 
I do not hold that everything ancient is good because it is ancient. I do not 
advocate surrender of GodDgiven reasoning faculty in the face of ancient 
tradition. Any tradition, however ancient, if inconsistent with morality, is fit to 
be banished from the land. Untouchability may be considered to be an ancient 
tradition, the institution of child widowhood and child marriage may be All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90 considered to be an ancient tradition, and even so many an ancient horrible 
belief and superstitious practice. I would sweep them out of existence if I had 
the power. (SB, 229) 
 
I do not disbelieve in idol worship. An idol does not excite any feeling of 
veneration in me. But I think that idol worship is part of human nature. We 
hanker after symbolism. (SB, 230) 
 
I do not forbid the use of images in prayer. I only prefer the worship of the 
Formless. This preference is perhaps improper. One thing suits one man; 
another thing will suit another man, and no comparison can fairly be made 
between the two. (DM, 168) 
 
I have come to feel that like human beings words have their evolution from 
stage to stage in the contents they hold. For instance the contents of the 
richest word―God― are not the same to every one of us. They will vary with 
the experience of each. (SB, 238) 
 
I see neither contradiction nor insanity in my life. It is true that as a man 
cannot see his back, so can he not see his errors or insanity. But the sages have 
often likened a man of religion to a lunatic. I therefore hug the belief that I 
may not be insane and may be truly religious. Which of the two I am in truth 
can only be decided after my death. (MM, 1) 
 
Whenever I see an erring man, I say to myself I have also erred; when I see a 
lustful man I say to myself, so was I once; and in this way I feel kinship with 
everyone in the world and feel that I cannot be happy without the humblest of 
us being happy. (MM, 2D3) 
 
I shall have to answer my God and my Maker if I give anyone less than his due, 
but I am sure that He will bless me if He knows that I gave one more than his All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91 due. (MM, 3) 
 
Mine is a life full of joy in the midst of incessant work. In not wanting to think 
of what tomorrow will bring for me I feel as free as a bird.... The thought that I 
am ceaselessly and honestly struggling against the requirements of the flesh 
sustains me. (MM, 3) 
 
I am too conscious of the imperfections of the species to which I belong to be 
irritated against any member thereof. My remedy is to deal with the wrong 
wherever I see it, not to hurt the wrongDdoer, even as I would not like to be 
hurt for the wrongs I continually do. (MM, 3) 
 
I remain an optimist, not that there is any evidence that I can give that right is 
going to prosper, but because of my unflinching faith that right must prosper in 
the end... Our inspiration can come only from our faith that right must 
ultimately prevail. (MM, 5) 
 
There are limits to the capacity of an individual, and the moment he flatters 
himself that he can undertake all tasks, God is there to humble his pride. For 
myself, I am gifted with enough humility to look even to babes and suckling for 
help. (MM, 6) 
 
A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness of its parent although it is 
unconscious of it. But it is dried up as soon as it enters upon an existence 
independent of the ocean. We do not exaggerate when we say that life is a 
mere bubble. (MM, 5) 
 
I am an irrepressible optimist, because I believe in myself. That sounds very 
arrogant, doesn't it? But I say it from the depths of my humility. I believe in the 
supreme power of God. I believe in Truth and, therefore, I have no doubt in the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92 future of this country or the future of humanity. (MM, 10) 
 
Mine is not a religion of the prisonDhouse. It has room for the least among God's 
creation. But it is proof against insolence, pride of race, religion or colour. 
(MM, 81) 
 
I do not share the belief that there can or will be on earth one religion. I am 
striving, therefore, to find a common factor and to induce mutual tolerance. 
(MM, 82) 
 
I hold that a life of perfect continence in thought, speech and action is 
necessary for reaching spiritual perfection. And a nation that does not possess 
such men is poorer for the want. (MM, 106) 
 
A sinner is equal to the saint in the eye of God. Both will have equal justice, 
and both an equal opportunity either to go forward or to go backward. Both are 
His children, His creation. A saint who considers himself superior to a sinner 
forfeits his sainthood and becomes worse than the sinner, who, unlike the 
proud saint, knows not what he is doing. (MM, 167) 
 
We often confuse spiritual knowledge with spiritual attainment. Spirituality is 
not a matter of knowing scriptures and engaging in philosophical discussions. It 
is a matter of heart culture, of unmeasurable strength. Fearlessness is the first 
requisite of spirituality. Cowards can never be moral. (SB, 210) 
 
Man should earnestly desire the wellDbeing of all God's creation and pray that 
he might have the strength to do so. In desiring the wellDbeing of all lies his 
own welfare; he who desires only his own or his community's welfare is selfish 
and it can never be well with him..... It is essential for man to discriminate 
between what he may consider to be good and what is really good for him. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93 (MGP, I, 348) 
 
I believe in the absolute oneness of God and, therefore, of humanity. What 
though we have many bodies? We have but one soul. The rays of the sun are 
many through refraction. But they have the same source. I cannot, therefore, 
detach myself from the wickedest soul nor may I be denied identity with the 
most virtuous. (MGP, II, 784) 
 
If I were a dictator, religion and State would be separate. I swear by my 
religion. I will die for it. But it is my personal affair. The State has nothing to 
do with it. The State would look after secular welfare, health, 
communications, foreign relations, currency and so on, but not your or my 
religion. That is everybody's personal concern. (MT, VII, 264) 
 
I am surrounded by exaggeration and untruth. In spite of my best efforts to find 
it, I do not know where Truth lies. But it seems to me that I have come nearer 
to God and Truth. It has cost me old friendships but I am not sorry for it. To me 
it is a sign of my having come nearer to God that I can write and speak to 
everybody plainly and fearlessly about the delicate issue in the teeth of the 
fiercest opposition, practice in full the eleven vows which I have professed, 
without the slightest feeling of perturbation or unrest. Sixty years of striving 
have at last enabled me to realize the ideal of truth and purity which I have 
ever set before myself. (MGP, II, 143) 
 
All that we know is that one should do one's duty and leave the results in the 
hands of God. Man is supposed to be master of his own destiny, but it is only 
partly true. He can make his own destiny only in so far as he is allowed by the 
Great Power which overrides all our intentions, all our plans and carries out His 
own plans. I call that Power not by the name of Allah, Khuda or God but Truth. 
The whole truth is embodied only within the heart of that Great Power ―Truth. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94 (MGP, II, 91) 
 
I know of no greater sin than to oppress the innocent in the name of God. 
(MGP, II, 143) 
 
When I think of my littleness and my limitations on the one hand and of the 
expectations raised about me on the other, I become dazed for the moment, 
but I come to myself as soon as I realize that these expectations are a tribute 
not to me, a curious mixture of Jekyll and Hyde, but to the incarnation, 
however imperfect but comparatively great in me, of the two priceless 
qualities of truth and nonviolence. (MM, 14) 
 
There is nothing on earth that I would not give up for the sake of the country 
excepting of course two things and two only, namely, truth and nonDviolence. I 
would not sacrifice the two for all the world. For to me Truth is God and there 
is no way to find Truth except the way of nonDviolence. I do not seek to serve 
India at the sacrifice of Truth or God. For I know that a man who forsakes Truth 
can forsake his country, and his nearest and dearest ones. (MT, II, 312) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  
03. MEANS AND ENDS 
 
Mea
ns and end are convertible terms in my philosophy of life. (SB, 13) 
 
They say 'means are after all means'. I would say 'means are after all 
everything'. As the means so the end. There is no wall of separation between 
means and end. Indeed the Creator has given us control (and that too very 
limited) over means, none over the end. Realization of the goal is in exact 
proportion to that of the means. This is a proposition that admits of no 
exception. (SB, 37) 
 
Ahimsa  and Truth are so intertwined that it is practically impossible to 
disentangle and separate them. They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather 
a smooth unstamped metallic disc. Who can say, which is the obverse, and 
which the reverse? Nevertheless, ahimsa  is the means; Truth is the end. Means 
to be means must always be within our reach, and so ahimsa  is our supreme 
duty. If we take care of the means, we are bound to reach the end sooner or 
later. When once we have grasped this point final victory is beyond question. 
Whatever difficulties we encounter, whatever apparent reverses we sustain, 
we may not give up the quest for Truth which alone is, being God Himself. (SB, 
14) 
 
I do not believe in shortDviolentDcuts to success.... However much I may 
sympathize with and admire worthy motives, I am an uncompromising opponent 
of violent methods even to serve the noblest of causes. There is, therefore, 
really no meetingDground between the school of violence and myself. But my 
creed of nonDviolence not only does not preclude me but compels me even to 
associate with anarchists and all those who believe in violence. But that 
association is always with the sole object of weaning them from what appears 
to me their error. For experience convinces me that permanent good can never All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96 be the outcome of untruth and violence. Even if my belief is a fond delusion, it 
will be admitted that it is a fascinating delusion. (MM, 126) 
 
Your belief that there is no connection between the means and the end is a 
great mistake. Through that mistake even men who have been considered 
religious have committed grievous crimes. Your reasoning is the same as saying 
that we can get a rose through planting a noxious weed. If I want to cross the 
ocean, I can do so only by means of a vessel; if I were to use a cart for that 
purpose, both the cart and I would soon find the bottom. 'As is the God, so is 
the votary' is a maxim worth considering. Its meaning has been distorted and 
men have gone astray. The means may be likened to a seed, the end to a tree; 
and there is just the same inviolable connection between the means and the 
end as there is between the seed and the tree. I am not likely to obtain the 
result flowing from the worship of God by laying myself prostrate before Satan. 
If, therefore, anyone were to say: 'I want to worship God; it does not matter 
that I do so by means of Satan', it would be set down as ignorant folly. We reap 
exactly as we sow. (HS, 51D52) 
 
Socialism is a beautiful word and, so far as I am aware, in socialism all the 
members of society are equal ― none low, none high. In the individual body, 
the head is not high because it is the top of the body, nor are the soles of the 
feet low because they touch the earth. Even as members of the individual body 
are equal, so are the members of society. This is socialism. 
In it the prince and the peasant, the wealthy and the poor, the employer and 
the employee are all on the same level. In terms of religion, there is no duality 
in socialism. It is all unity. Looking at society all the world over, there is 
nothing but duality or plurality. Unity is conspicuous by its absence.... In the 
unity of my conception there is perfect unity in the plurality of designs. 
In order to reach this state, we may not look on things philosophically and say 
that we need not make a move until all are converted to socialism. Without 
changing our life we may go on giving addresses, forming parties and hawkDlike All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97 seize the game when it comes our way. This is no socialism. The more we treat 
it as game to be seized, the farther it must recede from us. 
Socialism begins with the first convert. If there is one such you can add zeroes 
to the one and the first zero will account for ten and every addition will 
account for ten times the previous number. If, however, the beginner is a zero, 
in other words, no one makes the beginning, multiplicity of zeroes will also 
produce zero value. Time and paper occupied in writing zeroes will be so much 
waste. 
This socialism is as pure as crystal. It, therefore, requires crystalDlike means to 
achieve it. Impure means result in an impure end. Hence the prince and the 
peasant will not be equaled by cutting off the prince's head, nor can the 
process of cutting off equalize the employer and the employed. One cannot 
reach truth by untruthfulness. Truthful conduct alone can reach truth. Are not 
nonDviolence and truth twins? The answer is an emphatic 'No'. NonDviolence is 
embedded in truth and vice versa. Hence has it been said that they are faces of 
the same coin. Either is inseparable from the other. Read the coin either 
way―the spelling of words will be different; the value is the same. This 
blessed state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbour impurity of mind 
or body and you have untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore only truthful, nonDviolent and pureDhearted socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the world. (MGP, II, 140D41) 
 
The spiritual weapon of selfDpurification, intangible as it seems, is the most 
potent means of revolutionalizing one's environment and loosening external 
shackles. It works subtly and invisibly; it is an intense process though it might 
often seem a weary and longDdrawn process, it is the straightest way to 
liberation, the surest and quickest and no effort can be too great for it. What it 
requires is faith―an unshakable mountainDlike faith that flinches from nothing. 
(SB, 160D61) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98 I am more concerned in preventing the brutalization of human nature than in 
the prevention of the sufferings of my own people. I know that people who 
voluntarily undergo a course of suffering raise themselves and the whole of 
humanity; but I also know that people who become brutalized in their 
desperate efforts to get victory over their opponents or to exploit weaker 
nations or weaker men, not only drag down themselves but mankind also. And 
it cannot be a matter of pleasure to me or anyone else to see human nature 
dragged to the mire. If we are all sons of the same God and partake of the 
same divine essence, we must partake of the sin of every person whether he 
belongs to us or to another race. You can understand how repugnant it must be 
to invoke the beast in any human being, how much more so in Englishmen, 
among whom I count numerous friends. (SB, 161) 
 
The method of passive resistance is the clearest and safest, because, if the 
cause is not true, it is the resisters, and they alone, who suffer. (SB, 162) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  
04. AHIMSA OR THE WAY OF NON-VIOLENCE 
 
Non
Dviolence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. It is mightier 
than the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by the ingenuity of man. 
Destruction is not the law of the humans. Man lives freely by his readiness to 
die, if need be, at the hands of his brother, never by killing him. Every murder 
or other injury, no matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on another is 
a crime against humanity. (MM, 49) 
 
The first condition of nonDviolence is justice all round in every department of 
life. Perhaps, it is too much to expect of human nature. I do not, however, 
think so. No one should dogmatize about the capacity of human nature for 
degradation or exaltation. (MT, V, 344) 
 
Just as one must learn the art of killing in the training for violence, so one 
must learn the art of dying in the training for nonDviolence. Violence does not 
mean emancipation from fear, but discovering the means of combating the 
cause of fear. NonDviolence, on the other hand, has no cause for fear. The 
votary of nonDviolence has to cultivate the capacity for sacrifice of the highest 
type in order to be free from fear. He recks not if he should lose his land, his 
wealth, his life. He who has not overcome all fear cannot practice ahimsa  to 
perfection. The votary of ahimsa  has only one fear, that is of God. He who 
seeks refuge in God ought to have a glimpse of the Atma  that transcends the 
body; and the moment one has a glimpse of the imperishable Atma  one sheds 
the love of the perishable body. Training in nonDviolence is thus diametrically 
opposed to training in violence. Violence is needed for the protection of things 
external, nonDviolence is needed for the protection of the Atma , for the 
protection of one's honour. (SB, 16) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  It is not nonDviolence if we merely love those that love us. It is nonDviolence 
only when we love those that hate us. I know how difficult it is to follow this 
grand law of love. But are not all great and good things difficult to do? Love of 
the hater is the most difficult of all. But by the grace of God even this most 
difficult thing becomes easy to accomplish if we want to do it. (SB, 18) 
 
I have found that life persists in the midst of destruction and therefore there 
must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only under that law would a 
wellDordered society be intelligible and life worth living. And if that is the law 
of life, we have to work it out in daily life. Whenever there are jars, wherever 
you are confronted with an opponent conquer him with love. In this crude 
manner I have worked it out in my life. That does not mean that all my 
difficulties are solved. Only I have found that this law of love has answered as 
the law of destruction has never done. 
It is not that I am incapable of anger, for instance, but I succeed on almost all 
occasions to keep my feelings under control. Whatever may be the result, there 
is always in me conscious struggle for following the law of nonDviolence 
deliberately and ceaselessly. Such a struggle leaves one stronger for it. The 
more I work at this law, the more I feel the delight in my life, the delight in 
the scheme of the universe. It gives me a peace and a meaning of the mysteries 
of nature that I have no power to describe. (SB, 25) 
 
I saw that nations like individuals could only be made through the agony of the 
Cross and in no other way. Joy comes not out of infliction of pain on others but 
out of pain voluntarily borne by oneself. (SB, 18) 
 
If we turn our eyes to the time of which history has any record down to our 
own time, we shall find that man has been steadily progressing 
towards ahimsa . Our remote ancestors were cannibals. Then came a time when 
they were fed up with cannibalism and they began to live on chase. Next came 
a stage when man was ashamed of leading the life of a wandering hunter. He 
therefore took to agriculture and depended principally on mother earth for his All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  food. Thus from being a nomad he settled down to civilized stable life, founded 
villages and towns, and from member of a family he became member of a 
community and a nation. All these are signs of progressive ahimsa  and 
diminishing himsa . Had it been otherwise the human species should have been 
extinct by now, even as many of the lower species have disappeared. 
Prophets and avatars  have also taught the lesson of ahimsa  more or less. Not 
one of them has professed to teach himsa . And how should it be 
otherwise? Himsa  does not need to be taught. Man as animal is violent, but as 
Spirit is nonDviolent. The moment he awakes to the Spirit within, he cannot 
remain violent. Either he progresses towards ahimsa  or rushes to his doom. 
That is why the prophets and avatars  have taught the lesson of truth, harmony, 
brotherhood, justice, etc. ―all attributes of ahimsa . (SB, 23) 
 
I claim that even now, though the social structure is not based on a conscious 
acceptance of nonDviolence, all the world over mankind lives and men retain 
their possessions on the sufferance of one another. If they had not done so, 
only the fewest and the most ferocious would have survived. But such is not the 
case. Families are bound together by ties of love, and so are groups in the soD
called civilized society called nations. Only they do not recognize the 
supremacy of the law of nonDviolence. It follows, therefore, that they have not 
investigated its vast possibilities. Hitherto, out of sheer inertia, shall I say, we 
have taken it for granted that complete nonDviolence is possible only for the 
few who take the vow of nonDpossession and the allied abstinences. Whilst it is 
true that the votaries alone can carry on research work and declare from time 
to time the new possibilities of the great eternal law governing man, if it is a 
law, it must hold good for all. The many failures we see are not of the law but 
of the followers, many of whom do not even know that they are under the law 
willyDnilly. When a mother dies for her child she unknowingly obeys the law. I 
have been pleading for the past fifty years for a conscious acceptance of the 
law and its zealous practice even in the face of failures. Fifty years' work has 
shown marvelous results and strengthened my faith. I do claim that by constant 
practice we shall come to a state of things when lawful possession will All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  commend universal and voluntary respect. No doubt such possession will not be 
tainted. It will not be an insolent demonstration of the inequalities that 
surround us everywhere. Nor need the problem of unjust and unlawful 
possession appall the votary of nonDviolence. He has at his disposal the nonD
violent weapon of Satyagraha  and nonDcoDoperation which hitherto has been 
found to be a complete substitute of violence whenever it has been applied 
honestly in sufficient measure. I have never claimed to present the complete 
science of nonDviolence. It does not lend itself to such treatment. So far as I 
know, no single physical science does, not even the very exact science of 
mathematics. I am but a seeker. (SB, 24D25) 
 
In the application of Satyagraha , I discovered in the earliest stages that pursuit 
of truth did not admit of violence being inflicted on one's opponent but that he 
must be weaned from error by patience and sympathy. For, what appears to be 
truth to the one may appear to be error to another. And patience means selfD
suffering. So the doctrine came to mean vindication of truth, not by infliction 
of suffering on the opponent, but on one's self. (SB, 17D18) 
 
In this age of wonders no one will say that a thing or idea is worthless because 
it is new. To say it is impossible because it is difficult, is again not in 
consonance with the spirit of the age. Things undreamt of are daily being seen, 
the impossible is ever becoming possible. We are constantly being astonished 
these days at the amazing discoveries in the field of violence. But I maintain 
that far more undreamt of and seemingly impossible discoveries will be made 
in the field of nonDviolence. (SB, 31D32) 
 
Man and his deed are two distinct things. It is quite proper to resist and attack 
a system, but to resist and attack its author is tantamount to resisting and 
attacking oneself. For we are all tarred with the same brush, and are children 
of one and the same Creator, and as such the divine powers within us are 
infinite. To slight a single human being is to slight those divine powers, and All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  thus to harm not only that being but with him the whole world. (SB, 27D28) 
 
NonDviolence is a universal principle and its operation is not limited by a hostile 
environment. Indeed, its efficacy can be tested only when it acts in the midst 
of and in spite of opposition. Our nonDviolence would be a hollow thing and 
nothing worth, if it depended for its success on the goodwill of the authorities. 
(SB, 33) 
 
The only condition of a successful use of this force is recognition of the 
existence of the soul as apart from the body and its permanent nature. And this 
recognition must amount to a living faith and not mere intellectual grasp. (SB, 
32) 
 
Some friends have told me that truth and nonDviolence have no place in politics 
and worldly affairs. I do not agree. I have no use for them as a means of 
individual salvation. Their introduction and application in everyday life has 
been my experiment all along. (SB, 33) 
 
No man could be actively nonDviolent and not rise against social injustice no 
matter where it occurred. (SB, 33) 
 
Passive resistance is a method of securing rights by personal suffering; it is the 
reverse of resistance by arms. When I refuse to do a thing that is repugnant to 
my conscience, I use soulDforce. For instance, the government of the day has 
passed a law which is applicable to me. I do not like it. If by using violence I 
force the government to repeal the law, I am employing what may be termed 
bodyDforce. If I do not obey the law and accept the penalty for its breach, I use 
soulDforce. It involves sacrifice of self. 
Everybody admits that sacrifice of self is infinitely superior to sacrifice of 
others. Moreover, if this kind of force is used in a cause that is unjust, only the 
person using it suffers. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  He does not make others suffer for his mistakes. Men have before now done 
many things which were subsequently found to have been wrong. No man can 
claim that he is absolutely in the right or that a particular thing is wrong 
because he thinks so, but it is wrong for him so long as that is his deliberate 
judgment. It is therefore clear that he should not do that which he knows to be 
wrong, and suffer the consequence whatever it may be. This is the key to the 
use of soulDforce. (SB, 34) 
 
A votary of ahimsa  cannot subscribe to the utilitarian formula (of the greatest 
good of the greatest number). He will strive for the greatest good of all and die 
in the attempt to realize the ideal. He will therefore be willing to die, so that 
the others may live. He will serve himself with the rest, by himself dying. The 
greatest good of all inevitably includes the good of the greatest number, and, 
therefore, he and the utilitarian will converge in many points in their career 
but there does come a time when they must part company, and even work in 
opposite directions. The utilitarian to be logical will never sacrifice himself. 
The absolutist will even sacrifice himself. (SB, 38D39) 
 
You might of course say that there can be no nonDviolent rebellion and there 
has been none known to history. Well, it is my ambition to provide an instance, 
and it is my dream that my country may win its freedom through nonDviolence. 
And, I would like to repeat to the world times without number, that I will not 
purchase my country's freedom at the cost of nonDviolence. My marriage to 
nonDviolence is such an absolute thing that I would rather commit suicide than 
be deflected from my position. I have not mentioned truth in this connection, 
simply because truth cannot be expressed except by nonDviolence. (SB, 142D43) 
 
The accumulated experience of the past thirty years, the first eight of which 
were in South Africa, fills me with the greatest hope that in the adoption of 
nonDviolence lies the future of India and the world. It is the most harmless and 
yet equally effective way of dealing with the political and economic wrongs of 
the downDtrodden portion of humanity. I have known from early youth that All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  nonDviolence is not a cloistered virtue to be practiced by the individual for the 
peace and final salvation, but it is a rule of conduct for society if it is to live 
consistently with human dignity and make progress towards the attainment of 
peace for which it has been yearning for ages past. (SB, 145) 
 
Up to the year 1906, I simply relied on appeal to reason. I was a very 
industrious reformer. I was a good draftsman, as I always had a close grip of 
facts which in its turn was the necessary result of my meticulous regard for 
truth. But I found that reason failed to produce an impression when the critical 
moment arrived in South Africa. My people were excited; even a worm will and 
does sometimes turn ―and there was talk of wreaking vengeance. I had then to 
choose between allying myself to violence or finding out some other method of 
meeting the crisis and stopping the rot and it came to me that we should 
refuse to obey legislation that was degrading and let them put us in jail if they 
liked. Thus came into being the moral equivalent of war. I was then a loyalist, 
because I implicitly believed that the sum total of the activities of the British 
Empire was good for India and for humanity. Arriving in England soon after the 
outbreak of the war I plunged into it and later when I was forced to go to India 
as a result of the pleurisy that I had developed, I led a recruiting campaign at 
the risk of my life, and to the horror of some of my friends. The disillusionment 
came in 1919 after the passage of the Black Rowlatt Act (Act depriving Indians 
of some fundamental civil liberties) and the refusal of the government to give 
the simple elementary redress of proved wrongs that we had asked for. And so, 
in 1920, I became a rebel. Since then the conviction has been growing upon 
me, that things of fundamental importance to the people are not secured by 
reason alone but have to be purchased with their suffering. Suffering is the law 
of human beings; war is the law of the jungle. But suffering is infinitely more 
powerful than the law of the jungle for converting the opponent and opening 
his ears, which are otherwise shut, to the voice of reason. Nobody has probably 
drawn up more petitions or espoused more forlorn causes than I and I have 
come to this fundamental conclusion that if you want something really 
important to be done you must not merely satisfy the reason, you must move All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  the heart also. The appeal of reason is more to the head but the penetration of 
the heart comes from suffering. It opens up the inner understanding in man. 
Suffering is the badge of the human race, not the sword. (SB, 146D47) 
 
NonDviolence is a power which can be wielded equally by all ―children, young 
men and women or grown up people ―provided they have a living faith in the 
God of Love and have therefore equal love for all mankind. When nonDviolence 
is accepted as the law of life it must pervade the whole being and not be 
applied to isolated acts. (SB, 147) 
 
If we are to be nonDviolent, we must then not wish for anything on this earth 
which the meanest or the lowest of human beings cannot have. (SB, 16) 
 
The principle of nonDviolence necessitates complete abstention from 
exploitation in any form. (SB, 33) 
 
My resistance to war does not carry me to the point of thwarting those who 
wish to take part in it. I reason with them. I put before them the better way 
and leave them to make the choice. (SB, 144) 
 
I would say to my critics to enter with me into the sufferings, not only of the 
people of India but of those, whether engaged in the war or not, of the whole 
world. I cannot look at this butchery going on in the world with indifference. I 
have an unchangeable faith that it is beneath the dignity of man to resort to 
mutual slaughter. I have no doubt that there is a way out. (SB, 145) 
 
Perfect nonDviolence is impossible so long as we exist physically, for we would 
want some space at least to occupy. Perfect nonDviolence whilst you inhabit 
the body is only a theory like Euclid's point or straight line, but we have to 
endeavour every moment of our lives. (SB, 147) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  Taking life may be a duty. We do destroy as much life as we think necessary for 
sustaining our body. Thus for food we take life, vegetable and other, and for 
health we destroy mosquitoes and the like by the use of disinfectants, etc., 
and we do not think that we are guilty of irreligion in doing so...for the benefit 
of the species, we kill carnivorous beasts.... Even man slaughter may be 
necessary in certain cases. Suppose a man runs amuck and goes furiously about, 
sword in hand, and killing anyone that comes in his way, and no one dares to 
capture him alive. Anyone who despatches this lunatic will earn the gratitude 
of the community and be regarded as a benevolent man. (SB, 149) 
 
I see that there is an instinctive horror of killing living beings under any 
circumstances whatever. For instance, an alternative has been suggested in the 
shape of confining even rabid dogs in a certain place and allowing them to die 
a slow death. Now my idea compassion makes this thing impossible for me. I 
cannot for a moment bear to see a dog, or for that matter any other living 
being, helplessly suffering the torture of a slow death. I do not kill a human 
being thus circumstanced because I have more hopeful remedies. I should kill a 
dog similarly situated because in its case I am without a remedy. Should my 
child be attacked with rabies and there was no helpful remedy to relieve his 
agony, I should consider it my duty to take his life. Fatalism has its limits. We 
leave things to fate after exhausting all the remedies. One of the remedies and 
the final one to relieve the agony of a tortured child is to take his life. (SB, 
149) 
 
In its positive form, ahimsa  means the largest love, greatest charity. If I am a 
follower of ahimsa I must love  my enemy. I must apply the same rules to the 
wrongDdoer who is my enemy or a stranger to me, as I would to my wrongDdoing 
father or son. This active ahimsa  necessarily includes truth and fearlessness. As 
man cannot deceive the loved one, he does not fear or frighten him or her. Gift 
of life is the greatest of all gifts, a man who gives it in reality, disarms all 
hostility. He has paved the way for an honourable understanding. And none 
who is himself subject to fear can bestow that gift. He must therefore be All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  himself fearless. A man cannot practice ahimsa  and be a coward at the same 
time. The practice of ahimsa  calls forth the greatest courage. (SB, 151) 
 
Having flung aside the sword, there is nothing except the cup of love which I 
can offer to those who oppose me. It is by offering that cup that I expect to 
draw them close to me. I cannot think of permanent enmity between man and 
man, and believing as I do in the theory of rebirth, I live in the hope that if not 
in this birth, in some other birth, I shall be able to hug all humanity in friendly 
embrace. (SB, 151D52) 
 
Love is the strongest force the world possesses and yet it is the humblest 
imaginable. (SB, 152) 
 
The hardest heart and the grossest ignorance must disappear before the rising 
sun of suffering without anger and without malice. (SB, 152) 
 
NonDviolence is 'not a resignation from all real fighting against wickedness'. On 
the contrary, the nonDviolence of my conception is a more active and real fight 
against wickedness than retaliation whose very nature is to increase 
wickedness. I contemplate a mental and therefore a moral opposition to 
immoralities. I seek entirely to blunt the edge of the tyrant's sword, not by 
putting up against it a sharperDedged weapon, but by disappointing his 
expectation that I would be offering physical resistance. The resistance of the 
soul that I should offer would elude him. It would at first dazzle him and at last 
compel recognition from him, which recognition would not humiliate but would 
uplift him. It may be urged that this is an ideal state. And so it is. (SB, 152) 
 
Ahimsa  is a comprehensive principle. We are helpless mortals caught in the 
conflagration of himsa . The saying that life lives on life has a deep meaning in 
it. Man cannot for a moment live without consciously or unconsciously 
committing outward himsa . The very fact of his living―eating, drinking and All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  moving about ―necessarily involves some himsa , destruction of life, be it ever 
so minute. A votary of ahimsa therefore remains true to his faith if the spring 
of all his actions is compassion, if he shuns to the best of his ability the 
destruction of the tiniest creature, tries to save it, and thus incessantly strives 
to be free from the deadly coil of himsa . He will be constantly growing in selfD
restraint and compassion, but he can never become entirely free from 
outward himsa . 
Then again, because underlying ahimsa  is the unity of all life, the error of one 
cannot but affect all, and hence man cannot be wholly free from himsa . So 
long as he continues to be a social being, he cannot but participate in 
the himsa  that the very existence involves. When two nations are fighting, the 
duty of a votary of ahimsa  is to stop the war. He who is not equal to that duty, 
he who has no power of resisting war, he who is not qualified to resist war, 
may take part in war, and yet wholeDheartedly try to free himself, his nation 
and the world from war. (AMG, 427D28) 
 
I make no distinction, from the point of view of ahimsa  between combatants 
and nonDcombatants. He who volunteers to serve a band of dacoits, by working 
as their carrier, or their watchman while they are about their business, or their 
nurse when they are wounded, is as much guilty of dacoity as the dacoits 
themselves. In the same way those who confine themselves to attending to the 
wounded in battle cannot be absolved from the guilt of war. (AMG, 428) 
 
The question is subtle. It admits of differences of opinion, and therefore I have 
submitted my argument as clearly as possible to those who believe 
in ahimsa and who are making serious efforts to practice it in every walk of 
life. 
A devotee of Truth may not do anything in deference to convention. He must 
always hold himself open to correction, and whenever he discovers himself to 
be wrong he must confess it at all costs and atone for it. (AMG, 429) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110  NonDviolence to be a potent force must begin with the mind. NonDviolence of 
the mere body without the coDoperation of the mind is nonDviolence of the 
weak or the cowardly, and has therefore no potency. If we bear malice and 
hatred in our bosoms and pretend not to retaliate, it must recoil upon us and 
lead to our destruction. For abstention from mere bodily violence not to be 
injurious, it is at least necessary not to entertain hatred if we cannot generate 
active love. (SB, 154) 
 
He is no follower of ahimsa  who does not care a straw if he kills a man by 
inches by deceiving him in a trade or who would protect by force of arms a few 
cows and make away with the butcher or who, in order to do a supposed good 
to his country, does not mind killing of a few officials. All these are actuated 
by hatred, cowardice and fear. (SB, 155) 
 
I object to violence because when it appears to do good, the good is only 
temporary; the evil it does is permanent. I do not believe that the killing of 
even every Englishman can do the slightest good to India. The millions will be 
just as badly off as they are today, if someone made it possible to kill off every 
Englishman tomorrow. The responsibility is more ours than that of the English 
for the present state of things. The English will be powerless to do evil if we 
will but do good. Hence my incessant emphasis on reform from within. (SB, 
157) 
 
History teaches one that those who have, no doubt with honest motives, ousted 
the greedy by using brute force against them, have in their turn become a prey 
to the disease of the conquered. (SB, 157) 
 
From violence done to the foreign ruler, violence to our own people whom we 
may consider to be obstructing the country's progress is an easy natural step. 
Whatever may have been the result of violent activities in other countries and 
without reference to the philosophy of nonDviolence, it does not require much 
intellectual effort to see that if we resort to violence for ridding society of All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  many abuses which impede our progress, we shall add to our difficulties and 
postpone the day of freedom. The people unprepared for reforms because 
unconvinced of their necessity will be maddened with rage over their coercion, 
and will seek the assistance of the foreigner in order to retaliate. Has not this 
been happening before our eyes for the past many years of which we have still 
painfully vivid recollections? (SB, 159D60) 
 
If I can have nothing to do with the organized violence of the government, I can 
have less to do with the unorganized violence of the people. I would prefer to 
be crushed between the two. (SB, 206) 
 
I have been practicing with scientific precision nonDviolence and its possibilities 
for an unbroken period of over 50 years. I have applied it in every walk of 
life―domestic, institutional, economic and political. I know of no single case in 
which it has failed. Where it has seemed sometimes to have failed, I have 
ascribed it to my imperfections. I claim no perfection for myself. But I do claim 
to be a passionate seeker after Truth, which is but another name for God. In 
the course of that search the discovery of nonDviolence came to me. Its spread 
is my life mission. I have no interest in living except for the prosecution of that 
mission. (MM, 42) 
 
It is to me a matter of perennial satisfaction that I retain generally the 
affection and trust of those whose principles and policies I oppose. The South 
Africans gave me personally their confidence and extended their friendship. In 
spite of my denunciation of British policy and system I enjoy the affection of 
thousands of Englishmen and women, and in spite of unqualified condemnation 
of modern materialistic civilization, the circle of European and American 
friends is ever widening. It is again a triumph of nonDviolence. (MM, 3D4) 
 
My experience, daily growing stronger and richer, tells me that there is no 
peace for individuals or for nations without practicing truth and nonDviolence All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  to the uttermost extent possible for man. The policy of retaliation has never 
succeeded. (MM, 44) 
 
My love for nonDviolence is superior to every other thing mundane or 
supramundane. It is equaled only by my love for truth which is to me 
synonymous with nonDviolence through which and which alone I can see and 
reach Truth. My scheme of life, if it draws no distinction between different 
religionists in India, also draws none between different races. For me 'A man's a 
man for a' that'. (MM, 44) 
 
I am but a weak aspirant, ever failing, ever trying. My failures make me more 
vigilant than before and intensify my faith. I can see with the eye of faith that 
the observance of the twin doctrine of truth and nonDviolence has possibilities 
of which we have but very inadequate conception. (MM, 44) 
 
I am an irrepressible optimist. My optimism rests on my belief in the infinite 
possibilities of the individual to develop nonDviolence. The more you develop it 
in your own being, the more infectious it becomes till it overwhelms your 
surroundings and by and by might over sweep the world. (MM, 46) 
 
In my opinion nonDviolence is not passivity in any shape or form. NonDviolence, 
as I understand it, is the most active force in the world.... NonDviolence is the 
supreme law. During my half a century of experience I have not yet come 
across a situation when I had to say that I was helpless, that I had no remedy in 
terms of nonDviolence. (MM, 46) 
 
It is the acid test of nonDviolence that in a nonDviolent conflict there is no 
rancour left behind, and in the end the enemies are converted into friends. 
That was my experience in South Africa with General Smuts. He started with 
being my bitterest opponent and critic. Today he is my warmest friend. (MM, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  46) 
 
The strength to kill is not essential for selfDdefense; one ought to have the 
strength to die. When a man is fully ready to die, he will not even desire to 
offer violence. Indeed, I may put it down as a selfDevident proposition that the 
desire to kill is in inverse proportion to the desire to die. And history is replete 
with instances of men who by dying with courage and compassion on their lips 
converted the hearts of their violent opponents. (MM, 48D49) 
 
I am but a humble explorer of the science of nonDviolence. Its hidden depths 
sometimes stagger me just as much as they stagger fellowDworkers. (MM, 48) 
 
It has become the fashion these days to say that society cannot be organized or 
run on nonDviolent lines. I join issue on that point. In a family, when a father 
slaps his delinquent child, the latter does not think of retaliating. He obeys his 
father not because of the deterrent effect of the slap but because of the 
offended love which he senses behind it. That, in my opinion, is an epitome of 
the way in which society is or should be governed. What is true of the family 
must be true of society which is but a larger family. (MM, 50) 
 
I do not want to live at the cost of the life even of a snake. I should let him 
bite me to death rather than kill him. But it is likely that if God puts me to that 
cruel test and permits a snake to assault me, I may not have the courage to 
die, but that the beast in me may assert itself and I may seek to kill the snake 
in defending this perishable body. I admit that my belief has not become so 
incarnate in me as to warrant my stating emphatically that I have shed all fear 
of snakes so as to befriend them as I would like to be able to. (MM, 52) 
 
I am not opposed to the progress of science as such. On the contrary, the 
scientific spirit of the West commands my admiration and if that admiration is 
qualified, it is because the scientist of the West takes no note of God's lower All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  creation. I abhor vivisection with my whole soul. I detest the unpardonable 
slaughter of innocent life in the name of science and humanity soDcalled, and 
all the scientific discoveries stained with innocent blood I count as of no 
consequence. If the circulation of blood theory could not have been discovered 
without vivisection, the human kind could well have done without it. And I see 
the day clearly dawning when the honest scientist of the West will put 
limitations upon the present methods of pursuing knowledge. (MM, 54) 
 
NonDviolence is not an easy thing to understand, still less to practice, weak as 
we are. We must all act prayerfully and humbly and continually asking God to 
open the eyes of our understanding being ever ready to act according to the 
light as we daily receive it. My task as a lover and promoter of peace, 
therefore, today consists in unflinching devotion to nonDviolence in the 
prosecution of the campaign for regaining our liberty. And if India succeeds in 
so regaining it, it will be the greatest contribution to the world peace. (MM, 58) 
 
Passive resistance is an allDsided sword; it can be used anyhow; it blesses him 
who uses it and him against whom it is used. Without drawing a drop of blood it 
produces farDreaching results. It never rusts and cannot be stolen. (MM, 63) 
 
Disobedience to be civil must be sincere, respectful, restrained, never defiant, 
must be based upon some wellDunderstood principle, must not be capricious 
and above all, must have no illDwill or hatred behind it. (MM, 64) 
 
Jesus Christ, Daniel and Socrates represented the purest form of passive 
resistance or soulDforce. All these teachers counted their bodies as nothing in 
comparison to their soul. Tolstoy was the best and brightest (modern) exponent 
of the doctrine. He not only expounded it, but lived according to it. In India, 
the doctrine was understood and commonly practiced long before it came into 
vogue in Europe. It is easy to see that soulDforce is infinitely superior to bodyD
force. If people in order to secure redress of wrongs resort to soulDforce, much All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  of the present suffering will be avoided. (MM, 68) 
 
Buddha fearlessly carried the war into the enemy's camp and brought down on 
its knees an arrogant priesthood. Christ drove out the moneyDchangers from the 
temple of Jerusalem and drew down curses from Heaven upon the hypocrites 
and the Pharisees. Both were for intensely direct action. But even as Buddha 
and Christ chastised, they showed unmistakable gentleness and love behind 
every act of theirs. They would not raise a finger against their enemies, but 
would gladly surrender themselves rather than the truth for which they lived. 
Buddha would have died resisting the priesthood, if the majesty of his love had 
not proved to be equal to the task of bending the priesthood. Christ died on 
the cross with a crown of thorns on his head defying the might of a whole 
empire. And if I raise resistances of a nonDviolent character, I simply and 
humbly follow in the footsteps of the great teachers. (MM, 68D69) 
 
It is a law of Satyagraha  that when a man has no weapon in his hands and when 
he cannot think of a way out, he should take the final step of giving up his 
body. (DM, 296) 
 
Ahimsa  is soulDforce and the soul is imperishable, changeless and eternal. The 
atom bomb is the acme of physical force and, as such subject to the law of 
dissipation, decay and death that governs the physical universe. Our scriptures 
bear witness that when soulDforce is fully awakened in us, it becomes 
irresistible. But the test and condition of full awakening is that it must 
permeate every pore of our being and emanate with every breath that we 
breathe. 
But no institution can be made nonDviolent by compulsion. NonDviolence and 
truth cannot be written into constitution. They have to be adopted of one's 
own free will. They must sit naturally upon us like nextDtoDskin garments or 
else they become a contradiction in terms. (MGP, II, 124D25) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  Life is an aspiration. Its mission is to strive after perfection, which is selfD
realization. The ideal must not be lowered because of our weaknesses and 
imperfections.... One who hooks his fortunes to ahimsa , the law of love, daily 
lessens the circle of destruction, and to that extent promotes life and love; he 
who swears by himsa , the law of hate, daily widens the circle of destruction, 
and to that extent promotes death and hate. (MGP, II, 507) 
 
In life, it is impossible to eschew violence completely. Now the question arises, 
where is one to draw the line? The line cannot be the same for everyone. For, 
although, essentially the principle is the same, yet everyone applies it in his or 
her own way. What is one man's food can be another's poison. MeatDeating is a 
sin for me. Yet, for another person, who has always lived on meat and never 
seen anything wrong in it, to give it up, simply in order to copy me, will be a 
sin. 
If I wish to be an agriculturist and stay in a jungle, I will have to use the 
minimum unavoidable violence, in order to protect my fields. I will have to kill 
monkeys, birds and insects, which eat up my crops. If I do not wish to do so 
myself, I will have to engage someone to do it for me. There is not much 
difference between the two. To allow crops to be eaten up by animals, in the 
name of ahimsa , while there is a famine in the land, is certainly a sin. Evil and 
good are relative terms. What is good under certain conditions can become an 
evil or a sin, under a different set of conditions. 
Man is not to drown himself in the well of the shastras , but he is to dive in 
their broad ocean and bring out pearls. 
At every step he has to use his discrimination as to what is ahimsa  and what 
is himsa . In this, there is no room for shame or cowardice. The poet had said 
that the road leading up to God is for the brave, never for the cowardly. (MT, 
VII, 152D53) 
 
To say or write a distasteful word is surely not violent especially when the 
speaker or writer believes it to be true. The essence of violence is that there All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  must be a violent intention behind a thought, word, or act, i.e., an intention to 
do harm to the opponent soDcalled. 
False notions of propriety or fear of wounding susceptibilities often deter 
people from saying what they mean and ultimately land them on the shores of 
hypocrisy. But if nonDviolence of thought is to be evolved in individuals or 
societies or nations, truth has to be told, however harsh or unpopular it may 
appear to be for the moment. (SB, 150D51) 
 
Never has anything been done on this earth without direct action. I reject the 
word 'passive resistance' because of its insufficiency and its being interpreted 
as a weapon of the weak. (SB, 153) 
 
NonDviolence presupposes ability to strike. It is a conscious, deliberate restraint 
put upon one's desire for vengeance. But vengeance is any day superior to 
passive, effeminate and helpless submission. Forgiveness is higher still. 
Vengeance too is weakness. The desire for vengeance comes out of fear of 
harm, imaginary or real. A man who fears no one on earth would consider it 
troublesome even to summon up anger against one who is vainly trying to 
injure him. (SB, 153) 
 
NonDviolence and cowardice go ill together. I can imagine a fully armed man to 
be at heart a coward. Possession of arms implies an element of fear, if not 
cowardice. But true nonDviolence is an impossibility without the possession of 
unadulterated fearlessness. (SB, 154) 
 
My creed of nonDviolence is an extremely active force. It has no room for 
cowardice or even weakness. There is hope for a violent man to be some day 
nonDviolent, but there is none for a coward. I have therefore said more than 
once in these pages that if we do not know how to defend ourselves, our 
women and our places of worship by the force of suffering, i.e., nonDviolence, 
we must, if we are men, be at least able to defend all these by fighting. (SB, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  154) 
 
The people of a village near Bettia told me that they had run away whilst the 
police were looting their houses and molesting their womenfolk. When they 
said that they had run away because I had told them to be nonDviolent, I hung 
my head in shame. I assured them that such was not the meaning of my nonD
violence. I expected them to intercept the mightiest power that might be in 
the act of harming those who were under their protection, and draw without 
retaliation all harm upon their own heads even to the point of death, but never 
to run away from the storm centre. It was manly enough to defend one's 
property, honour, or religion at the point of the sword. It was manlier and 
nobler to defend them without seeking to injure the wrongdoer. But it was 
unmanly, unnatural and dishonorable to forsake the post of duty and, in order 
to save one's skin, to leave property, honour or religion to the mercy of the 
wrongDdoer. I could see my way of delivering ahimsa  to those who knew how to 
die, not to those who were afraid of death. (SB, 155D56) 
 
I would risk violence a thousand times than the emasculation of a whole race. 
(SB, 156) 
 
My nonDviolence does not admit of running away from danger and leaving dear 
ones unprotected. Between violence and cowardly flight, I can only prefer 
violence to cowardice. I can no more preach nonDviolence to a coward than I 
can tempt a blind man to enjoy healthy scenes. NonDviolence is the summit of 
bravery. And in my own experience, I have had no difficulty in demonstrating 
to men trained in the school of violence the superiority of nonDviolence. As a 
coward, which I was for years, I harboured violence. I began to prize nonD
violence only when I began to shed cowardice. (MM, 47) 
 
NonDviolence cannot be taught to a person who fears to die and has no power 
of resistance. A helpless mouse is not nonDviolent because he is always eaten 
by pussy. He would gladly eat the murderess if he could, but he ever tries to All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  flee from her. We do not call him a coward, because he is made by nature to 
behave no better than he does. But a man who, when faced by danger, behaves 
like a mouse, is rightly called a coward. He harbours violence and hatred in his 
heart and would kill his enemy if he could without hurting himself. He is a 
stranger to nonDviolence. All sermonizing on it will be lost on him. Bravery is 
foreign to his nature. Before he can understand nonDviolence he has to be 
taught to stand his ground and even suffer death, in the attempt to defend 
himself against the aggressor who bids fair to overwhelm him. To do otherwise 
would be to confirm his cowardice and take him farther away from nonD
violence. Whilst I may not actually help anyone to retaliate, I must not let a 
coward seek shelter behind nonDviolence soDcalled. Not knowing the stuff of 
which nonDviolence is made, many have honestly believed that running away 
from danger every time was a virtue compared to offering resistance, 
especially when it was fraught with danger to one's life. As a teacher of nonD
violence I must, so far as it is possible for me, guard against such an unmanly 
belief. (MM, 49) 
 
No matter how weak a person is in body, if it is a shame to flee, he will stand 
his ground and die at his post. This would be nonDviolence and bravery. No 
matter how weak he is, he will use what strength he has in inflicting injury on 
his opponent, and die in the attempt. This is bravery, but not nonDviolence. If, 
when his duty is to face danger, he flees, it is cowardice. In the first case the 
man will have love or charity in him. In the second and third case, there would 
be a dislike or distrust and fear. (MM, 50) 
 
Supposing I was a Negro, and my sister was ravished by a white or lynched by a 
whole community, what would be my duty? I ask myself. And the answer comes 
to me: I must not wish ill to these, but neither must I coDoperate with them. It 
may be that ordinarily I depend on the lynching community for my livelihood. I 
refuse to coDoperate with them, refuse even to touch the food that comes from 
them, and I refuse to coDoperate with even my brother Negroes who tolerate 
the wrong. That is the selfDimmolation I mean. I have often in my life resorted All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120  to the plan. Of course, a mechanical act of starvation will mean nothing. One's 
faith must remain undimmed whilst life ebbs out, minute by minute. But I am 
every poor specimen of the practice of nonDviolence, and my answer may not 
convince you. But I am striving very hard, and even if I do not succeed fully in 
this life, my faith will not diminish. (MT, IV, 61) 
 
In this age of the rule of brute force, it is almost impossible for anyone to 
believe that anyone else could possibly reject the law of the final supremacy of 
brute force. And so I receive anonymous letters advising me that I must not 
interfere with the progress of the nonDcoDoperation movement even though 
popular violence may break out. Others come to me and, assuming that 
secretly I must be plotting violence, inquire when the happy moment for 
declaring open violence is to arrive. They assure me that the English will never 
yield to anything but violence, secret or open. Yet others, I am informed, 
believe that I am the most rascally person living in India because I never give 
out my real intention and that they have not a shadow of a doubt that I believe 
in violence just as much as most people do. 
Such being the hold that the doctrine of the sword has on the majority of 
mankind, and as success of nonDcoDoperation depends principally on absence of 
violence during its pendency, and as my views in this matter affect the conduct 
of a large number of people, I am anxious to state them as clearly as possible. 
I do believe that, where there is only a choice between cowardice and 
violence, I would advise violence. Thus when my eldest son asked me what he 
should have done, had he been present when I was almost fatally assaulted in 
1908, whether he should have run away and seen me killed or whether he 
should have used his physical force which he could and wanted to use, and 
defend me, I told him that it was his duty to defend me even by using violence. 
Hence it was that I took part in the Boer War, the soDcalled Zulu Rebellion and 
the late war. Hence also do I advocate training in arms for those who believe in 
the method of violence. I would rather have India resort to arms in order to 
defend her honour than that she should in a cowardly manner become or 
remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  But I believe that nonDviolence is infinitely superior to violence, forgiveness is 
more manly than punishment. Forgiveness adorns a soldier. But abstinence is 
forgiveness only when there is the power to punish; it is meaningless when it 
pretends to proceed from a helpless creature. A mouse hardly forgives a cat 
when it allows itself to be torn to pieces by her. I, therefore, appreciate the 
sentiment of those who cry out for the condign punishment of General Dyer and 
his ilk. They would tear him to pieces if they could. But I do not believe India 
to be a helpless creature. Only I want to use India's and my strength for a 
better purpose. 
Let me not be misunderstood. Strength does not come from physical capacity. 
It comes from an indomitable will. An average Zulu is anyway more than a 
match for an average Englishman in bodily capacity. But he flees from an 
English boy, because he fears the boy's revolver or those who will use it for 
him. He fears death and is nerveless in spite of his burly figure. We in India 
may in a moment realize that one hundred thousand Englishmen need not 
frighten three hundred million human beings. A definite forgiveness would, 
therefore, mean a definite recognition of our strength. With enlightened 
forgiveness must come a mighty wave of strength in us, which would make it 
impossible for a Dyer and a Frank Johnson to heap affront on India's devoted 
head. It matters little to me that for the moment I do not drive my point home. 
We feel too downtrodden not to be angry and revengeful. But I must not refrain 
from saying that India can gain more by waiving the right of punishment. We 
have better work to do, a better mission to deliver to the world. 
I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. Religion of nonDviolence 
is not meant merely for the rishis  and saints. It is meant for the common 
people as well. NonDviolence is the law of our species as violence is the law of 
the brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute, and he knows no law but that of 
physical might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher law, to the 
strength of the spirit. 
I have ventured to place before India the ancient law of selfDsacrifice. 
For Satyagraha  and its offshoots, nonDcoDoperation and civil resistance, are 
nothing but new names for the law of suffering. The rishis , who discovered the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  law of nonDviolence in the midst of violence, were greater geniuses than 
Newton. They were themselves greater warriors than Wellington. Having 
themselves known the use of arms, they realized their uselessness and taught a 
weary world that its salvation lay not through violence but through nonD
violence. 
NonDviolence in its dynamic condition means conscious suffering. It does not 
mean meek submission to the will of the evilDdoer, but it means putting of 
one's whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our 
being, it is possible for a single individual to defy the whole might of an unjust 
empire to save his honour, his religion, his soul, and lay the foundation for that  
empire's fall or its regeneration. 
And so I am not pleading for India to practice nonDviolence because it is weak. I 
want her to practice nonDviolence being conscious of her strength and power. 
No training in arms is required for realization of her strength. We seem to need 
it, because we seem to think that we are but a lump of flesh. I want to 
recognize that she has a soul that cannot perish and that can rise triumphant 
above every physical weakness and defy the physical combination of a whole 
world.... If India takes up the doctrine of the sword, she may gain momentary 
victory. Then India will cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to India 
because I owe my all to her. I believe absolutely that she has a mission for the 
world. She is not to copy Europe blindly. India's acceptance of the doctrine of 
the sword will be the hour of my trial. I hope I shall not be found wanting. My 
religion has no geographical limits. If I have a living faith in it, it will transcend 
my love for India herself. My life is dedicated to the service of India through 
the religion of nonDviolence which I believe to be the root of Hinduism. (MT, II, 
5D8) 
 
I must continue to argue till I convert opponents or I own defeat. For my 
mission is to convert every Indian, even Englishmen and finally the world, to 
nonDviolence for regulating mutual relations whether political, economic, social 
or religious. If I am accused of being too ambitious, I should plead guilty. If I 
am told that my dream can never materialize, I would answer 'that is possible', All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123  and go my way. I am a seasoned soldier of nonDviolence, and I have evidence 
enough to sustain my faith. Whether, therefore, I have one comrade or more or 
none, I must continue my experiment. (MT, V, 273) 
 
It has been suggested by American friends that the atom bomb will bring 
in ahimsa , as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant that its destructive power 
will so disgust the world, that it will turn it away from violence for the time 
being. And this is very like a man glutting himself with the dainties to the point 
of nausea, and turning away from them only to return with redoubled zeal 
after the effect of nausea is well over. Precisely in the same manner will the 
world return to violence with renewed zeal, after the effect of disgust is worn 
out. 
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God's, not man's plan. Man knows 
that only evil can come out of evil, as good out of good.....The moral to be 
legitimately drawn from the supreme tragedy of the atom bomb is that it will 
not be destroyed by counter bombs, even as violence cannot be by counter 
violence. Mankind has to go out of violence only through nonDviolence. Hatred 
can be overcome only by love. Counter hatred only increases the surface, as 
well as the depth of hatred. 
I am aware that I am repeating what I have many times stated before and 
practiced to the best of my ability and capacity. What I first stated was itself 
nothing new. It was as old as the hills. Only I recited no copyDbook maxim but 
definitely announced what I believed in every fibre of my being. Sixty years of 
practice in various walks of life has only enriched the belief which the 
experience of friends fortified. It is, however, the central truth by which one 
can stand alone without flinching. I believe in what Max Muller said years ago, 
namely, that truth needed to be repeated, as long as there were men who 
disbelieved it. (MT, VII, 171D73) 
 
If India makes violence her creed, and I have survived, I would not care to live 
in India. She will cease to evoke any pride in me. My patriotism is subservient 
to my religion. I cling to India like a child to its mother's breast, because I feel All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124  that she gives me the spiritual nourishment I need. She has the environment 
that responds to my highest aspiration. When that faith is gone, I shall feel like 
an orphan without hope of ever finding a guardian. (MM, 133) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125   
05. SELF-DISCIPLINE 
 
Civi
lization, in the real sense of the term, consists not in multiplication but in 
the deliberate and voluntary restriction of wants. This alone promotes real 
happiness and contentment, and increases the capacity for service. (SB, 39) 
 
A certain degree of physical harmony and comfort is necessary, but above that 
level, it becomes a hindrance instead of a help. Therefore the ideal of creating 
an unlimited number of wants and satisfying them seems to be a delusion and a 
snare. The satisfaction of one's physical needs, even the intellectual needs of 
one's narrow self, must meet at a point a dead stop before it degenerates into 
physical and intellectual voluptuousness. A man must arrange his physical and 
cultural circumstances so that they may not hinder him in his service of 
humanity, on which all his energies should be concentrated. (SB, 39) 
 
The relation between the body and the mind is so intimate that, if either of 
them got out of order, the whole system would suffer. Hence it follows that a 
pure character is the foundation of health in the real sense of the term; and 
we may say that all evil thoughts and evil passions are but different forms of 
disease. (SB, 268) 
 
Perfect health can be attained only by living in obedience to the laws of God, 
and defying the power of Satan. True happiness is impossible without true 
health and true health is impossible without a rigid control of the palate. All 
the other senses will automatically come under control when the palate has 
been brought under control. And he who has conquered his senses has really 
conquered the whole world, and he becomes a part of God. (SB, 268) 
 
I have taken up journalism not for its sake but merely as an aid to what I have 
conceived to be my mission in life. My mission is to teach by example and All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126  precept under severe restraint the use of the matchless weapon 
of Satyagraha  which is a direct corollary of nonDviolence and truth. I am 
anxious, indeed I am impatient, to demonstrate that there is no remedy for the 
many ills of life save that of nonDviolence. It is a solvent strong enough to melt 
the stoniest heart. To be true to my faith, therefore, I may not write in anger 
or malice. I may not write idly. I may not write merely to excite passion. The 
reader can have no idea of the restraint I have to exercise from week to week 
in the choice of topics and my vocabulary. It is a training for me. It enables me 
to peep into myself and to make discoveries of my weaknesses. Often my 
vanity dictates a smart expression or my anger a harsh adjective. It is a terrible 
ordeal but a fine exercise to remove these weeds. The reader sees the pages of 
the Young India  fairly wellDdressedDup and sometimes, with Romain Rolland, he 
is inclined to say 'what a fine old man this must be!' Well, let the world 
understand that the fineness is carefully and prayerfully cultivated. And, if it 
has proved acceptable to some whose opinion I cherish, let the reader 
understand that when that fineness has become perfectly natural, i.e., when I 
have become incapable of evil and when nothing harsh or haughty occupies, be 
it momentarily, my thoughtDWorld, then and not till then, my nonDviolence will 
move all the hearts of all the world. I have placed before me and the reader no 
impossible ideal or ordeal. It is man's prerogative and birthDright. We have lost 
the paradise only to regain it. (SB, 271D72; see also MM, 44) 
 
I have learnt through bitter experience the one supreme lesson to conserve my 
anger, and as heat conserved is transmuted into energy, even so our anger 
controlled can be transmuted into a power which can move the world. (MM, 11) 
It is not that I do not get angry. I don't give vent to anger. I cultivate the 
quality of patience as angerlessness, and generally speaking, I succeed. But I 
only control my anger when it comes. How I find it possible to control it would 
be a useless question, or it is a habit that everyone must cultivate and must 
succeed in forming by constant practice. (MM, 11) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127  It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the consequences of one's acts. It is 
good for a person who overDeats to have an ache and a fast. It is bad for him to 
indulge his appetite and then escape the consequences by taking tonics or 
other medicine. It is still worse for a person to indulge in his animal passions 
and escape the consequences of his acts. Nature is relentless and will have full 
revenge for any such violation of her laws. Moral results can only be produced 
by moral restraints. All other restraints defeat the very purpose for which they 
are intended. (MM, 108) 
 
It is not for us to find fault with anyone else and sit in judgment over him. We 
should be exhausted judging ourselves only, and so long as we notice a single 
fault in ourselves and wish our relations and friends not to forsake us in spite of 
such fault, we have no right to poke our nose into other people's conduct. If in 
spite of ourselves we notice another's fault, we should ask him himself if we 
have the power and think it proper to do so, but we have no right to ask 
anybody else. (DM, 98) 
 
Do not brood over the passions. When you have once come to a decision, do not 
be reconsidering it. Taking a vow implies that the mind ceases to think on the 
subject of that vow any longer. When a merchant has sold some goods, he 
thinks no more about them, but only about other things. The same is the case 
with the subjectDmatter of a vow. (DM, 298) 
 
You will wish to know what the marks of a man are who wants to realize truth 
which is God. He must be completely free from anger and lust, greed and 
attachment, pride and fear. He must reduce himself to zero and have perfect 
control over all his senses― beginning with the palate or tongue. Tongue is the 
organ of speech as well as of taste. It is with the tongue that we indulge in 
exaggeration, untruth and speech that hurts. The craving for taste makes us 
slaves to the palate so that like animals we live to eat. But with proper 
discipline, we can make ourselves into beings only a 'little below the angels'. 
He who has mastered his senses is first and foremost among men. All virtues All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128  reside in him. God manifests Himself through him. Such is the power of selfD
discipline. (MGP, II, 233) 
 
All universal rules of conduct known as God's commandments are simple and 
easy to understand and to carry out, if the will is there. They only appear to be 
difficult because of the inertia which governs mankind. There is nothing at a 
standstill in nature. Only God is motionless for He was, is and will be the same 
yesterday, today and tomorrow, and vet is ever moving.... Hence I hold that if 
mankind is to live, it has to come increasingly under sway of truth and nonD
violence. (MGP, II, 442) 
 
Just as for conducting scientific experiments there is an indispensable scientific 
course of instruction, in the same way, strict preliminary discipline is necessary 
to qualify a person to make experiments in the spiritual realm. (MGP, II, 792) 
 
Abstemiousness from intoxicating drinks and drugs, and from all kinds of foods, 
especially meat, is undoubtedly a great aid to the evolution of the spirit, but it 
is by no means an end in itself. Many a man eating meat and living in the fear 
of God is nearer his freedom than a man religiously abstaining from meat and 
many other things, but blaspheming God in every one of his acts. (SB, 221) 
 
Experience teaches that animal food is unsuited to those who would curb their 
passions. But it is wrong to overestimate the importance of food in the 
formation of character or in subjugating the flesh. Diet is a powerful factor not 
to be neglected. But to sum up all religion in terms of diet, as is often done in 
India, is as wrong as it is to disregard all restraint in regard to diet and to give 
full reins to one's appetite. (SB, 221) 
 
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the spiritual discipline of a 
votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129  in order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his 
speech; he will measure every word. (MM, 32) 
 
It [silence] has now become both a physical and spiritual necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pressure. Then I wanted time for 
writing. After however, I had practiced it for some time, I saw the spiritual 
value of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind that that was the time when I 
could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally 
built for silence. (MM, 33) 
 
Silence of the sewnDup lips is no silence. One may achieve the same result by 
chopping off one's tongue, but that too would not be silence. He is silent who, 
having the capacity to speak, utters no idle word. (MM, 32D33) 
 
All power comes from the preservation of and sublimation of the vitality that is 
responsible for the creation of life. This vitality is continuously and even 
unconsciously dissipated by evil or even rambling, disorderly, unwanted 
thoughts. And since thought is the root of all speech and action, the quality of 
the latter corresponds to that of the former. Hence perfectly controlled 
thought is itself power of the highest potency and becomes selfDacting.... If 
man is after the image of God, he has but to will a thing in the limited sphere 
allotted to him and it becomes. Such power is impossible in one who dissipates 
his energy in any way whatsoever. (MGP, I, 573) 
 
It is better to enjoy through the body than to be enjoying the thought of it. It is 
good to disapprove of sensual desires as soon as they arise in the mind and try 
to keep them down; but if, for want of physical enjoyment, the mind wallows 
in thoughts of enjoyment, then it is legitimate to satisfy the hunger of the 
body. About this I have no doubt. (SB, 217) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothing to be ashamed of in it. But 
it is meant only for the act of creation. Any other use of it is a sin against God 
and humanity. (SB, 18) 
 
The world seems to be running after things of transitory value. It has no time 
for the other. And yet, when one thinks a little deeper, it becomes clear that it 
is the things eternal that count in the end.... One such isbrahmacharya . 
What is brahmacharya ? It is the way of life which leads us to Brahma ―God. It 
includes full control over the process of reproduction. The control must be in 
thought, word and deed. If the thought is not under control, the other two 
have no value.... For one whose thought is under control, the other is mere 
child's play. (MGP, I, 599) 
 
It is true that he who has attained perfect brahmacharya  does not stand in 
need of protecting walls. But the aspirant undoubtedly needs them, even as a 
young mango plant has need of a strong fence round it. A child goes from its 
mother's lap to the cradle and from cradle to the pushDcart ―till he becomes a 
man who has learnt to walk without aid. To cling to the aid when it is needless 
is surely harmful. 
It appears to me that even the true aspirant does not need the aboveD
mentioned restraints. Brahmacharya  is not a virtue that can be cultivated by 
outward restraints. He who runs away from a necessary contact with a woman 
does not understand the full meaning of brahmacharya . However attractive a 
woman may be, her attraction will produce no effect on the man without the 
urge.... 
The true brahmachari  will shun false restraints. He must create his own fences 
according to his limitations, breaking them down when he feels that they are 
unnecessary. The first thing is to know what true brahmacharya  is, then to 
realize its value, and lastly to try to cultivate this priceless virtue. I hold that 
true service of the country demands this observance. (MGP, I, 600) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131  I know from my own experience, that as long as I looked upon my wife carnally, 
we had no real understanding. Our love did not reach a high plane. There was 
affection between us always, but we came closer and closer, the more we, or 
rather I, became restrained. There never was any want of restraint on the part 
of my wife. Very often she would show restraint, but she rarely resisted me 
although she showed disinclination very often. All the time I wanted carnal 
pleasure I could not serve her. The moment I bade goodbye to a life of carnal 
pleasure, our whole relationship became spiritual. Lust died and love reigned 
instead. (MT, IV, 57D58) 
 
As an external aid to brahmacharya , fasting is as necessary as selection and 
restriction in diet. So overpowering are the senses that they can be kept under 
control only when they are completely hedged in on all sides, from above and 
from beneath. It is common knowledge that they are powerless without food, 
and so fasting undertaken with a view to control of the senses is, I have no 
doubt, very helpful. With some, fasting is of no avail, because assuming that 
mechanical fasting alone will make them immune, they keep their bodies 
without food, but feast their minds upon all sorts of delicacies, thinking all the 
while what they will eat and what they will drink after the fast terminates. 
Such fasting helps them in controlling neither palate nor lust. Fasting is useful 
when mind coDoperates with starving body, that is to say, when it cultivates 
distaste for the objects that are denied to the body. Mind is at the root of all 
sensuality. Fasting, therefore, has a limited use, for a fasting man may 
continue to be swayed by passion. (AMG, 258) 
 
Brahmacharya  is such only if it persists under all conditions and in the face of 
every possible temptation. If a beautiful woman approaches the marble statue 
of a man, it will not be affected in the least. Abrahmachari  is one who reacts 
in a similar case in the same way as marble does. But just as the marble statue 
refrains from using its eyes or ears, even so a man should avoid every occasion 
of sin. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132  You argue that the sight and the company of woman have been found to be 
inimical to selfDrestraint and are therefore to be avoided. This argument is 
fallacious. Brahmacharya hardly deserves the name if it can be observed only 
by avoiding the company of women even when such company is kept with a 
view to serve. It amounts to physical renunciation unbacked by the essential 
mental detachment, and lets us down in critical times. (DM, 80) 
 
For 20 years I was in closest touch with the West in South Africa. I have known 
the writings on sex by eminent writers like Havelock Ellis, Bertrand Russell, and 
their theories. They are all thinkers of eminence, integrity and experience. 
They have suffered for their convictions and for giving expression to the same. 
While totally repudiating institutions like marriage, etc., and the current code 
of morals―and there I disagree with them ―they are firm believers in the 
possibility and desirability of purity in life independently of those institutions 
and usages. I have come across men and women in the West who lead a pure 
life although they do not accept or observe the current usages and social 
conventions. My research runs somewhat in that direction. If you admit the 
necessity and desirability of reform, of discarding the old, wherever necessary, 
and building a new system of ethics and morals suited to the present age, then 
the question of seeking the permission of others or convincing them does not 
arise. A reformer cannot afford to wait till others are converted; he must take 
the lead and venture forth alone even in the teeth of universal opposition. I 
want to test, enlarge and revise the current definition of brahmacharya ....in 
the light of my observation, study and experience. Therefore, whenever an 
opportunity presents itself I do not evade it or run away from it. On the 
contrary, I deem it my duty, dharma , to meet it squarely in the face and find 
out where it leads to and where I stand. To avoid the contact of a woman, or 
to run away from it out of fear, I regard as unbecoming of an aspirant after 
true brahmacharya . I have never tried to cultivate or seek sex contact for 
carnal satisfaction. I do not claim to have completely eradicated the sex 
feeling in me. But it is my claim that I can keep it under control. (MGP, I, 588DAll Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  89) 
 
The whole train of thought which underlies birth control is erroneous and 
dangerous. Its supporters claim that a man has not only the right, but it is his 
duty to satisfy the animal instinct, and that his development would be arrested 
if he did not discharge this duty. I think this claim is false. It is idle to expect 
selfDrestraint from one who takes to artificial methods. In fact birth control is 
advocated on the ground that restraint of animal passion is an impossibility. To 
say that such restraint is impossible or unnecessary or harmful is the negation 
of all religion. For the whole superstructure of religion rests on the foundations 
of selfDcontrol. (DM, 253) 
 
I want to revert to the subject of birth control by contraceptives. It is dinned 
into one's ears that the gratification of the sex urge is a solemn obligation like 
the obligation of discharging debts lawfully incurred, and that not to do so 
would involve the penalty of intellectual decay. This sex urge has been isolated 
from the desire for progeny, and it is said by the protagonists of the use of 
contraceptives that the conception is an accident to be prevented except when 
the parties desire to have children. I venture to suggest that this is a most 
dangerous doctrine to preach anywhere; much more so in a country like India, 
where the middleDclass male population has become imbecile through abuse of 
the creative function. If satisfaction of the sex urge is a duty, the unnatural 
vice and several other ways of gratification would be commendable. The 
reader should know that even persons of note have been known to approve of 
what is commonly known as sexual perversion. He may be shocked at the 
statement. But if it somehow or other gains the stamp of respectability, it will 
be the rage amongst boys and girls to satisfy their urge among the members of 
their own sex. For me, the use of contraceptives is not far removed from the 
means to which persons have hitherto resorted for the gratification of their 
sexual desire with the results that very few know. I know what havoc secret 
vice has played among schoolboys and schoolgirls. The introduction of 
contraceptives under the name of science and the imprimatur of known leaders All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134  of society has intensified the complication and made the task of the reformers 
who work for purity of social life well nigh impossible for the moment. I betray 
no confidence when I inform the reader, that there are unmarried girls of 
impressionable age, studying in schools and colleges, who study birth control 
literature and magazines with avidity, and even possess contraceptives. It is 
impossible to confine their use to married women. Marriage loses its sanctity 
when its purpose and highest use is conceived to be the satisfaction of the 
animal passion without contemplating the natural result of such satisfaction. 
(MT, IV, 73) 
 
It is wrong to call me an ascetic. The ideals that regulate my life are presented 
for acceptance by mankind in general. I have arrived at them by gradual 
evolution. Every step was thought out, wellDconsidered, and taken with the 
greatest deliberation. Both my continence and nonDviolence were derived from 
personal experience and became necessary in response to the calls of public 
duty. The isolated life I had to lead in South Africa whether as a householder, 
legal practitioner, social reformer or politician, required, for the due 
fulfillment of these duties, the strictest regulation of sexual life and a rigid 
practice of nonDviolence and truth in human relations, whether with my own 
countrymen or with the Europeans. I claim to be no more than an average man 
with less than average ability. Nor can I claim any special merit for such nonD
violence or continence as I have been able to reach with laborious research. 
(SB, 215D16) 
 
My mind is made up. On the lonesome way of God on which I have set out, I 
need no earthly companions. Let those who will, therefore, denounce me, if I 
am the impostor they imagine me to be, though they may not say so in so many 
words. It might disillusion millions who persist in regarding me as a Mahatma. I 
must confess, the prospect of being so debunked greatly pleases me. (MGP, I, 
586) 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135   
06. INTERNATIONAL PEACE 
 
I do
 not believe that an individual may gain spiritually and those that surround 
him suffer. I believe in advaita . I believe in the essential unity of man and for 
that matter of all that lives. Therefore I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if one man falls, the whole 
world falls to that extent. (SB, 27) 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is content with, the welfare of 
the individual alone. Conversely, there is not a single moral offence which does 
not, directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the actual offender. 
Hence, whether an individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but 
really the concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole world. (SB, 27) 
 
Though there is repulsion enough in Nature, she lives by attraction. Mutual love 
enables Nature to persist. Man does not live by destruction. SelfDlove compels 
regard for others. Nations cohere because there is mutual regard among 
individuals composing them. Some day we must extend the national law to the 
universe, even as we have extended the family law to form nations ―a larger 
family. (SB, 22) 
 
Mankind is one, seeing that all are equally subject to the moral law. All men 
are equal in God's eyes. There are, of course, differences of race and status 
and the like, but the higher the status of a man, the greater is his 
responsibility. (MM, 137) 
 
My mission is not merely brotherhood of Indian humanity. My mission is not 
merely freedom of India, though today it undoubtedly engrosses practically the 
whole of my life and the whole of my time. But through realization of freedom 
of India I hope to realize and carry on the mission of the brotherhood of man. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136  My patriotism is not an exclusive thing. It is allDembracing and I should reject 
that patriotism which sought to mount upon the distress or the exploitation of 
other nationalities. The conception of my patriotism is nothing if it is not 
always, in every case without exception, consistent with the broadest good of 
humanity at large. Not only that, but my religion and my patriotism derived 
from my religion embrace all life. I want to realize brotherhood or identity not 
merely with the beings called human, but I want to realize identity with all 
life, even with such things as crawl upon earth. I want, if I don't give a shock, 
to realize identity with even the crawling things upon earth, because we claim 
descent from the same God, and that being so, all life in whatever form it 
appears must be essentially one. (MM, 135) 
 
It is impossible for one to be an internationalist without being a nationalist. 
Internationalism is possible only when nationalism becomes a fact, i.e., when 
peoples belonging to different countries have organized themselves and are 
able to act as one man. It is not nationalism that is evil, it is the narrowness, 
selfishness, exclusiveness which is the bane of modern nations which is evil. 
Each wants to profit at the expense of, and rise on the ruin of, the other. (MM, 
134) 
 
I am a humble servant of India and in trying to serve India, I serve humanity at 
large.... After nearly fifty years of public life, I am able to say today that my 
faith in the doctrine that the service of one's nation is not inconsistent with the 
service of the world has grown. It is a good doctrine. Its acceptance alone will 
ease the situation in the world and stop the mutual jealousies between nations 
inhabiting this globe of ours. (MM, 135D36) 
 
Interdependence is and ought to be as much the ideal of man as selfD
sufficiency. Man is a social being. Without interDrelation with society he cannot 
realize his oneness with the universe or suppress his egotism. His social 
interdependence enables him to test his faith and to prove himself on the 
touchstone of reality. If man were so placed or could so place himself as to be All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137  absolutely above all dependence on his fellowDbeings he would become so 
proud and arrogant as to be a veritable burden and nuisance to the world. 
Dependence on society teaches him the lesson of humanity. That a man ought 
to be able to satisfy most of his essential needs himself is obvious; but it is no 
less obvious to me that when selfDsufficiency is carried to the length of 
isolating oneself from society it almost amounts to sin. A man cannot become 
selfDsufficient even in respect of all various operations from the growing of the 
cotton to the spinning of the yarn. He has at some stage or other to take the 
aid of members of his family. And if one may take the help from one's own 
family, why not from one's neighbours? Or otherwise what is the significance of 
the great saying, 'The world is my family'? (MM, 136) 
 
Duties to self, to the family, to the country and to the world are not 
independent of one another. One cannot do good to the country by injuring 
himself or his family. Similarly one cannot serve the country injuring the world 
at large. In the final analysis we must die that the family may live, the family 
must die that the country may live and the country must die that the world 
may live. But only pure things can be offered in sacrifice. Therefore, selfD
purification is the first step. When the heart is pure, we at once realize what is 
our duty at every moment. (DM, 287) 
 
The golden way is to be friends with the world and to regard the whole human 
family as one. He who distinguishes between the votaries of one's own religion 
and those of another missDeducates the members of his own and opens the way 
for discord and irreligion. (MGP, I, 359) 
 
I live for India's freedom and would die for it, because it is part of Truth. Only 
a free India can worship the true God. I work for India's freedom because 
my swadeshi  teaches me that being born in it and having inherited her culture, 
I am fittest to serve her  and she has a prior claim to my service. But my 
patriotism is not exclusive; it is calculated not only not to hurt another nation 
but to benefit all in the true sense of the word. India's freedom as conceived by All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138  me can never be a menace to the world. (SB, 43) 
 
We want freedom for our country, but not at the expense or exploitation of 
others, not so as to degrade other countries. I do not want the freedom of India 
if it means the extinction of England or the disappearance of Englishmen. I 
want the freedom of my country so that other countries may learn something 
from my free country, so that the resources of my country might be utilized for 
the benefit of mankind. Just as the cult of patriotism teaches us today that the 
individual has to die for the family, the family has to die for the village, the 
village for the district, the district for the province, and the province for the 
country, even so, a country has to be free in order that it may die, if 
necessary, for the benefit of the world. My love therefore of nationalism or my 
idea of nationalism, is that my country may become free, that if need be, the 
whole country may die, so that the human race may live. There is no room for 
raceDhatred there. Let that be our nationalism. (SB, 43) 
 
There is no limit to extending our services to our neighbours across StateDmade 
frontiers. God never made those frontiers. (SB, 44) 
 
My goal is friendship with the whole world and I can combine the greatest love 
with the greatest opposition to wrong. (SB, 152) 
 
For me patriotism is the same as humanity. I am patriotic because I am human 
and humane. It is not exclusive, I will not hurt England or Germany to serve 
India. Imperialism has no place in my scheme of life. The law of a patriot is not 
different from that of the patriarch. And a patriot is so much the less a patriot 
if he is a lukewarm humanitarian. There is no conflict between private and 
political law. (MM, 133) 
 
Our nonDcoDoperation is neither with the English nor with the West. Our nonDcoD
operation is with the system the English have established, with the material All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139  civilization and its attendant greed and exploitation of the weak. Our nonDcoD
operation is a retirement within ourselves. Our nonDcoDoperation is a refusal to 
coDoperate with the English administrators on their own terms. We say to 
them: 'Come and coDoperate with us on our terms and it will be well for us, for 
you and the world.' We must refuse to be lifted off our feet. A drowning man 
cannot save others. In order to be fit to save others, we must try to save 
ourselves. Indian nationalism is not exclusive, nor aggressive, nor destructive. 
It is healthDgiving, religious and therefore humanitarian. India must learn to 
live before she can aspire to die for humanity. (SB, 113) 
 
I do not want England to be defeated or humiliated. It hurts me to find St. 
Paul's Cathedral damaged. It hurts me as much as I would be hurt if I heard 
that Kashi Vishvanath temple or the Jumma Masjid was damaged. I would like 
to defend both the Kashi Vishvanath temple and the Jumma Masjid and even 
St. Paul's Cathedral with my life, but would not take a single life for their 
defense. That is my fundamental difference with the British people. My 
sympathy is there with them nevertheless. Let there be no mistake on the part 
of the Englishmen, Congressmen or others whom my voice reaches, as to where 
nay sympathy lies. It is not because I love the British nation and hate the 
German. I do not think that the Germans as a nation are any worse than the 
English, or the Italians are any worse. We are all tarred with the same brush; 
we are all members of the vast human family. I decline to draw any distinction. 
I cannot claim any superiority for Indians. We have the same virtues and the 
same vices. Humanity is not divided into watertight compartments so that we 
cannot go from one to another. They may occupy one thousand rooms, but they 
are all related to one another. I would not say: 'India should be all in all, let 
the whole world perish.' That is not my message. India should be all in all, 
consistently with the wellDbeing of other nations of the world. I can keep India 
intact and its freedom also intact only if I have good will towards the whole of 
the human family and not merely for the human family which inhabits this little 
spot of the earth called India. It is big enough compared to other smaller All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140  nations, but what is India in the wide world or in the universe? (SB, 171D72) 
 
Not to believe in the possibility of permanent peace is to disbelieve in the 
godliness of human nature. Methods hitherto adopted have failed because rockD
bottom sincerity on the part of those who have striven has been lacking. Not 
that they have realized this lack. Peace is unattained by part performance of 
conditions, even as a chemical combination is impossible without complete 
fulfillment of the conditions of attainment thereof. If the recognized leaders of 
mankind who have control over the engines of destructions were wholly to 
renounce their use, with full knowledge of its implications, permanent peace 
can be obtained. This is clearly impossible without the Great Powers of the 
earth renouncing their imperialistic design. This again seems impossible 
without great nations ceasing to believe in soulDdestroying competition and to 
desire to multiply wants and, therefore, increase their material possessions. 
(MM, 59D60) 
 
I do suggest that the doctrine [of nonDviolence] holds good also as between 
States and States. I know that I am treading on delicate ground if I refer to the 
late war. But I fear I must in order to make the position clear. It was a war of 
aggrandizement, as I have understood, on either part. It was a war for dividing 
the spoils of the exploitation of weaker races ―otherwise euphemistically 
called the world commerce.... It would be found that before general 
disarmament in Europe commences, as it must some day, unless Europe is to 
commit suicide, some nation will have to dare to disarm herself and take large 
risks. The level of nonDviolence in that nation, if that event happily comes to 
pass, will naturally have risen so high as to command universal respect. Her 
judgments will be unerring, her decisions firm, her capacity for heroic selfD
sacrifice will be great, and she will want to live as much for other nations as 
for herself. (MM, 60D61) 
 
One thing is certain. If the mad race for armaments continues, it is bound to 
result in a slaughter such as has never occurred in history. If there is a victor All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141  left the very victory will be a living death for the nation that emerges 
victorious. There is no escape from the impending doom save through a bold 
and unconditional acceptance of the nonDviolent method with all its glorious 
implications. (MM, 63) 
 
If there were no greed, there would be no occasion for armaments. The 
principle of nonDviolence necessitates complete abstention from exploitation in 
any form. (MM, 63) 
 
Immediately the spirit of exploitation is gone, armaments will be felt as a 
positive unbearable burden. Real disarmament cannot come unless the nations 
of the world cease to exploit one another. (MM, 63) 
 
I would not like to live in this world if it is not to be one world. (MGP, II, 90) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142   
0. MAN AND MACHINE 
 
I 
must confess that I do not draw a sharp line or any distinction between 
economic and ethics. Economics that hurt the moral wellDbeing of an individual 
or a nation are immoral and, therefore, sinful. Thus, the economics that permit 
one country to prey upon another are immoral. (MM, 128) 
 
The end to be sought is human happiness combined with full mental and moral 
growth. I use the adjective moral as synonymous with spiritual. This end can be 
achieved under decentralization. Centralization as a system is inconsistent with 
a nonDviolent structure of society. (SB, 73) 
 
I would categorically state my conviction that the mania for mass production is 
responsible for tine world crisis. Granting for the moment that the machinery 
may supply all the needs of humanity, still, it would concentrate production in 
particular areas, so that you would have to go about in a roundabout way to 
regulate distribution, whereas, if there is production and distribution both in 
the respective areas where things are required, it is automatically regulated, 
and there is less chance for fraud, none for speculation. (SB, 71) 
 
Mass production takes no note of the real requirement of the consumer. If mass 
production were in itself a virtue, it should be capable of indefinite 
multiplication. But it can be definitely shown that mass production carries 
within it its own limitations. If all countries adopted the system of mass 
production there would not be a big enough market for their products. Mass 
production must then come to a stop. (MM, 121) 
 
I don't believe that industrialization is necessary in any case for any country, It 
is much less so for India, Indeed I believe that independent India can only 
discharge her duty towards a groaning world by adopting a simple but ennobled All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143  life by developing her thousands of cottages and living at peace with the world. 
High thinking is inconsistent with a complicated material life, based on high 
speed imposed on us by Mammon worship. All the graces of life are possible, 
only when we learn the art of living nobly. 
There may be sensation in living dangerously. We must draw the distinction 
between living in the face of danger and living dangerously. A man who dares 
to live alone in a forest infested by wild beasts and wilder men without a gun 
and with God as his only help, lives in the face of danger. A man who lives 
perpetually in midDair and dives to the earth below to the admiration of a 
gaping world lives dangerously. One is a purposeful, the other a purposeless 
life. (MT, VII, 224D25) 
 
What is the cause of the present chaos? It is exploitation, I will not say, of the 
weaker nations by the stronger, but of sister nations by sister nations. And my 
fundamental objection to machinery rests on the fact that it is machinery that 
has enabled these nations to exploit others. (SB, 64D65) 
 
I would destroy that system today, if I had the power. I would use the most 
deadly weapons, if I believed that they would destroy it. I refrain only because 
the use of such weapons would only perpetuate the system, though it may 
destroy its present administrators. Those who seek to destroy men rather than 
manners, adopt the latter and become worse than those whom they destroy 
under the mistaken belief that the manners will die with the men. They do not 
know the root of the evil. (SB, 66) 
 
Machinery has its place; it has come to stay. But it must not be allowed to 
displace necessary human labour. An improved plough is a good thing. But if by 
some chance one man could plough up, by some mechanical invention of his, 
the whole of the land of India and control all the agricultural produce and if 
the millions had no other occupation, they would starve: and being idle, they 
would become dunces, as many have already become. There is hourly danger of 
many more being reduced to that unenviable state. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144  I would welcome every improvement in the cottage machine, but I know that it 
is criminal to displace handDlabour by the introduction of powerDdriven spindles 
unless one is at the same time ready to give millions of farmers some other 
occupation in their homes. (SB, 66) 
 
What I object to, is the 'craze' for machinery, not machinery as such. The craze 
is for what they call labourDsaving machinery. Men go on 'saving labour' till 
thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of 
starvation. I want to save time and labour, not for a fraction of mankind, but 
for all; I want the concentration of wealth, not in the hands of a few, but in 
the hands of all. Today machinery merely helps a few to ride on the back of 
millions. The impetus behind it all is not the philanthropy to save labour, but 
greed. It is against this constitution of things that I am fighting with all my 
might. 
The supreme consideration is man. The machine should not tend to make 
atrophied the limbs of man. For instance, I would make intelligent exceptions. 
Take the case of the Singer Sewing Machine. It is one of the few useful things 
ever invented, and there is a romance about the device itself. Singer saw his 
wife labouring over the tedious process of sewing and seaming with her own 
hands, and simply out of his love for her he devised the sewing machine in 
order to save her from unnecessary labour. He, however, saved not only her 
labour but also the labour of everyone who could purchase a sewing machine. 
It is an alteration in the condition of labour that I want. This mad rush for 
wealth must cease, and the labourer must be assured, not only of a living 
wage, but a daily task that is not a mere drudgery. The machine will, under 
these conditions, be as much a help to the man working it as to the State, or 
the man who owns it. The present mad rush will cease, and the labourer will 
work (as I have said) under attractive and ideal conditions. This is but one of 
the exceptions I have in mind. The sewing machine had love at its back. The 
individual is the one supreme consideration. The saving of labour of the 
individual should be the object, and the honest humanitarian consideration, 
and not greed, the motive. Replace greed by love and everything will come All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145  right. (SB, 67D68) 
 
HandDspinning does not, it is not intended that it should, compete with, in 
order to displace, any existing type of industry; it does not aim at withdrawing 
a single ableDbodied person, who can otherwise find a remunerative occupation 
from his work. The sole claim advanced on its behalf is that it alone offers an 
immediate, practicable, and permanent solution of that problem of problems 
that confronts India, viz., the enforced idleness for nearly six months in the 
year of an overwhelming majority of India's population, owing to lack of a 
suitable supplementary occupation to agriculture and the chronic starvation of 
the masses that results therefrom. (SB, 58) 
 
I have not contemplated, much less advised, the abandonment of a single 
healthy, lifeDgiving industrial activity for the sake of handDspinning. The entire 
foundation of the spinning wheel rests on the fact that there are cores of semiD
employed people in India. And I should admit that if there were none such, 
there would be no room for the spinning wheel. (SB, 58) 
 
A starving man thinks first of satisfying his hunger before anything else. He will 
sell his liberty and all for the sake of getting a morsel of food. Such is the 
position of millions of the people of India. For them, liberty, God and all such 
words are merely letters put together without the slightest meaning. They jar 
upon them. If we want to give these people a sense of freedom we shall have 
to provide them with work which they can easily do in their desolate homes 
and which would give them at least the barest living. This can only be done by 
the spinning wheel. And when they have become selfDreliant and are able to 
support themselves, we are in a position to talk to them about freedom, about 
Congress etc. Those, therefore, who bring them work and means of getting a 
crust of bread will be their deliverers and will be also the people who will 
make them hunger for liberty. (SB, 59) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146  Little do townDdwellers know how the semiDstarved masses of India are slowly 
sinking to lifelessness. Little do they know that their miserable comfort 
represents the brokerage they get for the work they do for the foreign 
exploiter, that the profits and the brokerage are sucked from the masses. Little 
do they realize that the government established by law in British India is 
carried on for this exploitation of the masses. No sophistry, no jugglery in 
figures can explain away the evidence that the skeletons in many villages 
present to the naked eye. I have no doubt whatsoever that both England and 
the townDdwellers of India will have to answer, if there is a God above, for this 
crime against humanity which is perhaps unequalled in history. (SB, 65) 
 
I would favour the use of the most elaborate machinery if thereby India's 
pauperism and resulting idleness be avoided. I have suggested handDspinning as 
the only ready means of driving away penury and making famine of work and 
wealth impossible. The spinning wheel itself is a piece of valuable machinery, 
and in my own humble way I have tried to secure improvements in it in keeping 
with the special conditions of India. (SB, 66D67) 
 
I would say that if the village perishes, India will perish too. India will be no 
more India. Her own mission in the world will get lost. The revival of the 
village is possible only when it is no more exploited. Industrialization on a mass 
scale will necessarily lead to passive or active exploitation of the villagers as 
the problems of competition and marketing come in. Therefore we have to 
concentrate on the village being selfDcontained, manufacturing mainly for use. 
Provided this character of the village industry is maintained, there would be no 
objection to villagers using even the modern machines and tools that they can 
make and can afford to use. Only they should not be used as a means of 
exploitation of others. (SB, 71) 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147   
0. POVERTY IN THE MIDST OF PLENTY 
 
T
hat economics is untrue which ignores or disregards moral values. The 
extension of the law of nonDviolence in the domain of economics means nothing 
less than the introduction of moral values as a factor to be considered in 
regulating international commerce. (SB, 41) 
 
According to me the economic constitution of India and for that matter of the 
world, should be such that no one under it should suffer from want of food and 
clothing. In other words everybody should be able to get sufficient work to 
enable him to make the two ends meet. And this ideal can be universally 
realized only if the means of production of the elementary necessaries of life 
remain in the control of the masses. These should be freely available to all as 
God's air and water are or ought to be; they should not be made a vehicle of 
traffic for the exploitation of others. Their monopolization by any country, 
nation or group of persons would be unjust. The neglect of this simple principle 
is the cause of the destitution that we witness today not only in this unhappy 
land but in other parts of the world too. (SB, 40) 
 
My ideal is equal distribution, but so far as I can see, it is not to be realized. 
Therefore work for equitable distribution. (SB, 77) 
 
Love and exclusive possession can never go together. Theoretically when there 
is perfect love, there must be perfect nonDpossession. The body is our last 
possession. So a man can only exercise perfect love and be completely 
dispossessed, if he is prepared to embrace death and renounce his body for the 
sake of human service. 
But that is true in theory only. In actual life, we can hardly exercise perfect 
love, for the body as a possession will always remain with us. Man will ever 
remain imperfect and it will always be his part to try to be perfect. So that All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  perfection in love or nonDpossession will remain an unattainable ideal as long as 
we are alive, but towards which we must ceaselessly strive. (SB, 17) 
 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take anything that I do not need for 
my own immediate use, and keep it, I thieve it from somebody else. I venture 
to suggest that it is the fundamental law of Nature, without exception, that 
Nature produces enough for our wants from day to day, and if only everybody 
took enough for himself and nothing more, there would be no pauperism in this 
world, there would be no man dying of starvation in this world. But so long as 
we have got this inequality, so long we are thieving. I am no socialist and I do 
not want to dispossess those who have got possessions; but I do say that, 
personally, those of us who want to see light out of darkness have to follow this 
rule. I do not want to dispossess anybody. I should then be departing from the 
rule of ahimsa . If somebody else possesses more than I do, let him. But so far 
as my own life has to be regulated, I do say that I dare not possess anything 
which I do not want. In India we have got three millions of people having to be 
satisfied with one meal a day, and that meal consisting of a chapati  containing 
no fat in it, and a pinch of salt. You and I have no right to anything that we 
really have until these three millions are clothed and fed better. You and I, 
who ought to know better, must adjust our wants, and even undergo voluntary 
starvation in order that they may be nursed, fed and clothed. (SB, 75) 
 
NonDpossession is allied to nonDstealing. A thing not originally stolen must 
nevertheless be classified stolen property, if one possesses it without needing 
it. Possession implies provision for the future. A seeker after Truth, a follower 
of the Law of Love cannot hold anything against tomorrow. God never stores 
for the morrow; He never creates more than what is strictly needed for the 
moment. If, therefore, we repose faith in His providence, we should rest 
assured, that He Will give us everything that we require. Saints and devotees, 
who have lived in such faith, have always derived a justification for it from 
their experience. Our ignorance or negligence of the Divine Law, which gives to 
man from day to day his daily bread and no more, has given rise to inequalities All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149  with all the miseries attendant upon them. The rich have a superfluous store of 
things which they do not need, and which are therefore neglected and wasted, 
while millions are starved to death for want of sustenance. If each retained 
possession only of what he needed, no one would be in want, and all would live 
in contentment. As it is, the rich are discontented no less than the poor. The 
poor man would fain become a millionaire, and the millionaire a 
multimillionaire. The rich should take the initiative in dispossession with a view 
to a universal diffusion of the spirit of contentment. If only they keep their 
own property within moderate limits, the starving will be easily fed, and will 
learn the lesson of contentment along with the rich. (SB, 75D76) 
 
Economic equality is the master key to nonDviolent independence. Working for 
economic equality means abolishing the eternal conflict between capital and 
labour. It means the leveling down of the few rich in whose hands is 
concentrated the bulk of the nation's wealth on the one hand, and a leveling up 
of the semiDstarved naked millions on the other. A nonDviolent system of 
governments is clearly an impossibility so long as the wide gulf between the 
rich and the hungry millions persists. The contrast between the palaces of New 
Delhi and the miserable hovels of the poor, labouring class cannot last one day 
in a free India in which the poor will enjoy the same power as the richest in the 
land. A violent and bloody revolution is a certainty one day unless there is a 
voluntary abdication of riches and the power that riches give and sharing them 
for the common good. I adhere to my doctrine of trusteeship in spite of the 
ridicule that has been poured upon it. It is true that it is difficult to reach. So 
is nonDviolence difficult to attain. (SB, 77D78) 
 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural wants and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarter of a pound of flour for his 
bread and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their 
wants. To bring this ideal into being the entire social order has got to be 
reconstructed. A society based on nonDviolence cannot nurture any other ideal. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150  We may not perhaps be able to realize the goal but we must bear it in mind 
and work unceasingly to near it. To the same extent as we progress towards 
our goal we shall find contentment and happiness, and to that extent too, shall 
we have contributed towards the bringing into being of a nonDviolent society. 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be brought about through nonD
violence. The first step towards it is for him who has made this ideal part of his 
being to bring about the necessary changes in his personal life. He would 
reduce his wants to a minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His 
earnings would be free of dishonesty. The desire for speculation would be 
renounced. His habitation would be in keeping with his new mode of life. There 
would be selfDrestraint exercised in every sphere of life. When he has done all 
that is possible in his own life, then only will he be in a position to preach this 
ideal among his associates and neighbours. 
Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distribution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for superfluous wealth possessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a rupee more than their 
neighbours. How is this to be brought about? NonDviolently? Or should the 
wealthy be dispossessed of their possessions? To do this we would naturally 
have to resort to violence. This violent action cannot benefit the society. 
Society will be the poorer, for it will lose the gifts of a man who knows how to 
accumulate wealth. Therefore the nonDviolent way is evidently superior. The 
rich man will be left in possession of his wealth, of which he will use what he 
reasonably requires for his personal needs and will act as a trustee for the 
remainder to be used for the society. In this argument honesty on the part of 
the trustee is assumed. 
If however, in spite of the utmost effort, the rich do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latter are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In trying to find out the solution 
of this riddle I have lighted on nonDviolent nonDcoDoperation and civil 
disobedience as the right and infallible means. 
The rich cannot accumulate wealth without the coDoperation of the poor in 
society. If this knowledge were to penetrate to and spread amongst the poor, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  they would become strong and would learn how to free themselves by means of 
nonDviolence from the crushing inequalities which have brought them to the 
verge of starvation. (SB, 78D79) 
 
I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national than that for, say, one hour 
in the day, we should all do the labour that the poor must do, and thus identify 
ourselves with them and through them with all mankind. I cannot imagine 
better worship of God than that in His name I should labour for the poor even 
as they do. (SB, 52) 
 
'Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow' says the Bible. Sacrifices may be of 
many kinds. One of them may well be bread labour. If all laboured for their 
bread and no more, then there would be enough food and enough leisure for 
all. Then there would be no cry of overDpopulation, no disease and no such 
misery as we see around. Such labour will be the highest form of sacrifice. Men 
will no doubt do many other things either through their bodies or through their 
minds, but all this will be labour of love for the common good. There will then 
be no rich and no poor, none high and none low, no touchable and no 
untouchable. (SB, 54) 
 
'Why should I, who have no need to work for food, spin?' may be the question 
asked. Because I am eating what does not belong to me. I am living on the 
spoliation of my countrymen. Trace the course of every pice that finds its way 
into your pocket, and you will realize the truth of what I write.... 
I must refuse to insult the naked by giving them clothes they do not need, 
instead of giving them work which they sorely need. I will not commit the sin of 
becoming their patron, but on learning that I had assisted in impoverishing 
them, I would give them neither crumbs nor castDoff clothing, but the best of 
my food and clothes and associate myself with them in work.... 
God created man to work for his food and said that those who are without work 
were thieves. (SB, 50) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  We should be ashamed of resting or having a square meal so long as there is 
one ableDbodied man or woman without work or food. (SB, 49) 
 
I hate privilege and monopoly. Whatever cannot be shared with the masses is 
taboo to me. (MM, 11) 
 
It is open to the world....to laugh at my dispossessing myself of all property. 
For me the dispossession has been a positive gain. I would like people to 
compete with me in my contentment. It is the richest treasure I own. Hence it 
is perhaps right to say that though I preach poverty, I am a rich man! (MM, 101) 
No one has ever suggested that grinding pauperism can lead to anything else 
than moral degradation. Every human being has a right to live and therefore to 
find the wherewithal to feed himself and where necessary to clothe and house 
himself. But for this very simple performance we need no assistance from 
economists or their laws. 
'Take no thought for the morrow' is an injunction which finds an echo in almost 
all the religious scriptures of the world. In a wellDordered society the securing 
of one's livelihood should be and is found to be the easiest thing in the world. 
Indeed the test of orderliness in a country is not the number of millionaires it 
owns, but the absence of starvation among its masses. (SB, 76) 
 
My ahimsa  would not tolerate the idea of giving a free meal to a healthy person 
who has not worked for it in some honest way and if I had the power, I would 
stop every sadavrata  where free meals are given. It has degraded the nation 
and it has encouraged laziness, idleness, hypocrisy and even crime. (SB, 49) 
 
True to his poetical instinct, the poet lives for the morrow and would have us 
do likewise. He presents to our admiring gaze the beautiful picture of the birds 
early in the morning singing hymns of praise as they soar into the sky. These 
birds have had their day's food and soared with rested wings, in whose veins 
new blood had flown during the previous night. But I have had the pain of All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  watching birds who for want of strength could not be coaxed even into a flutter 
of their wings. The human bird under the Indian sky gets up weaker than when 
he pretended to retire. For millions it is an eternal vigil or an eternal trance. It 
is an indescribably painful state which has got to be experienced to be 
realized. I have found it impossible to soothe suffering patients with a song 
from Kabir. The hungry millions ask for one poem―invigorating food. They 
cannot be given it. They must earn it. And they can earn only by the sweat of 
their brow. (SB, 48D49) 
 
Imagine, therefore, what a calamity it must be to have 300 million unemployed 
and underemployed, several millions becoming degraded every day for want of 
employment, devoid of selfDrespect, devoid of faith in God. I may as well place 
before the dog over there the message of God as before those hungry millions 
we have no lustre in their eyes and whose only God is their bread. I can take 
before them a message of God only by taking the message of sacred work 
before them. It is good enough to talk of God whilst we are sitting here after a 
nice breakfast and looking forward to a nicer luncheon, but how am I to talk of 
God to the millions who have to go without two meals a day? To them God can 
only appear as bread and butter. (SB, 49) 
 
To a people famishing and idle, the only acceptable form in which God can 
dare appear is work and promise of food as wages. (SB, 49) 
 
For the poor the economic is the spiritual. You cannot make any other appeal 
to those starving millions. It will fall flat on them. But you take food to them 
and they will regard you as their God. They are incapable of any other thought. 
(MM, 104) 
 
By the nonDviolent method, we seek not to destroy the capitalist, we seek to 
destroy capitalism. We invite the capitalist to regard himself as a trustee for 
those on whom he depends for the making, the retention and the increase of All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154  his capital. Nor need the worker wait for his conversion. If capital is power, so 
is work. Either power can be used destructively or creatively. Either is 
dependent on the other. Immediately the worker realizes his strength, he is in 
a position to become a coDsharer with the capitalist instead of remaining his 
slave. If he aims at becoming the sole owner, he will most likely be killing the 
hen that lays golden eggs. (MM, 116) 
 
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts 
have. And since every right carries with it a corresponding duty and the 
corresponding remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is merely a matter of 
finding out the corresponding duties and remedies to vindicate the elementary 
fundamental equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs and 
the corresponding remedy is to nonDcoDoperate with him who deprives me of 
the fruit of my labour. And if I would recognize the fundamental equality, as I 
must, of the capitalist and the labourer, I must not aim at his destruction. I 
must strive for his conversion. My nonDcoDoperation with him will open his eyes 
to the wrong he may be doing. (MM, 117) 
 
I cannot picture to myself a time when no man shall be richer than another. 
But I do picture to myself a time when the rich will spurn to enrich themselves 
at the expense of the poor and the poor will cease to envy the rich. Even in a 
most perfect world, we shall fail to avoid inequalities, but we can and must 
avoid strife and bitterness. There are numerous examples extant of the rich 
and the poor living in perfect friendliness. We have but to multiply such 
instances. (SB, 81) 
 
I do not believe that the capitalists and the landlords are all exploiters by an 
inherent necessity, or that there is a basic or irreconcilable antagonism 
between their interests and those of the masses. All exploitation is based on 
coDoperation, willing or forced, of the exploited. However much we may detest 
admitting it, the fact remains that there would be no exploitation if people 
refused to obey the exploiter. But self comes in and we hug the chains that All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155  bind us. This must cease. What is needed is not the extinction of landlords and 
capitalists, but a transformation of the existing relationship between them and 
the masses into something healthier and purer. (SB, 91) 
 
The idea of class war does not appeal to me. In India a class war is not only not 
inevitable, but it is avoidable if we have understood the message of nonD
violence. Those who talk about class war as being inevitable have not 
understood the implications of nonDviolence or have understood them only skinD
deep. (SB, 92) 
 
Exploitation of the poor can be extinguished not by effecting the destruction of 
a few millionaires, but by removing the ignorance of the poor and teaching 
them to nonDcoDoperate with their exploiters. That will convert the exploiters 
also. I have even suggested that ultimately it will lead to both being equal 
partners. Capital as such is not evil; it is its wrong use that is evil. Capital in 
some form or other will always be needed. (SB, 94) 
 
Those who own money now are asked to behave like the trustees holding their 
riches on behalf of the poor. You may say that trusteeship is a legal fiction. 
But, if people meditate over it constantly and try to act up to it, then life on 
earth would be governed far more by love than it is at present. Absolute 
trusteeship is an abstraction like Euclid's definition of a point, and is equally 
unattainable. But if we strive for it, we shall be able to go further in realizing a 
state of equality on earth than by any other method. (MT, IV, 13D14) 
 
Complete renunciation of one's possessions is a thing which very few even 
among ordinary folk are capable of. All that can legitimately be expected of 
the wealthy class, is that they should hold their riches and talents in trust and 
use them for the service of the society. To insist on more would be to kill the 
goose that laid the golden eggs. (MGP, I, 66) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156   
. DEMOCRACY AND THE PEOPLE 
 
My notion of democracy is that under it the weakest should have the same 
opportunity as the strongest. That can never happen except through nonD
violence. (MT, V, 343) 
 
I have always held that social justice, even unto the least and lowliest, is 
impossible of attainment by force. I have believed that it is possible by proper 
training of the lowliest by nonDviolent means to secure the redress of the 
wrongs suffered by them. That means is nonDviolent nonDcoDoperation. At 
times, nonDcoDoperation becomes as much a duty as coDoperation. No one is 
bound to coDoperate in one's own undoing or slavery. Freedom received through 
tile effort of others, however benevolent, cannot be retained when such effort 
is withdrawn. In other words, such freedom is not real freedom. But the 
lowliest can feel its glow, as soon as they learn the art of attaining it through 
nonDviolent nonDcoDoperation. (MT, V, 342) 
 
Civil disobedience is the inherent right  of a citizen. He dare not give it up 
without ceasing to be a man. Civil disobedience is never followed by anarchy. 
Criminal disobedience can lead to it. Every State puts down criminal 
disobedience by force. It perishes if it does not. But to put down civil 
disobedience is to attempt to imprison conscience. (MM, 65) 
 
True democracy or the swaraj  of the masses can never come through untruthful 
and violent means, for the simple reason that the natural corollary to their use 
would be to remove all opposition through the suppression or extermination of 
the antagonists. That does not make for individual freedom. Individual freedom 
can have the fullest play only under a regime of unadulterated ahimsa . (SB, 
143) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  The fact that there are so many men still alive in the world shows that it is 
based not on the force of arms but on the force of truth or love. Therefore, the 
greatest and most unimpeachable evidence of the success of this force is to be 
found in the fact that, in spite of the wars of the world, it still lives on. 
Thousands, indeed tens of thousands, depend for their existence on a very 
active working of this force. Little quarrels of millions of families in their daily 
lives disappear before the exercise of this force. Hundreds of nations live in 
peace. History does not and cannot take note of this fact. History is really a 
record of every interruption of the even working of the force of love or of the 
soul. Two brothers quarrel; one of them repents and reawakens the love that 
was lying dormant in him; the two again begin to live in peace; nobody takes 
note of this. But if the two brothers, through the intervention of solicitors or 
some other reason take up arms or go to law ―which is another form of the 
exhibition of brute force ―their doings would be immediately noticed in the 
press, they would be the talk of their neighbours and would probably go down 
in history. And what is true of families and communities is true of nations. 
There is no reason to believe that there is one law for families and another for 
nations. History, then, is a record of an interruption of the course of nature. 
SoulDforce, being natural, is not noted in history. (SB, 22) 
 
SelfDgovernment depends entirely upon our own internal strength, upon our 
ability to fight against the heaviest odds. Indeed, selfDgovernment which does 
not require that continuous striving to attain it and to sustain it, is not worth 
the name. I have therefore endeavoured to show both in word and deed that 
political selfDgovernment― that is selfDgovernment for a large number of men 
and women―is no better than individual selfDgovernment, and therefore, it is 
to be attained by precisely the same means that are required for individual 
selfDgovernment or selfDrule. (SB, 37) 
 
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discharge our duties, right will not be 
far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we run after rights, they will escape All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  us like a willDo'DtheDwisp. The more we pursue them, the farther will they fly. 
(SB, 38) 
 
To me political power is not an end but one of the means of enabling people to 
better their condition in every department of life. Political power means 
capacity to regulate national life through national representatives. If national 
life becomes as perfect as to become selfDregulated, no representation 
becomes necessary. There is then a state of enlightened anarchy. In such a 
state everyone is his own ruler. He rules himself in such a manner that he is 
never a hindrance to his neighbour. In the ideal State, therefore, there is no 
political power because there is no State. But the ideal is never fully realized 
in life. Hence the classical statement of Thoreau that that government is best 
which governs the least. (SB, 41) 
 
I believe that true democracy can only be an outcome of nonDviolence. The 
structure of a world federation can be raised only on a foundation of nonD
violence, and violence will have to be totally given up in world affairs. (SB, 43) 
 
My idea of society is that while we are born equal, meaning that we have a 
right to equal opportunity, all have not the same capacity. It is, in the nature 
of things, impossible. For instance, all cannot have the same height, or colour 
or degree of intelligence, etc.; therefore in the nature of things, some will 
have ability to earn more and other less. People with talents will have more, 
and they will utilize their talents for this purpose. If they utilize kindly, they 
will be performing the work of the State. Such people exist as trustees, on no 
other terms. I would allow a man of intellect to earn more, I would not cramp 
his talent. But the bulk of his greater earnings must be used for the good of the 
State, just as the income of all earning sons of the father go to the common 
family fund. They would have their earnings only as trustees. It may be that I 
would fail miserably in this. But that is what I am sailing for. (SB, 82D83) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159  I hope to demonstrate that real swaraj  will come not by the acquisition of 
authority by a few but by the acquisition of the capacity by all to resist 
authority when abused. In other words, swaraj  is to be attained by educating 
the masses to a sense of their capacity to regulate and control authority. (SB, 
109) 
 
Mere withdrawal of the English is not independence. It means the consciousness 
in the average villager that he is the maker of his own destiny, he is his own 
legislator through his chosen representative. (SB, 109) 
 
We have long been accustomed to think that power comes only through 
legislative assemblies. I have regarded this belief as a grave error brought 
about by inertia or hypnotism. A superficial study of the British history has 
made us think that all power percolates to the people from parliaments. The 
truth is that power resides in the people and it is entrusted for the time being 
to those whom they may choose as their representatives. The parliaments have 
no power or even existence independently of the people. It has been my effort 
for the last twentyDone years to convince the people of this simple truth. Civil 
disobedience is the storehouse of power. Imagine a whole people unwilling to 
conform to the laws of the legislature and prepared to suffer the consequences 
of nonDcompliance! They will bring the whole legislative and the executive 
machinery to a standstill. The police and the military are of use to coerce 
minorities however powerful they may be. But no police or military coercion 
can bend the resolute will of a people, out for suffering to the uttermost. 
And parliamentary procedure is good only when its members are willing to 
conform to the will of the majority. In other words, it is fairly effective only 
among compatibles. (MT, VI, 23) 
 
What we want, I hope, is a government not based on coercion even of a 
minority but on its conversion. If it is a change from white military rule to a 
brown, we hardly need make any fuss. At any rate the masses then do not 
count. They will be subject to the same spoliation as now, if not even worse. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  (SB, 111) 
 
I feel that fundamentally the disease is the same in Europe as it is in India, in 
spite of the fact that in the former the people enjoy political selfD
government..... The same remedy is, therefore, likely to be applicable. Shorn 
of all camouflage, the exploitation of the masses of Europe is sustained by 
violence. 
Violence on the part of the masses will never remove the disease. Anyway up 
to now experience shows that success of violence has been shortDlived. It has 
led to greater violence. What has been tried hitherto has been a variety of 
violence and artificial checks dependent mainly upon the will of the violent. At 
the crucial moment these checks have naturally broken down. It seems to me, 
therefore, that sooner or later, the European masses will have to take to nonD
violence if they are to find their deliverance. (SB, 111) 
 
I am not interested in freeing India merely from the English yoke. I am bent 
upon freeing India from any yoke whatsoever. I have no desire to exchange 
'king log for king stork'. Hence for me the movement of swaraj is a movement of 
selfDpurification. (SB, 118) 
 
Our tyranny, if we impose our will on others, will be infinitely worse than that 
of the handful of Englishmen who form the bureaucracy. Theirs is a terrorism 
imposed by a minority struggling to exist in the midst of opposition. Ours will 
be a terrorism imposed by a majority and therefore worse and really more 
godless than the first. We must therefore eliminate compulsion in any shape 
from our struggle. If we are only a handful holding freely the doctrine of nonD
cooperation, we may have to die in the attempt to convert others to our view, 
but we shall have truly defended and represented our cause. If however we 
enlist under our banner men by force, we shall be denying our cause and God, 
and if we seem to succeed for the moment, we shall have succeeded in 
establishing a worse terror. (SB, 193D94) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161  A born democrat is a born disciplinarian. Democracy comes naturally to him 
who is habituated normally to yield willing obedience to all laws, human or 
divine. I claim to be a democrat both by instinct and training. Let those who 
are ambitious to serve democracy qualify themselves by satisfying first this acid 
test of democracy. Moreover, a democrat must be utterly selfless. He must 
think and dream not in terms of self or party but only of democracy. Only then 
does he acquire the right of civil disobedience. I do not want anybody to give 
up his convictions or to suppress himself. I do not believe that a healthy and 
honest difference of opinion will injure our cause. But opportunism, 
camouflage or patched up compromises certainly will. If you must dissent, you 
should take care that your opinions voice your innermost convictions and are 
not intended merely as convenient party cry. 
I value individual freedom but you must not forget that man is essentially a 
social being. He has risen to his present status by learning to adjust his 
individualism to the requirements of social progress. Unrestricted individualism 
is the law of the beast of the jungle. We have learnt to strike the mean 
between individual freedom and social restraint. Willing submission to social 
restraint for the sake of the wellDbeing of the whole society enriches both the 
individual and the society of which one is a member. (SB, 190) 
 
The golden rule of conduct, therefore, is mutual toleration, seeing that we will 
never all think alike and we shall see Truth in fragment and from different 
angles of vision. Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, therefore, it 
is a good guide for individual conduct, imposition of that conduct upon all will 
be an insufferable interference with everybody's freedom of conscience. (SB, 
20) 
 
Differences of opinion should never mean hostility. If they did, my wife and I 
should be sworn enemies of one another. I do not know two persons in the 
world who had no difference of opinion, and as I am a follower of the Gita, I 
have always attempted to regard those who differ from me with the same All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  affection as I have for my nearest and dearest. (MM, 3) 
 
I shall continue to confess blunders each time the people commit them. The 
only tyrant I accept in this world is the 'still small voice' within me. And even 
though I have to face the prospect of a minority of one, I humbly believe I have 
the courage to be in such a hopeless minority. (MM, 9) 
 
I can truthfully say that I am slow to see the blemishes of fellow beings, being 
myself full of them, and therefore being in need of their charity. I have learnt 
not to judge any one harshly and to make allowances for defects that I may 
detect. (MM, 9) 
 
I have often been charged with having an unyielding nature. I have been told 
that I would not bow to the decisions of the majority. I have been accused of 
being autocratic.... I have never been able to subscribe to the charge of 
obstinacy or autocracy. On the contrary, I pride myself on my yielding nature in 
nonDvital matters. I detest autocracy. Valuing my freedom and independence I 
equally cherish them for others. I have no desire to carry a single soul with me, 
if I cannot appeal to his or her reason. My unconventionality I carry to the point 
of rejecting the divinity of the oldest shastras  if they cannot convince my 
reason. But I have found by experience that, if I wish to live in society and still 
retain my independence, I must limit the points of utter independence to 
matters of firstDrate importance. In all others which do not involve a departure 
from one's personal religion or moral code, one most yield to the majority 
(MM, 11) 
 
I do not believe in the doctrine of the greatest good of the greatest number. It 
means in its nakedness that in order to achieve the supposed good of 51 per 
cent the interest of 49 per cent may be, or rather, should be sacrificed. It is a 
heartless doctrine and has done harm to humanity. The only real, dignified, 
human doctrine is the greatest good of all, and this can only be achieved by All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  uttermost selfDsacrifice. (DM, 149) 
 
Those who claim to lead the masses must resolutely refuse to be led by them, 
if we want to avoid mob law and desire ordered progress for the country. I 
believe that mere protestation of one's opinion and surrender to the mass 
opinion is not only not enough, but in matters of vital importance, leaders 
must act contrary to the mass of opinion if it does not commend itself to their 
reason. (SB, 201) 
 
A leader is useless when he acts against the prompting of his own conscience, 
surrounded as he must be by people holding all kinds of views. He will drift like 
an anchorless ship, if he has not the inner voice to hold him firm and guide 
him. (SB, 201D02) 
 
While admitting that man actually lives by habit, I hold that it is better for him 
to live by the exercise of will. I also believe that men are capable of 
developing their will to an extent that will reduce the exploitation to a 
minimum. I look upon an increase of the power of the State with the greatest 
fear because, although while apparently doing good by minimizing exploitation, 
it does the greatest harm to mankind by destroying individually which lies at 
the root of all progress. We know of so many cases where men have adopted 
trusteeship, but none where the State has really lived for the poor. (MT, IV, 15) 
 
The State represents violence in a concentrated and organized form. The 
individual has a soul, but as the State is a soulless machine, it can never be 
weaned from violence to which it owes its very existence. (SB, 42) 
 
It is my firm conviction that if the State suppressed capitalism by violence, it 
will be caught in the coil of violence itself and fail to develop nonDviolence at 
any time. (SB, 42) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164  SelfDgovernment means continuous effort to be independent of government 
control whether it is foreign government or whether it is national. Swaraj   
government will be a sorry affair if people look up to it for the regulation of 
every detail of life. (SB, 109) 
 
We must be content to die, if we cannot live as free men and women. (SB, 109) 
 
The rule of majority has a narrow application, i.e., one should yield to the 
majority in matters of detail. But it is slavery to be amenable to the majority, 
no matter what its decisions are. Democracy is not a state in which people act 
like sheep. Under democracy individual liberty of opinion and action is 
jealously guarded. (SB, 110) 
 
In matters of conscience the law of majority has no place. (SB, 110) 
 
It is my certain conviction that no man loses his freedom except through his 
own weakness. (SB, 116) 
 
It is not so much British guns that are responsible for our subjection as our 
voluntary coDoperation. (SB, 116) 
 
Even the most despotic government cannot stand except for the consent of the 
governed which consent is often forcibly procured by the despot. Immediately 
the subject ceases to fear the despotic force, his power is gone. (SB, 116) 
 
Most people do not understand the complicated machinery of the government. 
They do not realize that every citizen silently but none the less certainly 
sustains the government of the day in ways of which he has no knowledge. 
Every citizen therefore renders himself responsible for every act of his 
government. And it is quite proper to support it so long as the actions of the 
government are bearable. But when they hurt him and his nation, it becomes All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  his duty to withdraw his support. (SB, 191) 
 
It is true that in the vast majority of cases, it is the duty of a subject to submit 
to wrongs on failure of the usual procedure, so long as they do not affect his 
vital being. But every nation and every individual have the right, and it is their 
duty, to rise against an intolerable wrong. (SB, 191) 
 
There is no bravery greater than a resolute refusal to bend the knee to an 
earthly power, no matter how great, and that without bitterness of spirit and 
in the fullness of faith that the spirit alone lives, nothing else does. (MM, 100) 
 
The outward freedom that we shall attain will only be in exact proportion to 
the inward freedom to which we may have grown at a given moment. And if 
this is the correct view of freedom, our chief energy must be concentrated 
upon achieving reform from within. (SB, 36) 
 
The true democrat is he who with purely nonDviolent means defends his liberty 
and, therefore, his country's and ultimately that of the whole of mankind. (MM, 
132) 
 
Democracy disciplined and enlightened is the finest thing in the world. A 
democracy prejudiced, ignorant, superstitious will land itself in chaos and may 
be self'Ddestroyed. (MM, 130) 
 
Democracy and violence can ill go together. The States that are today 
nominally democratic have either to become frankly totalitarian or, if they are 
to become truly democratic, they must become courageously nonDviolent. It is 
a blasphemy to say that nonDviolence can only be practiced by individuals and 
never by nations which are composed of individuals. (MM, 131) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  For me the only training in swaraj  we need is the ability to defend ourselves 
against the whole world and to live our life in perfect freedom even though it 
may be full of defects. Good government is no substitute for selfDgovernment. 
(MT, II, 24) 
 
I do not blame the British. If we were weak in numbers as the British are, we 
would perhaps have resorted to the same methods as they are employing. 
Terrorism and deception are weapons not of the strong but of the weak. The 
British are weak in numbers, we are weak in spite of our numbers. The result is 
that each is dragging the other down. It is common experience that Englishmen 
lose in character after residence in India and that Indians lose in courage and 
manliness by contact with Englishmen. This process of weakening is good 
neither for us two nations, nor for the world. 
But if we Indians take care of ourselves the English and the rest of the world 
would take care of themselves. Our contribution to the progress of the world 
must, therefore, consist in setting our own house in order. (MT, II, 25D26) 
 
What then is the meaning of nonDcoDoperation in terms of the law of suffering? 
We must voluntarily put up with the losses and inconveniences that arise from 
having to withdraw our support from a government that is ruling against our 
will. 'Possession of power and riches is a crime under an unjust government, 
poverty in that case is a virtue,' says Thoreau. It may be that in the transition 
state we may make mistakes; there may be avoidable suffering. These things 
are preferable to national emasculation. 
We must refuse to wait for the wrong to be righted till the wrongDdoer has 
been roused to a sense of his iniquity. We must not, for fear of ourselves or 
others having to suffer, remain participators in it. But we must combat the 
wrong by ceasing to assist the wrongDdoer directly or indirectly. 
If a father does injustice, it is the duty of his children to leave the parental 
roof. If the headmaster of a school conducts his institution on an immoral basis, 
the pupils must leave the school. If the chairman of a corporation is corrupt, 
the members thereof must wash their hands clean of his corruption by All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167  withdrawing from it; even so if a government does a grave injustice the subject 
must withdraw coDoperation wholly or partially, sufficiently to wean the ruler 
from wickedness. In each case conceived by me there is an element of 
suffering whether mental or physical. Without such suffering it is not possible 
to attain freedom. (MT, I, 357) 
 
The moment I became a satyagrahi  from that moment I ceased to be a subject, 
but never ceased to be a citizen. A citizen obeys laws voluntarily and never 
under compulsion or for fear of the punishment prescribed for their breach. He 
breaks them when he considers it necessary and welcomes the punishment. 
That robs it of its edge or of the disgrace which it is supposed to imply. (MT, 
VI, 269) 
 
Complete civil disobedience is rebellion without the element of violence in it. 
An outDandDout civil resister simply ignores the authority of the State. He 
becomes an outlaw claiming to disregard every unmoral State law. Thus, for 
instance, he may refuse to pay taxes, he may refuse to recognize the authority 
in his daily intercourse. He may refuse to obey the law of trespass and claim to 
enter military barracks in order to speak to the soldiers, he may refuse to 
submit to limitations upon the manner of picketing and may picket within the 
proscribed area. In doing all this he never uses force and never resists force 
when it is used against him. In fact, he invites imprisonment and other uses of 
force against himself. This he does because and when he finds the bodily 
freedom he seemingly enjoys being an intolerable burden. He argues to himself 
that a State allows personal freedom only in so far as the citizen submits to its 
regulations. Submission to the State law is the price a citizen pays for his 
personal liberty. Submission, therefore, to a State law wholly or largely unjust 
is an immoral barter for liberty. A citizen who thus realizes the evil nature of a 
State is not satisfied to live on its sufferance, and therefore appears to the 
others who do not share his belief to be a nuisance to society whilst he is 
endeavoring to compel the State, without committing a moral breach, to arrest 
him. Thus considered, civil resistance is a most powerful expression of a soul's All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168  anguish and an eloquent protest against the continuance of an evil State. Is not 
this the history of all reform? Have not reformers, much to the disgust of their 
fellows, discarded even innocent symbols associated with 'an evil practice? 
When a body of men disown the State under which they have hitherto lived, 
they nearly establish their own government. I say nearly, for they do not go to 
the point of using force when they are resisted by the State. Their 'business', as 
of the individual, is to be locked up or shot by the State, unless it recognizes 
their separate existence, in other words bows to their will. Thus three 
thousand Indians in South Africa after due notice to the Government of the 
Transvaal crossed the Transvaal border in 1914 in defiance of the Transvaal 
Immigration Law and compelled the government to arrest them. When it failed 
to provoke them to violence or to coerce them into submission, it yielded to 
their demands. A body of civil resisters is, therefore, like an army subject to all 
the discipline of a soldier, only harder because of want of excitement of an 
ordinary soldier's life. And as a civil resistance army is or ought to be free from 
passion because free from the spirit of retaliation, it requires the fewest 
number of soldiers. Indeed one perfect  civil resister is enough to win the battle 
of Right against Wrong. (SB, 192D93) 
 
Discipline has a place in nonDviolent strategy, but much more is required. In 
a Satyagraha  army everybody is a soldier and a servant. But at a pinch 
every satyagrahi  soldier has also to be his own general and leader. Mere 
discipline, cannot make for leadership. The latter calls for faith and vision. (SB, 
203) 
 
Where selfDreliance is the order of the day, where no one has to look 
expectantly at another, where there are no leaders and no followers, or where 
all are leaders and all are followers, the death of a fighter, however eminent, 
makes not for slackness but on the other hand intensifies the struggle. (SB, 
203) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  Every good movement passes through five stages, indifference, ridicule, abuse, 
repression, and respect. We had indifference for a few months. Then the 
Viceroy graciously laughed at it. Abuse, including misrepresentation, has been 
the order of the day. The Provincial Governors and the antiDnonDcoDoperation 
press have heaped as much abuse upon the movement as they have been able 
to. Now comes repression, at present yet in its fairly mild form. Every 
movement that survives repression, mild or severe, invariably commands 
respect which is another name for success. This repression, if we are true, may 
be treated as a sure sign of the approaching victory. But, if we are true, we 
shall neither be cowed down nor angrily retaliate and be violent. Violence is 
suicide. (SB, 204) 
 
My confidence is unshaken. If a single satyagrahi  holds out to the end, victory 
is absolutely certain. (SB, 203) 
 
My work will be finished, if I succeed in carrying conviction to the human 
family that every man or woman, however weak in body, is the guardian of his 
or her selfDrespect and liberty. This defense avails, though the whole world 
may be against the individual resister. (MT, VI, 336) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170   
1. EDUCATION 
 
R
eal education consists in drawing the best out of yourself. What better book 
can there be than the book of humanity? (SB, 251) 
 
I hold that true education of the intellect can only come through a proper 
exercise and training of the bodily organs, e.g., hands, feet, eyes, ears, nose, 
etc. In other word an intelligent use of the bodily organs in a child provides the 
best and quickest way of developing his intellect. But unless the development 
of the mind and body goes hand in hand with a corresponding awakening of the 
soul, the former alone would prove to be a poor lopsided affair. By spiritual 
training I mean education of the heart. A proper and all round development of 
the mind, therefore, can take place only when it proceeds pari passu with the 
education of the physical and spiritual faculties of the child. They constitute an 
indivisible whole. According to this theory, therefore, it would be a gross 
fallacy to suppose that they can be developed piecemeal or independently of 
one another. (SB, 256) 
 
By Education I mean an allDround drawing out of the best in child and 
man―body, mind and spirit. Literacy is not the end of education nor even the 
beginning. It is only one of the means whereby man and woman can be 
educated. Literacy in itself is no education. I would therefore begin the child's 
education by teaching it a useful handicraft and enabling it to produce from 
the moment it begins its training. Thus every school can be made selfD
supporting, the condition being that the State takes over the manufactures of 
these schools. 
I hold that the highest development of the mind and the soul is possible under 
such a system of education. Only every handicraft has to be taught not merely 
mechanically as is done today but scientifically, i.e., the child should know the 
why and the wherefore of every process. I am not writing this without some All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171  confidence, because it has the backing of experience. This method is being 
adopted more or less completely wherever spinning is being taught to workers. 
I have myself taught sandalDmaking and even spinning on these lines with good 
results. This method does not exclude a knowledge of history and geography. 
But I find that this is being taught by transmitting such general information by 
word of mouth. One imparts ten times as much in this manner as by reading 
and writing. The signs of the alphabet may be taught later when the pupil has 
learnt to distinguish wheat from the chaff and when he has somewhat 
developed his or her tastes. This is a revolutionary proposal, but it saves 
immense labour and enables a student to acquire in one year what he may take 
much longer to learn. This means allDround economy. Of course the pupil learns 
mathematics whilst he is learning his handicraft. (SB, 256D57) 
 
I admit my limitations. I have no university education worth the name. My high 
school career was never above the average. I was thankful if I could pass my 
examinations. Distinction in the school was beyond my aspiration. Nevertheless 
I do hold very strong views on education in general, including what is called 
higher education. And I owe it to the country that my views should d be clearly 
known and taken for what they may be worth. I must shed the timidity that has 
led almost to selfDsuppression. I must not fear ridicule, and even loss of 
popularity or prestige. If I hide my belief, I shall never correct errors of 
judgment. I am always eager to discover them and more than eager to correct 
them. 
Let me now state my conclusions held for a number of years and enforced 
wherever I had opportunity of enforcing them:  
1. I am not opposed to education even of' the highest type attainable in the 
world.  
2. The State must pay for it wherever it has definite use for it.  
3. I am opposed to all higher education being paid for from the general 
revenue.  
4. It is my firm conviction that the vast amount of the soDcalled education in 
arts, given in our colleges, is sheer waste and has resulted in unemployment All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  among the educated classes. What is more, it has destroyed the health, both 
mental and physical, of the boys and girls who have the misfortune to go 
through the grind in our colleges.  
5. The medium of a foreign language through which higher education has been 
imparted in India has caused incalculable intellectual and moral injury to the 
nation. We are too near our own times to judge the enormity of the damage 
done. And we who have received such education have both to be victims and 
judges―an almost impossible feat.  
I must give my reasons for the conclusions set forth above. This I can best do, 
perhaps, by giving a chapter from my own experience. Up to the age of 12 all 
the knowledge I gained was through Gujarati, my mother tongue. I knew then 
something of arithmetic, history and geography. Then I entered a High School. 
For the first three years the mother tongue was still the medium. But the 
schoolmaster's business was to drive English into the pupil's head. Therefore 
more than half of our time was given to learning English and mastering its 
arbitrary spelling and pronunciation. It was a painful discovery to have to learn 
a language that was not pronounced as it was written. It was a strange 
experience to have to learn the spelling by heart. But that is by the way, and 
irrelevant to my argument. However, for the first three years, it was 
comparatively plain sailing. The pillory began with the fourth year. Everything 
had to be learnt through English ―geometry, algebra, chemistry, astronomy, 
history, geography. The tyranny of English was so great that even Sanskrit or 
Persian had to be learnt through English, not through the mother tongue. If any 
boy Spoke in Gujarati which he understood, he was punished. It did not matter 
to the teacher, if a boy spoke bad English which he could neither pronounce 
correctly or understand fully. Why should the teacher worry? His own English 
was by no means without blemish. It could not be otherwise. English was as 
much a foreign language to him as to his pupils. The result was chaos. We boys 
had to learn many things by heart, though we could not understand them fully 
and often not at all. My head used to reel as the teacher as struggling to make 
his exposition on geometry understood by us. I could make neither head nor tail 
of geometry till we reached the thirteenth theorem of the first book of Euclid. All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173  And let me confess to the reader that in spite of all my love for the mother 
tongue, I do not to this day know the Gujarati equivalents of the technical 
terms of geometry, algebra and the like. I know now that what I took four 
years to learn of arithmetic, geometry, algebra, chemistry and astronomy, I 
should have learnt easily in one year, if I had not to learn them through English 
but Gujarati. My grasp of the subjects would have been easier and clearer. My 
Gujarati vocabulary would have been richer. I would have made use of such 
knowledge in my own home. This English medium created an impassable barrier 
between me and the members of my family, who had not gone through English 
schools. My father knew nothing of what I was doing. I could not, even if I had 
wished it, interest my father in what I was learning. For though he had ample 
intelligence, he knew not a word of English. I was fast becoming a stranger in 
my own home. I certainly became a superior person. Even my dress began to 
undergo imperceptible changes. What happened to me was not an uncommon 
experience. It was common to the majority. The first three years in the High 
School made little addition to my stock of general knowledge. They were a 
preparation for fitting the boys for teaching them everything through English. 
High Schools were schools for cultural conquest by the English. The knowledge 
gained by the three hundred boys of my High School became a circumscribed 
possession. It was not for transmission to the masses. A word about literature. 
We had to learn several books of English prose and English poetry. No doubt all 
this was nice. But that knowledge has been of no use to me in serving or 
bringing me in touch with the masses. I am unable to say that if I had not 
learnt what I did of English prose and poetry, I should have missed a rare 
treasure. If I had, instead, passed those precious seven years in mastering 
Gujarati and had learnt mathematics, science, and Sanskrit and other subjects 
through Gujarati, I could easily have shared the knowledge so gained with my 
neighbours. I would have enriched Gujarati, and who can say that I would not 
have with my habit of application and my inordinate love for the country and 
mother tongue, made a richer and greater contribution to the service of the 
masses? 
I must not be understood to decry English or its noble literature. The columns All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174  of the Harijan  are sufficient evidence of my love of English. But the nobility of 
its literature cannot avail the Indian nation any more than the temperate 
climate or the scenery of England can avail her. India has to flourish in her own 
climate and scenery and her own literature, even though all the three may be 
inferior to the English climate, scenery and literature. We and our children 
must build on our own heritage. If we borrow another, we impoverish our own. 
We can never grow on foreign victuals. I want the nation to have the treasures 
contained in that language, for that matter in other languages of the world, 
through its own vernaculars. I do not need to learn Bengali in order to know the 
beauties of Rabindranath's matchless productions. I get them through good 
translations. Gujarati boys and girls do not need to learn Russian to appreciate 
Tolstoy's short stories. They learn them through good translations. It is the 
boast of Englishmen that the best of the world's literary output is in the hands 
of that nation in simple English inside of a week of its publication. Why need I 
learn English to get at the best of what Shakespeare and Milton thought and 
wrote? 
It would be good economy to set apart a class of students whose business would 
be to learn the best of what is to be learnt in the different languages of the 
world and give the translation in the vernaculars. Our masters chose the wrong 
way for us, and habit has made the wrong appear as right.... Universities must 
be made selfDsupporting. The State should simply educate those whose services 
it would need. For all other branches of learning it should encourage private 
effort. The medium of instruction should be altered at once and at any cost, 
the provincial languages being given their rightful place. I would prefer 
temporary chaos in higher education to the criminal waste that is daily 
accumulating .... Thus I claim that I am not an enemy of higher education. But 
I am an enemy of higher education as it is given in this country. Under my 
scheme there will be more and better libraries, more and better laboratories, 
more and better research institutes. Under it we should have an army of 
chemists, engineers and other experts who will be real servants of the nation, 
and answer the varied and growing requirements of a people who are becoming 
increasingly conscious of their rights and wants. And all these experts will All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175  speak, not a foreign tongue, but the language of the people. The knowledge 
gained by them will be the common property of the people. There will be truly 
original work instead of mere imitation. And the cost will be evenly and justly 
distributed. (SB, 261D66) 
 
The Indian culture of our times is in the making. Many of us are striving to 
produce a blend of all the cultures which seem today to be in clash with one 
another. No culture can live, if it attempts to be exclusive. There is no such 
thing as pure Aryan culture in existence today in India. Whether the Aryans 
were indigenous to India or were unwelcome intruders, does not interest me 
much. What does interest me is the fact that my remote ancestors blended 
with one another with the utmost freedom and we of the present generation 
are a result of that blend. Whether we are doing any good to the country of our 
birth and tile tiny globe which sustains us or whether we are a burden, the 
future alone will show. (SB, 266D67) 
 
I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides and my windows to be 
stuffed. I want the cultures of all lands to be blown about my house as freely 
as possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any. I would have our young 
men and women with literary tastes to learn as much of English and other 
worldDlanguages as they like, and then expect them to give the benefits of 
their learning to India and to the world like a Bose, a Ray or the Poet himself. 
(Sir Jagdish Chandra Bose and Sir P. G. Ray were eminent Indian scientists; 'the 
Poet' refers to Rabindranath Tagore.) But I would not have a single Indian to 
forget, neglect or be ashamed of his mother tongue, or to feel that he or she 
cannot think or express the best thoughts in his or her own vernacular. Mine is 
not a religion of the prisonDhouse. (SB, 267) 
 
Music means rhythm, order. Its effect is electrical. It immediately soothes. 
Unfortunately like our shastras , music has been the prerogative of the few. It 
has never become nationalized in the modern sense. If I had any influence with 
volunteer boy scouts and Seva Samiti  organizations, I would make compulsory a All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176  proper singing in company of national songs. And to that end I should have 
great musicians attending every Congress or conference and teaching mass 
music. (SB, 274) 
 
In Pandit Khare's opinion, based upon wide experience, music should form part 
of the syllabus of primary education. I heartily endorse the proposition. The 
modulation of the voice is as necessary as the training of the hand. Physical 
drill, handicrafts, drawing and music should go hand in hand in order to draw 
the best out of the boys and girls and create in them a real interest in their 
tuition. (SB, 274) 
 
The eyes, the ears and the tongue come before the hand. Reading comes 
before writing and drawing before tracing the letters of the alphabet. If this 
natural method is followed, the understanding of the children will have much 
better opportunity of development than when it is under check by beginning 
the children's training with the alphabet. (MM, 162) 
 
Nothing can be farther from my thought than that we should become exclusive 
or erect barriers. But I do respectfully contend that an appreciation of other 
cultures can fitly follow, never precede, an appreciation and assimilation of 
our own....An academic grasp without practice behind it is like an embalmed 
corpse, perhaps lovely to look at but nothing to inspire or ennoble. My religion 
forbids me to belittle or disregard other cultures, as it insists under pain of 
civil suicide upon imbibing and living my own. (SB, 254) 
 
The utterly false idea that intelligence can be developed only through bookD
reading should give place to the truth that the quickest development of the 
mind can be achieved by artisan's work being learnt in a scientific manner. 
True development of the mind commences immediately the apprentice is 
taught at every step why a particular manipulation of the hand or a tool is 
required. The problem of the unemployment of students can be solved without 
difficulty, if they will rank themselves among the common labourers. (SB, 256) All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177  I am not sure that it is not better for the children to have much of the 
preliminary instruction imparted to them vocally. To impose on children of 
tender age a knowledge of the alphabet and the ability to read before they can 
gain general knowledge is to deprive them, whilst they are fresh, of the power 
of assimilating instruction by word of mouth. (SB, 256) 
 
Literary training by itself adds not an inch to one's moral height and characterD
building is independent of literary training. (SB, 255) 
 
I am a firm believer in the principle of free and compulsory primary education 
for India. I also hold that we shall realize this only by teaching the children a 
useful vocation and utilizing it as a means for cultivating their mental, physical 
and spiritual faculties. Let no one consider these economic calculations in 
connection with education as sordid or out of place. There is nothing 
essentially sordid about economic calculations. True economics never militates 
against the highest ethical standard, just as true ethics to be worth its name 
must, at the same time, be also good economics. (SB, 258) 
 
I value education in the different sciences. Our children cannot have too much 
of chemistry and physics. (MM, 161) 
 
I would develop in the child his hands, his brain and his soul. The hands have 
almost atrophied. The soul has been altogether ignored. (MM, 161) 
 
As regards children's curiosity about the facts of life, we should tell them if we 
know, and admit our ignorance if we do not. If it is something that must not be 
told, we should check them and ask them not to put such questions even to 
anyone else. We must never put them off. They know more things than we 
imagine. If they do not know and if we refuse to tell them, they try to acquire 
the knowledge in a questionable manner. But if it has to be withheld from All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  them, we must take such risk. (DM, 188) 
 
A wise parent allows the children to make mistakes. It is good for them once in 
a while to burn their fingers. (MGP, I, 44) 
 
We cannot properly control or conquer the sexual passion by turning a blind 
eye to it. I am, therefore, strongly in favour of teaching young boys and young 
girls the significance and right use of their generative organs. In my own way I 
have tried to impart this knowledge to young children of both sexes, for whose 
training I was responsible. But the sex education that I stand for must have for 
its object the conquest and sublimation of the sex passion. Such education 
should automatically serve to bring home to children the essential distinction 
between man and brute, to make them realize that it is man's privilege and 
pride to be gifted with the faculties of head and heart both, that he is a 
thinking no less than a feeling animal, and to renounce the sovereignty of 
reason over the blind instinct is, therefore, to renounce a man's estate. In man, 
reason quickens and guides the feeling, in brute the soul lies ever dormant. To 
awaken the heart is to awaken the dormant soul, to awaken reason and to 
inculcate discrimination between good and evil. Today, our entire 
environment―our reading, our thinking, and our social behavior―is generally 
calculated to subserve and cater for the sex urge. To break through its coils is 
no easy task. But it is a task worthy of our highest endeavour. (MT, IV, 76) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179   
1. WOMEN 
 
I 
am firmly of opinion that India's salvation depends on the sacrifice and 
enlightenment of her women. (SB, 239) 
 
Ahimsa  means infinite love, which again means infinite capacity for suffering. 
Who but woman, the mother of man, shows this capacity in the largest 
measure? She shows it as she carries the infant and feeds it during nine months 
and derives joy in the suffering involved. What can beat the suffering caused 
by the pangs of labour? But she forgets them in the joy of creation. Who again 
suffers daily so that her babe may wax from day to day? Let her transfer that 
love to the whole of humanity, let her forget that she ever was or can be the 
object of man's lust. And she will occupy her proud position by the side of man 
as his mother, maker and silent leader. It is given to her to teach the art of 
peace to the warring world thirsting for that nectar. (SB, 241) 
 
My own opinion is that, just as fundamentally man and woman are one, their 
problem must be one in essence. The soul in both is the same. The two live the 
same life, have the same feelings. Each is a complement of the other. The one 
cannot live without the other's active help. 
But somehow or other man has dominated woman from ages past, and so 
woman has developed an inferiority complex. She has believed in the truth of 
man's interested teaching that she is inferior to him. But the seers among men 
have recognized her equal status. 
Nevertheless there is no doubt that at some point there is bifurcation. Whilst 
both are fundamentally one, it is also equally true that in the form there is a 
vital difference between the two. Hence the vocations of the two must also be 
different. The duty of motherhood, which the vast majority of women will 
always undertake, requires qualities which man need not possess. She is 
passive, he is active. She is essentially mistress of the house. He is the breadDAll Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  winner. She is the keeper and distributor of the bread. She is the careDtaker in 
every sense of the term. The art of bringing up the infants of the race is her 
special and sole prerogative. Without her care the race must become extinct. 
In my opinion it is degrading both for man and woman that woman should be 
called upon or induced to forsake the hearth and shoulder the rifle for the 
protection of that hearth. It is a reversion to barbarity and the beginning of the 
end. In trying to ride the horse that man rides, she brings herself and him 
down. The sin will be on man's head for tempting or compelling his companion 
to desert her special calling. There is as much bravery in keeping one's home in 
good order and condition as there is in defending it against attack from 
without. (SB, 239D40) 
 
If I were born a woman, I would rise in rebellion against any pretension on the 
part of man that woman is born to be his plaything. I have mentally become a 
woman in order to steal into her heart. I could not steal into my wife's heart 
until I decided to treat her differently than I used to do, and so I restored to 
her all her rights by dispossessing myself of all my soDcalled rights as her 
husband. (MM, 111) 
 
Of all the evils for which man has made himself responsible, none is so 
degrading, so shocking or so brutal as his abuse of the better half of 
humanity―to me, the female sex, not the weaker sex. It is the nobler of the 
two, for it is even today the embodiment of sacrifice, silent suffering, humility, 
faith and knowledge. (MM, 111D12) 
 
Woman must cease to consider herself the object of man's lust. The remedy is 
more in her hands than man's. (MM, 111) 
 
Chastity is not a hotDhouse growth. It cannot be protected by the surrounding 
wall of the purdah. It must grow from within, and to be worth anything it must All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181  be capable of withstanding every unsought temptation. (SB, 248) 
 
And why is there all this morbid anxiety about female purity? Have women any 
say in the matter of male purity? We hear nothing of women's anxiety about 
men's chastity. Why should men arrogate to themselves the right to regulate 
female purity? It cannot be superimposed from without. It is a matter of 
evolution from within and therefore of individual selfDeffort. (SB, 248) 
 
Women, I hold, is the personification of selfDsacrifice, but unfortunately today 
she does not realize what a tremendous advantage she has over man. As 
Tolstoy used to say, they are laboring under the hypnotic influence of man. If 
they would realize the strength of nonDviolence they would not consent to be 
called the weaker sex. (MM, 112) 
 
To call woman the weaker sex is a libel; it is man's injustice to women. If by 
strength is meant brute strength, then, indeed, is woman less brute than man. 
If by strength is meant moral power, then woman is immeasurably man's 
superior. Has she not greater intuition, is she not more selfDsacrificing, has she 
not greater powers of endurance, has she not greater courage? Without her 
man could not be. If nonDviolence is the law of our being, the future is with 
woman.... Who can make a more effective appeal to the heart than woman? 
(MM, 112) 
 
Women are special custodians of all that is pure auld religious in life. 
Conservative by nature, if they are slow to shed superstitious habits, they are 
also slow to give up all that is pure and noble in life. (MM, 112) 
 
I believe in the proper education of women. But I do believe that woman will 
not make her contribution to the world by mimicking or running a race with 
men. She can run the race, but she will not rise to the great heights she is All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  capable of by mimicking man. She has to be the complement of man. (MM, 113) 
 
Woman is the companion of man gifted with equal mental capacities. She has 
the right to participate in the minutest detail of the activities of man, and she 
has the same right of freedom and liberty as he. She is entitled to a supreme 
place in her own sphere of activity as man is in his. This ought to be the natural 
condition of things, and not a result only of learning to read and write. By 
sheer force of a vicious custom, even the most ignorant and wordless men have 
been enjoying a superiority over women which they do not deserve and ought 
not to have. (WSI, 4D5) 
 
If only women will forget that they belong to the weaker sex, I have no doubt 
that they can do infinitely more than men against war. Answer for yourselves 
what your great soldiers and generals would do, if their wives and daughter's 
and mothers refused to countenance their participation in militarism in any 
shape or form. (WSI, 18) 
 
A sister who is a good worker, and was anxious to remain celibate in order to 
serve better the country's cause, has recently married having met the mate of 
her dreams. But she imagines that in doing so she has done wrong and fallen 
from the high ideal which she had set before herself. I have tried to rid her 
mind of this delusion. It is no doubt an excellent thing for girls to remain 
unmarried for the sake of service, but the fact is that only one in a million is 
able to do so. Marriage is a natural thing in life and to consider it derogatory in 
any sense is wholly wrong. When one imagines any act a fall it is difficult, 
however hard one tries, to raise oneself. The idea is to look upon marriage as a 
sacrament and therefore to lead a life of selfDrestraint in the married estate. 
Marriage in Hinduism is one of the four ashramas. In fact the other three are 
based on it. 
The duty of the above mentioned and other sisters who think like her is, 
therefore, not to look down upon marriage but to give it its due place and 
make of it the sacrament it is. If they exercise the necessary selfDrestraint, All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183  they will find growing within themselves a greater strength for service. She 
who wishes to serve will naturally choose a partner in life who is of the same 
mind, and their joint service will be the country's gain. (SB, 246) 
 
Marriage confirms the right of union between two partners to the exclusion of 
all the others when in their joint opinion they consider such union to be 
desirable, but it confers no right upon one partner to demand obedience of the 
other to one's wish for union. What should be done when one partner on moral 
or other grounds cannot conform to the wishes of the other is a separate 
question. Personally if divorce was the only alternative, I should not hesitate to 
accept it, rather than interrupt my moral progress assuming that I want to 
restrain myself on purely moral grounds. (SB, 246D47) 
 
It is a tragedy that generally speaking our girls are not taught the duties of 
motherhood. But if married life is a religious duty, motherhood must be too. To 
be an ideal mother is no easy task. The procreation of children has to be 
undertaken with a full sense of responsibility. The mother should know what is 
her duty from the moment she conceives right up to the time the child is born. 
And she who gives intelligent, healthy and well brought up children to the 
country is surely rendering a service. When the latter grow up they too will be 
ready to serve. The truth of the matter is that those who are filled with a living 
spirit of service will always serve whatever their position in life. They will 
never adopt a way of life which will interfere with service. (WSI, 180) 
 
'Some people oppose a modification of laws relating to the right of a married 
woman to own property on the ground that economic independence of woman 
would lead to the spread of immortality among women and disruption of 
domestic life. What is your attitude on the question?' I would answer the 
question by a counter question: Has not independence of man and his holding 
property led to the spread of immorality among men? If you answer 'yes' then 
let it be so also with women. And when women have rights of ownership and 
the rest like men, it will be found that the enjoyment of such fights is not All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  responsible for their vices or their virtues. Morality Which depends upon the 
helplessness of a man or woman has not much to recommend it. Morality is 
rooted in the purity of our hearts. (WSI, 184) 
 
A young man has sent me a letter which can be given here only in substance. It 
is as under: 
'I am a married man. I had gone out to a foreign country. I had a friend whom 
both I and my parents implicitly trusted. During my absence he seduced my 
wife who has now conceived of him. My father now insists that the girl should 
resort to abortion; otherwise he says, the family would be disgraced. To me it 
seems that it would be wrong to do so. The poor woman is consumed with 
remorse. She cares neither to eat nor drink, but is always weeping. Will you 
kindly tell me as to what my duty is in the case?' 
I have published this letter with great hesitation. As everybody knows such 
cases are by no means infrequent in society. A restrained public discussion of 
the question, therefore, does not seem to me to be out of place. 
It seems to me clear as daylight that abortion would be a crime. Countless 
husbands are guilty of the same lapse as this poor woman, but nobody ever 
questions them. Society not only excuses them but does not even censure 
them. Then, again, the woman cannot conceal her shame while man can 
successfully hide his sin. The woman in question deserves to be pitied. It would 
be the sacred duty of the husband to bring up the baby with all the love and 
tenderness that he is capable of and to refuse to yield to the counsels of his 
father. Whether he should continue to live with his wife is a ticklish question. 
Circumstances may warrant separation from her. In that case he would be 
bound to provide for her maintenance and education and to help her to live a 
pure life. Nor should I see anything wrong in his accepting her repentance if it 
is sincere and genuine. Nay, further, I can imagine a situation when it would be 
the sacred duty of the husband, to take back an erring wife who has 
completely expiated for and redeemed her error. (WSI, 87) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185  Passive resistance is regarded as the weapon of the weak, but the resistance 
for which I had to coin a new name altogether is the weapon of the strongest. I 
had to coin a new word to signify what I meant. But its matchless beauty lies in 
the fact that, though it is the weapon of the strongest, it can be wielded by 
the weak in body, by the aged, and even by the children if they have stout 
hearts. And since resistance in Satyagraha  is offered through selfDsuffering, it is 
a weapon preDeminently open to women. We found last year that women in 
India, in many instances, surpassed their brothers in sufferings and the two 
played a noble part in the campaign. For the ideal of selfDsuffering became 
contagious and they embarked upon amazing acts of selfDdenial. Supposing that 
the women and the children of Europe became fired with the love of humanity, 
they would take the men by storm and reduce militarism to nothingness in an 
incredibly short time. The underlying idea is that women, children and others 
have the same soul, the same potentiality. The question is one of drawing out 
the limitless power of truth. (WSI, 187) 
 
When a woman is assaulted, she may not stop to think in terms 
of' himsa  or ahimsa . Her primary duty is selfDprotection. She is at liberty to 
employ every method or means that comes to her mind, in order to defend her 
honour. God has given her nails and teeth. She must use them with all her 
strength and, if need be, die in the effort. The man or woman who has shed all 
fear of death will be able not only to protect himself or herself but others also 
through laying down his or her life. In truth, we fear death most, and hence we 
ultimately submit to superior physical force. Some will bend the knee to the 
invader, some will resort to bribery, some will crawl on their bellies or submit 
to other forms of humiliation, and some women will even give their bodies 
rather than die. I have not written this in a carping spirit. I am only illustrating 
human nature. Whether we crawl on our bellies, or whether a woman yields to 
the lust of man, is symbolic of that same love of life which makes us stoop to 
anything. Therefore, only he who loses his life shall save it. To enjoy life one 
should give up the lure of life. That should be part of our nature. (MT, VI, 78) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  For me there can be no preparation for violence. All preparation must be for 
nonDviolence if courage of the highest type is to be developed.... If there are 
women who when assailed by miscreants cannot resist themselves without 
arms, they do not need to be advised to carry arms. They will do so. There is 
something wrong in this constant inquiry as to whether to bear arms or not. 
People have to learn to be naturally independent. If they will remember the 
central teaching, namely, that the real, effective resistance lies in nonD
violence, they will mould their conduct accordingly. And that is what the world 
has been doing, although unthinkingly. Since it has not the highest courage, 
namely, courage born of nonDviolence, it arms itself even unto the atom bomb. 
Those who do not see in it the futility of' violence will naturally arm themselves 
to the best of' their ability. (MGP, I, 327) 
 
It is for American women to show what power women can be in the world. But 
that can only be when you cease to be the toys of men's idle hours. You have 
got freedom. You can become a power for peace by refusing to be carried away 
by the floodDtide of the pseudoDscience glorifying selfDindulgence that is 
engulfing the West today and apply your minds instead to the science of nonD
violence; for forgiveness is your nature. By aping men, you neither become 
men nor can you function as your real selves and develop your special talent 
that God has given you. God has vouchsafed to women the power of nonD
violence more than to man. It is all the more effective because it is mute. 
Women are the natural messengers of the gospel of nonDviolence if only they 
will realize their high estate. (MGP, II, 103) 
 
But it is my firm conviction that if the men and women of India cultivate in 
themselves the courage to face death bravely and nonDviolently, they can laugh 
to scorn the power of armaments and realize the ideal of unadulterated 
independence in terms of the masses which would serve as an example to the 
world. In that women can take the lead for they are a personification of the 
power of selfDsuffering. (MGP, II, 104) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187   
1. MISCELLANEOUS 
 
I 
do not want to foresee the future. I am concerned with taking care of the 
present. God has given me no control over the moment following. (SB, 11) 
 
I have been known as a crank, faddist, madman. Evidently the reputation is 
well deserved. For wherever I go, I draw to myself cranks, faddists and 
madmen. (MM, 4) 
 
The world knows so little of how much my soDcalled greatness depends upon 
the incessant toil and drudgery of silent, devoted, able and pure workers, men 
as well as women. (MM, 8) 
 
I look upon myself as a dull person. I take more time than others in 
understanding some things, but I do not care. There is a limit to man's progress 
in intelligence; but the development of the qualities of the heart knows no 
bounds. (DM, 315) 
 
It may fairly be said that intellect has played a subordinate part in my life. I 
think I am a dull person. It is literally true in my case that God provides the 
man of faith with such intelligence as he needs. I have always honoured and 
reposed faith in ciders and wise men. But my deepest faith is in truth so that 
my path though difficult to tread has seemed easy to me. (DM, 318) 
 
In the majority of cases addresses presented to me contain adjectives which I 
am ill able to carry. Their use can do good neither to the writers nor to me. 
They unnecessarily humiliate me, for I have to confess that I do not deserve 
them. When they are deserved, their use is superfluous. They cannot add to 
the strength of the qualities possessed by me. They may, if I am not on my 
guard easily turn my head. The good that a man does is more often than not All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  better left unsaid. Imitation is the sincerest flattery. (MM, 8D9) 
 
The goal ever recedes from us. The greater the progress the greater the 
recognition of our unworthiness. Satisfaction lies in the effort, not in the 
attainment. Full effort is full victory. (SB, 19) 
 
I have not conceived my mission to be that of a knightDerrant wandering 
everywhere to deliver people from difficult situations. My humble occupation 
has been to show people how they can solve their own difficulties. (SB, 44) 
 
If I seem to take part in politics, it is only because polities encircle us today 
like the coil of a snake from which one cannot get out, no matter how much 
one tries. I wish therefore to wrestle with the snake. (SB, 45) 
 
My work of social reform was in no way less or subordinate to political work. 
The fact is, that when I saw that to a certain extent my social work would be 
impossible without the help of political work, I took to the latter and only to 
the extent that it helped the former. I must therefore confess that work of 
social reform or selfDpurification of this nature is a hundred times dearer to me 
than what is called purely political work. (SB, 45) 
 
I am, myself, the father of four boys whom I have brought up to the best of my 
lights. I have been an extremely obedient son to my parents, and an equally 
obedient pupil to my teachers. I know the value of filial duty. But I count duty 
to God above all these. (MT, II, 27D28) 
 
I deny being a visionary. I do not accept the claim of saintliness. I am of the 
earth, earthy.... I am prone to as many weaknesses as you are. But I have seen 
the world. I have lived in the world with my eyes open. I have gone through the 
most fiery ordeals that have fallen to the lot of man. I have gone through this All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189  discipline. (MM, 16) 
 
I have never made a fetish of consistency. I am a votary of Truth and I must say 
what I feel and think at a given moment on the question, without regard to 
what I may have said before on it.... As my vision gets clearer, my views must 
grow clearer with daily practice. Where I have deliberately altered an opinion, 
the change should be obvious. Only a careful eye would notice a gradual and 
imperceptible evolution. (MM, 41) 
 
I am not at all concerned with appearing to be consistent. In my pursuit after 
Truth I have discarded many ideas and learnt many new things. Old as I am in 
age, I have no feeling that I have ceased to grow inwardly or that my growth 
will stop with the dissolution of the flesh. What I am concerned with is my 
readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from moment to moment. (MM, 
41) 
 
At the time of writing I never think of what I have said before. My aim is not to 
be consistent with my previous statements on a given question, but to be 
consistent with Truth, as it may present itself to me at a given moment. The 
result has been that I have grown from truth to truth; I have saved my memory 
an undue strain; and what is more, whenever I have been obliged to compare 
my writing even of fifty years ago with the latest, I have discovered no 
inconsistency between the two. But friends who observe inconsistency will do 
well to take the meaning that my latest writings may yield unless of course 
they prefer the old. But before making the choice, they should try to see if 
there is not an underlying and abiding consistency between the two seeming 
inconsistencies. (MT, V, 206) 
 
It is better in prayer to have a heart without words than words without a heart. 
(MM, 31) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190  Behind my nonDcoDoperation there is always the keenest desire to coDoperate 
on the slightest pretext even with the worst of opponents. To me, a very 
imperfect mortal, ever in need of God's grace, no one is beyond redemption. 
(MM, 69) 
 
My nonDcoDoperation has its root not in hatred, but in love. My personal religion 
peremptorily forbids me to hate anybody. I learnt this simple yet grand 
doctrine when I was twelve years old through a school book and the conviction 
has persisted up to now. It is daily growing on me. It is burning passion with 
me. (MM, 70) 
 
What is true of individuals is true of nations. One cannot forgive too much. The 
weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is the attribute of the strong. (MM, 79) 
 
Suffering has its wellDdefined limits. Suffering can be both wise and unwise, 
and when the limit is reached, to prolong it would be not wise, but the height 
of folly. (MM, 66) 
 
Ours will only then be a truly spiritual nation when we shall show more truth 
than gold, greater fearlessness than pomp of power and wealth, greater charity 
than love of self. If we will but clean our houses, our palaces and temples of 
the attributes of wealth and show in them the attributes of morality, one can 
offer battle to any combination of hostile forces, without having to carry the 
burden of a heavy militia. (MT, I, 241D42) 
 
I would far rather that India perished than that she won freedom at the 
sacrifice of truth. (MM, 145) 
 
If I had no sense of humour, I should long ago have committed suicide. (MM, 9) 
My philosophy, if I can be said to have any, excludes the possibility of harm to 
one's cause by outside agencies. The harm comes deservedly and only when the All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191  cause itself is bad or, being good, its champions are untrue, faintDhearted or 
unclean. (MM, 12) 
 
Somehow I am able to draw the noblest in mankind, and that is what enables 
me to maintain my faith in God and human nature. (MM, 12) 
 
If I was what I want to be I would not then need to argue with anyone. My word 
would go straight home. Indeed I would not even need to utter the word. The 
mere will on my part would suffice to produce the required effect. But I am 
painfully aware of my limitations. (MM, 12) 
 
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be a God. I 
plead not for the suppression of reason, but for a due recognition of that in us 
which sanctifies reason. (SB, 28D29) 
 
In every branch of reform constant study giving one a mastery over one's 
subject is necessary. Ignorance is at the root of failures, partial or complete, of 
all reform movements whose merits are admitted, for every project 
masquerading under the name of reform is not necessarily worthy of being so 
designated. (SB, 29) 
 
In dealing with living entities, the dry syllogistic method leads not only to bad 
logic but sometimes to fatal logic. For if you miss even a tiny factor ―and you 
never have control over all the factors that enter into dealings with human 
beings―your conclusion is likely to be wrong. Therefore, you never reach the 
final truth, you only reach an approximation; and that too if you are extra 
careful in your dealings. (SB, 45) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  It is a bad habit to say that another man's thoughts are bad and ours only are 
good and that those holding different views from ours are the enemies of the 
country. (SB, 193) 
 
Let us honour our opponents for the same honesty of purpose and patriotic 
motives that we claim for ourselves. (SB, 193) 
 
It is true that I have often been let down. Many have deceived me and many 
have been found wanting. But I do not repent of my association with them. For 
I know how to nonDcoDoperate, as I know how to coDoperate. The most 
practical, the most dignified way of going on in the world is to take people at 
their word, when you have no positive reason to the contrary. (SB, 193) 
 
If we are to make progress, we must not repeat history but make new history. 
We must add to the inheritance left by our ancestors. If we may make new 
discoveries and inventions in the phenomenal world, must we declare our 
bankruptcy in the spiritual domain? Is it impossible to multiply the exceptions 
so as to make them the rule? Must man always be brute first and man after, if 
at all? (SB, 182) 
 
In every great cause it is not the number of fighters that counts but it is the 
quality of which they are made that becomes the deciding factor. The greatest 
men of the world have always stood alone. Take the great prophets Zoroaster, 
Buddha, Jesus, Muhammad ―they all stood alone like many others whom I can 
name. But they had living faith in themselves and their God, and believing as 
they did that God was on their side, they never felt lonely. (SB, 209) 
 
Meetings and group organizations are all right. They are of some help, but very 
little. They are like the scaffolding that an architect erects ―a temporary and 
makeshift expedient. The thing that really matters is an invincible faith that All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193  cannot be quenched. (SB, 209) 
 
No matter how insignificant the thing you have to do, do it as well as you can, 
give it as much of your care and attention as you would give to the thing you 
regard as most important. For it will be by those small things that you shall be 
judged. (SB, 209) 
 
As to the habit of looking to the West for light, I can give little guidance if the 
whole of my life has not provided any. Light used to go out from the East. If 
the Eastern reservoir has become empty, naturally the East will have to borrow 
from the West. I wonder if light, if it is light and not a miasma, can ever be 
exhausted. As a boy I learnt that it grew with the giving. Anyway I have acted 
in that belief and have, therefore, traded on the ancestral capital. It has never 
failed me. This, however, does not mean that I must act like a frog in the well. 
There is nothing to prevent me from profiting by the light that may come from 
the West. Only I must take care that I am not overpowered by the glamour of 
the West. I must not mistake the glamour for true light. (SB, 278) 
 
I do not subscribe to the superstition that everything is good because it is 
ancient. I do not believe either that anything is good because it is Indian. (SB, 
275) 
 
I am no indiscriminate worshipper of all that goes under the name 'ancient'. I 
never hesitate to demolish all that is evil or immoral, no matter how ancient it 
may be, but with that reservation, I must confess to you, that I am an adorer of 
ancient institutions and it hurts me to think that people in their rush for 
everything modern despise all their ancient traditions and ignore them in their 
lives. (SB, 275D76) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194  True morality consists, not in following the beaten track, but in finding out the 
true path for ourselves and in fearlessly following it. (SB, 300) 
 
No action which is not voluntary can be called moral. So long as we act like 
machines, there can be no question of morality. If we want to call an action 
moral, it should have been done consciously and as a matter of duty. Any 
action that is dictated by fear or by coercion of any kind ceases to be moral. 
(SB, 300) 
 
One earns the right of fiercest criticism when one has convinced one's 
neighbours of one's affection for them and one's sound judgment, and when one 
is sure of not being in the slightest degree ruffled if one's judgment is not 
accepted or enforced. In other words, there should be love faculty for clear 
perception and complete toleration to enable one to criticize. (BM, 59) 
 
The word 'criminal' should be taboo from our dictionary. Or we are all 
criminals. 'Those of you that are without sin cast the first stone.' And no one 
was found to dare cast the stone at the sinning harlot. As a jailer once said, all 
are criminals in secret. There is profound truth in that saying uttered half in 
jest. Let them be therefore good companions. I know that this is easier said 
than done. And that is exactly what the Gita and as a matter of fact all 
religions enjoin upon us to do. (BM, 218) 
 
Man is the maker of his own destiny in the sense that he has the freedom of 
choice as to the manner in which he uses his freedom. But he is no controller of 
results. (MGP, I, 421) 
 
Goodness must be joined with knowledge. Mere goodness is not of much use. 
One must retain the fine discriminating quality which goes with spiritual 
courage and character. One must know in a crucial situation when to speak and 
when to be silent, when to act and when to refrain. Action and nonDaction in All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195  these circumstances become identical instead of being contradictory. (MGP, I, 
429D30) 
 
Everything created by God, animate or inanimate, has its good side and bad 
side. The wise man, like the fabled bird which separating the cream of milk 
from its water helps himself to the cream leaving the water alone, will take 
the good from everything leaving the bad alone. (MT, II, 384) 
 
It was forty years back, when I was passing through a severe crisis of skepticism 
and doubt, that I came across Tolstoy's book The Kingdom of God is Within 
You, and was deeply impressed by it. I was at that time a believer in violence. 
Its reading cured me of my skepticism and made me a firm believer in ahimsa . 
What has appealed to me most in Tolstoy's life is that he practised what he 
preached and reckoned no cost too great in his pursuit of truth. Take the 
simplicity of his life, it was wonderful. Born and brought up in the midst of 
luxury and comfort of a rich aristocratic family, blessed in an abundant 
measure with all the stores of the earth that desire can covet, this man who 
had fully known all the joys and pleasures of life turned his back upon them in 
the prime of his youth and afterwards never once looked back. 
He was the most truthful man of this age. His life was a constant endeavour, an 
unbroken tide of striving to seek the truth, and to practice it as he found it. He 
never tried to hide truth or tone it down but set it before the world in its 
entirety without equivocation or compromise, undeterred by the fear of any 
earthly power. 
He was the greatest apostle of nonDviolence that the present age has produced. 
No one in the West, before him or since, has written and spoken on nonD
violence so fully or insistently and with such penetration and insight as he. I 
would even go further and say that his remarkable development of this 
doctrine puts to shame the presentDday narrow and lopDsided interpretation put 
upon it by the votaries of ahimsa  in this land of ours. In spite of India's proud 
claim of being the karmabhumi , the land of realization, and in spite of some of 
the greatest discoveries in the field of ahimsa  that our ancient sages have All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196  made, what often goes by the name of ahimsa  among us today is a travesty of 
it. True ahimsa  should mean a complete freedom from ill will and anger and 
hate and an overflowing love for all. For inculcating this true and higher type 
of ahimsa amongst us, Tolstoy's life with its oceanDlike love should serve as a 
beacon light and a never failing source of inspiration. Tolstoy's critics have 
sometimes said that his life was a colossal failure, that he never found his 
ideal, the mystical green stick, in whose quest his entire life was passed. I do 
not hold with these critics. True, he himself said so. But that only shows his 
greatness. It may be that he failed fully to realize his ideal in life, but that is 
only human. No one can attain perfection while he is in the body for the simple 
reason that the ideal state is impossible so long as one has not completely 
overcome his ego, and ego cannot be wholly got rid of so long as one is tied 
down by shackles of the flesh. It was a favourite saying of Tolstoy that the 
moment one believes that he has reached his ideal, his further progress stops 
and his retrogression begins and that the very virtue of an ideal consists in that 
it recedes from us the nearer we go. To say, therefore, that Tolstoy on his own 
admission failed to reach his ideal does not detract a jot from his greatness, it 
only shows his humility. 
Much has been often sought to be made of the soDcalled inconsistencies of 
Tolstoy's life; but they were more apparent than real. Constant development is 
the law of life and a man who always tries to maintain his dogmas in order to 
appear consistent drives himself to a false position. That is why Emerson said 
that foolish consistency was the hobgoblin of little minds. Tolstoy's soDcalled 
inconsistencies were a sign of his development and his passionate regard for 
truth. He often seemed inconsistent because he was continuously outgrowing 
his own doctrines. His failures were public, his struggles and triumphs private. 
The world saw only the former, the latter remained unseen probably by Tolstoy 
himself most of all. His critics tried to make capital out of his faults, but no 
critic could be more exacting than he was with regard to himself. Ever on the 
alert for his shortcomings, before his critics had time to point at them, he had 
already proclaimed them to the world magnified a thousand fold and imposed 
upon himself the penance that seemed to him necessary. He welcomed All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197  criticism even when it was exaggerated and like all truly great men dreaded 
the world's praise. He was great even in his failures and his failures give us a 
measure not of the futility of his ideals but of his success.  
The third great point was a doctrine of 'bread labour', that everyone was bound 
to labour with his body for bread and most of the grinding misery in the world 
was due to the fact that men failed to discharge their duties in this respect. He 
regarded all schemes to ameliorate the poverty of the masses by the 
philanthropy of the rich, while they themselves shirked body labour and 
continued to live in luxury and ease, as hypocrisy and a sham, and suggested 
that if only man got off the backs of the poor, much of the so called 
philanthropy would be rendered unnecessary. 
And with him to believe was to act. So in the afternoon of his life, this man 
who had passed all his days in the soft lap of luxury took to a life of toil and 
hard labour. He took to bootDmaking and farming at which he worked hard for 
full eight hours a day. But his body labour did not blunt his powerful intellect; 
on the contrary it rendered it all the more keen and resplendent and it was in 
this period of his life that his most vigorous book ―What is Art ?―which he 
considered to be his masterpiece, was written in the intervals saved from the 
practice of his selfDchosen vocation. 
Literature, full of the virus of selfDindulgence, and served out in attractive 
forms, is flooding our country from the West and there is the greatest need for 
our youth to be on their guard. The present is for them an age of transition of 
ideals and ordeals; the one thing needful for the world, its youth and 
particularly the youth of India in this crisis, is Tolstoy's progressive selfD
restraint, for it alone can lead to true freedom for themselves, the country and 
the world. It is we ourselves, with our inertia, apathy and social abuse that 
more than England or anybody else block our way to freedom. And if we 
cleanse ourselves of our shortcomings and faults, no power on earth can even 
for a moment withhold swaraj  from us.... The three essential qualities of 
Tolstoy's life mentioned by me are of the utmost use to the youth in this hour 
of the world's trial. (MT, II, 418D20) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198  It is my settled conviction that no deserving institution ever dies for want of 
support. Institutions that have died have done so either because there was 
nothing in them to commend them to the public or because those in control 
lost faith, or which is perhaps the same thing, lost stamina. I would therefore 
urge the conductors of such institutions not to give in because of the general 
depression. It is a time of test for worthy institutions. (SB, 268D69) 
 
I had learnt at the outset not to carry on public work with borrowed money. 
One could rely on people's promise in most matters except in matters of 
money. (SB, 269) 
 
I disbelieve in the conversion of one person by another. My effort should never 
be to undermine another's faith but to make him a better follower of his own 
faith. This implies the belief in the truth of all religions and respect for them. 
It again implies true humility, a recognition of the fact that the divine light 
having been vouchsafed to all religions through an imperfect medium of flesh, 
they must share in more or less degree the imperfection of the vehicle. (MT, II, 
450) 
 
[To X who asked if it was true that Gandhi had allowed a venomous snake to 
pass over his body, he wrote:] 
It is both true and not true. The snake was passing over my body. In a case like 
that, what could I or anyone else do except to lie motionless? This hardly calls 
for any praise. And who knows whether or not the snake was poisonous? The 
idea that death is not a fearful event has been cherished by me for many a 
year, so that I recover soon enough from the shock of the death even of near 
and dear ones. (DM, 167D68) 
 
We have been taught to believe that what is beautiful need not be useful and 
what is useful cannot be beautiful. I want to show that what is useful can also All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199  be beautiful. (MGP, I, 168) 
 
People who claim to pursue 'art for art's sake' are unable to make good their 
claim. There is a place for art in life, apart from the question ―What is art? But 
art can only be a means to the end which we must all of us achieve. If however 
it becomes an end in itself, it enslaves and degrades humanity. (DM, 160) 
 
There are two aspects of things ―the outward and the inward. It is purely a 
matter of emphasis with me. The outward has no meaning except in so far as it 
helps the inward. All true art is thus the expression of the soul. The outward 
forms have value only in so far as they are the expression of the inner spirit in 
man. Art of that nature has the greatest possible appeal for me. But I know 
that many call themselves artists, and are recognized as such, and yet in their 
works there is absolutely no trace of the souls upward urge and unrest. (SB, 
273) 
 
All true art must help the soul to realize its inner self. In my own case, I find 
that I can do entirely without external forms in my soul's realization. My room 
may have blank walls; and I may even dispense with the roof, so that I may 
gaze out upon the starry heavens overhead that stretch in an unending expanse 
of beauty. What conscious art of man can give me the panoramic scenes that 
open out before me, when I look up to the sky above with all its shining stars? 
This, however, does not mean that I refuse to accept the value of productions 
of art, generally accepted as such, but only that I personally feel how 
inadequate these are compared with the eternal symbols of beauty in Nature. 
These productions of man's art have their value only so far as they help the soul 
onward towards selfDrealization. (SB, 273) 
 
I love music and all the other arts, but I do not attach such value to them as is 
generally done. I cannot, for example, recognize the value of those activities 
which require technical knowledge for their understanding.... When I gaze at All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  the starDsown heaven, and the infinite beauty it affords my eyes, that means to 
me more than all that human art can give me. That does not mean that I ignore 
the value of those works generally called artistic; but personally, in comparison 
with the infinite beauty of Nature, I feel their unreality too intensely.... Life is 
greater than all art. I would go even further and declare that the man whose 
life comes nearest to perfection is the greatest artist; for what is art without 
the sure foundation and frameDwork of a noble life? (MM, 39) 
 
Truly beautiful creations come when right perception is at work. If these 
moments are rare in life they are also rare in art. (SB, 274) 
 
True art takes note not merely of form but also of what lies behind. There is an 
art that kills and an art that gives life. True art must be evidence of happiness, 
contentment and purity of its authors. (SB, 274) 
 
We have somehow accustomed ourselves to the belief that art is independent 
of the purity of private life. I can say with all the experience at my command 
that nothing could be more untrue. As I am nearing the end of my earthly life I 
can say that purity of life is the highest and truest art. The art of producing 
good music from a cultivated voice can be achieved by many, but the art of 
producing that music from the harmony of a pure life is achieved very rarely. 
(SB, 274) 
 
If I can say so without arrogance and with due humility, my message and 
methods are, indeed, in their essentials for the whole world and it gives me 
keen satisfaction to know that it has already received a wonderful response in 
the hearts of a large and daily growing number of men and women in the West. 
(MM, 135) 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201  The highest honour that my friends can do me is to enforce in their own lives 
the programme that I stand for or to resist me to their utmost if they do not 
believe in it. (MM, 8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202   
GLOSSARY  
Advaita  NonDduality. A school of philosophy associated with the Indian 
philosopher, Shankaracharya (788D820), which believes that there 
is only one Absolute Truth; all else is appearance. 
Ahimsa  Nonviolence, positively the practice of love.  
Ashram  Hermitage; a quiet place where people having common ideals lead 
a community life and follow a particular discipline. The place 
where Gandhi resided with his coDworkers and disciples was 
referred to as the ashram . 
Ashrama  Hindu idealism prescribes four stages or periods of good life, 
called ashramas : the period of study and selfDdiscipline; of life as a 
householder and man of the World; of contemplation and gradual 
withdrawal from worldly ties; of total renunciation. 
Atma  Soul, self.  
Avatar  A divine incarnation.  
Bania  Member of the third caste among the Hindus, whose traditional 
occupation is trade and commerce. 
Bhagavat  A sacred book of the Hindus dealing also with th e life and teachings 
of Lord Krishna. 
Brahmacharya  Celibacy; a life of self Ddiscipline and continence dedicated to 
higher pursuits. 
Brahmin  Member of the first caste among the Hindus whose traditional 
occupation is priesthood or devotion to learning. 
Chapati  Cake of unleavened bread.  
Charkha  Spinning wheel.  
Dharma  Religion; moral law or practice; duty.  
Diwan  Chief minister of a princely State.  
Himsa  Violence.  All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203  Kalma  Designates the profession of faith whereby a Muslim witnesses the 
unity of God. 
Khaddar Hand Dspun and hand Dwoven doth.  
Mahatma  Lit. A great soul; a title generally given to saints. In later years 
Gandhi was generally referred to in India as the Mahatma. 
Manu  An ancient preceptor and author of the Code of Laws, named after 
him. 
Moksha  Emancipation from earthly attachments; liberation from the cycle 
of births. 
Muni Seer; sage; particularly a Jain saint.  
Nawab  Muslim dignitary or ruler.  
Purdah  Veil worn by woman in some eastern countries.  
Rishi Sage.  
Sadavrata  Giving of alms to the po or 
Samskar  Indelible impression left by past action.  
Satyagraha  Lit. Holding on to truth. Name given by Gandhi to the technique of 
nonDviolent resistance as practiced by him and under his guidance. 
Seva Samiti  A society for voluntary social service.  
Shastra  Hindu scripture.  
Swadeshi  Love of one's own country or patronage of things indigenous and 
native. 
Swaraj  SelfDrule. 
Upanishad  Ancient discourses on philosophy which are generally regarded as 
the source material of Hindu metaphysics. There are more than a 
hundred such Upanishads of which ten are considered as principal. 
Vakil  Pleader; lawyer.  
Vedas  The earliest and most sacred writings of the Hindus.  
 
 All Men Are Brothers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204   
Sources  
AMG An Autobiography or The Story Of My Experiments with Truth, by M. K. 
Gandhi. Published by Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 
originally in two volumes, Vol. I in 1927 and Vol. II in 1929; the present 
edition used was published in August 1948. 
BM Bapu's letter's to Mira, Published by Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, August 1949. 
CWMG  The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. Published by the Publications 
Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of 
India, New Delhi; Vol. I was published in January 1958. 
DM The Diary of Mahadev Desai. Published by Navajivan Publis hing House, 
Ahmedabad; Vol. 1 was published in 1953. 
HS Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule, by M. K. Gandhi. Published by 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, originally in 1938; the present 
edition used was published in 1946. 
MGP Mahatma Gandhi, The Last Phase, by Pyarelal. Published by Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, in two volumes, Vol. I in February 1956 
and Vol. II in February 1958. 
MM The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi, compiled by R. K. Prabhu and U. R. Rao. 
Published by Oxford University Press, London, in March 1945. 
MT Mahatma, Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, by D. G. Tendulkar. 
Published by Vithalbhai K. Jhaveri & D. G. Tendulkar, Bombay 6, in 
eight volumes, Vol. I in August 1951, Vol. II in December 1951, Vol. III in 
March 1952, Vol. IV in July 1952, Vol. V in October 1952, Vol. VI in 
March 1953, Vol. VII in August 1953, Vol. VIII in January 1954. 
SB Selections from Gandhi, by Nirmal Kumar Bose. Published by Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, in 1948. 
WSI Women and Social Injustice, by M. K. Gandhi. Published by Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, originally in 1942; the present edition 
used was published in 1954. 
 