ANASAKTI
DARSHAN
International journal for building a non-violent egalitarian society
Combined Issue : July 2010 – June 2011, V ol. 5 No. 2 and V ol. 6 No. 1
Chief Editor
Manimala
Director, Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti
Honorary Editor Editorial Assistance
Rajeev Ranjan Giri Dr. Sailaja Gullapalli
Special Issue on Bhoodan
Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti
(An autonomous body under Ministry of Culture)
Rajghat, New Delhi-110002
Contents
Editorial 1
OBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: – Dr. Parag Cholkar 5
An Overview
OVinoba’s Movement: –  Kanti Shah 31
An Overview
OSabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki –  Prabhat Kumar 41
OPadyatri Sant and Bhoodan Yagna –  Shiv Kumar Mishra 49
ODistribution of land would – Shubhamurti 54
lead to reforms
ODistribution of land is the – Razi Ahmad 81
resolution of violence
OFrom Bhoodan to an alternative –  Vinod Shahi 92
development model
OLoss of social capital and naxal –  Uttam Sinha 101
problem in India
OAgricultural system, agricultural –  Dr. Krishnaswarup Anandi 118
land and cottage industry
OThe 21st Century and Bhoodan –  Dr. Ramji Singh 123
OHistorical analysis of – Rajesh Kumar 130
land ownership
OImpact of Gandhian thought – Pankaj Kumar Dubey 138
on the Ideology of LoknayakJayaprakash NarayanAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 1ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Editorial
Log aate gaye aur karwan banta gaya . . .
Manimala
The year 2011 marks the sixtieth anniversary of the Bhoodan Revolution
started on 18th April, 1951 in a village in Andhra Pradesh when an incidentturned instantaneously into a revolution. Majority of the nation’s population
was landless. A few had control over all the land. As a result, within few
years of Independence, the result of the handful of landed people controllingthe rest, had become evident. The landed and landless were coming into
conflict in a village in Andhra Pradesh. Some violent incidents also took
place. In this region, the group trying to resolve matters of land throughviolent means was active. In this scenario, people found hope in Vinoba
Bhave. Vinoba was chosen by Mahatma Gandhi as the first Satyagrahi in the
Individual Satyagraha initiated in 1940. After all, what had Gandhiji seen inthis man called Vinayak? This question has to be seen in the context of the
multitudes that were Gandhi’s followers and disciples at that time. The first
Satyagraha of the Individual Satyagrahi was initiated on 17th October, 1940.It is important to recall that Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru was the second
Satyagrahi.  Gandhiji declared Vinayak as the first Satyagrahi and also gave
him the name ‘Vinoba’. This is the first instance that drew everybody’sattention to Vinoba. Vinobaji continued to work in Gandhiji’s Constructive
Programmes. After Gandhiji’s death, his disciples saw hope in Vinoba. The
Telangana region of Andhra Pradesh was under the effect of violent incidentson the issue of Land. The ‘Sarvodaya Samaj’ also decided to hold its
conference in the Shivrampalli village of this region. In addition, they
requested Vinobaji to attend and grace their conference. Vinobaji started onfoot to be a part of this conference. On his way, he met people, shared their
worries and woes. He also heeded their views on contemporary society, nation
and the world scenario.
On returning from this conference, the landless dalit villagers of
Pochampalli village demanded some land while talking to him. Vinobaji2 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011asked the villagers for potential solutions to their issues. Ramchandra Reddy
of that village suggested that 100 acres of land be given as ‘daan’ to them.
Acharya Vinoba contemplated deeply on this suggestion and gave it the shapeof a principle. In this novel incident, he saw the resolution of the impending
turmoil facing the entire nation in the near future. It was no longer relevant
here whether Ramchandra Reddy had given this land to accord democraticrights to the landless people, or merely to fulfill his own father’s wishes.
Inspired by this incident, Gandhiji’s spiritual disciple, Acharya Vinoba
assessed the importance of ‘daan’/ (offering) in the Indian consciousnessand planned ‘Bhoodan’ and began to visit different parts of the country to
realize this vision.
It must be noted that Acharya Vinoba did not try to first formulate a
principle through intellectual discourse, to be applied to reality later. Instead,
he took the learning from a real incident and transformed it into a principle.
In this, he saw Pochampalli village as representative soul of the entire nation.
Vinoba single-handedly and relentlessly pursued this understanding of
India; people kept joining him, and it became a movement. Gradually, the
movement took over the entire nation. It needs to be stressed that AcharyaVinoba saw people’s tendency to ‘daan’ as more prominent than their greed
and selfishness. Besides this, he also knew that sooner or later, people who
had accumulated land would distribute to those who were landless. He alwayskept in mind the lesson of his teacher Mahatma Gandhi, “Earth has enough
to fulfill everyone’s need, but not to fulfill even one’s greed.” To fulfill
everyone’s need meant everyone having land, especially those who rely onagriculture for livelihood. Acharya Vinoba opined that everyone had a right
to land. He believed in a phrase that ‘Sabai bhoomi Gopal ki’, i.e., All the
land belongs to Him (God).
The Bhoodan Revolution was strengthened by the support of youth.
Land was substantially donated. The next phase of this movement was
Gramdan. Acharya Vinoba and Jaiprakash Narayan expanded the horizonsof the Bhoodan Movement and elaborated its many aspects to turn it into a
complete philosophy.
The Bhoodan Revolution, termed Bhoodan Yagya by Vinobaji, was
severely criticized too. In response to that, Jaiprakash Narayan had written
an article titled ‘Samagr Ahimsak Kranti ka pehla sopan: Bhoodan’. In this,
JP said that “even the Law hasn’t been as successful in the issue of land-divisions as Bhoodan had been. Nehruji was the Prime Minister. He wrote
countless letters to the Chief Ministers of different States of the country
regarding the ‘Hadbandi’ law. Several circulars went on behalf of the PlanningManimalaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 3Commission. Many Socialist and Communist movements also focussed on
this issue. Even then, in 25 years of Swaraj, the land distributed through
Bhoodan is much more than that by the processes of Law itself. Have youever asked as to how much has been distributed to landless people through
the Hadbandi law? I am not talking about the land owned and administered
by the Government. Instead, I am inquiring about the land distributed bylanded owners to landless people under this law. Through this perspective, a
mere 8000 acres of land had been accorded through law in Gujarat, of which
around 6000 acres had been distributed; whereas 50,000 acres has alreadybeen distributed through Bhoodan. Under this law in Maharashtra, around
1.25 lakh acres of land has been declared received, of which not even 25,000
acres had been distributed; as opposed to 3.6 lakh acres distributed to landlesspeople through Bhoodan. People go about saying that people have received
sandy, rocky and infertile land in Bhoodan, but has anyone bothered to check
and validate the actual fact of these claims? All the land that was distributed,was later reviewed and declared as suitable for farming.
On the other hand, also, it needs to be seen as to how much land has
been distributed through the violent process. After all that happened inTelangana, not even a single acre of land was earned by anybody. Naxalbadi
faced so much bloodshed and violence and still, no one got any land. Hence,
in this issue of land-distribution, the path of empathy has been far moresuccessful than that of the law or death. The Bhoodan Revolution has
distributed 12 lakh acres of land to landless people. In addition, all of this
has been achieved kindly and willingly. This also builds the moral fibre ofthe nation. This had become a unifying strength at a time when divisive
forces are rampant everywhere in the nation.”
This view from Jaiprakash Narayan is in response to those who attempted
to undermine the importance of Bhoodan. Certainly, Bhoodan-Gramdan
Movement had some shortcomings too; but their assessment cannot be done
merely on those factors.
Earlier, those neglecting the importance of Bhoodan were told very
aptly by Prime Minister Jawahar Lal Nehru that “The Bhoodan Movement
started by Acharya Vinoba is unprecedented, which could have only beenmaterialized in India. Some people point out its flaws and shortcomings. I
believe that despite these shortcomings, this movement has been very
successful. Its success can be measured by the land and villages that havebeen offered as ‘daan’. But even more important result of this movement, is
the atmosphere established by it, which allows for betterment of land-
organization and assists in forming better laws as the views of peopleEditorial4 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011
regarding it are changing. In my opinion, laws are important for land-
organization, but to reform the consciousness of people at large is
fundamentally more important.”
At present, many critical discussions and arguments are taking place
regarding this issue of land. Despite this, even today, land has not been
justifiably distributed in our country. Most of the land is owned and controlledby few people, and the larger part of the population remains landless.
The present understanding of progress has rendered this question and
its associated problems even more serious. In the past few years, violentinstances around occupation of land and forests have also taken place. The
question of forests is linked to that of land. The migration and displacement
happened in the name of progress destroys forest-land as well as the cultureand practices of people who inhabit those areas. The lure of this progress has
resulted in making our relationship with earth a merely commercial one. As
a result, the entire world is under the threat of environmental degradation.Many intellectuals of the world have been contemplating on this issue. The
Russian author Tolstoy wrote a story on land. In this story, he raised the
question of how much land does a man need, after all? In the beginning ofthe 20th century, Madhavrao Sapre wrote a story titled ‘Ek tokri bhar mitti’,
which depicted the issue of forceful land occupation by zamindars. On similar
themes, stories titled ‘Garib ki Haaye’ and ‘Balidaan’ were penned by eminentHindi writer, Premchand.
On the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary of Bhoodan, this issue has
collated articles related to the ideology of Bhoodan-Gramdan, and variousaspects of its philosophy. Along with this, it also presents the experiences of
those who participated in Bhoodan Movement along with Acharya Vinoba.
This issue also has sketches that depict the limits of this movement. Besidesthese, a historical reading of land laws and beliefs associated with land, and
articles demonstrating Mahatma Gandhi’s and Dr. Ambedkar ’s intellectual
views on the matter are included. We hope that through this issue, the Bhoodanmovement would be remembered and the present-day problems of land would
be understood in its context. We would assess the success of this attempt
through your letters and comments. We shall await your opinion.ManimalaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 5ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Bhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview
Dr. Parag Cholkar
It has been over sixty years since the birth of the Bhoodan-Gramdan
movement. Bhoodan and its offshoot, the Gramdan movement, were visible
at the ground level as a movement for around 25 years and after its end, 37years have gone by. Circumstances have changed. So, what is the need to have
an analysis of the movement now? Can we draw some lessons from this
movement to face the present day challenges? Even when this movement wasendeavouring to bring about new consciousness among the people, especially
in the rural areas, the so-called intellectuals of those times did little, except
ignoring or ridiculing the movement and dismissing it in a few words bornout of ignorance and lack of understanding. This movement, which presented
a novel and unprecedented solution to a complex and formidable problem
outside the framework of the State, and through it showed a way for thetransformation in individual and social life, did not receive from them the
attention it deserved; it was not adequately studied. Those intellectuals were
either hoping for action from the State that claimed to be a welfare State; orwere enamoured by the sterile violent activities backed by a verbose jargon.
Perhaps, this class had neither the will nor the capacity to understand the
words having moorings in the tradition and the ground realities of this country.
But, now the sterility of the violence of the extreme left is apparent to
all, and so are the limitations of the State and its real character. In fact a
question has arisen whether the so-called welfare State is really working forthe welfare of the people, or serving the interests of national and international
capital? The problems of those times are still there and new problems too
have arisen. The land problem that gave birth to Bhoodan movement stillexists, albeit in a changed form. Perhaps it has become more serious.
Farmers are fighting everywhere to save their land from the assault of6 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011the capital which have the backing of the State apparatus. The Gramdan
movement fought against the process of the breaking of villages, which hadstarted in the country in the colonial era. That process still continues; and
despite the rhetoric of Panchayati raj, the slavery in villages is increasing in
alarming proportions. Violence and State action have clearly failed to find away out of this impasse; in fact, they are aggravating the situation. The only
way that is left, is that of non-violence. A number of mass movements are
claiming to follow that path. But they, and the people too, need to have adeeper understanding of the meaning of non-violence, its strategy and the
way of its working. And their power will grow in proportion to this
understanding. An overview of the Bhoodan-Gramdan movement would befruitful in this connection.
When the country became independent, land problem was one of the
most serious and complex problems facing it. Perhaps it was the worst legacyof British rule.
There is sufficient evidence that the concept of individual ownership of
land that is prevalent at present, was not there in India in the ancient times.The State was not the ultimate and sovereign owner of the land; it had, only
the right to a certain share in the produce of the land. In the middle ages, due
to increasing demands of the State, the land revenue started increasing. Duringthe period of British imperialism, it reached unbelievable levels. And it had
to be paid in cash and even before the produce was sold in the market. As a
result, the farmer got into the debt trap. As land became a saleable commodity,farmers began to lose hold over their land rapidly and it started getting
concentrated in the hands of absentee landlords. Farmers became labourers.
Coupled with the deliberate destruction of the domestic industry, this processresulted in great increase in the ranks of the labourers, accentuating in turn
their exploitation. The loss of fertility of land and the low prices of the
agricultural products aggravated the problem. Not only was the entireagriculture and the land system ruptured, but, also the whole of social,
economic, political and cultural fabric of the society, which had developed
throughout the ages was dealt a death-blow.
On August 15, 1947, the country became independent. But that was
just the transfer of political power at the Centre. As Gandhiji had written in
his Last Testament, from the point of view of the seven lakh villages of thecountry, the social, moral and economic freedom of the country was yet to
be attained.
1 In fact, in the true sense, political freedom too was to be attained;Dr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 7the villagers had lost this freedom in the colonial era.
Finding a lasting solution to the land problem was not only necessary
to give succour to the farmer, but it was also necessary to take a step towards
the true and total freedom.
It had always been Gandhiji’s effort to make the freedom movement,
the movement of the farmers. Even before independence, land reforms like
abolition of the zamindari system, protection of the tenants, cooperative
farming and land ceiling were being discussed. Therefore, taking some stepsin the interests of the farmer after independence was but natural. But vested
interests were strong in the State structure; and there were some limitations
of the democratic structure and the process too. So, revolutionary steps couldnot be expected from the State; especially when there was no pressure from
the vigilant and organised public opinion. Those, who were making policy
decisions were influenced by the so-called ‘modern’ thinking. The countrywas dependent on imports for its food, therefore, increase in production was
bound to have priority; and the economists believed that redistribution of
land would adversely affect food production.
For this reason, land reforms were put on the back burner, legal battles
continued for years, and the half-hearted and haphazard land reforms that
took place proved ineffectual.
On the other hand, it was impossible to bring about land reforms through
violence. Violence can never be the power of the people. Violence of a handful
of people is bound to degenerate into terrorism even though it is done in thename of the masses. Violence of a small group can never succeed against the
might of a modern State. And even if such violence succeeds in capturing
the State power, it will result in the rule of that group and not that of thepeople. The history of Communism teaches us this lesson. In Telengana (1951)
the Communists could not distribute the land permanently, nor are the
Naxalites able to do it now.
But it was necessary to strike a blow at the huge disparity in the land
ownership in the country. This was necessary not merely for economic and
social justice, but also to increase productivity. The farm labourer was toilingon the land, but he did not own it. He had a great hunger for land. If he could
get land, it would provide him a permanent source of livelihood; increase in
farm productivity too was bound to follow, besides mitigating his povertyand exploitation. Only then could the last man feel the advent of freedom.
The need for redistribution of land was, thus, obvious. But there wasBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview8 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011nothing for the landless in the various schemes of the government. The first
Five Year Plan accepted that the farm labourers who did not have tenancyrights would hardly gain from the State-sponsored redistribution schemes
2
and mentioned Bhoodan in this connection. Economist D.R. Gadgil,commenting on the plan, said, “This can only be interpreted as meaning thatthe State itself considers it neither necessary nor possible to do anything for
them.”
3 But there was urgent need to act on a priority basis in this direction.
In such a situation, Bhoodan stood up for the landless. Bhoodan stressed
the need for land redistribution and also questioned the ethical basis of private
property in land. It not only did much in this direction, it also created an
atmosphere wherein the government was forced to carry out land reforms,and its task was facilitated to an extent. This contribution was acknowledged
by many, including the then Prime Minister, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.
But, even as the Bhoodan movement was going on, those involved in
it, did have the realisation right from the outset that land redistribution in
itself, would not be sufficient; it would result in the fragmentation of land;
and the key to the lasting solution of the land problem lies in the villagisationof land–that is, control of the village community over the land. Bhoodan,
therefore, naturally blossomed into Gramdan and the latter became the main
focus of the movement.
After Gandhiji’s assassination, the followers of Gandhiji were in a
quandry over what to do next and they turned to Vinoba. Vinoba had come
into limelight when he was selected as the first satyagrahi by Mahatma Gandhiin 1940 to start individual Satyagraha. Vinoba had spent years in the Gandhi
ashrams pursuing his spiritual quest which included experiments in the realm
of Gandhian constructive work. In March 1948, a conference of constructiveworkers was held at Sevagram, where Sarvodaya Samaj was formed. This
conference heralded the rise of Vinoba as the leader of the Gandhian fraternity.
When the conference of Sarvodaya Samaj was organised in April 1951, atShivarampalli in the Telengana region, which was wrecked by Communist
violence, he was engaged in the experiments of rishi-kheti  (farming without
the aid of bullocks and machines) and kanchan-mukti  (freedom from the
evils of money). Pursued by the organisers, he consented to attend the
conference, but he set out on foot. He passed through many villages, talking
to the people, understanding their tribulations. While returning on foot, hereached Pochampalli on April 18, 1951 and on that day an incident occurred
that started the Bhoodan movement. When the dalits in the village demandedDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 9land, Vinoba casually asked those present, whether they could do something
in this regard. An individual named Ramchandra Reddy got up and announcedthat he would be willing to donate 100 acres of land.
The donation made by Ramchandra Reddy was to fulfil a wish of his
late father. It was not a donation that had been given for the landless,acknowledging their right over land; nor had Vinoba asked for such a
donation. This incident could very well be viewed as a peculiar incident in a
particular circumstance. But the genius of Vinoba realised its implications.He realised that this could be a non-violent way through which land could
be redistributed, and that too without creating any ill will among different
sections of the society.
It was bound to appear impossible. Could the land hunger of millions
of landless be satisfied in this manner? Can it be achieved without political
power and organisational strength? But Vinoba, a man of God, took it as asignal from God and set out with faith.
A trust was formed to administer the 100 acres of land received in
Pochampalli and it was decided that the dalit families would work on itcollectively. While going from Pochampalli to Tangalpalli, the next
destination, Vinoba was welcomed on the way by people and it was there
that he asked for land for the landless; for the first time. 25 acres were donated.At Tangalpalli, Vinoba received 90 acres of land. He, then went marching
forward and kept on receiving more and more land.
It was indeed strange that people were coming forward to donate land
to an individual, who had neither any temporal power nor the backing of any
organisation. Certainly it was the strength of his charisma, the power in his
words that was working wonders. The unique movement caught the attentionof the entire country.
For Vinoba, this work was a ‘yajna’, an act of sacrifice wherein everyone
ought to participate. That is why he would ask for land even from the smallfarmers. He did not beg for land, but asked for it as a right of the landless.
For him ‘daan’ meant equal distribution, the meaning he claimed to have
derived from the scriptures. He believed that traditional words should not beabandoned; rather new meanings should be given to them. The villagers,
acquainted with the traditional words, were understanding what Vinoba was
saying. For Vinoba, the redistribution of land was not simply a work fortemporary relief. He was striking at the very root of the concept of individual
ownership of land. For him, the redistribution of land was the first step inBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview10 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011the direction of total transformation. There was great potential in this seed.
“This issue is an international issue and if we solve it in a peaceful manner,one can say that after Swaraj, we have made a major discovery. If we are
able to achieve what we have set out for, and I believe that we will be able to
achieve it, then this will show a new path for emancipation to the wholeworld. The movement has the potential to usher in world-wide revolution.”
4
It had been Vinoba’s quest to find ‘non-violent means for the mitigation ofour problems on social and individual levels’.
5 It was this quest that had
yielded this novel means.
During the 58 days of Telengana march, Vinoba received 12,201 acres
of land in 200 villages.6 The work of redistributing the land also started. For
redistributing the land, the Hyderabad provincial government formulated
rules and authorised the committee nominated by Vinoba for distribution of
the donated land.
In June 1951, Vinoba returned to his ashram and got engaged in his
experiment of kanchan-mukti. He did want the work of Bhoodan to continue
in Telangana; perhaps he would have decided on the further course of actionby evaluating the progress of the work there. But at that time the First Five
Year Plan was being formulated. To have Vinoba’s views on it, Nehru sent
R. K. Patil, a member of the Planning Commission to meet Vinoba. Vinoba’sviews were highly critical. For him any plan that did not focus on food self-
sufficiency, generation of employment and land redistribution was worthless.
The rulers of the country who claimed to follow the Mahatma had to take theviews of Gandhians into cognizance. Nehru invited Vinoba to Delhi to talk
at length with the members of the Planning Commission.
Vinoba started for Delhi on the 12th September 1951, but on foot. This
time, it was but natural to try to broaden the Bhoodan movement. So Vinoba
started speaking on Bhoodan, forcefully putting his point of view with cogent
arguments and drawing upon varied parables. And he kept on getting land.Sceptics had said that Vinoba got land in Telangana because of the Communist
menace there; elsewhere he would not get land. But they were proved wrong.
Vinoba reached Delhi on the 13th November. Till then, he had receiveddonations of 19,436 acres of land.
7 On his way, in Sagar (Madhya Pradesh)
he presented the demand for 50 million acres of land before the country–one
sixth of all the cultivable land in the country, which, according to him, wasnecessary to give land to all the landless in the country.
In his message to the Delhiites, sent in advance, Vinoba had said, “IDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 11have not come to beg (bhiksha), but to initiate you (to give diksha).”8 That
was what he really meant to do–to initiate the people into a life of service,sacrifice and altruism.
Given the ‘modern’ thinking behind the Plan, significant change therein
was clearly not possible. Nevertheless, Vinoba explained his views to themembers of the Planning Commission. For him, it was more important to
reach out the people, the real masters in a democracy, and to build people’s
power to force the government to take necessary measures. He, therefore,did not turn now towards his ashram. Rather, he immersed himself in the
vast ocean of the people in the country. For the next 13 years, he kept on
walking from village to village to reach those whom no one had ever reachedbefore.
From Delhi, Vinoba came to Uttar Pradesh. Ignoring the din of the first
election, he continued his work. In April 1952, at the Sarvodaya Conferenceat Sewapuri, Sarva Seva Sangh, an all-India organisation of the Gandhians
took over the task of Bhoodan movement. Uptil now only Vinoba was walking
on foot, collecting donations of land; now the work of Bhoodan began in allthe regions of the country. Apart from Gandhian constructive workers,
workers of political parties also started taking part in the Bhoodan work.
Upto the time of the Sewapuri Conference, more than 1 lakh acres of landhad been received as Bhoodan. At the Conference, it was resolved that 2.5
million acres be obtained within two years.
9 In an appeal addressed to all the
countrymen, Vinoba made three claims for Bhoodan: “Firstly, it is in tunewith the Indian culture and ethos. Secondly, it has the potentiality to usher in
social and economic revolution. And thirdly, it can help in establishing world
peace.”
10
Such were the potentialities inherent in the Bhoodan work. On the 9th
May 1952, the day of Buddha Jayanti, Vinoba gave Bhoodan a new dimension
by calling it Dharma Chakra Pravartan–beginning of a spiritual revolution.That the foundation of Bhoodan was spiritual was a recurrent theme in
Vinoba’s discourses.
During his march in Uttar Pradesh, Vinoba received 295,054 acres of
land.
11 The work of redistribution of this land also commenced. For the first
time in the country the Bhoodan-Yajna Act was passed in Uttar Pradesh.
Under it, there was a provision for the establishment of a Bhoodan-YajnaCommittee to redistribute the Bhoodan land. Its chairman and members were
to be nominated by Vinoba.
12 Later, the same provision was made in theBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview12 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Acts passed in other States. Enactment of laws that gave authority to an
individual who did not hold any governmental post was indeed unique.
The biggest achievement in Uttar Pradesh was the Gramdan of Mangroth
village. On the 24th May 1952, all the landholders of this village donated
their entire land in the village, totalling 828 acres.13 V oluntary surrender of
private property in land, sanctioned by the Constitution of the country, by all
the landowners in a village was a phenomenon of unprecedented dimensions.
There was no question of giving this land to outsiders; it was natural toredistribute it among those villagers working on the land. Herein lied the
possibility of having community control over the most important natural
resource in the village. The potentialities of the movement were gettinggradually unfolded.
After Uttar Pradesh, Vinoba entered Bihar on getting assurance by the
workers there, that they would ensure collection of 4 lakh acres of land.Vinoba now thought of attempting the solution of the land problem in a
particular State, and to him Bihar was the right State in this regard. He,
therefore, appealed to the people of Bihar to give him one sixth of theirentire arable land–that is 32 lakh acres. He said, “If we fail to solve this
problem within a particular time frame then the pace of the age would overtake
us; our programme will then be only a programme for relief; it will lose itsrevolutionary possibilities. Therefore, we must attempt to solve the problem
somewhere. Bihar was a medium sized State where people are good-natured.
Non-violence has the greatest chance to succeed in a region where Buddhahad given his message.”
14
For this purpose, Vinoba tried his best in Bihar. The main political parties
passed resolutions supporting Bhoodan and joined the movement. Thegovernment too extended full cooperation. Socialist leader and hero of the
‘Quit India’ movement in August 1942, Jayaprakash Narayan, disassociated
himself from Socialism and party politics and joined the Bhoodan movement.He was searching for a practical method to bring in social revolution in the
Gandhian philosophy; in Vinoba’s movement he found the answer.
15
In March 1953, at the Sarvodaya conference at Chandil, in his famous
speech, Vinoba put forth the concept of people’s power, the third power
which is opposed to violence and is different from the coercive power of the
State. He also explained the concepts of vichar-shasan  (belief in the power
of thought) and kartrutva-vibhajan  (decentralisation of power), the main
elements in the Sarvodaya methodology. This is Vinoba’s original and radicalDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 13contribution not only to the Gandhian philosophy but also to the political
science. He gave the clarion call for land revolution, fixed the target ofcollection of 50 million acres of land by 1957. Jayaprakash appealed to the
youth to give up their studies and give one year for this work. Up to the
Chandil conference the Bhoodan movement had received the Bhoodan of1.15 million acres of land.
16
Now, the Bhoodan movement had spread to almost all parts of the
country; it had taken the shape of a countrywide movement. Workers ofthe movement were travelling throughout the country, mostly on foot;
meetings and conventions were taking place in different parts of the country.
The movement was receiving widespread support from all the quarters.People were looking at it with hope that it would solve their problems. In
foreign countries also, there was increasing curiosity about this movement,
and many foreigners were coming to the country to see and understandthis movement. Many were taking part in the padayatras. They were giving
their first hand accounts in various newspapers, journals, and on radio
stations. Even ordinary workers were getting land. Often there were longqueues of people at meetings for ‘donating land!’ The atmosphere was
surcharged with a new consciousness. Vinoba’s march was like a ‘mobile
university’, imparting knowledge to people in the remotest corners of thecountry and sowing the seeds of human values and revolutionary
inspirations. In April 1954, at the Sarvodaya conference at Bodhgaya,
Jayaprakash announced dedication of life for the cause of the movement.Vinoba himself and seven hundred other workers too announced that they
were going to dedicate their lives for the movement. By then, the Bhoodan
movement had received 28.15 lakh acres of land, and the resolve to collect2.5 million acres of land in two years had been fulfilled. Around 56,000
acres of land had been distributed.
17 The work of redistribution of land
was lagging behind and therefore, it was decided that special thrust wouldbe given to it. However, this was a very difficult, complex and time-
consuming task particularly because of the involvement of the Revenue
Department – a department known for its incompetence and corruption.
In Bihar, intensive work had created a favourable atmosphere. The sale
and purchase of land had lessened, and so also the land-related litigation.
Jayaprakash told Krishnavallabh Sahay, Revenue Minister of Bihar, “Nomass movement can do anything more than this. The atmosphere is favourable
and now it is up to the government to take its advantage.”
18 But theBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview14 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011government failed to take advantage of this psychological moment. But was
it right to expect that the status-quoist state would take radical measures?
In Bihar, the movement received a total of 22.32 lakh acres, and what
was particularly significant was that this land was donated through 286,420
donation deeds.19 From Bihar, Vinoba went to Odisha. And here, he began
talking of the land revolution– not just redistribution of land, but its
villagisation; that is, establishment of community control over land.
Vinoba thought that Odisha, the poorest State in the country was the
most favourable for such an attempt: “If the poor do not surrender their
ownership rights first, then who else will? The ownership of the rich will go
automatically; the poor will have to give it up voluntarily. It is India’s goodfortune that a few rich also come forward to surrender their ownership. But
one cannot rely too much on that. Hence, we should gain as much sympathy
of the rich as possible, but focus on seeing that the poor give up theirownership; that is the best way for the dissolution of ownership. For this
Orissa was the right place.”
20
Surrender of the individual ownership of land is the foundation of
Gramdan. Therefore, emphasis was put on  Gramdan in Odisha. Especially
tribal villages came forward to declare Gramdan in large numbers.
Redistribution of land based on the size of the family took place in
many of the tribal villages. V oluntary surrender of individual ownership of
land by all the landowners of the village and its complete redistribution was
a phenomenon of revolutionary dimensions. There were instances oflandowners relinquishing land over 100 acres and gladly accepting 5 acres,
while landless persons with larger families got 10 acres or more. It was
indeed unbelievable; but this did take place in scores of villages across theState. However, it is unfortunate that its implications were not realized and
the country’s energies were not channelled towards this purpose.
The concept of Gramdan evolved gradually. It started with the abolition
of individual ownership of land and its redistribution. The individual
ownership of land stood dissolved. Who will then be the owner of the land?
The entire village community should control the land; its survival dependson it and only it can utilize it properly in the interest of the whole community.
When a basic resource like land comes under the control of the entire
community, it can formulate and execute plans for its economic development
and welfare on its basis. Poverty, hunger and unemployment in the village
could then be effectively tackled. When the people in the village sit togetherDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 15and think about the welfare of the village, they can solve their problems,
resolve fights within the village and can run the affairs of the village–that is,they can advance towards Gram-Swaraj (village self-rule). Gramdan can
thus, be the harbinger of Gram-Swaraj. Right since the inception of the
Bhoodan movement, Vinoba had kept on stressing that land must not be theprivate property of anybody; it should be available to all like air and water;
it, too, is a gift of the Lord to all: ‘The land is the Lord’s; no one can have
individual ownership over it’ (Sabai bhoomi Gopal ki, nahin kisee ki maliki).No one can own the land, but all should have equal right over it. A resource
like land should not be an instrument of personal benefit and nor should it
serve to make the State more powerful. Only the local community shouldhave control over it, as, only it can protect and develop it. This would lead
the villages towards Gram-Swaraj and the State would gradually wither away.
All the revolutionaries had always desired the withering away of the State,as they had believed that revolution would not be complete without it.
However, the Socialists and the Communists actually worked for making
the State stronger and stronger and the anarchists could not find a properway for its dissolution. Gramdan removes this deficiency in the theory and
practice of revolution; and it therefore, is still relevant– not only in India,
but also all over the world facing an unprecedented crisis where its verysurvival is at stake. Vinoba’s genius blossomed further in exploring and
explaining the potentialities in Gramdan.
The Koraput district in Odisha recorded the highest number of
Gramdans; and on its basis, an attempt was made to create a model of
alternative development.
21 That attempt failed, but valuable lessons could
be learnt from it. Vinoba’s standpoint in this respect was always clear; healways maintained that the task of the workers was to work for strengthening
the spirit of brotherhood and unity among the villagers and to see that the
Gramsabha (the assembly of all the adult villagers) evolves into an activeunit where everybody has a stake and a role. Once it is realized, then it was
up to the villagers themselves to work for their progress with their intellectual
and physical resources.
From Odisha, Vinoba went to Andhra Pradesh and from there to Tamil
Nadu. Detractors had said that Gramdans took place in Odisha because the
villages there were mainly tribal, where the people were simpletons and theland did not have much market value. it will not be possible in Tamil Nadu
where the land was fertile and the farmers were educated. But thisBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview16 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011presumption was proved wrong and Gramdans took place in Tamil Nadu
also in large numbers.
Now, it had been proved beyond doubt that land could be got and
distributed through Bhoodan all over India and that the villagers can give up
individual ownership of land and take the pledge of Gramdan. Of course,there were obstacles; there were ups and downs in the movement. But all
these were natural. The main thing was that the message of the movement
had spread all over the country, and its practicability and applicability hadbeen proved beyond doubt. From the very beginning, Vinoba wanted that
this movement should be taken up by the people themselves. It should not
remain a cadre-based movement; the people should consider and make ittheir own. If the people wanted Swaraj then it was for them to work for it; no
group claiming to represent them–howsoever noble its ideals might be–bring
it for them. Only a truly people’s movement can be revolutionary. Over theyears, Vinoba had been talking from time to time about ‘ nidhimukti ’ (freedom
from funds) and ‘ tantramukti ’ (freedom from any formal structure). In
November 1956, at Palni (Tamil Nadu) he succeeded in convincing hisfollowers. Sarva Seva Sangh resolved for their adoption. It resolved to
discontinue any aid from any centralised fund and to dissolve the Bhoodan
committees working at that time. Gandhi Smarak Nidhi was funding themovement on its own accord, but now the Sangh decided that they would
not take any funds from it. This was indeed a revolutionary decision.
Normally, the organisations seek money and the donors decide whether togive that to them or not. But here the donor was offering financial aid on its
own accord, and the recipient decided to refuse it!” All organisations want
to strengthen themselves, but in the process they may get strengthened; notthe people.
The decision was undoubtedly revolutionary, but it did not yield the
desired results. The movement did not become the people’s movement. Thetemporary arrangement made for conducting the movement did not serve
the purpose. An organisation of Sarvodaya mandals had to be created to take
it forward. While there were political workers in the Bhoodan committees,the members of the Sarvodaya mandals were non-political workers. The idea
that the people should work on their own initiative was good, but there was
no sufficient groundwork. The movement did need full-time workers, buthow could they be expected to work without any honorarium, howsoever
meagre it may be? The full-time workers had families to support. It was notDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 17that Vinoba was not concerned about it; he did make suggestions from time
to time for the type of funding that was in tune with the philosophy of themovement. It was for this reason that he gave the programmes of ‘sootanjali’
(donation of self-spun yarn hanks) and ‘sampattidan’  (voluntary donation of
one sixth of one’s income every year), but none of these programmes worked.Later, he gave the programme of ‘sarvodaya-patra’ (families sympathetic to
the cause should keep a vessel wherein the youngest child in the home would
deposit a handful of grains, which would later be utilized partially for thesubsistence of the workers) which sought to earn the people’s consent for a
revolutionary programme. But this programme too could not make much
headway.
From Tamil Nadu, Vinoba went to Kerala. In Kerala, he announced the
setting up of Shanti Sena (Peace Brigade). The incidents of violence in the
country were increasing, and for the success of the Gramdan movement itwas necessary that there be goodwill and brotherhood in society. The Peace
Brigade was supposed to consist of workers who would serve the society
and work for the Sarvodaya movement during peacetime, and would be readyto lay down their lives to put out the flames of violence whenever they erupt.
Some work was done in this direction and in some of the communal riots the
Peace Brigade did creditable work.
From Kerala, Vinoba came to Karnataka where he gave the programme
of “sarvodaya-patra”  and also gave the mantra, ‘Jai Jagat’ (Victory to the
world). In Yelwal, on September 21-22, 1957, there was an all-party meetingon Gramdan in which the President, Prime Minister and nearly all the top
leaders of the country were present. The Gramdan movement was praised
and everyone promised full support to it. It was recommended at the meetingthat there should be closest possible co-operation between the government’s
Community Development Programme, which at that time was the main
instrument through which the government worked for the rural development,and the Gramdan movement.
22 For this purpose, the objectives of the
Community Development Programme were changed.23 That the elected
representatives in democratic India put their seal of approval on Gramdanwas a major historical event.
From Karnataka, Vinoba went to Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan,
Punjab and from there he entered Kashmir. In Punjab, he spoke against theentry of politics in the gurudwaras and reminded the Sikhs that their gurus
(the ten masters venerated and followed by the Sikhs) stood for unity, loveBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview18 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011and sharing. His journey to Kashmir was in his own words, ‘a message of
love’. In his eyes, all his work had essentially this aim: to unite the hearts ofthe people. In Kashmir, he went up to the Pir Panjal range which is at the
height of 13500 feet. From Kashmir, he turned south and came to Madhya
Pradesh where a large number of dreaded dacoits of the Chambal valleysurrendered before him. This was another example of the power of non-
violence. In Indore, he stayed for one month and tried to make it a ‘Sarvodaya-
nagar’ (a city following the ideals of Sarvodaya)–tried to find out how andwhich Sarvodaya programmes could be undertaken in the cities.
In July 1960, there were riots in Assam wherein linguistic minorities
were targetted. Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru requested Vinoba to gothere. Vinoba already had plans to to go to North East in any case, and so
from Madhya Pradesh, he headed to Assam. Here, he spread the message of
peace and brotherhood and also worked for the Gramdan movement. Hestayed in Assam for one and a half year and a large number of Gramdans
took place. There was a major problem of infiltration (from the neighbouring
East Pakistan) in Assam at that time–which is still present. Vinoba believedthat Gramdan would be an ideal solution to tackle that problem, as no outsider
can purchase land in a gramdan village without the consent of the gramsabha.
Even now, fifty years later, the gramdan villages in Assam are free frominfiltration.
While returning from Assam, the best route was through East Pakistan
(now Bangladesh) and the Pakistani government gave permission to Vinobato enter the country. In his 16 day’s stay there, he received 176 bighas of
land in Bhoodan and it was distributed then and there.
24 This showed that
Bhoodan-Gramdan could be replicated in other countries too.
By September 30, 1962, this is where the Bhoodan-Gramdan movement
stood: A total of 530,344 donors had given 41, 62,623 acres of land; 11,20,485
acres of land had been distributed to 313,866 landless persons and the numberof gramdani villages was 5079.25 Bhoodan Acts had been passed in almost
all the States, and Bhoodan committees had also been constituted under it.
They were distributing the land, but the work was not progressing at thedesired pace. Donation of land had almost come to a standstill. During
Vinoba’s tour Gramdans were being declared, but their number was not
enough to have an impact on the society. In the gramdani villages and also inother areas, efforts were being made to progress in the direction of gram-
swaraj, but that progress too was lagging behind expectations. NidhimuktiDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 19and ‘tantramukti’  had resulted in reduction in the number of workers.
Naturally, there were demands from the ranks of the movement for
rethinking on its strategy. However, Vinoba was in favour of continuing the
Bhoodan-Gramdan programmes which for him were still useful and necessary
and scope still existed for them. Gramdan involved the redistribution of entirecultivable land of the village. That it took place in quite a few villages was
indeed a unique achievement. But it was very difficult for this thing to take
place on a large scale. And no programme could be an instrument of changewithout being able to be implemented on a large scale.
Moreover, it is certainly more practicable to proceed towards the
dissolution of landownership in a phased manner. Vinoba, therefore, putforward the scheme of ‘Sulabh Gramdan’, whose main features were as
follows:
1. At least 75 per cent of the landowners should surrender ownership
of their land to the village community–that is, gramsabhas, meaning
the assembly of all the adult male and female population–and the
land so donated would vest in it.
2. This land should at least be 51 per cent of the entire cultivable village
land.
3. At least 75 per cent of the people of the village should accept
Gramdan.
4. Five per cent of the land vested in the gramsabha would be given to
the landless.
5. The remaining 95 per cent of the land would remain with the original
owners and their descendents. However, it can be transferred within
the village only, and that too with the permission of the gramsabha.
6. The villagers would give 2.5 per cent of their earnings or produce
to the gramsabha with which the ‘gram-kosh’  would be formed.
This would be used for providing aid to the needy, for overalldevelopment of the village or for public works.
On fulfillment of these conditions the village would deemed to be a gramdani
village. All the adult men and women of the village would sit together in thegramsabha and discuss and decide about the village affairs, make plans and
execute them. The decisions of the gramsabha would be taken by consensus–
either by unanimity or with everyone’s consent, and not by vote. Only sucha decision-making process is in tune with freedom, and only it would be able
to lead the people towards gram-swaraj. Division between majority andBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview20 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011minority would break the unity of the village. The gramsabha should have all
the powers that are necessary to discharge its duties.
With the advent of Sulabh Gramdan, the number of Gramdans in the
country started increasing. To fit them in a legal framework, many states
passed laws. Substantial powers have been given to the gramdani villages interms of these Acts. After fulfilling the necessary requirements–which show
the keenness of the villagers to advance towards gram-swaraj and
demonstrates their fitness for it–any village can opt for Gramdan and getthose powers. Even today, Gramdan Acts are the most potent instruments
for village self-government.
In December 1963, the Sarvodaya conference at Raipur adopted the
three-point programme of Sulabh Gramdan, village-oriented khadi and
Shanti-Sena, and it was decided to intensify the Gram-swaraj movement
throughout the country on the basis of that programme.
From Raipur, Vinoba moved towards Wardha. But, in June 1964, ill-
health forced him to stay at Pavnar Ashram. His health was no longer
permitting padayatras. For 13 years of his life, he had walked without break,disregarding hot or cold weather or rains; crossing forests, mountains and
rivers that lay in the way. During his Bhoodan-Gramdan padayatra, Vinoba
must have walked at least 80,000 kilometers.
26
But Vinoba could not stay for long at Pavnar. The situation in the country
was deteriorating at an alarming pace. To make the movement widespread
and effective it was necessary to focus on a particular area and concentrateall the energies there. In May 1965, he threw a challenge to the workers of
Bihar that if they are prepared to bring 10,000 villages under Gramdan in six
months, he was ready to come to Bihar. He gave the word–‘toofan’ (typhoon).The workers of Bihar accepted this challenge.
For Vinoba, it was his last fight–the last and the best. By 14 years of
tireless efforts he had built a unique movement and showed a new way. Themovement had certainly received some support from different quarters, but
it had not yet been able to mobilise the kind of support that could make it an
instrument for fundamental change in the country. In the fast-deterioratingsituation in the country the people were losing patience and unrest and
violence were increasing. Vinoba’s call to the workers was: “Time is fast
running out. You must prove the efficacy of gram-swaraj through Gramdanwithin five to six years, otherwise this ideology would go into cold storage.
It may be good, but it would be of no use if it stays in cold storage. ThisDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 21ideology has the power to save the country and also the world.”27
For this reason, Vinoba concentrated all his energies in Bihar. He himself
came to Bihar in September 1965. This time padayatra was not possible; so
he travelled by car. Efforts were launched from every quarter to bring the
entire State into the ambit of Gramdan. The government too extended ahelping hand. Workers reached out to people even in the remotest areas,
convincing them about the necessity of Gramdan. Even the administrative
blocks, tehsils and districts started accepting Gramdan–that is, majority ofvillages therein resolved to accept Gramdan. In the course of time, Bihardan
became the aim of the movement. The idea was that if a new structure could
be developed based on Gramdan, then it would have an economic and politicalimpact on the society in the State. Vinoba’s urgency was becoming more
and more vocal: “If we do not work quickly then it would not matter whether
we do it or not. If we do it in 10 to 20 years, it would be meaningless. Thenthe circumstances would be beyond any control and the entire work would
become futile. The forces of violence would assert themselves. That is why
I am stressing on quick action. If the village unites, only then it will bestrong and the people will be free from exploitation. The government would
never be able to free them from exploitation. It is for the villagers to do it.
For this, Gramdan is the only non-violent programme. If we do not take thisup the downtrodden would revolt. Their continuous exploitation is beyond
endurance.”
28
The Toofan movement sought to get the signatures (or thumb
impressions) of at least 75 per cent of the landowners on the declaration
forms saying that they were in favour of Gramdan of the village. In a way, it
was a massive signature campaign under which the idea of Gramdan wasbeing spread from village to village and their consent for it was being taken
in the form of signatures or thumb impressions. The workers of the movement
went from village to village, knocked on doors and went to the fields toconvince the people. The work went on in the midst of political instability,
valueless politics and natural calamities like floods and droughts. There was
an unprecedented churning in rural Bihar. Signing the declaration forms forGramdan was a vote in its favour, on the foundation of which an alternative
system would have taken shape.
By October 1969, when the Sarvodaya conference took place at Rajgir,
60065 villages in Bihar had come under Gramdan –almost the entire state
had ‘voted’ in favour of Gramdan. The movement had reached its peak. TheBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview22 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Toofan movement had brought a new zest everywhere in the country and
Gramdan was getting widespread support there. In the country, the numberof gramdani villages had risen to 137,208.
29 But when work is done at great
speed, keeping targets, and help of anyone who is willing is taken, it is but
natural that there will be deficiencies and impurities. Yet it was not aninsignificant fact that lakhs of people in thousands of villages had come to
know about Gramdan and they had given their consent for it. This was no
mean achievement. To detractors, who said that getting consent or declaration
forms for Gramdan was just paperwork, Vinoba used to reply that even the
vote is a piece of paper; yet it can topple governments.
Moreover, a vote in itself is inactive, but the consent forms signed for
Gramdan showed willingness of the person to do something. Now, the task
was to make as many of those villages gramdani-villages in the true sense to
work for making the gramsabhas there strong, active and the vehicle oftransformation. The era of propagation of ideology had passed to a certain
extent. Now the work demanded a new vision, new approach and new
methods. This is what Vinoba wanted and the situation demanded that thestrategy of the movement should have been revised accordingly. Whatever
had been done earlier was just groundwork; the real work of gram-swaraj
was to begin now.
Unfortunately this could not be done. There were attempts to get the
legal stipulations fulfilled, particularly in Saharsa and Musahari in Bihar.
But they could not make much headway due to red-tapism in the governmentbureaucracy and several other factors. Efforts did take place; and that is why
there are 3932 villages that are registered gramdani villages under different
state Bhoodan-Gramdan Acts.
30 In these villages at least the individual
ownership of land has been abolished, and that too voluntarily.
Nevertheless, what had been aimed at could not be achieved. The
movement lost its momentum and gradually dissipated when confronted withthe reality of rural India and in the end it became confined to the pages of
history. The movement ended, but Bhoodan-Gramdan is still alive. The
distribution of Bhoodan land is still going on and so far around 25 lakh acresof land have been distributed to the landless poor in the country. There still
exist 3932 gramdani villages and efforts are on to make some of them active.
Villages like Seed in Rajasthan and Keliweli in Maharashtra havedemonstrated the potentialities inherent in Gramdan. Villagers of
Maharashtra’s Lekha-Mendha village–the first village to get forest rights inDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 23the country–have unanimously resolved to opt for Gramdan.
The distribution of land received under Bhoodan proved to be a great
challenge before the movement. It could not keep pace with the donations.
The work of distribution was complex and time-consuming and it could not
proceed without the co-operation of the government’s revenue administration,which had been notorious for its inefficiency and corruption. Without the
government’s seal of approval, no distribution of land could have legal
sanctity and permanence. Had there been political and administrative will, aprocess could have been devised to complete the work easily and quickly.
However, this did not happen. This work also demanded technical knowledge
and skill, which the workers in the Bhoodan-Gramdan movement generallylacked; nor was there any arrangement for their training for this purpose.
The distribution of Bhoodan land started almost since the time of inception
of the movement. State governments have to be complimented for takingnecessary legal and administrative measures. The detailed rules for land-
distribution were formulated by Vinoba himself. He saw to it that the entire
process of land-distribution remains transparent. The rules stipulated thatthis be done in the well-publicised village meetings in the presence of
government officials, that all the details of land available for distribution be
obtained beforehand, that it be done with consensus and land be given to themost needy and with the consent of the landless present. It was also stipulated
that at least one third of the land distributed should be given to those from
the scheduled castes. The land so given was to be cultivated by the recipientsand not to be sold.
It was necessary that this work be done with caution and not in haste.
Moreover, it was the strategy of the movement to first concentrate onobtaining the donation of land and there was also the paucity of workers.
All this naturally led to a gap between receipts and distribution and the
movement could not escape its repercussions. There was no question ofleaving the work of distribution of land in the hands of the government, as
the donors were giving land to Vinoba and not to the government. There
were differences of opinion within the movement regarding the role of thedonor in the distribution of the land. In 1956, Vinoba was against giving
the donors the right to decide who the recipient would be, but he changed
his stand in 1963.
31
But, it did involve risk as the experience of the Bigha-Kattha campaign
in Bihar showed. Naturally, the distribution work remained worker-centric.Bhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview24 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011But these workers were human beings after all; they were not free from
human limitations and failings. That was why complaints about corruptionwere voiced from time to time. And though the incidence of corruption was
decidedly meagre, it did affect the image of the movement. Actually, this
work of distribution was that of the village communities, and they shouldhave done it. This is what Vinoba always wanted. But the gramsabhas were
not strong. Gramdan movement too failed in empowering them.
The work of distribution needed money, and that should have been
provided by the society and the government; the movement could not be
expected to bear this burden. The government did constitute the Bhoodan
Committees, but they always lacked money and other resources. Even today,the Committees who are alive are grappling with this problem.
Even then, the overall work of distribution of land has been reasonably
satisfactory. Independent studies have confirmed this. For example, inVidharba, a study on Bhoodan was done by leftist intellectuals Dr. K. R.
Nanekar and Dr. S. V . Khandewale. They found that “by and large all the
guidelines and laws were followed while distributing the land.”
32
When the landless were getting land through voluntary efforts, the
welfare State should have come forward to ensure that the landless were
settled properly. But the State did not fulfill this obligation.
The landless who got land were poor; they did not have any resources.
Some efforts were made by the Bhoodan movement to provide resources
but they were not sufficient. Neither did the government give resources, nordid it make arrangement for loans on easy terms. Forget giving special
treatment, the farmers who got land under Bhoodan were given step-motherly
treatment. In a state like Bihar, mutation of thousands of acres of land is stillpending even after so many years. The problem of forcible eviction is serious
and the State is not fulfilling its duty of restoring possession of land to evict
Bhoodan farmers.
Despite all problems, till date, around 25 lakh acres of land has been
distributed among the landless and this is a creditable achievement. Moreover,
most of this land has been received by those belonging to scheduled castes,scheduled tribes and other backward castes, since they were the most needy.
The Chairman of the first Backward Classes Commission, Kakasaheb
Kalelkar had said that the Bhoodan movement gave land to those castes whohad all along been deprived of it.
33
And it is noteworthy that despite all the powers and resources at theirDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 25command the States, through the land ceiling Acts have been able to distribute
only 49.65 acres of land, just double of what has been distributed throughBhoodan (24.44 lakh acres).
34
The Bhoodan movement took forward Gandhi’s epochal work–of which
political independence was only the first step. Vinoba proved to be not onlythe spiritual successor of Gandhi, as is often said, but he also proved to be
his political successor. Bhoodan-Gramdan movement always kept itself aloof
from party politics, but it was essentially a political movement in the truesense of the term. Vinoba took forward, through his ideas and work, Gandhi’s
work in terms of his political aim (a state-free society), political means
(satyagraha) as well as political programme (constructive programme).
Vinoba took a material problem in his hands, but the movement was
fundamentally spiritual. The Bhoodan movement showed that man could rise
above narrow self-interest and greed. Critics at first did not believe that anyonecould donate land, and when it started happening, they said that the special
conditions in Telangana were responsible for it and this could not be replicated
elsewhere. When it took place in other States, they said that this was due tothe abolition of zamindari system. But they forgot that when the zamindars
were donating land as Bhoodan, they were forsaking the compensation that
was legally due to them. Moreover, not only big zamindars, but large numberof small landholders were also donating land. Then, the critics thought that
those giving land must be doing so to get name and fame, and that they were
giving disputed and poor quality land. And they took this conjecture as asettled fact. This was far from the truth. One can cite in this respect the study
done by Babulal Gandhi in Western Maharashtra, where he found that those
who gave disputed land or gave land to gain applause were only 13 to 14 percent of the total number of donors–the percentage of land so donated was
obviously even lesser.
35 There can be no doubt that most of those who donated
land did so because they were motivated by a higher call and whateverpressure there was, it was moral pressure, which cannot not be faulted. And
this land was distributed in such a way that the recipients’ self-respect was not
hurt.
That some of the land was of poor quality was only natural. But land
unfit for cultivation can surely be used for several other purposes, and it was
actually so used to some extent. On the other hand, one can safely surmisethat the Government must have got the most possible inferior land under the
ceiling acts. Yet the so-called intellectuals, without carrying out anyBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview26 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011independent comparative study about the land received under Bhoodan and
the ceiling Acts, did not hesitate in making sweeping statements proclaimingthat inferior lands were received under Bhoodan. In fact, no land can be said
to be bad. The land that is not cultivable can be made so through irrigation
etc. Kanti Shah rightly says, “....but no one received motivation from thefact that when so much land has been received in a manner unprecedented in
the history of the world, let all efforts be put in to make every inch of it
cultivable. In Israel the people did the extraordinary work of turning patchesof desert into oases. Had our governments, our loquacious intellectuals and
the leaders in different fields shown a little more imagination they would
have launched a country-wide movement along with Bhoodan for thispurpose. But --- they were interested only in declaring at the slightest
opportunity that Vinoba had failed!”
36
If Vinoba came to know that the land was bad, he used to refuse to
accept it. And the very fact that around 25 lakh acres of the land have been
distributed means that at least this much land was cultivable, as only such
land has been distributed. This is not a small figure.
An objection was that Bhoodan would result in fragmentation of land,
which was already much fragmented; and small plots were not economically
viable. Vinoba did recognise this; and therefore, from the very beginning heused to harp on the theme that the land of the village should belong to the
village. But he believed that Bhoodan was necessary as a first step towards
the abolition of landownership, for providing immediate relief to the landlessand bringing unity and goodwill in the society. Ultimately, the land had to
belong to the entire village and that is why Gramdan became the ultimate
goal and main programme of the movement.
There was also the criticism of taking donations from the poor. But
this, in fact, was the special characteristic of Bhoodan. It wanted to create an
environment of giving and not taking in society. Vinoba believed that if thepoor gave land, then that would bring a moral pressure on the rich: “When
lakhs of poor donate, the battle would be won without any fighting.”
37
Therefore, Vinoba did not think then that-time was opportune for any
kind of aggressive satyagraha. He had to face the criticism that he gave up
Gandhiji’s aggressive satyagraha. Vinoba used to point out that Bhoodan
was also a kind of satyagraha; and that the strategy of the movementdemanded that first the ideology be sufficiently spread.
“Sarvodaya says that if a principle is accepted by a majority and is stillDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 27being disregarded, then it is a fit case for satyagraha; but if a principle is
accepted by us but not by the majority, then it is a matter for education andnot for satyagraha. The principle that there should be no individual ownership
of land is not accepted by the majority only we believe in it, and therefore it
is a matter of education, and not of satyagraha.”
38 For this reason, Vinoba
gave emphasis on spreading the message of the movement. When the majority
accepts a principle, then satyagraha can be done to bring round the intransigent
few. Satyagraha can also be undertaken when the majority, even thoughaccepting a principle, are not following it because of weakness. Under such
circumstances Vinoba did give permission for satyagraha; in fact, he took a
lead in 1960 for satyagraha against vulgar posters and in 1976 for satyagrahaagainst cow-slaughter. Vinoba’s critics, however, continued to criticise him,
often without knowing the real situation or even after receiving cogent replies.
Hallam Tennyson makes this pertinent observation, “ In one form or another,
Vinoba repeated his arguments.But the protesters took little notice.They went
on protesting—querulous, nagging, captious and continual.It was hard for
those who prided themselves on their sophisitication to accept the fact thatsomething as simple as bhoodan could possibly work.”
39
It was due to this approach of the intellectual community that Bhoodan-
Gramdan was not adequately studied. The terminology of the movementwas another problem for them. Pandit Nehru had rightly said, “There is no
doubt that Acharya Vinoba’s movement is a somewhat a strange way of
solving this important and complex problem. This is a way which the learnedeconomists cannot explain; perhaps cannot understand as well.”
40 That is
why Acharya Kripalani had said, “Gandhiji’s non-violent non-cooperation
and decentralised industrialisation had to be explained to the educated personin the modern Western terminology; the Bhoodan movement also has to be
explained to them in that manner.”
41 Undoubtedly, the movement did not
succeed in doing it adequately; and therefore the urban media by and largeignored it.
In the first phase of the Bhoodan movement, there was some support
from the political workers. They participated in the work of the Bhoodancommittees, which clearly served their political interests. But after the
dissolution of the Bhoodan committees in 1957, they naturally lost interest
in that work. Their vested interests were obviously opposed to the declaredaims of the movement. Vinoba always exhorted the people to shun the party
politics. Political workers co-operated in the Gramdan phase also, as massBhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview28 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011contact involved therein was likely to give them political benefit. But when
it came to implementing the next phase of Gramdan, their co-operation couldnot be hoped for. The government also extended co-operation in the early
phase as the movement was giving land to the landless and so easing pressure
on the government. But Gramdan was Gram-Swaraj–where the villagerswould be masters of their own village. Opposition of the government to this
‘state within the state’ was but natural. Moreover, the government machinery,
built during the colonial period, has a particular nature, which has not changedmuch even after independence.
The movement had the benefit of Vinoba’s extra-ordinary charismatic
leadership. But that too had its limitations. It was Vinoba who gave vision tothe movement and decided about its strategy and programmes. So when
Vinoba withdrew, the movement collapsed. The movement was essentially
an ideological one, and therefore, it was necessary that the workers shouldhave understood its ideology thoroughly. For this reason, Vinoba always
used to stress on study, but its inadequacy always remained a matter of
concern. Nor were there adequate training facilities. Therefore, there wasalways ideological confusion among the workers and even in the second and
third leadership tiers of the movement. Jayaprakash Nayaran once admitted
candidly: “Even we ourselves do not fully understand this new method, soothers too naturally do not understand it.”
42 Most of the workers who came
from the political background could not perhaps completely change their
old mindset. However, it has to be conceded that the workers of the movementworked impartially. They rose above pettiness and worked selflessly and
honestly. This movement only gave hardship to the workers, there was no
incentive or promise of power or money or position. Even then, the dedicatedworkers worked for years, facing ridicule, opposition, privations. This
undoubtedly is one of the greatest achievements of the movement.
The movement could not fulfil its announced objectives. This was only
natural. Its aim was so high that it was bound to fail. But what it achieved in
concrete terms and also intangibly has to be taken into account by any
authentic history. The main achievement of this movement is that it putforward an alternative. It presented a new process for change; and it gave
several ideas and programmes in this connection. The ascension of ideas
during the course of this movement is simply astonishing. This ascension isa valuable treasure of the entire humankind. The seed it sowed can never be
lost. And it should not be lost, as therein lies not only the survival but alsoDr. Parag CholkarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 29the progress and evolution of the human race.
(The writer has recently written the history of Bhoodan-Gramdan
movement in three volumes, titled ‘Sabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki’, which has
been published by Gujarat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad)
Dr. Parag Cholkar
P-2, Laxmi Nagar, Nagpur – 440022)
Phone: 0712-2221479; Mobile: 09822565574
e-mail: samyayog@rediffmail.com
References
1. Pyarelal: Mahatma Gandhi – Poornaahuti (Fourth volume) (Navjeevan, Ahmedabad,
1973) p. 530
2. http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planch12|p.73. Presidential address to the 15th annual conference of the Indian Society of Agricultural
Economics (1954), p. 8
4. Sarvodaya, June 1951, p. 7155. Sarvodaya, August 1951, p. 8556. Suresh Ram: Vinoba and his Mission (Sarva Seva Sangh, Varanasi, 1962), p. 607. Ibid, p. 708. Vinoba: Rajghat Ki Sanniddhi Men (Sasta Sahitya Mandal, New Delhi, 1952), p. 99. Sarva Seva Sangh Executive Committee Minutes Register.
10. Sevapuri Sarvodaya Sammelan (1952) vivaran, Annexure 3, p. 7.
11. Bhoodan-Yajna, 26-12-1958
12. Uttar Pradesh Bhoodan Yagna Adhiniyam, 1952, Section 4 (1)13. Srikrishnadutt Bhatt: Chalo Chale Mangroth (Sarva Seva Sangh, Kashi, 1958), pp.
23-26.
14. Chandil Sarvodaya Sammelan (1953) vivaran, pp. 59-6015. Jayaprakash Narayan: Meri Vicharyatra (Editor: Kanti Shah, Sarva Seva Sangh,
Varanasi, 1974), pp. 29-30.
16. Chandil Sarvodaya Sammelan (1953) vivaran, Annexure 12.17. Bodhgaya Sarvodaya Sammelan (1954) vivaran, Annexure, p. 32.18. Sarvanarayandas: Vinoba Ka Bihar Parva (Paramdham Prakashan, Pavnar, 1998),
p. 84.
19. Ibid, p. 75.20. Kusum Deshpande: Krantichya Dishene (Paramdham Prakashan, Pavnar, 1956),
Foreword, p. 3.
21. Annasahab Sahasrabuddhe’s book, ‘Koraput Men Gramvikas Ka Prayog’ (Sarva Seva
Sangh, Varanasi, 1961) gives an authentic description of this experiment in detail.
22. From the folder published by Sarva Seva Sangh.23. Community Development and Panchayati Raj in India (1952-72) (Government of
India, Ministry of Agriculture, 1972).
24. Charu Choudhary: Vinoba Ki Pakistan Yatra (Sarva Seva Sangh, Varanasi, 1963), pp.
181-188.Bhoodan-Gramdan Movement: An Overview30 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Dr. Parag Cholkar
25. Sarva Seva Sangh karya-vivaran, 1961-62.
26. It is difficult to tell the exact distance covered by Vinoba’s padayatra. The figure
given here is based on Vinoba Sahitya V ol. 20 (Paramdham Prakashan, Pavnar, 2001).
27. Vinoba: Toofan Ka Sanket (Sarva Seva Sangh, Varanasi, 1965), p. 58.28. Vinoba Sahitya V ol. 15 (Paramdham Prakashan, Pavnar, 1996), p. 362.29. Sarva Seva Sangh karya-vivaran (May 1969- September 1969), Annexure 5.30. Parag Cholkar: Sabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki, V ol. 3 (Gujarat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad,
2010), p. 271.
31. Vinoba-Pravachan, Bajaj Nagar, 15-10-1956, and Sarva Seva Sangh, Arambagh
Adhiveshan karyavahi (1963), pp. 27-29.
32. Dr. K. R. Nanekar, S. V . Khandewale: Vidharbhatil Bhoodan (Nagpur Vidyapeeth,
Nagpur, 1970), p. 94.
33. Kaka Kalelkar: Vinoba Aur Sarvodaya Kranti (Sarva Seva Sangh, Varanasi, 1970),
p. 122.
34. Parag Cholkar, op. cit., p. 271, p. 51 and (www.rural.nic.in).35. Babulal Gandhi: Bharatatil Bhoomihin Ani Bhoodan (Paramdham Prakashan, Pavnar,
1962), p. 133.
36. Kanti Shah: Vinoba – Jivan aur Karya (Sarva Seva Sangh, Varanasi, 1979), p. 97.37. Vinoba: Bhoodan Ganga, V ol. 2 (Sarva Seva Sangh, Varanasi, 1956), p. 69.38. Vinoba-Sahitya, V ol. 16 (Paramdham Prakashan, Pavnar, 1996), p. 285.39. Hallam Tennyson: Saint on the March (Victor Gollancz Limited, London, 1955), p. 83.40. Sarvodaya, March-April 1953.41. Sarvodaya, June 1953, p. 710.42. Sarva Seva Sangh Tirupati Adhivashan (1969) karyavahi, pp. 97-98Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 31ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Vinoba’s Movement: An Overview
Kanti Shah
On 18 April, 1951, Vinoba got 100 acres of land as donation in Pochampallivillage of Andhra Pradesh. Thus, triggered the phenomenal Bhoodan-
Gramdan and people’s movement. Now 60 years have gone by and it is now
time to attempt having an overview of the movement.
In reality, the movement was only part of an overarching movement
called Sarvodaya. Therefore, when we attempt to overview Bhoodan, the
context would be the entire Sarvodaya movement.
‘Sarvodaya’, the word, was coined 100 years ago. In ancient literature,
this word might have been used in some context, but its use as a definitive
philosophy is only 100 years old.
This word took shape in Gandhi’s mind in 1904 when he read Ruskin’s
book ‘Unto This Last’, but the word took concrete shape in 1908 when Gandhi
translated the gist of this book in Gujarati. The translation is an example ofGandhi’s literary acumen. The title of Ruskin’s book was taken from a Biblical
story ‘Unto This Last’, which means that even the last person should get an
equal share. In those days, the concept of ‘Greatest good of greatest number’was in vogue. But Gandhi said that Sarvodaya meant the rise of all, and it
was not merely the greatest good of the greatest number or of the last person
standing in the queue. From then on, the ideology of Sarvodaya got firmlyestablished in social discourses. The detailed explanation of the meaning of
Sarvodaya can be found in ‘Hind Swaraj’ that was written by Gandhi in
1909. The overview that we are attempting here would be against thisbackground.
It seems Gandhi’s preoccupation with Swaraj did not allow him the
occasion to consider the principle of ‘Sarvodaya’ as the founding document32 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011of the Indian society. It is true that over the years he did study and practise
some aspects of Sarvodaya and presented creative programmes, concept ofGram Swaraj etc. But he was hardly able to achieve what all he had envisioned
in ‘Hind Swaraj’. However, the concept of Satyagraha that was mentioned
in the Hind Swaraj did play a major role in the freedom movement of thecountry.
It has often been argued that the country only came to know about the
confrontationist Gandhi and not the creative Gandhi. There has hardly beenany serious discussion on building up the country based on the ideas presented
in Hind Swaraj. It is a matter of great shame and tragedy that even the
influential Congress leaders who were with Gandhi in the Swaraj movementcould not understand the broad goal that was outlined in Hind Swaraj’s ‘Yug
Karya’. In 1945, in a letter to Gandhi, Nehru had written, ‘I had read ‘Hind
Swaraj’ a long time back and now I only have a vague memory of it. Evenwhile reading it, I considered it to be impractical and even now I feel the
same. You know that Congress has never considered the thoughts in the
book as even worth discussing. So accepting them is out of the question.’
It was amidst this atmosphere that Gandhi was assassinated in 1948.
We did get Swaraj, but Gandhi was forced to say, “This is not my idea of
Swaraj.” In other words, Hind Swaraj never got beyond theory.
Through Vinoba’s movement, Gandhi’s unfinished core works got a
fillip. It was a continuation of the non-violent movement that was started by
Gandhi and Vinoba carried it forward. Vinoba announced that after ‘Swaraj’it was now time for ‘Sarvodaya’. Till he was 32 years, Vinoba continued his
work quietly at Antevasi ashram, one of the lesser known Gandhi ashrams.
However, he was aware of all that was going on outside the ashram andstudied and analysed them. He took part in Satyagrahas and also went to jail.
But he never left the ashram.
When Gandhi was assassinated, Vinoba decided that he had to move
out of the ashram. He was clear sighted about Gandhi’s main aim which was
to introduce the concept of ahimsa in the social milieu and to build up a non-
violent society based on Gram Swaraj.
Therefore, when in Pochampalli, he got the unprecedented donation of
100 acres of land, Vinoba saw a glimmer of hope. He believed that this was
a signal from God and he went out to work. He went out to ask for land andhe kept on getting land. From Pochampalli, he reached Pavnar and in theKanti ShahAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 33next 70 days, he got 12,000 acres of land, which means that everyday he got
around 200 acres of land. Two months later, he went to Delhi on foot when
he was called by Nehru. Later, he got 18,000 acres of land in 62 days. Thismeant that he got 300 acres everyday. The gift of land was not meant fortemple, dharmashala, school etc. While asking for Bhoodan, Vinoba used tosay that this was not ‘Bheeksha’ but ‘Deeksha’. “This is deeksha for non-violent revolution. We have to build a Sarvodayi community, and on behalfof the poor I have come to you asking for their right.’
In Bhoodan movement, Vinoba saw the seeds of non-violent revolution.
He saw this as a route through which the concept of non-violence couldenter the society. He chose April 18 as the birthday of the Sarvodayamovement, as it was on this date that he had received the first concretedonation of land. Soon, he left the ashram and got immersed himself in themovement. When he reached Delhi, after walking 800 kilometers, he had
visible achievements behind him.
While speaking before the Planning Commission, he said in no equivocal
words, “Your Five Year Plan is fit to be put in the garbage. You are talkingabout national planning, but you do not have any provision that will providefood for all and employment for all. Your only aim appears to be increasingproduction. But along with that there should be equality and compassion.Your ‘percolation theory’ will not help society’s poor and you will have toformulate special programmes for them.”
Vinoba could see that the people sitting in Delhi were thinking in the
opposite direction and therefore, he said, “Leave Delhi and let us hit ruralIndia.”
Vinoba was to stake his entire life for this. Once he had said, “My inner
soul tells me that I have always tried to walk the path of non-violence andlove shown by Gandhiji and in my efforts I have reached my utmost level.There has never been a single moment when I have faltered or becomenegligent. After Bapu’s death, I am doing his work, and I do not have theslightest doubts about this.”
In this way, Gandhi’s core work and philosophy was kept alive. A
revolutionary like Jayaprakashji remarked, “Through his Bhoodan-Gramdan,Vinoba made a unique experiment in bringing spiritual values within thecommunity. The main aim of society is the development of humane values,and Vinoba’s various programmes showed the way how the new foundationof a society can be based on moral values.”Vinoba’s Movement: An Overview34 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Further, the importance of Bhoodan movement in the context of larger
Sarvodaya movement can be gauged from Jayaprakashji’s statement, “IfVinobaji had not started this revolutionary movement, then we would have
stayed where we were, then; we would have been content with spinning the
charkha, putting Gandhiji’s picture in our homes, keeping a fast on Gandhi-Jayanti like Janmashtami and Ramnavami, but we would have forgotten the
idea of non-violent revolution and lost the war for Sarvodaya, which would
have appeared as something hazy in the distant horizon. It was due to Vinoba’smovement that Gandhi’s core philosophy of changing society through non-
violent revolution remained alive. The soul of Sarvodaya would never have
been visible had it not been for this movement. Through V inoba’s movement
we have been able to see the revolutionary face of Gandhiji’s creative
programmes.”
In 1959, Arthur Koestler came to India. He took part in the padyatra
and talked to Vinoba at length. He wrote in the London Observer, “Vinoba is
presenting an alternative based on the Indian traditions to Nehru’s western
concept of development. Vinoba’s insight and intelligence has rejectedNehru’s social revolution that is based on development, competition and
mechanization, something that had been done by Gandhi earlier.”
All this had happened within a few years of the country becoming
independent. Vinoba continued his movement for over two and half decades.
He made a Herculean effort to take the Swaraj gained with independence in
the direction of ‘Hind Swaraj’ as conceived by Gandhiji. We saw that duringGandhi’s era, very little work was done in this direction. The top leaders,
intellectuals and the vast majority of the people thought that Gandhiji’s dream
as portrayed in ‘Hind Swaraj’ was impractical. They did not even considerthat it merited a serious discussion.
The fate of the nation was in the hands of Nehru. His thinking was
different. Under his guidance, India followed the western pattern ofdevelopment and society that had been criticised by Gandhiji in ‘Hind
Swaraj’. The majority of people who were holding seats of power shared
Nehru’s vision and the way the foundation of the country was being laid.
It was in this atmosphere that Vinoba got 100 acres of land under
Bhoodan in Pochampalli and laid the foundation of a movement inspired by
Gandhiji’s vision. Vinoba went against mighty institutions and tried toimplement the vision of ‘Hind Swaraj’ on the ground.Kanti ShahAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 35For those who believed in what was written in ‘Hind Swaraj’, the
Bhoodan movement started by Vinoba was an inspirational period. It waslike a dream coming true, the rule of virtuous was being put in place on
earth, and that there could be a significant change in man’s behaviour; such
was the belief of the people through this movement. People thought that ifthe human race had to get out of the cycle of violence, then a non-violent
solution to mankind’s trouble must be developed.
The movement gave a feeling that it was possible that the country’s
Swaraj would be based on love, on non-violence and it would elevate mankind
to another level and it was possible to achieve Sarvodaya if we follow the
blueprint given in Hind Swaraj.
In the contemporary period, when the world is moving in a direction
opposite to the one prescribed in Hind Swaraj, the intensity of Vinoba’s
movement is difficult to assess. The effort put in might appear a little wanting,its message a bit ineffective, and the possibility of elevating mankind to
another plane, ephemeral.
In Vinoba’s Bhoodan movement, lakhs of people donated lakhs of acres
of land that was to be distributed among the landless labourers. In the present
scenario, it is very difficult even to imagine that such a thing took place. But
it is a fact that even if we discard the donated land that could not be distributed,around 25 lakh acres of land has been distributed among the landless. Those
who got the land received a chance to work hard and earn their livelihood
with dignity and respect.
And when the Gramdan movement started, then its concept was such
that we will find it unbelievable today. All the landowners of the village
were supposed to transfer all the land held by them to the gramsabha andthen they were to distribute the land among the landless equally. Such
redistribution took place in several villages.
In reality, such a movement would be considered as unique in the history
of mankind. It was a true demonstration of the power of love and non-violence.
Vinoba said at that time that the Gramdan movement he witnessed in several
villages of Orissa and the subsequent redistribution of land made him believethat he had seen God in those places.
Around 5000-7000 Gramdans took place, but for a revolution to take
place, this had to be more wide spread. For this purpose, a programme wasmade of Gramdan. Under this programme, it was entailed that the land wasVinoba’s Movement: An Overview36 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011to be transferred in the name of the gram sabha. It could not be sold or kept
as mortgage. It was decided that the landowners would hand over five percentof their holdings to the landless, and then each person would give 2.5 per-
cent of his money to the village fund. All the villagers would be members of
the gram sabha and the decisions would be taken unanimously.
This was a comprehensive programme of Gramdan and Vinoba said
that this model should spread all over the country. There should be a hurricane
of Gramdan, and only then the revolutionary aspect of Gramdan would bevisible. When there is a tempest then each leaf of the tree is shaken. Similarly,
each person got inspired by this non-violent revolution and worked for it,
and it spread like a storm all over the country. The strategy of Gramdan wasbased on mass psychology and if one system had to be supplanted by another
system then it was necessary to have mass awakening. In the end, what was
proposed to be done had to have the will of the people behind it. Thegovernment can always say that we have the support of the people as they
have voted for us. But whose support do we have? Therefore, Bhoodan-
Gramdan movement was nothing but an effort to find public support throughmass education so that people’s power may stand behind it. Its nature was
similar to signature campaign or an election.
Subsequently, thousands of Gramdan took place. Taking the consent
and signatures of thousands of people by going into the most interior of
villages was not an easy task. Thousands of ‘resolution deeds’ piled up. The
concept of Gramdan reached each and every village. In village after villagethe people supported it and signed the resolution deeds, giving up their lands.
In the words of Jayaprakash Narayan, “All the ‘resolution deeds’ of Gramdan
are an expression of the sentiments of the people.”
This was a process of the revolution. Vinoba had started this revolution
very boldly, but unfortunately, it did not succeed. Some circumstances went
against the movement and in some cases the calculations made, went awry.The work of verifying the Gramdan took a very long time, and the swelling
of public support in the earlier period ebbed with time like the flood waters
that rise and then come down. The forces against the movement proved morepowerful. Due to some reason, Vinoba had to leave the centre stage in Bihar.
The hurricane that the movement was supposed to create did not take shape,
and any further work came to an end. The movement was like a rocket aboutto be launched for space, if there was sufficient fuel (ground support in theKanti ShahAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 37case of the movement) but instead of breaking free from the earth’s
atmosphere it came down to the earth. The ‘hurricane’ did not gather enoughstrength to make the movement a success and fizzled out. But this does not
mean that this was the end of everything. Like scientific experiments, social
experiments should also continue and then one day it will become a success.
Much has been and will be written about Vinoba’s movement, and such
analysis is welcome. The movement would be and should be analysed from
various angles and on a set of different parameters. If there were anyshortcomings or problems so far as the boldness, strategy, working style,
competence etc. of the movement are concerned, it would come out through
these studies. But one thing can be said with certainty that in the two to threedecades of the movement, the horizon of the concept of Sarvodaya has
expanded a great deal. The movement presented a new and much more
humane form of development as opposed to what is followed at present.Even though people might not have accepted it wholeheartedly, the fact
remains that it has found a place in its agenda. Jayaprakash correctly said
that the revolutionary potential of the movement was apparent to the entiresociety.
Nevertheless, it can be said that whatever was achieved was much less
than what could have been achieved. There are a number of reasons for this,but the main reason is that the forces opposed to this movement proved
much stronger. We should not forget that at the time of Vinoba’s movement
the political and social elite in society were enamoured by the western ideaof development that stresses material prosperity. The clout of the cities started
increasing. Those who were educated and had a say in society were running
after consumerism and power. This section was effective in society. Thesepeople who had power and were into business were also big landowners.
Therefore, even though an environment was created by the Bhoodan and
Gramdan movement, no concrete steps were taken to provide a lastingsolution to the question of land. In Japan, just after the end of Second World
War, the American General MacArthur, who was acting as the administrator
of Japan, made three acres as the land ceiling and redistributed it among thegenuine farmers immediately. This could have been done in India. But the
Socialists who were in power and in positions of influence failed to create
an environment for such a step to be taken. And thus, a historic moment waslost.Vinoba’s Movement: An Overview38 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011The work of Gramdan was fundamental to building a new social order.
It was the foundation of Gandhi’s concept of Gram Swaraj. It is only on thefoundation of Gram Swaraj that a new world order based on non-violence
could evolve and prosper. During Gramdan one thing came out clearly—the
concept touched the hearts of the people and there was widespread supportfor it. The proof was the thousands of resolution deeds signed and given by
the villagers pledging their land to the entire community through the Gram
Sabha.
Of the initial villages that went in for Gramdan, 3932 villages are still
under the Gramdan law. Here the entire land of the village has been transferred
from individual name to Gram Sabha’s name. But the society at large failedto appreciate the revolutionary step that had been taken.
Some of the Gramdan villages started implementing the next stage of
experiments and some outsiders also came and witnessed the change in thesevillages.
One of them was England’s Erica Linton. She came to India and visited
the Gramdan villages in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,Kerala, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar Pradesh. She walked, travelled in bullock
carts and mixed with the villagers to understand the movement. The
description of her travels was put down in a book in 1971 – ‘ Fragments of a
vision ’. The preface of the book was written by E.F. Schumacher, the well-
known writer of “Small is Beautiful”.
This book is the result of a deep study of the Gramdan movement and
presents its firsthand picture. Erica, in her book, writes, “In some villages
Gramdan has taken place only on paper, while in some other villages the
Gramdan concept has been taken ahead to quite an extent. Even though thebusy people of the village who are part of the movement do not make a great
deal about Gramdan and think it as natural, but for those who are looking at
it from the perspective of non-violent revolution at work, it is a great arenafor learning.”
Ercia wrote, “After talking with the villagers I came to the conclusion
that the maximum number of people have benefitted from Gramdan. Theysay that as the land is now in the name of the Gram Sabha instead of individual
owners, the land has become safe. Now no outsider can come and purchase
our land and the land will belong to that person who tills it. And the mainthing is that we have gained freedom from the government employee. NowKanti ShahAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 39all the work of the village is done through the Gram Sabha.”
Erica had a very interesting conversation with a 12-year-old boy at a
Gramdan village. Ercia asked – How much land do you have? The boy replied,
— At present we are tilling 12 bigha of land, but if we do not till the land, it
might be given to others. Erica said – Why so? This land belongs to you,does it not? To this the boy replied, “If we do not till the land, how can it be
ours. The land belongs to all. What is the use of keeping it vacant when
someone else can till it?”
Erica comments, “The ease with which the boy talked about community
ownership of land shows that the idea that land cannot be owned individually
and cannot be bought and sold has taken root in his consciousness. This is aquestion of values. And if one generation of people can imbibe such a value
then it would be great victory for Gramdan”.
This reminds one of the episodes involving two IAS officers narrated
by Pyarelalji in his book ‘The last phase’ . Just a couple of months before
independence, two IAS officers were travelling in the first class compartment
of a train. They were saying that this would be their last journey in the firstclass as after independence the Gandhiwalas would not allow anything like
first class to remain and make everything equal for everyone.
This was the environment of the country on the eve of independence.
But the followers of Gandhi could not take advantage of this environment
and the gains soon dissipated. The role of Gandhi’s followers in this, is well
known. But again such an environment was created during Vinoba’smovement and there was a chance that Swaraj would be taken in the direction
of Hind Swaraj as conceived by Gandhiji. A non-violent process of reforming
the society had started. But unfortunately, this opportunity was also lost.
Louis Fisher had said, “Gramdan is the most creative thought coming
from the east in recent times.” It was a new development for social science
which gave it a way to get rid of the violence that is besetting the world.Vinoba had tried to develop a new culture for the villages by creating a non-
violent society, and thereby he tried to lay foundation to Gandhiji’s concept
of Gram Swaraj. But the will, determination, commitment and support neededfor such a thing to succeed was lacking in the people who were in power and
those who counted in society. A person like Erica Linton could come from
abroad to study and find great value in the Gramdan movement, but our ownintellectuals did not have the time or inclination to look into this movement.Vinoba’s Movement: An Overview40 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011They could not rise above their narrow mindedness. This class ridiculed
Vinoba’s Bhoodan and Gramdan, that all the land Vinoba had, was on paperor the land given was of poor quality.
In any case, the non-violent movement started by Vinoba remained
incomplete. The forces of opposition proved stronger. The apathy of theintellectuals and lack of vision meant that no one could understand the real
value of the movement. But nevertheless, Vinoba’s movement has enriched
our thought process.
The effort continued for two and a half decades. Vinoba spoke at length
about it wherever he went and he thought about reforming and reconstructing
the society a great deal. The fundamental questions about society were askedand discussed and solutions were sought for them on the basis of non-violence.
Many of the concepts in Hind Swaraj were also evaluated and it came into
public domain and consciousness. As a result, in the world arena, thephilosophy of Sarvodaya has etched its name very clearly. This has been a
major contribution of Vinoba’s movement. The philosophy is above any
particular area or time and provides new thoughts about constructing a society.
The history of this incomplete movement might say anything, but in
the annals of human revolution, Vinoba’s contribution is invaluable. This is
what the history of human revolution would say.
Contact: C/o Sarvodya Parisar Trust
PINDV AL, Talluka Dharampur
Distt. Balsad, Gujarat-396050Kanti ShahAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 41ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Sabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki
Prabhat Kumar
For a variety of reasons, the issue of land reforms is very important in India.Vinoba Bhave said: all land belongs to Gopal. Land has been given by nature
and the livelihood of each and every person depends on it. Nature has given
us water, forest, land, air – all of which is interlinked – and if some peoplehave ownership of these natural resources then it will lead to discord in
society and creation of various classes. The new policies of liberalisation,
privatisation and globalisation have changed nature’s inter-dependentdevelopment. Inter-dependent development means independence of the
community, while liberalisation/privatisation means being subservient to
capital. The way there is competition and a race to get the biggest share ofthe pie—, human values, cooperative spirit, brotherhood, sacrifice, peace,
respect and peaceful coexistence are being lost.
In the present capitalist set up, financial capital is invisible. No one has
any faith in its commitment, it can move from one area to another, wherever
it gets better returns. Under these circumstances there is ‘‘rush to get
possession of something concrete and physical like land, which is an excellentmedium. Therefore, any project that needs five hectares of land demands 50
to 100 hectares. To get hold of this land, the government uses the Land
Acquisition Act. And farmers’ movements that are rising against suchacquisitions are being ruthlessly put down. This is an anti-people action.
Tribals, farmers, landless and labourers are the worst sufferers of this land
acquisition and increasingly resorting to violence as no one listens to them.As a result, their un-channelled anger erupts from time to time in various
parts of the country.
This will ultimately only help the Maoists, who believe in the politics42 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011of organised violence. In Gandhi’s country, where the village is supposed to
be self-reliant, we have a situation where people are being displaced fromtheir land in the villages and are being forced to live in intolerable conditions.
The people who are victims of such a situation have a fundamental right to
rebel and fight for their rights.
After independence, there has been decline of two to three per cent
only in the number of people dependent on agriculture, but agriculture’s
share in the national income is going down. This is a grave problem. Underthese circumstances there is a need to think deeply and act on the issue of
land reforms.
Land has been one of the biggest assets of the country, but this asset has
been used only by a handful of people. That is why inequality has increased
in society. Before the British rule, the land was under the community or
clan, which could be seen in later years in the ownership patterns among thetribals also. In 1793, the British introduced the Land Management Act and
fixed land revenue. From here the zamindari system started. A feudal agrarian
economy took shape. The land ownership went into the hands of a few Britishsupplicants. The land owners and the cultivators got divided into two different
classes, and rural India was transformed into a new exploitative social
structure. The only aim of the zamindar was to extract the maximum amountof land tax as possible. Under such conditions, the actual cultivators did not
have any desire to increase production. Their capacity to put back money
into the land got increasingly reduced due to excessive land tax they had topay. Slowly the independent economic system of the rural areas disintegrated.
Due to non-payment of land tax the land was taken away from genuine
farmers, and the ranks of the landless kept on increasing. Land went into thehands of people who were not cultivators. The livelihood of the landless and
the share-croppers became the victim of the zamindars’ whim.
V oices of dissent started being heard against the adverse land
management system which was not beneficial for majority of the people.
For this reason, debate on land reforms started during the period of Second
World War before the country’s independence. But in India, the land ownersand other rich class had so much control over the bureaucracy and political
field that this debate was effectively stifled. Land owners were entrenched
in the power structure and they were against any land reforms.
But Mahatma Gandhi always wanted villages to be economicallyPrabhat KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 43independent. He was always with the common farmer. He protested against
the zamindari system imposed by the British and protested against theatrocities committed against the farmers. In 1917, he led the Champaran
Satyagraha in Bihar. This was the country’s first non-violent land reform
movement. Due to Mahatma Gandhi, the credit for the movement went tothe Congress party. And due to the success of the Champaran movement, the
Congress party got a lot of support from the farmers. But the Congress party
never carried out any other movement similar to the Champaran movement.
Before independence, the Congress formed the government. In 1937,
the Bihar government was formed under the leadership of Srikrishan Singh.
The socialist segment within the Congress started raising its voice for landreforms. Socialist leaders, Jaiprakash Narayan, Swami Sahajanand Saraswati,
and Pandit Yadunandan Sharma were prominent among them. It was due to
pressure from these leaders that in 1946 the Indian National Congress declaredin its election manifesto that land reforms were the need of the hour for the
country. For this, there should be direct relation between the farmers and the
State. The middle-men had to be removed.
But there was a lot of difference between what the government said and
what it did. The government took support of the farmers by saying that they
would be given land from the zamindars without any fighting.
The laws of land reforms made by the government were not honest
efforts. To save the zamindars, a number of loopholes were left in the laws.
The government went on making claims under the land reform programmethat this much land had been distributed to the landless this year. There were
political debates over the claims made by the government. The idea that the
land would belong to the farmers proved elusive.
But, after independence the socialists carried out a big movement for
land. Ram Manohar Lohia introduced the concept of ‘Jati’ (caste) and ‘Jamin’
(land) into agrarian problem. He said that the exploitation of one caste byanother that was inbuilt in the society, was largely rooted in the economic
structure in which there was large scale unequal distribution of land among
the people. He made a call for ending the caste system and asked the exploitedcastes to organise themselves and carry out peaceful agitation. In the Bhoomi
Harpo (grab the land) Satyagraha lakhs of middle castes took part, and their
awareness increased greatly.
The middle castes benefitted from this movement. But the casteSabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki44 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011consciousness did not get converted into class consciousness and the Dalits
could not get involved in this movement. Their efforts for class struggleproved incomplete. Their agitation was always against the government and
the bureaucracy and it was never against the big landowners. But the failure
of the socialists to be united with society at large prevented their aggressivemovement from turning into a class struggle.
The Communists of India had the Dalits with them in their land
agitations, but the leadership was always in the hands of the upper castes.Many of these upper caste people were very big zamindars also. After
independence the power unleashed due to the land agitations was channelled
to get a share of the power at the Centre. From time to time, the Communistsmade compromises with the Congress and ended the land agitations. These
compromises prevented the Dalits from developing into an independent
political force which would be able to free the land for the landless. In 1974,the Communists opposed the Bihar movement and supported the emergency.
Jayaprakash Narayan was called a fascist. As a result, the image of the
Communists who were fighting for land rights got sullied.
In Telangana region of Andhra Pradesh, the Bhoodan movement started
after the violent agitation for land led by the Communists. This movement
was led by Acharya Vinoba Bhave. He asked for land for the landless. Hesaid that the exploitation by the rich segment in society is responsible for the
birth of Communists. Therefore, it is necessary that the inequitable
distribution of land be rectified peacefully. Vinoba Bhave stayed in Biharfrom September 14, 1952 to December 31, 1954. The Bhoodan Yagna
committee was formed. The Bhoodan Act was passed.
The entire Bhoodan movement received 21,17,756 acres of land during
the entire movement and of it around 50 per cent was received in Bihar. Of
the land received, 13 lakh acres of land was either under river and nullahs or
mountainous or barren. According to the Bandopadhyay report (2008) onBhoodan in Bihar, nothing much could be achieved because of incompetence
of the Bhoodan Yagna Committee and the government’s revenue department.
According to records of the Bhoodan Yagna committee, they received6,48,476 acres of land, of which they distributed 2,55,343 acres of land. In
all 276,320 acres of land were not fit for distribution. The committee still
has 1,14,408 acres of land with it.
The absence of landless Dalits directly in the Bhoodan movement meantPrabhat KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 45that in more than half the cases, the landless Dalits could not take possession
of the land that had been given to them. And in cases where they did getpossession, they could not get the title deeds in their names. The
administration did not help them. Due to lack of organisation of the Bhoodan
movement, those who had been given land under the Bhoodan movementwere dispossessed. In the end, the Sarvodayis who had dreamt of changing
the society through Bhoodan movement became part of the establishment.
Despite getting lakhs of acres of land for distribution, the Bhoodan movementcould not bring about a major change in society. The main reason for this
was the lack of organisation of the lower strata of society. The Sarvodayis
laid great emphasis on the ‘generosity’ of the rich and influential class. Toencourage this ‘generosity’ the Sarvodayis relied on non-violent activities.
But the non-violent action did not have the philosophy of Satyagraha where
the dispossessed, victimised and exploited people had an awakening abouttheir rights. Even Jayaprakash Narayan who gave a new breath of life to
Bhoodan movement after joining it had to admit later, ‘In the Sarvodaya
movement we only paid attention to changing the powerful and rich. Thepoor and exploited had very little role to play in the Sarvodaya movement.’
Due to Naxalite movement in Bihar in 1970-71, there were protests
against social injustice and demand for minimum wages, and it also turnedto the question of land. There was leadership from the middle class and
Dalits. But the inevitability of violence during class war led to conflicts
between castes and it could not become a class war. In this violence themusclemen hired by the landowners and other inter-mediators were killed.
Due to such violence the Naxalites did get publicity, but it was not a decisive
fight that could change the system.
In 1974, the Bihar movement started under Jayaprakash Narayan.
Independent organisations like the Chhatra Yuva Sangharsh Vahini were
formed. The Sangharsh Vahini that believed in Jayaprakash Narayan’s conceptof ‘Total Revolution’ announced land movement in Bihar.
In 1978, the Chatra Yuva Sangharsh Vahini organised the Dalits and the
Backwards together for a peaceful agitation for the 12,000 acres of landbelonging to Bodhgaya Math. This fight was fought under the leadership of
Dalits and women. After 10 years of struggle the landless were able to get
10,000 acre of the land. For the first time in India, women got a right overland and this was also the first time that peaceful class-war took place in theSabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki46 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011country. The agitation succeeded in demolishing the feudal structure of
Shankar Math in Bodhgaya. There is a need to study why the movement didnot spread or whether it was successful or not.
However, for the generation that was born after independence, the
Bodhgaya land agitation could be an inspiration for those who believe insocial justice and an equitable society.
In Bihar, land reform laws were made since 1949, but in most of the
cases the laws were weak. In 1949 the Bihar Zamindari Act, in 1950 theBihar Land Reforms Law and in 1961 the Hadbandi Kshetra Parisiman Aur
Atirikta Bhoomi Adhigrahan Kanoon was made. But due to pressure from
the land owners, the law could be implemented 10 years later on September9, 1970. This means that after the passing of the Bihar Zamindari Act in
1950, the excess land was kept by the zamindars for 20 years and during this
period they transferred land on a large scale in fake names. They createdreligious trusts, gardens etc. and in most cases managed to keep the land in
their own possession.
By January 2001, 2.78 lakh acres of additional land was distributed
among 3.53 lakh landless under the Bihar Bhoo-Hadbandi Kanoon. The land
distributed among each family was not sufficient for profitable agriculture,
and also the quality of the land that had been given was also not good.
Moreover, even though the landless had allotment letters with them,
they were either unable to trace it, or they were in the possession of powerful
people as a result of which thousands could not take possession of theirland.
The Nitish Kumar government formed the Bhoomi Sudhar Sangathan
on June 16, 2006. D Bandopadhyay, a retired civil servant from West Bengalwas made its chairman. He had a great role in formulating and executing
‘Operation Barga’ in West Bengal. Bandopadhyay submitted his report to
the government on June 11, 2008. There was great hue and cry in the politicalcircle over the recommendations. Therefore, the Nitish government resolved
that they would only implement the recommendations related to Bhoodan
land. The Nitish government is also under the influence of big land owners.It is due to lack of resolve of the government that 107,677.25 acre of land
involved in 1975 cases is pending in courts for decades. Apart from this
96,666 acres of land taken over under the Hadbandi Act could not bedistributed. In 1962, the then revenue minister of Bihar, had said that 18Prabhat KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 47lakh acres of land had been identified under the provisions of the Act, but
finally only 3,67,864.25 acres of land could be acquired. This means that inBihar, be it the Congress or any other government, the influence of the land
owners has always been there. There is dissatisfaction in society about the
failure of the government to take land from people who are unable to use itfor productive purposes and giving it to genuine cultivators. According to a
latest report, of the 38 districts of Bihar, 35 are affected by Naxalism. The
Maoists are gaining ground due to the dissatisfaction among the ruralpopulation. Due to lack of proper means of livelihood, the poor people are
unable to live a life of dignity. Under these circumstances, it is but natural
that the people would take to politics of extremes. If we take into accountthe Union Home Ministry’s report of 2006 on Naxalism, we find that in nine
police stations of State, there are major reports on activities of the extremists.
We will find that parallel governments are running in 20 to 25 per cent partof the country, and the writ of the administration does not run here. To run
the administration, the officers, contractors, land owners and traders have to
pay levy to the extremists. This system is what Mao Tse Tung used to callfishing in the trobuled water syndrome, where the disaffected farmers and
landless are the water and the Maoists are the fish who live in the water.
Instead of solving the problem, the government tries to deal with the violentand non-violent movements in the same manner as a result of which the
non-violent movements are becoming weak.
The Bandopadhyay Commission understood that since the time of
independence there is a major connection between rural development and
the way agrarian relations are structured. The old structure of agrarian
relations was proving to be an obstacle in modernising agriculture. It wasthis same structure that was responsible for the unequal distribution of the
benefits of development, which was resulting in huge disparities in the income
and property of people. The upper castes took away the major chunk of thedevelopment pie and they increased their political power. So to make
fundamental structural changes it was necessary to change the rural agrarian
structure. For this, it is essential that States like Bihar implement the landreforms honestly. The Commission has said that the share cropper law of
1885 made by the British needs to be replaced by a new law. The Commission
said that Bihar’s ‘Hadbandi’ law was flawed. There were several avenues inthis law where excess land could be parked, thus making it ineffective. ItSabai Bhoomi Gopal Ki48 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011also called for improvement in revenue administration and also in mutation
process, contract farming among other things.
It is shameful that the State government is standing by the side of the
people who are cornering land, water and even the environment. In a poor
agriculture based country like India, there is a direct relation between hungerand land. In the International Convention on Hunger and Poverty in 1995
and the World Food Convention in 1996, the issues of cornering of resources
by a handful, land relations etc. was discussed in detail. There is a traditionalrelation between food security and the livelihood of the poor. The agricultural
labourers, fishermen, tribals and other marginalised communities have been
forced to live a life without dignity since the time of British imperialism. Itis necessary that correct land reforms be implemented and the actual
agriculture workers are allowed a greater allocation of the resources. There
should be a stop to all land acquisition and the entire policy should bereviewed. A white paper should be released on all the land that has been
acquired so far. There should be a consensus on land acquisition. The land
reform laws made by the States should be further strengthened andimplemented.
Contact: Vaisnavi Plaza,
Dwarka Mandir Lane,
West Boring Canal Road,
Patna-800001
Ph.: 029334330432Prabhat KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 49ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Padyatri Sant and Bhoodan Yagna
Shiv Kumar Mishra
On October 17, 1940, the Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi had chosenAcharya Vinoba Bhave as the first satyagrahi (proponent of satyagraha)  to
start personal satyagraha (movement which meant holding to the truth) and
Jawaharlal Nehru as the second. The British Colonial government hadcommitted India into the Second World War without the consent of the
Indian people. To oppose this decision by the foreign government, the
Congress party decided to launch individual satyagraha . Underlying this
decision there was a strategy of preparing their supporters and the party
organisation for the mass movement which was to follow. By May 15, 1941,
25,000 satyagrahis  had courted arrested and demonstrated the commitment
of the people towards the freedom movement. After their release from jail
the main worry of the national leadership was India’s security. In December
1941, the working committee meeting of the Congress party passedresolution to support the British government in their war effort but with
the rider that after the end of the war, the British would give total freedom
to the country.
During his period in prison, Bhave, wrote major three books – Swaraj
Shastra, Sthitpragya darshan and Isha Vasya Vrith .
If Mahatma Gandhi’s political guru was Gopal Krishna Gokhale then
his spiritual disciple was Acharya Vinoba Bhave. On June 7, 1916, Vinayak
(Acharya Vinoba) reached Mahatma Gandhi’s Kocharab Ashram in
Ahmedabad. When the two met for the first time, they realised that there
was an eternal bond between them.
To quote Bhave:“When I met Bapu, I felt a unique mixture of peace of Himalaya and50 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011the revolution of Bengal present in him. From that moment, my life
became dedicated to the cause of peaceful revolution.”
Years later, after Vinayak had become Acharya Vinoba, he said that the name
had been given to him by Gandhiji.
Later, Gandhiji shifted his ashram from Kocharab to the banks of the
river Sabarmati. Morning and evening prayers were held daily at the ashram.The ashram inmates had to make rotis and also clean toilets. Subsequently,
the charkha (spinning wheel) was also introduced and they all started making
thread. Acharya Vinoba was closely associated with all these works goingon at the ashram.
Who is this first satyagrahi , Acharya Vinoba? This question was raised
by most people of the country. No one in the country knew about his silentmeditation. In the end, Mahadev Bhai Desai introduced the first satyagrahi
through an article in the magazine Harijan . The first speech given by Acharya
Vinoba was given at a public meeting at Pavnar.
Acharya Vinoba went to jail for his personal satyagraha  and the Quit
India movement. During his period in jail, Acharya Vinoba read and wrote a
lot and he also had the responsibility of serving the country that had beenentrusted upon him by Gandhiji, when he chose Acharya Vinoba as the first
Satyagrahi.
Acharya Vinoba was released from jail on July 9, 1945 and he returned
to Pavnar and started working as he earlier used to do.Independent India had
seen the sacrifice of Bapu and the division of the country. Once India became
free on August 15, 1947 Mahatma Gandhi was in Bengal trying to heal thewounds of communal conflict. He did not take part in the celebrations of
Swaraj , and he was assassinated on January 30, 1948 while going for his
evening prayers.
With the partition of the country, over 1.5 crore of the population crossed
the borders, over 10 lakh innocent Hindus and Muslims were killed in the
communal riots that ensued in the aftermath of the partition. Around 1 lakhwomen were kidnapped during this period. Muhammad Ali Jinnah’s adamant
stance, the conspiracy of the British and the helplessness of the national
leadership resulted in the country’s partition.
To bring about communal amity in Delhi was one of the biggest
challenges before the country. On Mahatma Gandhi’s call, Pandit Sunderlal
came from Allahabad to Delhi. People like Indira Gandhi, Subhadra Joshi,Shiv Kumar MishraAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 51Anees Kidwai and other such enlightened people worked for communal
harmony. Pandit Sunderlal joined hands with communist K M Ashraf andstarted working among Mev Muslims. On Pandit Nehru’s call, AcharyaVinoba also reached Delhi and started resettling Mev Muslims of Rajasthan.
The Telangana agitation in Andhra Pradesh and farmer’s militant Tebhaga
movement in Bengal has caught the imagination of the people of the country.
Fed up with the oppressive rule of the Nizam, the farmers of Telangana liberated
30,000 villages in the region and redistributed land among the landless andpoor. With this, land became the centre of politics in the country.
The popular Congress government started abolishing zamindari system
and Princely States. During the struggle for independence the Congress hadpromised the share croppers that they would abolish zamindari  after the
country gained independence. However, due to loopholes in the law the rich
landlords were able to keep most of their land and the poor in the villagesdid not get much. As a result the anger among the poor farmers kept onincreasing and this anger took a much bigger form in the farmer’s agitationin the Telangana region.
The question of land is closely related to democracy. In communist
countries, the question of land was sought to be solved through collective
farming and communes, but in India there was the successful example of theChamparan and Kheda Satyagraha of Mahatma Gandhi, and inspiration wassought from there. In 1936, under the guidance of the Congress party theBharatiya Kisan Sabha  was formed and the work of organising farmers and
working to solve their problems started to take a new direction. The next
step of implementation of Mahatma Gandhi’s philosophy was the Bhoodan
movement started by Acharya Vinoba Bhave, which called for a change ofheart, which was among Mahatma Gandhi’s core beliefs.
Mahatma Gandhi, Saint Kabir and Gautam Buddha had great influence
on Acharya Vinoba. He was a great believer of non-violent revolution. Withhis footing firmly on the ground realities, Acharya Vinoba thought about
peaceful revolution for the welfare of the entire universe. On March 7, 1951
he left Sevagram and over the next 13 years and one month he covered43,000 miles on foot – nearly equal to walking the circumference of theearth twice – before he returned to Sevagram on April 6, 1964.
Commenting on Acharya Vinoba’s journey, Prime Minister Jawaharlal
Nehru said in Parliament, “What our (government’s) powerful services could
not achieve, a small fakir has managed to do ….. Tathagat Gautam BuddhaPadyatri Sant and Bhoodan Yagna52 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011had said two and half thousand years ago that enmity can never be finished
by enmity; it is only love that can overcome enmity. This is Sanatan dharma .”
Acharya Vinoba had appealed to the countrymen that poverty eradication
was the main task before them and they should unite forgetting their partyaffiliation and work towards that goal.
Similarly, the first Prime Minister of free India, Jawaharlal Nehru had
said in December 1962: Poverty is our biggest enemy. All of us should fight
to defeat this enemy.
Gandhi and Acharya Vinoba believed in the path of Sarvodaya, while
Marx and Lenin believed in Communism. AcharyaVinoba said that thoughCommunism uses violent means, its fundamental strength comes fromcompassion that is inherent in it. Acharya Vinoba said that we should imbibe
the urgency that is in the communists to eradicate poverty. Often it is seen
that those who advocate peace and non-violence are those who are for status-quo and those who want to change the society are for violence. If we useMarx’s dialectics then I can say that Ahimsa or non-violence is status-quo.Violence is thesis, revolution is anti-thesis and non-violent revolution issynthesis.
At a public meeting in Sagar, Acharya Vinoba is quoted to have said:
There are five crore landless in the country and there is 30 crore acre of
cultivable land. I want just one sixth of this entire cultivable land. Vinobaargued that giving one sixth of the share to the king is an old Indiantradition and among the masses, the poorest of the poor is the king. Iam asking for five crore acre of land for this king, and this will prove to
be a unique revolution under Indian culture.
In 1957, the first elected communist government in Kerala presented its own
agenda for land reforms. The entire spectrum of forces joined hands againstthis reform movement started by the communist government and after 28months the communist government collapsed.
The Left have a popular base in West Bengal, Kerala and Tripura. Even
though the Left Government has been ousted from Bengal after 34 years of
rule, the work of distributing government land among the poor done by HareKrishna Kanar was something unique. As a result of this work of redistributionof land, the Left had a strong base in the rural areas and the poor becameland owners in villages.
There have been fundamental changes in the ground realities over theShiv Kumar MishraAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 53years. Due to industrialisation and urbanisation, concrete jungles and colonies
are coming up on agriculture land. There have been violent agitations against
this tendency, and therefore, the teachings of Gandhi and Acharya Vinoba
are once again becoming relevant.
“All land belongs to Gopal”, this is what Acharya Tulsi, a Jainist ascetic
had said and Acharya Vinoba agreed with and adhered to it. Without dropping
a single drop of blood, without hurting anyone’s sentiments, Acharya Vinobaattempted to end individual ownership of land.
When he used to visit villages during his padyatra, Acharya Vinoba
used to say, “For good governance and peace, give land, for a great revolutiongive land.”
Jaiprakash Narayan was with Acharya Vinoba in this movement, and
Pandit Nehru was watching the entire Bhoodan  movement with a keen
interest. Of the 5.5 lakh villages of the country Gramdan took place in 1.6
lakh villages, which means that one fifth of the country’s population signed
in the paper agreeing to give up individual ownership of land and hand itover to the community. The Bhoodan  movement got 50 lakh acres of land,
and of them 13 lakh acre of land got distributed. In Bihar alone, five lakh
landless got land. It was ‘ bhoodani baba ’ who gave us this land. These words
are said by numerous landless people who got land due to the Bhoodan
movement. The entire f amily works hard on that plot of land and while eating
the fruits of the land, it is AcharyaVinoba they remember and thank humbly.
Acharya Vinoba’s Bhoodan movement has been seen and analysed by
the entire world. The grandson of English poet Lord Alfred Tennyson, Hallam
Tennyson, was with Acharya Vinoba during his padyatra. Later in his book,The Saint on the March he wrote,
“Even in saints there is a tiny bit of possessiveness, pride due to the
sacrifices they have made, but Vinoba never allowed any of these to affecthim. And he never told anyone to emulate him.”
France’s Lafadelvasta had written, “The contribution of Acharya Vinoba
in India’s social and economic revolution is a dramatic miracle”
These were some of the reactions to Bhoodan  from eminent people of
the world. I salute the Padyatri sant.
Contact: IX/79, Judge Colony
Vaishali-201010
Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh)
Mobile: 09910339427Padyatri Sant and Bhoodan Yagna54 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Distribution of Land would lead to reforms
An Interview of Shubhamurti with Aneesh Ankur
Shubhamurti  is the chairman of the Bihar Bhoodan Yagna Committee
and a well-known social worker. He has worked with Jaiprakash Narayan
since 1969. After JP’s movement in Bihar, he worked in the field of health.
He has been working with the Bhoodan Yagna Committee for the past fouryears and a lot of work has been done in the field of land donation during his
tenure. Excerpts of his talks with Aneesh Ankur .
Q. Shubhamurtiji, tell us how you feel about the Bhoodan movement
after nearly half a century? What effect did it have on Bihar? What were the
problems and challenges you all faced during the entire movement?
A. Not only the Bhoodan movement, all problems related to landless
and land have been further complicated by the bureaucracy and it appears
very difficult to break out of their clutches. Unless there is a paradigm shift,
things will not be on the track. Firstly, the bureaucracy is of the colonialmindset and its main orientation is to ensure that there is no constructive
work that breaks the status quo and if some work is going on in this direction
then the aim is on how to put hurdles before it. Whosoever’s interest getsaffected places hurdles before it.
The Bhoodan movement has been quite successful and the government
was quite successful in transferring land to the landless through thismovement. One of the ways was shown by Vinoba Bhave who had asked
people to donate land which would then be redistributed among the landless.
But the bureaucracy complicated the process of redistribution. It is verydifficult to transfer land through this channel. The pattern of land ownership
prevalent since the advent of the British has not been the traditional way in
this country. Earlier, the village as a whole used to hold the land and theAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 55concept of individual ownership is a recent one. The people who used to live
in the village used to plough the field and sow it according to the needs ofthe village. The villagers used to think – how can we maximise the output
and get maximum benefit for the people. Naturally, those who were in the
field of farming got the maximum amount of land since it was their job to dothe farming. There might have been big land owners, but they too used to
cultivate the land, but the village as a whole owned the land. This community
holding of land was more just, but the British came and made ownership ofland on an individual basis. The Bhoodan movement started by Vinobaji
also wanted to change the way the people thought about ownership of land
and that is why he gave the slogan – all lands belong to Gopal – which meantthat all the land belonged to the village. This was a change from the concept
of individual ownership. Vinobaji used to worry that how the numerous
landless were going to manage if small plots of land went to them afterredistribution of land. How were they going to plough these plots, from where
were they going to get the finance to plant crops etc?
To tide over this problem, the concept of Gramdan came after Bhoodan,
where it was stressed that even if there are individual cultivators the land
ultimately belonged to the village, at least in the first phase. Then, other
things could be thought once cooperation increased among the villagers. JPtalked about Gramdan while working in Mushari, but the idea could not be
planted among the bureaucrats and there was no demand from the grassroots
to implement it. JP, then thought that some other method should be adoptedand he launched the Total Revolution movement. When he realised that the
concept of common ownership would not work, he talked of redistributing
the land and among the landless and also give them the right to stay (BasgeetKa Parcha), which was vetted by the government. By that time the government
had also passed law in this regard and in 1970–71, thousands of farmers
were benefitted. But, then the work lost its momentum and JP also realisedthat the bureaucracy simply did not have the wherewithal to implement it.
The Gramdaan Act had given more powers to the villages than what the
villagers received after the implementation of the Panchayati Raj Act, butfurther implementation got bogged down due to the bureaucracy.
Q. You are saying that the bureaucracy was the main stumbling block
behind the failure of the Bhoodan movement, but was the bureaucracy solelyresponsible for the failure or was it also due to lack of political will of theShubhamurti56 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011leaders? After all the bureaucracy is but a tool.
A. Yes the bureaucracy is but a tool, but I feel that the question of lack
of political will is less important as on a number of occasions there was
political leadership that was conducive to the idea.
Q. Like?A. We have to understand that when Srikrishna Singh – the first Chief
Minister of Bihar – was in power, especially during the first five years there
was great emphasis on land redistribution. For the first time in Bihar theLand Reform Act was made, the zamindari system was abolished, the Land
Ceiling Act was passed, the Basgeet Act was passed, and the share croppers
were recognised under it and eight to nine laws on land reforms were passedduring this period. Then K B Sahay came and he too was committed, but his
tenure was too short.
So, I don’t feel that there was a lack of political will, but it was the
bureaucracy that meddled in the implementation. When the backward
leadership came to fore they were not as conservating about land as the
earlier leadership, but there was less work done during this period. Duringthe Laloo-Nitish era not much thought was given on what had to be changed;
the processes through which the land could be transferred. The Bhoodan
committee was simply given the power that they should redistribute the land,but the bureaucracy still holds the actual power of giving the landless
beneficiary the right to the given land.
It is a strange process that even though it is the government that has set
up the Bhoodan committee and the committee is distributing actual Bhoodan
land vetted by the government to the landless; the beneficiary still has to go
to the bureaucracy for possession and permanent title of the land. Thegovernment should recognise the beneficiary who has been given the land
by the committee as the undisputed owner and hand over the land without
having to go to the bureaucracy.
At present, the bureaucracy goes through the certificate issued by the
committee, and then follows the process of mutation and then the land is
handed over. This is a lengthy and unnecessary process, and this loopholehas become a big hole and the beneficiaries have to do the rounds of the
bureaucracy endlessly. One of the demands before the mutation is that it has
to be proved that the land that has been given as Bhoodan actually belongsto the owner. This is totally unnecessary as this process has already beenShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 57done when the land was being acquired by the government in the first place,
before being transferred to Bhoodan committee.
Q. This unnecessary interference of the bureaucracy could have been
removed at the political level. Any government in power can come and say
that the land allotment of the Bhoodan committee is final?
A. Yes, this can be done, but is not being done. We have seen that the
ministers keep quiet before the officers. The ministers feel that the IAS officers
know English, they know more than us. The aura of the officers is so greatthat even intelligent ministers keep quiet and this is true from top to bottom.
Though things have improved slightly and nowadays the ministers have
become more assertive. But, even now though many of the electedrepresentatives have the will to supersede the bureaucracy, yet they lack the
confidence. Another fear of the politicians is that if they clash with the
bureaucracy then the latter will somehow embroil them in some problem.Nobody is prefect, and also the law is such that one can face allegations of
corruption in whatever work one does, the alternative being not to work at
all. I have also seen that the top bureaucrats fear implementing the law. Theythink that implementation of the law would have their own pros and cons
and numerous questions can be raised on the basis of the negative aspects
and there is going to be continuous harassment. So the tendency of the topbureaucrat is not to work more, just enough to get by, save your skin while
working and do not take any risks. The power situation in the country is
such that if you want to work for the powerless then you have to take somerisk. I told the present Chief Secretary that do the things on my behalf, I will
go to jail if necessary, but he feels that if I go to jail then he too would be
questioned why he gave permission. Even the honest bureaucrat is afraidand more than political will it is the commitment of the bureaucracy that is
necessary.
Q. Given the circumstances, do you think that the nature of the
bureaucracy would change? If things continue then nothing will change?
A. If the bureaucracy does not change then it guarantees that nothing
will change, and it is equally true that such change has never occurredanywhere.
Q. How much work of the Bhoodan is left? How much land is there that
has to be redistributed?
A. When I came four years back there was 30,000 acres that had to beShubhamurti58 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011distributed. On papers it was 1.5 lakh acres, but on scrutinising it transpired
that much of it could not be distributed at all. Of the 1.5 lakh acres, there isno description of 1.25 lakh acres of land. If it had been done immediately
then the land could have been given. Usually these announcements were
made in gram sabhas. A person got up and announced that he would bedonating say five or 10 acres of land. The atmosphere was such that at the
time of announcement, the person sincerely meant it, but at that time often
he himself did not know which portion of the land he would be giving, andwhat is its description so that that portion of the land could be positively
identified. People were less educated in those days and often they did not
have the proper papers. The work of preparing papers etc was mainly doneby government servants and the volunteers of the movement did not have
the proper knowledge and expertise to note down the description of the land
being donated. There were some volunteers who had knowledge of thesethings and in places where they went, the details were registered. Some of
the more aware donors themselves provided the details. Some donors had
the right intensions but did not have the details. If the government was morepro-active and had proper laws been passed, then all the land that had been
donated could have been distributed. But now it is near impossible. The land
donated at that time has now been redistributed a number of times and itwould be very difficult to take it back.
Q. So of the 1.5 lakh acre only 30,000 acre land is such that it can be
distributed?
A. Of the 30,000 acre, only 2,000 acre is left. There is an additional
5000 acre which the government has to conform and hand it back to us. The
Bhoodan committee has written to the government to expedite the matter.
Q. Have the landless been given possession of the 28,000 acre of land
that has been distributed?
A. There are two to three categories in it. We have decided that only
women would be made owners of the land and we have given land to 30,000
women. They have possession of the land and their names are registered in
the government papers also. There is also one section that has possession ofthe land, but their names are not registered in the government papers. This
section comprises maximum number and they are in constant fear that the
land would be taken away from them. Their detractors also harp on the factthat their names are not in official records and also say that Bhoodan isShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 59nothing, whereas Bhoodan is an act and has the force of the government
behind it. Yet, an atmosphere is being created that the Bhoodan committee ispowerless and cannot do anything. The ruling party, the opposition and also
the Congress leaders have their role in creating this environment, and the
big farmers also support them. Also we announced that the landless shouldtake possession of Bhoodan land if they come to know of it and we will give
them certificate later on. Due to this in various places people have taken
possession of Bhoodan land that had been encroached upon.
Q. Under these circumstances, things would take a violent turn?
A. So far things haven’t taken a violent turn, mainly because the number
of such cases are not large. In any case, people who have illegally occupiedthe land also know that it is Bhoodan land and meant for the poor and they
have usually given it up when the landless comes with the certificate issued
by the Bhoodan committee.
In some places there have been cases where the encroached land has
not been vacated even after the landless has been allotted the land. In that
case, we tell the landless that this is his piece of land and also write to thedistrict magistrate\SP and ask them to get the land vacated, and it is their
responsibility to get the encroachment vacated.
Q. Has it ever happened that you had to take help of the administration
to give possession of the land to the landless from the encroacher? Has the
administration and bureaucracy helped you?
A. There are examples, but they are few. In most cases, the bureaucracy
is afraid to act. They feel that if they try to remove the encroachment then
there will be a fight, blood will flow and someone might get killed and further
problems might arise for them. We feel that there might be some smallincidents of violence while enforcing the ruling of the Bhoodan committee,
but if we do not do anything then there might be bigger violence. To prevent
the bigger violence, we have to do something. The work can be done tactfullyby creating constant pressure, but what can be achieved if we run away from
the situation. Now we are concentrating on organising the women and trying
to create an atmosphere whereby they can take possession of undisputedland.
Q. How will the women know that which land is meant for them?
A. We have the details. We have staff who measure the land and then we
inform the farmer that this is Bhoodan land and he is illegally occupying it.Shubhamurti60 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Q. You talked of only two categories so far, there is also a third category
where the landless do not have the land registered in their names and neitherdo they have it under their possession?
A. The third category do not have possession, nor are their names in the
government register, they only have our letter saying that the land belongsto them. But we have seen that even if he has a piece of paper saying that a
particular plot belongs to him, he will try his best to get it. If he fears violence
is necessary to forcibly occupy the land then he will come rushing to us, andask us to help him get the land. We write to the administration and this
creates pressure on the person occupying the land illegally. But this can
work only up to a point and the bureaucracy won’t go beyond a certain point.Therefore, we have created a strategy wherein we tell the landless that this
land belongs to them and we are building up the organisation to support
them and create pressure. We also write to the government to create pressure.
Q. How many committees of Bhoodan Yagna committee have been
formed? Are they present in all the districts? How does it run?
A. There are committees in each district and they are recognised by the
government. They have powers backed by law. But it is also true that where
10 people are required we have only two or three. Sometimes there is no
bailiff. When we ask the government to provide us with a Bailiff, sometimesthe District Magistrate obliges us, sometimes he does not. So we have to
work with all these handicaps. Therefore, somewhere these committees are
effective and somewhere they are not.
There is also the question of salary. Since the committee has been
constituted under an Act, there should have been a budget for the government
that would have ensured that everyone got their salaries - which also shouldhave been mentioned – and it would have provided for tour and travel. But
this clause was deliberately left out. When we ask from where we will get
the money for running the establishment, we are told that we should somehowmanage on our own. It has become joke. When the Bhoodan committee was
formed initially, the government was more liberal and provided money to it.
And there were Vinobaji and Jayaprakash, who provided moral pressure andthe government sanctioned budget for the committee. But now that even
Jayaprakash Narayan is no more, all the pressure has gone.
Q. So the government does not listen to your pleas?A. The government says that we have to fend for ourselves. They doShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 61not want to even listen to us. This government has increased our budget a
bit. We had asked for Rs 1.5 crore, but they gave us only Rs 65 lakhs, whichis less than half. They have told us to manage within this. This amount includes
the salaries of the staff. Earlier, we were given only Rs 24 lakhs. But if we
have to do even minimum amount of work we should be given Rs 1.5 croreand if we have to work properly then we should be given Rs 2 crore.
Whereas, if one looks at the employees of the revenue department, the
circle officer, additional collector and his entire machinery, the governmentspends anywhere between Rs 15-20 crores. This is apart from their salaries.
Compared to Rs 20 crore, we are only asking for Rs 2 crore, but you
(government) are not willing to agree and say that we should work withinlimits of our budget. This constraint is applicable only for us, not the secretary
level bureaucrats of the government.
Q. It is still not clear even today about the amount of land which was
received under Bhoodan. Some people say it is 6 lakh acres, and some say
21 lakh acres. What is the true figure?
A. Around 24 lakh acres was received in Bihar only under Bhoodan,
but this included Jharkhand. After the division of Bihar, a big section went
to Jharkhand. The forests, mountains where there were big tracts of land
went there. In Bihar, only small tracts of land was left. In Bihar, around 6.5lakh acres was left. When the government started looking into the land they
found that 3.5 lakh acre of land could not be distributed as they were nullahs,
forests or even graveyards. But even from the remaining land it was foundthat there were no proper records of 15000-25000 acres, leaving behind 2.75
lakh acres and from this we have distributed around 2.5 lakh acres.
Q. When was the maximum amount of land distributed?A. The maximum distribution was in the initial phase when Vinoba and
Jayaprakash were there – from 1952-53 to 1965-70. What remained was
difficult to distribute.
Q. After Vinoba and Jayaprakash, what per cent of land was distributed?
A. According to my estimate, around 40 per cent of the land was left
after them. Then the work of distribution went on very slowly. All I can sayis that more land has been distributed in the four years of my tenure when
compared to the last 15-16 years. Now only around 2000 acres are left. Plus
there is the possibility that around 5000 acres might be added.
The recommendations of the D Bandopadhyay committee on land setShubhamurti62 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011up by the Nitish Kumar government has also to be considered. In its first
recommendation, the Bandopadhyay committee asked whether the 3.5 lakhacres of land declared unfit for distribution by the officials was correct or
not. Or whether the officials had been hand in glove with the landowners
and given false report. However, the government was not willing that weconduct a survey. Initially, the suggestion had been that if we do the survey
then the real situation would become clear. We did a survey, but though we
were not able to do it properly, it did appear that a large part of the land wasnot fit for distribution. In some cases the description is too scanty and in
some case the situation map is very small. But even then, of the 3.5 lakh
acres, we have description of around 40,000 acres. Of the remaining land wefound that, the description  of 1.10 lakh acre could not be confirmed. I
personally feel that around 50,000 acres of land that were under rivers and
nullahs have now come out as rivers have dried up and have become goodagriculture land which can be distributed. Also with the help of new
technology poor quality land can now be made fertile.
I also feel that these days the number of landless has increased due to
displacement from dams and other projects. While earlier we only used to
give agriculture land, now we also give land for housing purpose.
Q. How much land do you give for housing purpose?A. We give around 10 decimal land, which is around 2 cottas, so that
people can build their houses and also plant a few trees and bushes.
Q. Has large scale displacement of people resulted in this change in
policy?
A. Displacement has increased landlessness. At the time of
independence, around 25 per cent of the population did not have land, now ithas jumped to 40 per cent. Poverty and illiteracy has also increased due to
landlessness. Also our pattern has changed. Now agriculture land is given to
local landless, relocation of landless from other places is not done. Also thelandless are unwilling to move to another place. The demand and importance
of land is greater in places where there are more landless. But our effort is to
ensure that no one gets less than 10 decimals. But, for example when weinitially allotted 3 acres of land to three brothers, it appeared fine, but by the
time they got the land, they had their families and many children.
Q. What has been the political impact of this in Bihar?A. There has been great political impact. The communists were angryShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 63with the movement as they felt that due to Bhoodan the agitation of the poor
and landless that could have taken a violent turn became a more gradual andpeaceful change.
Q. When did the Bhoodan movement really start? There are conflicting
dates.
A. The Bhoodan movement primarily started from Telangana region,
when after independence there was violence around 1950s. Vinobaji went
there. In any case after Gandhiji’s death there was discussion among hisfollowers about what had to be done to perpetuate his legacy. The discussion
was held at Seva Gram in which Nehru and Jaiprakash among others were
also present. During that period the refugee problem was at its peak andVinobaji wanted to see whether Gandhiji’s philosophy could work among
them. The refugees did not have any home of their own. The efforts of the
government were the same as it is today – very slow. Also, most of the reliefmaterial that came for the refugees disappeared, no one knows where.
Vinobaji felt that it would be futile to work among the refugees.
During this period a violent agitation started for land in the Telangana
region. Vinobaji thought that if we really believe in ahimsa and it really
works, then it should work in the Telangana region also. He went to one of
the violence affected village and asked the villagers the reason behind theviolence and they said that it was land. Vinobaji asked the villagers how
much land they wanted and they said that they would need 100 acres of land.
In this meeting, which had been organised by the communists, both the landowners and the landless were present. Then, Vinobaji turned to the landowners
and asked whether they could give 100 acres of land. One landlord stood up
and said that he would donate 101 acres. His name was Ramchandra Reddy,and there is also a statue of him in that village. Vinobaji thought that if land
could be procured for the landless here, why not in other places. He started
his padyatra from there. In 1952, he went via Seva Gram, from there to UttarPradesh, Benaras and then to Bihar. He started getting land from 1952 and
even in places he did not visit, his followers received land.
Q. How long did the people continue with donating land under the
movement, and how long did the landless receive land?
A. Bits and pieces of land are still being given. Whenever people come
to meet us, we ask them, ‘Can you donate land,’ and people donate two tothree cottas. There is software engineer from Purnea district who is nowShubhamurti64 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011settled in Hyderabad. He wanted to sell his property here and talked to me,
and said, ‘Now that I have talked to you, I will sell the rest of my land, butdonate 10 acres of land under Bhoodan.’ The Bhoodan movement started
from 1952, but the maximum amount of land was received during 1962-63.
After that the quantum of land received decreased, and part of the reasonwas because Vinobaji had stopped emphasising Bhoodan and had moved on
to the concept of Gramdaan.
Q. Gramdaan? What is this concept?A. The concept is that even if the landless gets land, how will he cultivate
it? He usually does not know about agriculture, is illiterate and also does not
have the resources to start cultivation. Vinobaji had also seen the attitude ofthe government and realised that no help would come from that quarter. So
if the big and small people of the village got together and run the village,
which Gandhiji termed as ‘village republic’, then everybody would benefit.Vinobaji also believed that land ownership should not be individual but of
the village, which has also been our tradition. For this reason he talked about
Gramdaan.
Apart from education, politics and economic development the villagers
would be able to determine their day to day life on their own. The government
is outside the village. No one will go to court with quarrels, the village itselfwill decide on it. But if they want, they can move to court. It means a village
free of government interference. He (Vinobaji) used to say like Gandhiji
that we have gained freedom from foreign government, but true Swaraj willcome only when we are free of the domestic government also meaning with
the freedom from both domestic and foreign governments, the villagers would
be able to determine their life on their own. The people who worked withGandhiji at that time, including Nehru might not have believed in all that
Gandhiji stood for, but they could not come out against him and accepted
whatever he said. Vinobaji caught this strain of though later on and soonJayaprakash also joined. Apart from Nehru, Jayaprakashji was the tallest
leader and his coming out for Bhoodan created a major impact.
Q. When did Vinobaji change track from Bhoodan to Gramdaan?A. When Bhoodan movement was launched, some of the villagers said,
why do you want land, take the entire village. At that time there was no legal
framework for this concept, but later on a formula was put in place. Thevillagers would donate and create a village fund and they would meet once aShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 65month for gram sabha. Each household would place their problems at the
gram sabha, which would meet once a month. There would be discussion onthe problems and if need be, they would go to the government or find a
solution for themselves. It would be the duty of the gram sabha to see that
there was no landless in the village and there was a village fund, that eventhe poor had enough land on which to build a house with space for a few
trees. Apart from gram sabha, gram kosh (village fund) and Bhoodan, Vinobaji
also talked about Shanti Sena, comprising youth of the village. They wouldact as the village police who would stop people fighting with each other and
mediate during quarrels. Ten persons would also patrol the village at night
to prevent thefts. All these ingredients were made part of the Gramdan Act.
Q. When was the Gramdan Act passed and how many villages came
under this act?
A. The Gramdan Act came into being in 1965. It was implemented in
totality in 150 to 200 villages. Vinobaji said that there are 5 lakh villages in
the country, and around 1.5 lakh of them are in Bihar, and hence it would be
a long time if one moved from one village to another. So they asked thevillages to give their consent, but as people said later, this is where Vinobaji’s
concept failed. While the villagers gave their consent in places visited by
Vinobaji and Jayaprakashji, it was only temporary. Once they went away,the villagers went back to their old ways of caste and creed etc.
Q. Then it means that there was no organisation that could implement
the act even if Vinobaji and Jayaprakashji did not go there. Also all this wasdue to their personal influence?
A. Yes, it was due to their personal influence that villagers agreed to
Gramdan, but there was no implementing organisation even though the Actwas made. Even now there are 150-200 villages in Muzaffarpur working
under the Gramdan Act.
Q. Did the maximum number of Gramdan take place here?A. Gramdan was the maximum in Muzaffarpur because Jayaprakashji
spend two years here. Even before this there was the Khadi gram ashram in
Munger. There was one Dhirendra Majumdar, who was Gandhiji’s disciple,who was also head of Sevagram. Gandhiji had himself nominated him. After
independence, Dhirendra Majumdar came and settled in Munger. He spent
his life working on 7-8 acre of land there and spreading the message ofGandhiji and implemented the concept of Gramdan in the villages there.Shubhamurti66 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011There was some Gramdan in most districts, wherever Jaiprakashji went.
Q. So Dhirendra Majumdar was the first to implement the concept?A. The concept was brought by Vinobaji, but Dhirendra was the first to
implement it. Later, Jayaprakashji built the Sekhodora ashram in Nawada. It
is still there. Some work was also done in Gaya. That was also notified in thegazette. After gazette notification, the government officials used to check it
to see whether everything was functioning properly or not. Then it was given
legal powers under the Gramdan Act. But then people started fighting, therewas corruption, and the powers under Gramdan Act was taken away from
the villagers who were told that they were not organised enough to take
benefit of this act.
Q. Then the government also stopped helping?
A. The government had to give the powers. Vinobaji used to urge people
to unite and use the power of unity. Jayaprakashji was in Mushari for oneyear where he wrote the book “Face to Face”. Jayaprakashji felt that things
would not work in this way. How long could he go about convincing villagers
when they were so immersed in their own world of squabbles and humdrumof life? So in 1974 he turned towards revolution in Bihar.
Q. Is Gramdan still there? Are villages still functioning under this Act?
A. The Act was suspended in 1976, but when the Janata government
came to power and Karpuri Thakur headed the government, seven villagers
demanded this act. They were given powers and their share of revenue was
given directly to them from the respective panchayats.
Q. Did this Act bring about some noticeable change?
A. If the Act were in force for 10 years there would have been change,
but that did not happen. But what happened was that gram sabhas were heldwhere even if a weak person got up and stated his point, people of the village
had to listen to it and promise that they would do something, and some steps
were taken. No one was neglected completely. There were problems wherethere were no volunteers to help the villagers or if there were some very
powerful people who did not listen to anyone.
Q. Which means there was no agency?A. There was need for an agency. If the process had continued then
something would have evolved, but that did not happen.
Q. Till 1965 people donated land, and then the period of Gramdan
started. What happened to Bhoodan after that?ShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 67A. Till 1965 people donated land under Bhoodan movement and landless
continued getting it till 1970. By then, 60 per cent of the land had beendistributed. By 1969, Vinobaji had left. He said that people should think that
he was dead. I want to see how this concept would work after I die. Now you
all become leaders. This was a very good concept. But nothing would workif everything depended on one man. We depended on Mahatma Gandhi and
he was assassinated and look where we all went. Similarly, if the Bhoodan
and Gramdaan depended on me, you would not be empowered, how couldthe power of the common people increase instead of that of the leaders?
Then Vinobaji left from Pavnar ashram where he said that he would not
come out of the ashram. The role of Jayaprakashji started after that. Afterthe work he did in Mushari in 1970-71 he felt that this was not the right way.
He felt that while he was working in the villages, trying to change things,
the rulers of the country were turning autocratic. All the norms of governancewere being broken. Officers of the armed forces were being superseded,
Chief Justice of the Supreme Court was being superseded and the government
was putting in ‘yes men’ in their places. Corruption was also increasing.Jayaprakashji felt that forming an organisation and then fighting elections
was not the way. So he called for Youth for Democracy. I agree that had not
Jayaprakashji worked for Sarvodaya, Bhoodan, Gramdan; his personalitywould not have gained such a height so that everyone became attracted to it.
People felt that this man did not belong to any party, neither the ruling party
nor the opposition, but a man of the common people. There were politicianswho helped him, but Jayaprakashji kept a condition that whatever work was
done under his aegis would be apolitical and non-violent. That Jayaprakashji
called for peaceful movement was mainly the influence of the Sarvodayaand Bhoodan movement.
Q What happened after Jayaprakashji’s movement?
A. After Jayaprakashji’s movement there were no similar movements
anywhere. The leaders of the movement joined various parties and then
came to power. Later Jayaprakashji also made a youth organisation. Earlier
in that organisation there were 10 to 15 persons, people like me, who didnot belong to any party but just worked for the society. I joined Jayaprakashji
in 1970, but after the Bihar movement there were around 100-150 youths
who joined him. It was youth like these who brought about the Bodhgayamovement.Shubhamurti68 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Q. When was the Bhoodan committee formed and when was the Act
made effective?
A. In 1954 the Act came into force and the committee came from the
act itself.
Q. This Act was made effective during S K Singh’ s government? At that
time itself this loophole was left in the Act which ensured that the people had
to go to the bureaucracy to get land under the Act? Was this not very
deliberate?
A. This is a very important aspect of the Act and I do not think that the
government did understand its implication. If they understood, then the
bureaucracy deliberately kept it there to ensure that this did not leave theirdomain.
Q. Did this happen when Vinobaji was still there? Did Vinobaji fail to
understand its implication?
A. He did understand and that is why he talked of Gramdan, because he
felt that once the villagers became united then the government wouldn’t be
able to override the will of the people.
Q. Did Vinobaji not fight against what was essentially a bureaucratic
spanner in the works?
A. This is where there was a difference in the approach between
Jayaprakashji and Vinobaji. Jayaprakashji would keep a close watch on what
the politicians were doing, what the bureaucrats were doing and react to
their action. He gave his reaction on the issue of reservation or the Suezcrisis, because he felt that it was not a matter of politics but a matter of the
people and he should speak out. However, Vinobaji also understood these
things, but he did not react because he thought that this would divert hisattention from the main task.
Q. But Vinobaji did not speak against the bureaucratic interference.
Did he feel that if he spoke against the bureaucracy then he would have togo against the government?
A. No, whenever he spoke, it was in jest or at an academic level, but he
did not call for a movement against the bureaucrats.
Q. When was the Ceiling Act introduced?
A. It was introduced in 1950-51 along with the zamindari abolition act,
but it was decided that the Ceiling Act would be implemental 10 years later.This gave the rich zamindars the time to divert their property into fictitiousShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 69names (benami); for example 100 acres of land was divided into 20 people –
all fictitious people – and the zamindars continued to retain control.
Srikrishna Babu used to tell Vinobaji. Why are you working so hard in
the Bhoodan movement in your old age? We (government) have introduced
the land ceiling act which will ensure that land is distributed among thelandless. In reply Vinobaji said that the culture of the government is to ‘levy’
that is take things by force and our culture is ‘Devi’ which means to give
voluntarily.
He often used to taunt the bureaucracy. He said that like the flag of the
country was changed after the British left, the education and bureaucracy
should also be changed. But these people did not have the courage to pressthe point. When the First Five Year Plan was being prepared, Nehru gave a
draft copy to Vinobaji for his comment. Vinobaji read it and threw it into the
dustbin and said that there is nothing in it for the poor. All the benefits willgo to the rich and middle class. But the Plan was passed as Nehru, apart
from being Western oriented, was also popular.
Q. So the Bhoodan movement and the Ceiling Act started at around the
same time. But the Bhoodan movement became more popular?
A. Initially, the government did not get much land under the Ceiling
Act. While the Bhoodan movement received 3 lakh acres of land, the landseized under Ceiling Act was around 10,000 to 15,000 acres. There was no
comparison. But then, Vinobaji shifted from Bhoodan to Gramdaan and then
gave that up too. Land was seized under the Ceiling Act after 1970 andfinally the amount of land seized was somewhere near to the land received
under the Bhoodan movement.
Q. Did the government distribute the land that it seized after
implementing the Ceiling Act?
A. In most of the cases, the seized land was handed back to the original
owner on lease. A few days back I was at a departmental meeting and theissue of renewing the lease of land was being discussed. The lease of most
of the land in the city had been renewed for another 20 years at the earlier
rate, which is a paltry sum, as there was no provision in law to increase it. Itwas only after the leases had been renewed that the lease rent was increased.
Now the increase can be made only after 30 years. So this is how the law
itself allows fraud to be perpetrated. The logic of the government is thatafter they seized land, it should be put to use, so they handed it back to theShubhamurti70 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011same person for him to use. It would be interesting to see through RTI how
much land the government got from the Ceiling Act, how much is left andhow much of it has been leased. It is also possible that the government might
not be able to give an accurate figure as they themselves do not have it with
them.
Q. Is it possible that the government does not know how much land it
got under the Ceiling Act?
A. No, the government knows how much land it got under the Ceiling
Act, but perhaps it does not know how much of the land was given back to
the original owners on lease, and how much was distributed among landless
farmers. The main problem is that the land records are not accurate. In manycases the plot size is 10 acres, and while 4 acres is registered in your name,
5 acres is registered in my name. And we are forever fighting over the 2
acres. In 50 per cent of the cases, the land records are not correct or up todate, and the government has done nothing about it. In 1993, it announced
that it would computerise all the land records of the country and even amended
the Constitution for it, but the work has not been completed. Three yearsback the Chief Secretary called all the district magistrates and said that Bihar
has got the money for computerising the land records and we should start
working on it. At that time I had asked the main thing was to fix a completiondate, and the Chief Secretary had said that the work would be completed
within a year. But, the work has not even started till now.
We also believe that computerisation is necessary and we are
computerising all the Bhoodan records. Things would be much easier once
the work is complete. We have started work in 10-12 districts through
outsourcing. In the first phase the work is that of scanning and then dataentry. That work has been completed. We have also developed the software
but we do not have the data showing who has actual possession of a land,
whether mutation has been done etc. For this, we will have to conduct aground level survey at every place, but we do not have the required workers
for this.
But while doing this task, the Bhoodan workers got closely associated
with the government employees and learnt corruption from them. Now they
demand money from the landless in return for giving them certificate for the
land. The landless also thinks; Ok, I am getting land, so I might as wellspend some money for it. They are fools and do not understand that even ifShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 71they do not pay they will get the land. I often take the landless aside and ask
them if they have paid bribe and they say, ‘yes’, I gave this amount to thatperson. But of course, when confronted these workers deny it. Actually, it is
very difficult to check such corruption where both parties gain – like dowry.
But as Jayaprakash said, if the person at the top is honest, then controllingcorruption at the bottom is possible. When there was corruption at the top,
the work of Bhoodan got affected and it lost credibility. But now, after I took
over, the top is clean.
Q. Before you came, there was corruption at the top also?
A. There were two to three types of corruption, one of which was
personal. We have heard that during the time of Laloo Yadav, he used to tellthe district magistrates that you all have to give me this much amount of
money every month. Similarly, the head of Bhoodan committee used to tell
his units to give a certain amount of money to him every month. Wherewould the units get the money, but from the landless who are the potential
beneficiaries.
Q. So all this money came from the pockets of the poor?A. Yes, everything came from the pockets of the poor. When the Bhoodan
workers started taking money for issuing certificates for land, the government
officials also started demanding money for mutation of the land. The attitudewas, if the Bhoodan workers have taken money, why should we not take it.
Slowly the Bhoodan workers and the government officials joined hands,
and it became very difficult to control them. But even with all this we havedone our main task, that of giving land certificate to the landless. Now it is
the work of the government to do the mutation, give possession and enter
everything into the register.
Q. What percentage of the land is not in the possession of the landless?
A. Around 50 per cent of the land. The land belongs to them on paper,
but it is not in their possession, and if it is in their possession then the mutationhas not been done. In around 1.5 lakh acre of land, the work is complete and
no one can evict the landless from the land there. Entries are there in the
register of 1 lakh families, and names of 2 lakh families are yet to beregistered.
Q. This means that three lakh families have been affected by this in
Bihar?
A. The names of two lakh families are yet to come into the registers,Shubhamurti72 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011and this is an unfinished agenda. But the bureaucracy is saying that since the
Bhoodan committee has already distributed land by issuing certificates, itswork is done and the committee should be wound up. The present revenue
minister Ramai Ram told me in the first meeting that he had tried to dissolve
the Bhoodan committee during the period of Laloo Yadav, but he failed. Butnow as revenue minister, he says he will dissolve the committee.
Q. This means that the remaining work of Bhoodan has to be completed?
A. I asked whether the committee would be dissolved after the work is
done or before it. And he said that after the work is done. He said us much
money and support I needed, he is willing to give, but the work has to be
completed. The Bhoodan workers would be given jobs and those who are tobe retired would be retired. I told him that the government has my full support
if this is the plan. Anyway, Nitish Kumar understands all this and will not
dissolve the committee.
Q. So there is a possibility that the committee might be dissolved?
A. I do not think so. There was a lot of noise, but then everything settled
down.
Q. It appears that 50 per of the work is left to be done. If we take 1952-
53 data then 40,000 acres of land is still to be given out, that in itself is a
major challenge.
A. Yes, it is indeed a major challenge. As I told them, the Bhoodan
committee was not formed to distribute pieces of paper; the spirit behind the
committee is to ensure that the landless get possession of the land. It is ourmoral duty to ensure this, and it is the legal duty of the government to ensure
that the landless who have been issued the certificate by us get actual
possession of the land. The relevance of the committee will continue till theactual possession of the land is given. If we dissolve the committee now
then one can be sure that the government officials will do nothing about it.
But it is also true that the way things are going now ,is not good. Thegovernment is not fulfilling even the minimum needs of the committee. The
workers are getting half pay and under these circumstances how can we tell
them to work harder. We cannot bully them to work. It is not in our nature aswe believe in love and self discipline. We have to give them a reasonable
salary to make them work.
Q. The workers of Bhoodan movement must have joined it from the
initial stages?ShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 73A. Those who joined the movement in the initial phases have mostly
left, and later new people came in.
Q. Why did the new people join? Due to their passion or … ..?
A. Some are interested in the work, others came in because they are
intelligent and passed the interview.
Q. Maximum amount of Bhoodan land was distributed in Bihar. Was
such an Act passed elsewhere?
A.It was passed in several States, but the best work was done in Bihar
despite all the shortcomings. Apart from Bihar, it was also passed in Andhra
Pradesh and Rajasthan. In Rajasthan, the BJP government dissolved the
committee, now the Congress is in power and we have talked of reconstitutingit, but so far nothing has been done.
Q. There is no body at the national level?
A. Three years ago, I had initiated a proposal to have such a body,
otherwise I believe things won’t work out. This is a lacuna. In Andhra Pradesh,
the movement has not been very successful, but it is there. In Bihar it was
successful because people like Vinobaji and Jayaprakashji devoted a lot oftime for the movement.
Q. Why was it so successful in Bihar?
A. Vinobaji used to say that there is a quality in the people of  Bihar that
they have big hearts and if you place a noble thing before them, they will
respond to it. I have travelled all over the country, but in the end I am spending
so much time here because I feel that there is some hope here. I feel that thecountry will change. I cannot say anything with certainty, but all major
movements were successful in Bihar.
Q. Is it only a question of big hearts or is it because of the fear of the
Left ideology? The zamindars thought that it would be better to donate land
through Bhoodan than face the Left revolution?
A. When the Bhoodan movement was at its peak, where was the Left at
that time? If that had been the case, then the revolution would have taken
place in Andhra Pradesh where the Left was more powerful. The influence
of the Left started only in the 70s in Bihar.
Q. This means that the Left gained ground and society took a violent
turn only after Vinobaji left. As long as he was here, the Left could not get a
foothold?
A. After Vinobaji left, Jaiprakashji went to Mushari. The story goesShubhamurti74 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011that two Sarvodaya workers wrote to Jaiprakashji that they had received
threat letters from Naxals that they would be killed if they did not leave thatplace. Naxalism had started in Bengal in 1967 and this was the first instance
of their penetration in Bihar. At that time Jayaprakashji was in Uttarakhand.
He came to Muzaffarpur directly and said that he would work there. He saidthat I too want what the Naxals want, but their path is wrong. But by only
saying it will not be enough, we will have to work and show that the Naxal’s
path is wrong and ours is right. I will either complete the work or you willfind my bones. At that time I studied in L S College, and Jayaprakashji used
to come there frequently. We used to boycott classes and listen to him.
Q. At that time Rajkishore was a Naxalite who was killed by the police
and Jayaprakashji was angry and said that this was not the way to end
Naxalism.
A. It was Rajkishore who had written the threat letter to the Sarvodaya
workers. He was the leader of Naxals in Mushari and we used to have long
debates over several issues. Rajkishore knew that if Jayaprakash found out a
different path it was fine, otherwise it was the path of violence, for he, likeother Naxals, did not have faith in the system to deliver.
Q. The entire movement failed in its effort to save Bihar from violence,
because ultimately violence did take place?
A. When Vinobaji was asked about this, he said that there are three Bs
that are bogus– Baba (he used to refer himself to Baba) Bihar bogus, Baba
(Vinoba) bogus and Bhoodan bogus. What he meant to say was that they hadtried their best and work hard for it, but what to do if it did not succeed.
Vinobaji used to believe in work and did not worry about the fruit, which he
left to God.
Q. Vinobaji had realised that his work was not entirely successful and
therefore, he used such a powerful word as bogus?
A. It was a combination of both realisation and satire. Then came the
emergency and Vinobaji demanded ban on cow slaughter. He looked at the
ban not from religious but economic perspective. He said that with advent of
tractors there would be rising unemployment, environment would be degradedand agriculture would become an industry. Also the culture of agriculture
would end. Vinobaji said that Gandhiji also wanted to ban cow slaughter.
Indira Gandhi came to Vinobaji and though she assured it would be done,she lost the elections. Then Morarji Desai came and then again Indira GandhiShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 75was back. Vinobaji raised the issue again and he called for a Satyagraha
which is continuing even today, and has become the longest Satyagraha ever.Everyday the Satyagrahis assemble before a slaughter house in Mumbai and
are arrested. Their number varies, but they assemble everyday without fail.
Q. And the slaughter house has not been closed even now?A. When Vinobaji started the Satyagraha and Indira Gandhi did not ban
cow slaughter, he said what became famous in those days. He said that Indira
did not ban cow slaughter because she was not a ‘Gandhi’ and did notunderstand the emotion behind it. As Feroze Gandhi’s wife her surname was
‘Gandhy’, but Indira changed the spelling and became ‘Gandhi’. So, Vinobaji
said, ‘Just by writing ‘Gandhi’ one does not become a Gandhi.
Q. You said earlier that less work was done on land reform when the
backward classes came to power when compared to the first 15 years of
Congress rule.
A. I was surprised when some 20 years ago I was in Jehanabad when
Leftist violence was going on there. I asked the villagers, how much land the
Naxals had given them and they said not even one inch. Then, one of theNaxals I talked to said that all this killing is not to redistribute land, but the
main aim is to capture the Red Fort.
The other thing is that the work of land reform is very tedious and
complicated. For that you have to work at the grassroot level. Our expertise
is to shout slogans, take out marches etc, but when it comes to getting down
and working with papers, getting employees to do the job, we back out. Wedo not have the legal and technical faculty to tackle the problems associated
with land, otherwise a crop of such people would have come up by now. The
people did not learn it during Jayaprakashji’s movement nor during thesocialist movement. The movement in Bodhgaya would have been more
successful if we have had this expertise. We did stress this during the days of
Chatra Yuva Sangharsh Samiti in the seventies, but there was no orientationtowards it. They said this work did not seem to be fit for a Sarvodaya worker.
Q. Meaning?
A. Those associated with the Sarvodaya movement were not interested
in understanding and learning the small details. Like how to fill up land
papers, how land was measured, what are the problems faced etc, they were
only interested in agitation. But Jayaprakash had said that there were fouringredients of a movement– agitation, organisation, education and publicity.Shubhamurti76 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Of these four, the agitation part got the maximum attention in Bodhgaya and
the remaining three got neglected. Had we learned the technical aspects ofworking at the ground level the results would have been much greater. We
would have had a large number of experts on our ranks who would have
pointed out to the bureaucrats how things should be done, and counter thebureaucrats’ move in the legal and technical level. This would have forced
the bureaucrats to change and we would have been in a position to suggest
these changes, because we would have known what and where things aregoing wrong and who is doing it. We would have been able to stop corruption
at the ground level.
Q. You are trying to say whether it was Vinobaji’ s non-violent movement
or the violent ones of the Naxals, the main weakness in both the cases was
their failure to work at the ground level.
A. Vinobaji did have a number of followers in his movement who had
technical expertise, but later this was abandoned. His followers were told
that they should live with the poor, eat with the poor, work with them in the
fields, teach the poor etc, but there was no effort to learn the ways of theState. How does it work? Who to get hold of when something is not working?
Both the Naxals and the Sarvodayis believe that the State is the main
oppressor, yet we have not learnt how its oppressive system works, how tocounter it; Understand the rules of the game then play your own game and
beat it. But you did not understand the game and it slowly ate your vitals
without your having even realised it. We believe that more than the politiciansit was the bureaucracy that killed the Bhoodan movement.
There is another important paper written by Gandhiji the night before
he died – January 29 night. It was found in the morning on his table by hissecretary and he kept it. But when he was killed, it was brought out. The
paper is something of a will or testament of Gandhiji.
In that paper, he said that the Congress party should be disbanded as a
political party and it should devote itself to social work. Those who want to
work in the government should form something separate. He had framed a
number of rules for the Congress as an organisation that would serve thepeople. It included not fighting elections and coming to power, political
education of the people and constructive work and educating the people
among other things. Under political education of the people, he had suggestedthat the top leadership should work as ‘Loksevaks’ and educate the people.ShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 77Had people like Nehru, Rajendra Prasad, and Sardar Patel worked among
the people, they would have had a moral binding on the government, as theywere popular. Also the confidence of the people would have increased as
they would have thought that the most popular people were with us and not
in the government. But this idea was rejected as being impractical.
Jayaprakash said on a number of occasions that we did not understand
Gandhiji during his lifetime. What Gandhiji was saying was politics outside
the power structure. The Bhoodan movement revived that forgotten legacy,and the entire credit goes to Vinobaji and Jayaprakashji. It is not as if social
work has to be done only by staying in power, it can be done by staying with
the people. Vinobaji used to call this ‘Lokniti’. People’s power has to bebrought up against the State’s power; and in a true democracy there will be a
struggle between these two powers. If we stand with the people then the
people’s power will win and that would be true democracy. This was notunderstood by the politicians of that era. Jayaprakash and Vinobaji understood
this and revived it and carried on Gandhiji’s unfinished agenda. We feel that
had this agenda not been revived then the 1974 movement would not havetaken place and we would not have been living in a democracy, but
dictatorship.
Q. You said that in the last 20 years even though Laloo and Nitish have
been in power they have failed in the field of land reforms. This is unexpected
since both were products of Jayaprakash’s movement?
A. We think that during the period of Laloo’s rule, there was no one in
the leadership who could tackle the land issue. Nitish has improved the roads
and the law and order situation, but to work in the field of land reforms, one
has to enter deeper. Nitish did set up the D Bandopadhyay Commission onland reforms, but when the suggestions came out and there was talk of
implementing them, there was a hue and cry from the opposition and the
matter got politicised. And looking at the fierce opposition, Nitish also backeddown.
Q. There is no political will to implement them?
A. It is not a question of political will, but political fear that he will lose
the elections. All the land owners, upper castes will become united and we
will lose.
Even now land is the main source of income in Bihar. There is no
industry. Be it big farmers or middle farmers, they all feel that if there is landShubhamurti78 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011reforms then we will be finished, so they are against it.
I had suggested that as a starting step, land records should be
computerised. Half the problems would be solved then. From the errors in
the figures you would find out the real problems. With correct records court
cases would get reduced. The atmosphere would also change and there wouldbe a positive impact of all this. Then the entire field of land reforms would
be before you. If you step without a strong base you are bound to get entangled
and even the bureaucracy would not come to your aid.
I have written to the government saying that you can computerise the
records at your speed, but give us money to computerise our Bhoodan records,
and when all the land records get computerised, you can attach our figures.At present, the bureaucrats think that members of the Bhoodan committee
and their employees are distributing land and minting money. The bureaucrats
think that had we been distributing this land, we would have made the money.This is a reality. So there is always this attempt to make the Bhoodan land
part of the government land.
In the 60s when survey of Bhoodan land was done, the Bhoodan
committee did not have that many employees\workers who could work at
the ground level. As a result of which in the places were Bhoodan workers
went, the correct figures got noted. In places where there were no Bhoodanworkers, the government employees did the survey and in 40 per cent of the
cases, they have entered Bhoodan land as government land.
Now they are asking: how could you distribute this land which is
government land? But we are saying that we do not even know that you have
entered the Bhoodan land as government land. And in any case if we have
distributed the land, it has only been given to the landless, so how does itmatter who gave the land, whether it was the Bhoodan committee or the
government. But the district magistrates and others officers say that if it is
government land then we will distribute it, you won’t do it. Actually, whatthey want to say is that when you distribute it you make money, and when
we distribute it, we will make the money. But the problem is that farmers
have the land in their possession, now it won’t be possible to throw them outand give the land to someone else.
Q. Shubhamurtiji, it is said that poor quality of land was given in
Bhoodan. They were not serious while donating land?
A. This is true. Of the 6.5 lakh acre donated, only 2.5 lakh acres wereShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 79fit for agriculture and the remaining was unfit. People used to tell Vinobaji
that the people were cheating him, and he used to reply that let the peoplelearn to give, for so far they have only learned to grab. Be it stony land,
barren land, whatever, let them donate, we will take it. Also what was
considered to be bad land earlier has now turned out to be good and valuableland. For example, earlier land by the side of the road was considered to be
bad as water got collected in it during rains, but now in many places, land by
the roadside is prime property. Bhoodan has large tracts of such land, whichproperty dealers are eyeing hungrily.
Q. When land was donated to Bhoodan at gram sabhas, were the
documents not prepared?
A. When someone donated some land, it was announced in the gram
sabha – only the name, address and the quantum of land. Later the Bhoodan
worker went to that person’s house and took the details and filled in forms.The Bhoodan Act was passed in 1954, but this had been going on since
1952-53. In many cases, the people who donated the land did not have papers,
but had possession. And that was donated among the landless.
Q. So much land has been distributed in Bihar yet some people say that
land was never an agenda and there is no need for land reforms. However,
the Left believe that if land reforms take place a major problem would besolved. But another section also says that land reforms might have been an
agenda in the 70s, but it is no longer relevant.
A. There has been deliberate attempt to remove land as an agenda not
only from India, but all over the world. Those who say this do not have any
connection with land. They have only academic connection from afar. There
is a psychology attached to land, something akin to a mother’s love for herchild. Even the West understands this and calls it ‘affinity with land’ or
‘affinity with earth’. You cannot remove land from the agenda. In places like
Europe where people have got separated from land, the society hasdisintegrated. Family, society is all in the control of the state. The health,
even children and old people are looked after by the state. Such a condition
will arise in India if land is removed from agenda.
If land is redistributed it will bring about a major change not only on
the ground level but also at the psychological level. There is an allegation
against people of Bihar that they work well in other states, be it as workersor as DMs and SPs but the moment they work in Bihar they become lethargicShubhamurti80 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011and corrupt. If even 50 per cent of the problem of land is solved then there
will be a change in the attitude of the people. They will start working honestlyand the bureaucracy will also be affected by the change. And of course,
there will be a major impact on politics. Even though land is a political
issue, but there will be problem if we politicise the matter. To make landreforms effective, we have to do it in a non-political way, especially above
party politics. This can be done and it won’t be very difficult also. Over 50
per cent of the people directly depend on land and if we are able to normalisethings there, then a major work would be completed. People just have to
understand this.
Contact: Shubhmurti
202, Laxmi Appartment, Rairam Vriksh Path,
Nehru Nagar, Patliputra Colony,
Patna-800013
Anish Ankur
205, Gharownda Appartment
Pashim Lohanipur Kadamkuwan
Patna-3
Mobile: 09835430548ShubhamurtiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 81ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Distribution of Land is the resolution of violence
An Interview of Razi Ahmad with Aneesh Ankur
Razi Ahmed  is one of the best known Gandhians not only in Bihar, but
also all over the country. He has been the Secretary of the Gandhi Museum
in Patna for the past several decades. Apart from this, he is counted among
the few members of the civil society in Bihar. He has worked for a long timewith Vinoba Bhave, Jayaprakash Narayan and other prominent Gandhians.
His association with activists and leaders of mass movements like Bhave
continues even today. His name is taken with a lot of respect in Bihar eventoday. Some excerpts of his talk with Aneesh Ankur .
Q. Razi Sahab, it has been over 60 years since the Bhoodan movement
started. Great men like Bhave and Narayan led the movement. Now in 2011,how do you assess the movement?
A. Look, it is in a sad state of affairs. Bhoodan  was most successful in
Bihar. There were two to three meetings regarding Bhoodan  held in which
people from Bihar, Dhirendra Majumdar and Laxmi Sahu (his name was
Laxmi Narayan, and he lived at Begusarai) took a leading role. Sahu was a
topper in chemistry at the Calcutta University. Such talented people hadcome for the freedom struggle. At that time, Vaidhnath Choudhary was the
Congress general secretary and he used to stay at Rupauli ashram in Purnea.
Bhave approached Sri Babu – Srikrishna Singh – and said that he wantedVaidhnath Choudhary to work with him. This is how things unfolded; Sri
Babu had asked Bhave how much land he wanted. I will provide more land
than asked for by you. As far as I know it was anywhere between 16,000 to32,000 acres. Bhave’s reply was that land was not at issue, however they
really wanted Choudhary.
In those days there was only one Congress general secretary and he82 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011was very dedicated. When the Bhoodan  committee was formed, its first
President was Gaurishankar Babu of Rajauli. He had great knowledge oflaw and was member of the Constituent Assembly , and he himself was a big
farmer. He was the first president and Choudhary was the secretary. People
like Bhave, Narayan and Choudhary and others begged for land from thepeople and the donors gave them mountains, forests and stony land. Now,
people criticize that quality of Bhoodan  land was poor and blame Bhave and
others, but it was not their fault but that of the donors of the land so donated.Even till this date, there is no correct official record of the Bhoodan  land.
Though of course, there are claims of how much land has been distributed.
The Bihar government claims that from the time of Jagannath Mishra tillthis date it has distributed this much land among the landless, but the poor
have not been benefitted from it.
I believe that after Jayaprakash Narayana joined the Bhoodan  movement,
its canvas increased. Earlier, Bhave used to contribute by his spiritual
movement, but when JP joined the movement, it became of an international
magnitude. One may wonder: How did such a big revolutionary come intothe movement? JP used analytic analysis and depended on dialectic
materialism for arriving at analysis. Once he joined the movement, his
approach uplifted the movement. Once the landless first got the land, theydid not have control over it. The Government of Bihar had to provide Ameen
Sayani and he was required to mark the land, verify it and make it legal and
make its final documentation. After providing some financial support to theBhoodan  Committee, representatives of the government assumed that their
contribution was sufficient. The government did not support the committee
properly. The DMs and ADMs did not take the movement seriously. TheBhoodan  Act had a provision whereby Bhoodan  land could not be sold.
However, the agency that was meant to ensure its implementation probably
failed to do it successfully, as much of the land has been sold. Practicallypattern noticed was as follows.Once a person donated, say 5 bighas  of land,
he had some commitment because he believed in the Bhoodan  cause. He
donated the land and some landless might even have possession of the land.However, now the generation that had donated the land passed away and so
did the emotion associated with the cause. Now the grandson, who belongs
to the third generation decided that he needs the land so given, were hepowerful enough, he can possibly get the land evicted and attempt to sell it.Razi AhmadAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 83Although legally, he cannot do so, he might still be able to do so as the
implementing agency is seemingly inefficient in carrying out its job.
Bhoodan  should be seen through the prism of the country. We are a
predominately agricultural country with 70 to 80 percent of the population
living in villages. The backbone of any village is farming and land. However,post independence we failed to give any attention to the village and farming
as a result of which people lost their love for the land. People became willing
to sell their land. Those who had say 50 bighas of land were unwilling to
work on that land, as they thought that it was beneath their status. If we
delve deep, we will see that Bhoodan  is also about dignity of labour. Bhave
and Narayan used to plough the land and even clean the streets, as like theIndian farmer, they believed in the dignity of labour. Nowadays even the son
of a big landowner will prefer to work in a shop but not on his land because
the concept of dignity of labour in farming has gone. The new economicpolicy also has its lacunae as it does not see development from the farmer’s
perspective.
If you look at the development pattern of the country in the past 62
years, you will notice that the State had all the major industries in Barauni,
and in Sindhri. The Tatas also had some industries there. However, a different
scenario is presented in the case of a State like Punjab. It did not have asingle industry during independence and its people were depended solely on
agriculture. It was only post green revolution that slowly small industries
were developed with the support of agriculture. However, it seems that thishas taught us nothing. If after Bhoodan  we are successful in giving legal
possession of the land to the landless, then the love for the land will return
once again and many of the problems related to Naxalism will end. TheNaxalites or Maoists draw their support from this class of deprived people.
Q. You are trying to say that if Bhoodan land had been distributed
properly then the violence would not have taken place?
A. Definitely this would not have taken place. Bihar was the first state
after Jammu and Kashmir where zamindari  system was abolished. This work
was completed in the decade of the 1950s. There are dozens of laws relatedto land in this State. However, the problem is not the absence of laws but
absence of their effective implementation. In contemporary times, due to
the involvement of the media, there is complete transparency. Nothing ishidden and everything gets highlighted. In earlier times, when corruption inRazi Ahmad84 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011land started in Bettiah, Mahatma Gandhi had formed committee headed by
Sardar Patel to investigate the case, and later Rammanohar Lohia committeewas formed to continue similar investigations. In those days, only a few
people knew of the Sathgeer scam as the media did not have such an extensive
reach as it does now. Recently the Nitish Kumar government set up the DBandopadhyay committee but its report could not see the light of day.
However, if the Bhoodan land had been distributed properly, much of the
headache of the government would have gone.
Q. But what is the real problem in a State that was the first to abolish
zamindari?
A. The main problem is that of vested interest. There is a book on Bihar
by Damodaran, either from Cambridge or Oxford and it is titled ‘Broken
Promises’. The book is on the number of laws on land that have been enacted
since 1937 but has failed to be implemented. In the book, it is mentionedthat the people who had the leadership to fight for swaraj  and who were
supposed to represent the people, failed to understand the real emotion of
the people.
Q. Were all the leaders like this? Or did they fear that if they implemented
the law then there would be big conflicts in society and there would be a
bloodbath?
A. This is not entirely true. You see the number of positive points related
to land in Bihar cannot be found in other States. The number of socialist and
communist movement that have taken place in Bihar cannot be matched byother States. Mahatma Gandhi had also raised the issue of land in Bihar. The
commitment or emotion of so many people who wanted change in land
structure in Bihar cannot be questioned. These people were farsighted andhad a vision of moving forward, and the necessary laws were also being
made, but the implementing agency, the bureaucracy, did not understand its
importance. Sitting in air-conditioned rooms in Delhi or Patna they used todecide and thought that it could be implemented in every village. These
people did not have any connection or any desire to know the ground realities.
We still remember the days when the Bhoodan  Act was being made. People
like Gauri Babu, Jaiprakash Babu, Vaidhnath Choudhary used to sit with
Deputy Secretary Phool Singh in the latter’s office and discuss what should
and should not be there in the Bhoodan  Committee. All these people were
very learned and dedicated to the cause and that is why the good laws wereRazi AhmadAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 85made. However, there was weakness in the implementing agency. Now that
generation has also gone, and the generation that has occupied the governmentchairs do not have the experience.
Q. Even when Bhave and Narayan had such influence over the
government, why did it fail to implement the laws?
A. Till Bhave was around people talked about Bhoodan , but after that
people started talking about Gramdan  and after that they started talking about
Bihardan . I am not sure what Bhave thought but he was in a great hurry for
Bihardan in 1969, which was also the centenary of Mahatma Gandhi. He
thought that this was the correct opportunity. The Gandhi museum became
the headquarters for a month and Bhave stayed here for four months. Theerrors that Bhave committed in these movements were monumental. Under
the gramdan , all the people of the village who had land had to sign away
their land on behalf of the village. However, what happened was that thosewho had land did not sign it, but the 75 percent who did not have land signed
that they had handed over the land. I raised this question with Bhave. I told
him that I come from Barauni and our area also comes under gramdan . We
have land and even though we have not signed, it is being said that Gramdan
has been implemented there? How is this possible, I asked him. Then suddenly
the concept of Bihardan  started. In reality, the spirit of donating land was
hurt from that point.
Q. When was Bihardan to take place?
A. Bihardan  was supposed to take place on October 2, 1969 at the
convention in Rajgir. When Bhave started leaving from Gandhi museum a
large number of people came to bid goodbye and they included K B Sahay,
Vinodanand Jha among others – I have a photograph that I took with mycamera on that occasion. At that time some journalists had also come, and
one of them asked what happened to the movement and Bhave said – B
stand for Binoba, B for Bihardan and B for Bogus. He meant to say thateverything had turned bogus, nothing had been achieved.
Q. There is a Gramdan Act. Was is a blunder to go from Bhoodan to
Gramdan to Bihardan?
A. The blunder had been committed. JP also understood that a diversion
from the main issue had taken place. The ground level workers had all gone
and there was no force left in the movement. Gramdan  Act was framed, then
Bihardan  Act was also introduced, then the concept of Gram Swaraj  cameRazi Ahmad86 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011and in between the concept of Panchayati Raj  also came – all this created
contradictions. The Government of India talked about Panchayati raj . Gram
Swaraj  means that every individual is a member of it. This was the concept
of Mahatma Gandhi and Bhave and also of Prem Chand. Everyone would
have equal rights, there was no question of male or female. The sarpanch
would be of the same caste whose members lived there. Thus, there would
be no issue of social clash.
However, Bhave was in a hurry. He wanted that Bihardan  should be
completed by October 3, 1969. So, one person signed for five to six persons.
The work of getting the survey done was given to the primary teacher of the
village school and though he got the signatures, there was no verification.Therefore, there was no confirmation and thus there was no mutation of the
land and it did not pass legally to the landless. It was a chain reaction and
everything failed.
Q. You asked for land and you were given it verbally. May be you even
gave the papers, but they were not entered into the government registers,
and also the old power equations did not change?
A. Yes, mutation and entry into government registers did not take place
and when the price of land started increasing the people who had given the
land started taking it back. Those who had given the land in the first placehad gone by then and the new generation did not have the commitment for
the movement. Bhave and Narayan had their own aura and apart from them
even when people like Choudhary Babu and Sahu went to a place themovement caught some momentum, but after they were gone the continuity
of the movement ended.
Now, there are no ground level workers left in the movement. At that
time, the big names were associated with the Bhoodan  movement. Narayan
was in Saharsa when he suffered a heart attack, and then the Mushari protest
started. From Saharsa he went to Benaras for a medical check up and fromthere he went to Mushari. There, he received a letter from Badri Babu who
was the chairman of the Bhoodan  committee. He had received death threats.
A couple of murders had also taken place, and slowly the spirit of themovement died away. Then, other people came who did not have the passion
for the movement and for whom it was just a job. It was the old generation
that had kept the spirit of Bhoodan  alive through their sacrifices. In a state
where there is murder over every bigha  of land, it was by no means an underRazi AhmadAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 87achievement that the Bhoodan  movement received thousands of acres of
land.
Q. In Bihar the movement got 6 lakh acres of land – and it was 24 lakh
acres if we take Jharkhand into consideration – and of this 6 lakh acres,
only 3.5 lakh acres was found unfit to be distributed and the 2.75 lakh acresof land that has been distributed is creditable.
A. What you say is true. So far as land was concerned, there was a
revolutionary Telangana movement in the 1950s where land was takenforcibly, but in Bihar the people who were known as feudal elements gave
their land freely. It is the very people who are accused of being oppressive
who gave their land in Bihar. This factor had a major role in bringing aboutsocial change in the state.
Along with this, people who were actively involved in the socialist
movement, communist movement or in the Congress party during the fightfor independence had a commitment towards society. However, as these
people passed away, so did the movement. As a result, no one knows, even
those with the Bhoodan  movement, where the Bhoodan  land actually is on
the ground. There is no record now.
Q. Razi Sahab, can we say that the violence seen in the rural areas of
Bihar during the 1980s over the land issue would have taken place in the1960s had not the Bhoodan movement taken place?
A. Violence would surely have taken place in the 1960s had it not been
for the Bhoodan  movement. The people associated with the movement were
nationalist, and though they might not have agreed totally with Mahatma
Gandhi, they did not believe in violence. They believed that the solution
brought through violence was never permanent. Even if it were not non-violent, it at least had to be peaceful. Like the 1974 movement—Narayan
never called it a non-violent movement. He called it a peaceful movement.
If you see overall the movement was peaceful. In such a big movement veryfew people were killed. The thing that is done peacefully is usually permanent.
Q. Like the movement in Bodhgaya, which was against the matt there?
A. The movement in Bodhgaya was in continuation of Narayan’s
movement. Priyadarshi and others came later. At first, it was a movement of
Bhave. It was due to the goodwill of Narayan that the Mahant gave a lot of
land – like the Sukhoda ashram land. When Narayan came to the Bodhgayaconvention in 1954, it was his personality that made many people voluntarilyRazi Ahmad88 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011donate land. Once the second generation came, they had to fight for the
land.
Q. Razi Sahab, the Bhoodan movement redistributed land. However,
what was its impact on Bihar politics, its social scene and land relations?
A. In one way the impact has been revolutionary. For the people of
Bihar, land is very important and even murders take place for possession of
land. However, under this movement, people gave away their land to others,
for the poor, for their neighbour in the village. This is a major social change.The very landowners who were accused of being feudal were giving away
land and the poor would benefit from it. This, in itself, was revolutionary.
However, of course, we could not keep the spirit of the movement alive, butthat is true of the freedom movement also. All the dreams that we had during
the freedom movement could not be put in place on the ground. Bhoodan
was also such a step and now it is up to the new generation to implement it.
Q. Bhoodan had its impact on Bihar society for two to three decades
after independence. And as you said earlier, when problems started cropping
up in its implementation and the land under Bhoodan was not distributedproperly, rural Bihar took a violent turn.
A. You see in 1971, of the two persons who died in police firing in the
Mushari firing, one was a Muslim. He was the only earning member of thefamily. Narayan brought both his widow and her daughter with him to the
charkha samiti  and looked after them. It is our old culture that we help those
who are in trouble and stand beside them. There can be no solution withviolence.
However, now things have changed. The landowners who gave the land
have now taken back their land, because it is now the grandson who ownsthe land. Also prices of land and increased and he too needs the land. He
thinks that since then, all these years, the government has failed to distribute
the land given under Bhoodan,  it is all right to take it back. All this has
happened due to slackness of the government machinery.
Q. Earlier you said that even though the Bhoodan Act was made and
the Bhoodan committee was formed, people did not give power to it. Peoplemade fun of the committee. Why did this happen?
A. This is precisely what happened. The government gave the bailiff,
but did not give them the power. The work has to be done by the DistrictMagistrate, but the ground level worker had to deal with the BDO and CO.Razi AhmadAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 89Later the problems associated with the secretariat also crept in.
Q. So what should have been done?A. There should have been a time bound programme. But here diversions
took place. Gramdan and then Bihardan entered into Bhoodan . Actually,
once you got the land, the act of verification, documentation and distributionshould have been done according to a time bound programme, where the
movement was at its peak. Then, the entire committee should have been
wound up. But here, vested interests entered into the committee who wantedthe committee to continue for ever.
Q. So does the committee have any relevance today?
A. The relevance will be there even today because the Bhoodan  land
has not been distributed. The land donation is on paper and till such time all
the land has been distributed, the committee will continue to exist. It is for
this reason that Chandawar had undertaken a fast and the government hadassured him that he should give the government time till March and they
will complete all the work related to Bhoodan  in one selected district. Ask
the Bhoodan committee people, for which district had this commitment been
made? The commitment is to give the land within time; otherwise the work
will never take place.
Q. This means that the distribution of land under Bhoodan is still an
unfinished agenda?
A. It is an unfinished agenda. Under the Bhoodan Act, the land donated
under Bhoodan can neither be bought nor sold. Like the Tenancy Act, the
Chotanagpur Act, under which you cannot buy their land. No one can buy
tribal land; a tribal cannot sell his land to non-tribal. Similarly, the land belongs
to Bhoodan . Till the land is distributed, it will remain with the committee.
Now the government through the District Magistrates should verify this land
and distribute it in the village, and then a big issue would be resolved.
Q. Razi Sahab, it is said that the earlier governments under the Congress
were conservative when it came to the question of land, but in the decade of
the 1990s the backwards came to power and they were considered to be less
conservative when it came to matters of land. Yet, they did not fulfil theexpectations of the people regarding Bhoodan. Why was there a lack of
political will among the backward leadership?
A. Yes this is true. Things did not happen. The Socialists who came to
power like Karpoori Thakur or Mahamaya Babu did not act. Narayan usedRazi Ahmad90 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011to be angry with them as he said that they did not fulfil the promises that
they had made. Even during that time the issue of land was not implementedat the ground level.
Q. Razi Sahab, we are blaming the leaders, we are questioning their
honesty. However, what if the problem lay with the Act itself?
A. Though I am not a law student, as far as I know, the Act is very good.
It is pro-people. Our leaders have never thought of the poor. Had they thought
of the poor, then it would never have happened that while Patna was shiningand there was no drinking water in the villages. Whether it is the matter of
Bhoodan or any other issue, if the benefits do not percolate to the ground
level, then there will be problems. From 1967, the governments have beenformed by the Socialists, the Communists but the condition of the poor still
remains the same.
When in 1990, Laloo Prasad Yadav came to power and decided to take
oath in front of Narayan’s statue, I had written an article saying that this is
the first time that such a thing was happening. I am not sure whether other
people were happy or not, but Mahatma Gandhi, Dr Ram Manohar Lohia,Narayan, would surely have been happy when a leader took oath among the
people. It appeared that the fate of the people would change in Yadav’s hand.
However, after some time everything collapsed. Once politicians go to theAssembly or Parliament and sit in air-conditioned rooms, they begin to
represent one class – the political class. It does not matter whether they are
Communists or Socialists.
In Bihar, the control of the Socialists and Communists have all but
ended, even though this state was their birthplace. The Left movement cannot
be seen anywhere. The defeat of the Left is a big blow to all progressiveforces. At the time of independence movement, the people looked up to the
Congress with hope, later the poor looked up to the Red flag of the
Communists to fight for them. It is sad that the Red flag on which the poorrelied so much to change the status quo in their favour has ceased to be a
force.
Q. The demise of the Left was a big blow?A. It was indeed a big blow. You can see the result; violence is increasing.
The coming days would be more challenging. You cannot just wipe out the
people who are poor, who do not have water to drink, who have no food,whose children died without treatment. Suppressing them cannot be a solutionRazi AhmadAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 91as their number is huge and their cause is genuine.
Q. Razi Sahab, there is a big segment that is present in both politics
and social life who believe that the land agenda has ceased to exist.
A. No, the land agenda remains. If it is a question of land in the villages
then it is not an issue, but if it comes in the city it becomes an agenda. Thisis totally a wrong approach. Land still remains an agenda. The people of the
country and especially of Bihar have an attachment to land. Still a large
amount of land is unrecorded. There are still huge land holders in Palamudistrict. Same is true of Purnea, Motihari and Bettiah, where there are large
estates. These people have been able to keep the land illegally by transferring
them in the name of nonexistent persons. So still a lot has to be done regardingland and it will be a major challenge for any government that comes to power.
Contact: Gandhi Museum
Patna, BiharRazi Ahmad92 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
From Bhoodan to an
Alternative Development Model
Vinod Shahi
In the initial stages of human civilization, the relation between man and land
was governed by natural laws. But man had to come out of that because the
needs of development were not fulfilled by such a relation. The various types
of human hunger, desire for better houses, more production and more profits,other needs and aspiration took human beings into a complex world of socio-
political relations. This increased the rate of development but it also meant
that the natural relation between man and land ended, and man, who can beconsidered to be the son of earth, did not stop exploiting the mother earth in
order to satisfy his needs for development.
But the present day crisis in the field of natural resources and
environment has put a big question mark on the self-destructive journey of
mankind. Under these circumstances it has once again become necessary to
evaluate the pros and cons of a natural and unnatural relation between manand land. We should not just think blindly about the developmental goals,
but also look at the fundamental forms of development and keep in mind the
eternal needs. If we pause a while and think a bit then we can recollect thatwe had someone in our midst, in this modern era, who showed us the way –
Acharya Vinoba Bhave.
Before we get to know Vinoba Bhave, we should pay attention to one
stream of thought; that if we have to get rid of the evils that have crept into
the relationship between man and his environment due to socio-economic
development, then it cannot solely rely on transformation of our culture ormentality. But they can act as a hint which will guide us to take the correct
path. If we want to go deep and understand the matter then we can say that aAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 93healthy and humane culture will show us an alternative path that will lead to
a better relation between man and his environment. But man has not onlyconsciousness, but has land and also a body. So the cultural alternatives that
he searches for has to be given a solid appearance. We have to test whether
the alternatives, that are the products of human consciousness, are self-drivenor not. If not, then sooner or later, even the grandest of all alternatives to the
present day relation between man and his environment, comes close to fading
out – like Vinoba’s Bhoodan movement.
At first, it would not be out of place to talk about the Bhoodan movement
in general. Any movement has to be understood in its historical perspective
and then we can draw conclusions about its success or otherwise. However,if the subject is such that it cannot be fitted into the historical perspective as
it talks about something that can only be judged in times to come, then instead
of calling it a movement\revolution, we must understand that subject as beingsomething related to development or connected to our very survival. The
first thing we have to keep in mind is that Bhoodan as a movement is
something else – something that is quite limited in the economic sense. ButBhoodan as a step in the transformation and development process is quite
another thing – it has to be understood in the paradigm of man’s fundamental
relation with land. But before we can go to that fundamental issue, we haveto understand the role and importance of Bhoodan as an instrument of
revolution and its limitation.
After independence, the democratically elected government that took
steps towards decentralization was mainly due to ending of the feudal rule
in country. However, this goal of total decentralization could never reach its
logical conclusion. This was because even though the feudal rule of theprincely states of the country had ended, at the same time in an invisible
way, they were also getting united. This was because we had to have a strong
centre to dissolve and amalgamate all the feudal States into India. SardarPatel’s role during that period received praise because he successfully
integrated the States. That was the need of the hour. But, a strong Centre was
against a strong people’s democracy. The Centre’s structure was democratic,but the structure was supported by elements whose power and mentality
were feudal. Bureaucrats, big landlords and zamindars, erstwhile rulers and
other powerful people camouflaged their intensions and entered into powerby winning elections. And these elements were in favour of a strong Centre.From Bhoodan to an Alternative Development Model94 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011That is why even though it appeared that people oriented democracy was
coming, actually it receded and ultimately it vanished.
But the Bhoodan movement by attempting to change the attitude of the
land owners and making them donate land, was trying to create a pro-people
atmosphere.
The Bhoodan movement is related to the fundamental question of
reconstruction of the country. The question was whether the mentality of the
feudal elements would change and would become democratic once theirerstwhile principalities were merged with the democratic India. The moot
question here is to whom does the maximum amount of agriculture land
belong to? What had the local rulers and their partners, the British colonialrulers done when they were in power? Just to ensure that their rule became
stronger and entrenched, the British legally allotted vast tracts of land in
village after village to their supporters. Thus it had become necessary thatafter the merger of princely states into the India union, the erstwhile land
owners should recognise the fact that the farmers were the real owners of the
land and they should themselves take the initiative and return the land tothem.
The Bhoodan movement was the first step taken in this direction, but
later it was given some sort of legal sanctity. The land reforms that wereundertaken in the villages were an extension of this and they can be considered
to be progressive and pro-people efforts. But the real motive of Bhoodan
movement was much bigger. It became evident that by land reforms theneeds of only a small segment of the landless could be addressed. The second
problem was despite the best efforts, maximum amount of agriculture land
and other prime property remained in the hands of the traditional rich andinfluential class. These elements entered the power structure through
elections, formed a mafia pressure group and ensured that their interests
were protected.
Bhoodan movement wanted the ownership of land to be broad, humane
and flexible, but though there was some decentralisation in ownership
patterns, it did not penetrate much. The Bhoodan movement was unable tochange the feudal mentality, and it did not matter whether the land holding
was large or small. The landowners wanted to increase the area of their land
holding, were proud of their land holdings and had ambitions to be part ofthe power structure. In a democratic structure the chances of feudal elementsVinod ShahiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 95getting elected increased only if they donated land. Therefore, the big land
owners welcomed the Bhoodan movement. Moreover, the laws passed toregulate the amount of agriculture land one could hold, also did not harm the
interests of the land owners. The big landowners started keeping their land
in false names (benami) and this gave birth to a land mafia that became verypowerful with time. Therefore, after the land reform bills were passed, the
Indian democratic system saw the huge increase in the power of the land
mafia in the power structure. Of course, it would be wrong to blame theBhoodan movement for all the ailments in the system, but if we sit down to
analyse we can say that even such a humane and noble movement like
Bhoodan failed because it did not try and change the fundamental relationbetween land and man. As a result, the entire movement was comprised by
the vested interests who instead of being defeated, came forward in another
form and became more powerful and posed a greater challenge.
This was the biggest challenge before Gandhi’s philosophy in the
country. And even now this philosophy is practical and can take shape of a
radical movement and bring big results. There is public support and culturaland moral pressure is exerted, but it fails to give long term results and become
a model for development process. This is because by raising some
fundamental questions it is prevented from being categorised as a philosophyor ideology. Not only this, people have created such a big image and halo
around Gandhi and Vinoba that even a beginning cannot be made of discussing
their philosophy and ideas. A frank and free discussion of Gandhi’s ideaswas necessary so that with changing of time their ideas could be remoulded.
The blind devotion to Gandhi’s philosophy created such a backlash that it
created a feeling of disgust towards Gandhi. Thus, no one, neither thefollowers nor the critics of Gandhi raised some fundamental questions. Each
had their own fiefdom and interest to protect and these people really did not
have much concern about what Gandhi and Vinoba stood for. In the questfor the truth and ways of development, Gandhi, who was the first to stand
for truth, was shown the door.
The relationship between man and land is universal. The entire earth is
equally for the human beings and all the animals and other creatures in it.
Though the concept of this world is not clearly defined, there is no doubt
that there were no boundaries or barriers. This takes the form of consciousnessof the unbreakable unity of the earth. But with the march of civilization andFrom Bhoodan to an Alternative Development Model96 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011different social structures the relationship between man and land became
more and more complex, varied and fragmented. In fact the different socialstructures provide backing and solidity to these complex and varied
relationships between man and land. These relationships are defined and it
appears that they can be understood, but at the same time, as theserelationships are limited they appear to be adrift from the natural broad
doctrine. This is one of the fundamental contradictions that forms one of the
main unsolved problems in the social development of mankind. Man wantsto get back to the universal and broad definition of relationship between
man and land, but at the same time he is also unwilling to give up what he
owns directly. Let us glance at the social development of man. At first manused to live in tribes. At that time, man used to get land naturally, but slowly
it got converted into ‘land won through victory in war’. With the domination
of the victorious, the era of history started, and it goes to the extent of claimingto represent even the soul of man.
That land belongs to the victorious, or that land can be won is one of
the main planks of civilization which leads to new development. The historyof the world as written by the victorious is still preponderant in the social
and community consciousness of mankind. Along with this, the relationship
between man and land changed. Instead of treating land as our mother westarted treating it more like a servant.
Then came the next stage of development—it was the concept of state
in which the head of this feudal set up was the king and then land becamesomething that was granted as a gift by the king.
If we look at the structure of social classes and their relationship with
land, we can say that those who consider land as their mother are those whoare the producers. Their labour is the product that they get from the land. But
the creative freedom of this class is soon gone and they come under those
who win the land by war and they consider the product that comes from theland as something that is under them. In this era, the producers also took the
form of artists and craftsman. But once the relationship between land and
man changed from that of a mother to a servant, and then it became naturalthat those who produced things became the Dalits, and was pushed to the
lower strata of society.
Two groups are responsible for the social system under which land
become a commercial tool.Vinod ShahiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 97 One is the Brahmin ‘intellectual’ class which is involved in research
and the other is the victorious king’s class. The Brahmins discover and bringnew machines and other things and give a fillip to the development process.
The farmers and artisans use these new machines and tools and produce new
products from the land and these products slowly become expensive items.But unfortunately, like the beautiful girl who is going to lighten someone
else’s house after marriage, these products are enjoyed not by the producers
themselves, but by the kings. Not only this, the group that makes the productsexpensive are not the producers, but the traders. But at the same time, the
status of land rises from that of a servant and the Brahmans bring in cultural
rules that would govern the relationship between man and land.
After the middle-ages, a new chapter is written in the modern era about
the relationship between man and land. Land now becomes a product that
can be sold and bought. Thus, land degraded to a saleable commodity status.This is much worse than the status of servant given in the earlier era because
here there is no scope for human compassion in things bought and sold.
Even from the ethical point of view, there was some scope of ethics to befollowed where land is considered as a servant, and it can be termed as ‘pre-
ethical’. There is a chance that the relationship might turn ethical. But there
was no ethics when it came to procuring land.
In the modern era, there is a primacy of capitalism in relationship
between land and man. Even in the cases where land is inherited and there
are sentiments of hoary traditions present, the shadow of capitalistictendencies can be seen clearly. The third form of land holding is that of the
State, where the land is given under the capitalist model of development or
under individual ownership. Thus, in the modern era land is considered to bethe main way for increasing personal wealth.
But ever since, land has become an object for sale and purchase there is
very little scope that the emotional relationship between man and the landhe inherits, exists for a long time.
But when land comes under the influence of business capital then the
only motive man has, is to maximise profit from the land. He wants to exploitthe land to its maximum extent. As a result, with the spread of modern
capitalism, fertile land has become barren and there is excessive dependence
on technical experts in agriculture. Chemical fertilisers and improved seedshave become necessary for agriculture and use of tractors and combinedFrom Bhoodan to an Alternative Development Model98 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011harvesters have led to displacement of labour. In a country that has excessive
labour, this displacement has meant that the youth have diverted to join mafiagangs or even become terrorists. Drug abuse and irresponsible behaviour
that is plaguing the modern world is also one of the offshoots of this changed
relationship between man and land.
In land that is rich in minerals and other resources, excessive
exploitation has meant that there is danger that these natural resources will
vanish. Excessive exploitation has also meant that forest cover has comedown as a result of which wild animals are on the verge of extinction. Tribal
communities now have to be kept enclosed in their own small environment,
something akin to a zoo. The excessive exploitation of land has made itpolluted, sick and barren and the entire human race has become worried
about this change.
Bhoodan wanted to change this relationship between man and land into
a more humane platform. By urging for donation of land, the Bhoodan
movement aimed at laying foundation for the ultimate change in the
relationship between man and land – that is the natural relation that existedat the dawn of civilization. But this change had to be supported by the existing
social relationships so that it got a concrete shape, otherwise it would be
reduced to just a socialistic utopia, an alternative-consciousness, that can belost with time.
The work and success of Bhoodan movement lies mainly in the villages,
but for land reforms and fundamental change in the relationship betweenman and land, it is also necessary that attention be paid to urban development
and rejuvenation of forests. We have to ensure that the rising population and
the migration of the people from the villages to the cities do not result inagriculture land being gobbled up for urban housing. Similarly, the remaining
forests would also have to be protected since without the forest no
development model can be termed as just and humane. But we also have tounderstand that for all this, simply moral pressure is not sufficient, and nor
can any proposal for ‘donation’ of urban land bring about any practical results.
If agricultural land and forests are acquired for industrial development thenboth the idea of development and social amity will be in crisis. This is why
big questions come to the fore. Bhoodan is not possible in the cities but it is
also necessary to ensure that the poor people in the cities get a small plot ofland that would enable them to have a roof over their heads. It will also haveVinod ShahiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 99to be ensured that the nearby agriculture land and forests are not encroached
upon. So what should be the solution?
One of the possible solutions is to ensure that cities do not expand and
enter into land that is meant for agriculture and forest. Instead of allowing
the cities to spread horizontally, efforts should be made to make them growvertically so that they move up to the skies, but not spread on the ground.
Another solution might be to start a movement on the lines of Bhoodan
and ask owners of houses and bungalows to give out their roofs voluntarily.It is not necessary that this be given out free of cost, but be given out on a
‘practical and development oriented’ basis so that these can be used for
students accommodation or business purposes, which would be beneficialfor all. There should be an agreement with house owners whereby permission
would be granted for construction of additional four to five stories which
would be given out on ‘reasonable rent’. The construction would be done ona cooperative basis by people who are going to stay there or start a business
there. This would also lead to generation of employment. However, for this
to succeed one would have to start non-cooperation movement against thecartel of property dealers who only want to increase rent and property prices.
In countries like India where there is a huge population and for that
matter in all third world countries, all institutions that call for exclusive useof land should be dismantled. The commercial land in residential areas, which
are priced ten to twenty times are under the control of big property dealers
and big land owners. The policy of having separate residential and commercialareas and having laws and rules to assist such a division acts against the
development of people’s markets. The argument is that for the peace of the
people living in residential areas, commercial activities should not be allowedthere. Undoubtedly, such freedom should be thought about. But can there be
no plan where the market and residential houses live and grow side by side?
For example, in places, where the houses are open from both the sides, oneof the roads can be used for market? Why cannot right to practise business
be made a fundamental right? And why can’t all areas be made open for
residential and commercial to exist side by side? The real fear is that oncethis is done then the value of commercial property will come down, things
will become cheaper as producers will interact with the consumers directly.
It has also become necessary that tax be imposed only at the level of theproducer and licences and other requirements for business should be doneFrom Bhoodan to an Alternative Development Model100 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011away with. This flexibility, the produce of the villages will come directly to
the cities and all middlemen would be cut out or at least dependence onthem would get reduced to a great extent.
For example, freedom should be given to the farmers to sell their produce
in the nearby cities. If small traders go to these villages and directly purchase,say 10 to 20 sacks of grain or rice from the farmers and sell it through their
small shops then the dependence of the farmers on mandis would end. And
no farmer would be forced to sell their produce at a lower price. The farmerswould also come together and cooperate in building their own storage houses
where they would be able to store their produce when there is excessive
production and sell it when there is demand. The huge wastage of food grainsin the government sector would also end as the farmers would take better
care of the produce. Moreover, it is a guarantee that of the 100 persons who
face hunger at present, at least 10 would get food if this regime isimplemented.
All over the world, those who are born there consider that part of the
earth as sacred and do not exploit the natural resources of the area in such anexploitative manner that the land becomes barren and the environment
polluted. But land purchased by outsiders for profits on the strength of their
capital usually results in land getting exploited.
Therefore, the human race would have to bring a big change not only in
their consciousness, but also in their mentality. We will have to accept that
indigenous people have fundamental rights in their own land and environment.Also, that if there is any profit being derived from the land then the local
inhabitants would be the natural partners of the profits. And there should be
punishment for forcible removal of people and it should be considered ascrime against humanity.
All this will result in mankind getting back voluntarily to the
consciousness that they are sons of the earth. Earlier, this relationship betweenman and land was natural, but now it will be mankind’s choice. And this
would be the path for human salvation.
Contact: 9 L, Cheema Nagar Extension
Meethapur Road, Jallundhar, Punjab – 144014
Mobile- 098146-58097Vinod ShahiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 101ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Loss of Social Capital and
Naxal Problem in India
Uttam Sinha
A case for revival of Sarvodaya-Bhoodan like Movement in post Gandhi-
Vinoba phase
Civil society discourse has now entered into public domain from the academic
interpretations. People’s upsurge against corrupt and autocratic regimes in
different parts of the world has displayed a great potential. It has also displayeda potential of making an elected government to follow some of its dictats in
the absence of right to recall in a democratic set up like India. On going
Civil Society movement against corruption in political class has shown thispower once again in action. There is no doubt that people’s trust in the political
class and in the government is at the low ebb today and the line of separation
between civil society and political class have sharpened.
Corruption, of course, is a big issue but we should not forget that the
roots of corruption also lie within the society itself. Civil Society cannot
disown conducts of a society which it claims to represent. Corruption inpolitical class is merely a reflection of the darker side of our society. No
doubt, political class is more responsible for spreading corruption down wards
in the larger society. Still, can Civil Society rule out any of its involvementwith the political parties? Politics is the only process by which we can decide
the claim for representation. Civil Society seems looking at politics and parties
as ignoble, immoral and corrupt in general. Perhaps due to this reason itcould not muster enough support it was expecting on the issue from opposition
parties. Even Government after having long discussions and formal meetings
with the Civil Society groups today, is questioning their stake in framing of102 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011nature and content of a Bill against corruption.
These are creating serious doubts about sustainability of ongoing
movement. India has a vast and rich experience as far as people’s mobilization
is concerned. Our long history of Freedom Movement is full of such local,
regional and nationwide movements which combined both political protestas well as social reforms together. A society which has witnessed such a
high degree of moral and social commitment of our reformers and political
leaders is bound to compare the present movement with the past ones. Thiscomparison becomes more obvious when Civil Society groups choose to
call their protest by words like ‘Satyagraha’ and ‘Anshan’ etc.
While attempting to give an impression of Gandhian character to the
present movement, Civil Society should also focus on constructive aspects
of Satyagraha at par with political protests. Presently no such initiative is in
sight except for a sudden increased and developed networking and bondingbetween visual and mass media and the Civil Society groups. Perhaps the
use of information technology may be the need of the hour because of its
widespread reach in the society today. Mass contacting and obtainingfeedback from the common people is also part and parcel of Gandhian mass
mobilization. This is the only way through which a political protest can obtain
its legitimacy in India. The fact of the matter is that no Civil Society movementin India can do away with the name of Gandhi and the methods/ techniques
he devised for mass mobilisation.
 In India, at this moment, it seems that Civil Society is claiming to be
acting only to represent the people of India, not just to produce accountability
of the office of Lokpal. Besides the issue of bringing Prime Minister and
higher judiciary under the purview of Lokpal, one of the proponents of CivilSociety draft LOKPAL Bill says that the office of Lokpal will have 15000
staff who will look into the complaints of corruption against 43,00000
government servants. Practically, this sounds unreasonable in the wake ofincreasing use of RTI Act, whereas proposed Lokpal Bill, once enacted, is
expected to be used by people in much larger numbers for which human
resource of mere 15000 will not be sufficient. More so, when it has becomealmost difficult to find even one person of integrity, then from where will
Civil Society get such a larger number with unimpeachable integrity?
 As the expression of Civil Society is gaining new currency, it is
generating more questions than answers. Whom do we consider a civilUttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 103society? Does Baba Ramdev or RSS represent the civil society or the team
Anna represents the civil society? There is definition which may suggestRSS and similar organisations also falls within its framework. The entire
connotation associated with this word is not as positive as its current usage
would suggest. So there is a genuine fear that the movement may not justend up adding another ineffective Bill to the already existing exhaustive list!
The Indian society has always been portrayed as a society where modes of
authority and legitimacy lay outside the formal political structures. It isconsidered to be an association of associations based on ethnicity, kinship
and cultural cohesion. This social construction has been built-up over the
ages through indigenous forms of social transformations. Present CivilSociety mobilisation seems to have focused itself on a specific issue that is
corruption, especially in the political class.
Mahatma Gandhi knew the strength and possibilities of Civil Society
in controlling political class when it tends to go astray. But at the same time
he was very well aware of the weaknesses of Indian society due to its own
internal disorientation. He was perhaps one and only leader who gave equalimportance to both political protest and social reforms. He believed that no
political reform could be sustained without required social transformation.
Not only he had the courage to challenge an Empire but also he could speakup against his own people, ills inherent in their social customs and their
moral degeneration. He strongly believed that temptation towards any kind
of violence was the root cause of all social problems manifested in differentforms. His definition of violence included physical as well as mental one
that reflects in our overall conduct. He was rather disappointed on seeing
fast erosion of moral values and continuation of violent tendencies deeplyrooted in our society. Moral erosion resulted in phenomenon like corruption
and roots of violence in our society resulted in phenomenon like
Communalism and Naxalism. The Post-Gandhian era has seen all such decaysthat obviously resulted in loss of Social bond or Social Capital.
Term ‘Social Capital’, like the word ‘Civil Society’, is also a sociological
concept, which refers to connections within and between social networks. IfCivil Society represents the conscience of a society, then Social Capital may
be considered as active state of the same conscience. It has been discussed
as “something of a cure-all” for the problems of modern society. The coreidea behind this is that social networks have value, just as screwdriver, aLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India104 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011physical capital, or university education, a human capital, can increase
productivity [both individual and collective], so do social contacts affect theproductivity of individuals and groups. The concept of Social Capital
highlights the value of social relations and the role of cooperation and
confidence to get collective or economic results. In general terms, it couldbe said that social capital is fruit of social relations, and is expectant of
benefits derived from the cooperation between individuals and groups. This
is something close to the enlightened society of Gandhian connotation. Thisstate of enlightenment comes only when individuals and groups work in
harmony for the overall progress of society. Such opportunity of involvement,
interaction, networking of individuals and social groups are possible onlywhen the process of social transformation is in action under a general or
specific motivation. Gandhi’s mass movements had not only enlightened
Indian society as long as these were put into practice but its impact is stillfelt which is reflected in frequent use of conceptual terms like ‘Satyagraha’
and ‘Anshan’, nevertheless in post-Gandhian scenario.
The question arises here is how this social capital or the enlightened
state of society can be achieved and put to use in Indian context? The ongoing
Civil Society mobilization in India, of course, is providing an opportunity to
activate and utilise available Social Capital not only for achieving desiredcollective result but also to act decisively for internal reorganisation of society.
But is the Civil Society, as it has displayed itself today, capable of taking to
ethical enrichment of our own social fabric? Whether a strong Bill againstcorruption will be enough for moral regeneration of Indian society? In this
context can we learn something from our past experiences of Civil Society
mobilisations? Do such movements fit into the parameters of modernsociological definitions of Civil Society and Social Capital? Can a sincere
review of Gandhian and Sarvodaya movement, like Bhoodan, suggest
something to address both corruption and violence, especially Naxal violence,which is also linked to the agrarian land disputes and is a post Gandhi-Vinoba
phenomena? It poses a greater threat to Indian democracy than any other
form of violence as it has now gripped almost 150 districts of India by rootingout all democratic values and law of the land. In this context it is important
to understand whether the genesis of Naxal violence still lies in the inequitable
distribution of land or it has become more ambitious to capture politicalpower through undemocratic means under a fake ideological commitmentUttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 105of its cadres? This paper intends to start with the assumption that the Gandhi-
Vinoba version of social movement is best suited to Indian social conditionsand still has potential of mass mobilisation for a just cause. This might sound
impractical specifically to the Sarvodayaites as they seem more disheartened
today than the common person who still gets excited and motivated by thename of Gandhi and Vinoba.
The issues attempted here are merely to provoke and attract further
interest and attention of those seeking alternative options of socialtransformation in today’s context. The argument followed is based on
established facts and not mere references from published works. However,
the issue starts with Civil Society response to corruption in political classwith reiteration of the fact that corruption and violence has become a regular
feature of Indian society today. So just addressing corruption in political
class is not going to solve other major problems of our society. Even if presentCivil Society movement achieves its desired result in the form of enactment
of a strong Lokpal law, the role of Civil Society and its Social Capital will
not end there. To ensure that the proposed Lokpal Bill would not be misusedin future, Civil Society and its component i.e. Social Capital need to remain
on alert.
Gandhi was perhaps unique in terms of identifying and utilising
positively such available resources of Social Capital for collective growth
of society who could create an imagined Ashram community despite caste
and class differences. That community experience helped him to have a betterinsight into the Indian realities. His touch with rural India made his thinking
more complex, yet closer to the Indian reality. From the experiments he
made in Champaran and Kheda, he learnt that without active participationof the poor and socially backward, no popular movement would yield a result.
Gandhi devised an intelligent plan of social reconstruction programme based
on the abolition of untouchability and promotion of khadi. These programmes
resulted in the involvement of the upper caste which in turn exposed them to
the multilayered social structure resulting in the elite class’s exposure to the
issues and problems of the poor. Once they became conscious of the plightof the poor, they immediately joined hands to elevate their conditions.
Moreover, Gandhi was sure of the fact that without active cooperation
of the elite, no plan of social engineering would succeed. Creating anintegrated imagined community on a moral plane was to help in acceleratingLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India106 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011social change. He had experimented with his constructive programme at the
time of the non-cooperation movement in 1921. He also insisted that theCongress should approve his programme before he launched the mass
movement/s. Involvement in the social reconstruction programme helped
an ordinary worker to keep in touch with ground realities. Non-cooperationmovement was launched at the time when Indian Society was confronted
with massive social turmoil. In reality, the non-cooperation movement
combined multiple social and political movements within it. It was in fact,the first mass movement organised on an all India level. Participation in the
mass movement became an educative experience for a worker. Gandhi
encouraged the workers in the social-reconstruction programme when therewas no mass politics of political protest. This kept the workers within the
fold of social reconstruction programme, something like Social Capital in
action. Participation in the great social experiment kept the workers busy insocial networking and relation for collective result. It was followed by the
Civil Disobedience movement, the second mass movement on an all India
plane by combining social and economic issues together especially in UPand Andhra Pradesh.
From the above facts it can be drawn that his movements helped increase
in the Social Capital which he wisely invested in India’s struggle for freedom.People in the post-Gandhian era though have not seen those movements and
their electrifying effects on our society, are enjoying fruits emanated out of
it today. Perhaps that is why Indian society still can claim to have someSocial Capital left with it in comparison to other societies of the world. But
that does not rule out further loss in it when viewed from the perspective of
present condition of Indian society. State machinery is unable to stop financialfrauds and irregularities while on the other hand rural and tribal India is
suffering from Naxal violence and counter-violence emanating out of it. If
Civil Society in India wishes to root out the menace of corruption in politicalclass it also should act against the menace of Naxal violence without which
reforms would be incomplete.
Gandhi though always viewed State power with suspicion yet never
disputed its inevitability. Despite his disliking for present electoral politics,
he never tried to draw a line of separation between Civil Society and the
political class. He, instead believed in realising an essentially nonviolentself-reliant, self regulating society in phases, which may replace the State atUttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 107the end. He had serious doubts upon political class which was to regulate
activities of State after Independence. He believed that power, especially thepolitical power, has a tendency to corrupt unless and until there is a strong
orientation of character and will in our political representatives. That strong
orientation he found missing right from the formation of ConstituentAssemblies and among some political representatives who formed part of
these Assemblies. Instead of joining the celebrations of Indian Independence
in Delhi, he preferred fasting for the communal unity in Kolkata, a wish forhis beloved nation that he felt so important to place at the top of his list of
constructive programmes prescribed for free India. No wonder a large number
of his followers believed in his constructive programme for ensuringeconomic progress of free India.
After his death, the general optimism about the State that it could play
an important role in the regeneration of society shattered quickly. TheGovernment had rather a different vision of modern India and had no faith
in the Gandhian model of development. This internal drift in the shared vision
caused a fundamental disagreement among the followers of Gandhi whichhad a lasting consequence both on Indian politics as well as on the methods
and techniques of social transformation attempted in India after the passing
away of Gandhi-Vinoba and even Jayaprakash. Right from the foundationof the Indian State we took development with divided mindsets leaving a
scope and habit of criticism. While staunch followers of Gandhi believed in
village oriented development, the government was pushing for infrastructuraldevelopment in order to pave way for industrial growth and environment.
Instead of paying any attention to the Civil Society viewpoint, largely
represented by Gandhian constructive workers, government went on withtheir alternative model of development. Within the society itself, interaction,
networking, sharing for required social transformation, gradually became
stagnant in the absence of a Nationwide Civil Society mobilisation. Afterwinning political freedom, obtaining economic freedom was supposed to be
the shared goal for free India where Civil Society and democratic government
entered into conflict. This obviously had to reflect in our official plan ofeconomic development and the aspirations and need of the society and
affected people. After his death, his followers who preferred Gandhi’s
constructive programme as their future vocation, automatically assumedresponsibility of representing Civil Society in India especially in mattersLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India108 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011where they thought necessary to appraise the government.
It was in the midst of a growing agrarian unrest as the long awaited
land reforms were ignored due to the aggressive opposition from landlords
dominating political class, which provided grey area to the communists on
the other hand waiting for a peasant upsurge. Having no sign from thegovernment taking notice of these developments, a group of Gandhi’s
followers who scrupulously kept themselves out of power politics, decided
to do something to address the growing tendencies of rural violence. VinobaBhave, who was considered the spiritual heir of Mahatma Gandhi decided
to march on foot to the areas prone to agrarian violence in Andhra Pradesh
and Telangana regions during 1951. During this tour he was accidently offeredland gift which paved the way for a massive movement later conceptualised
by Vinoba as ‘ Bhoodan Yajna ’. The method of obtaining land gift was
individual persuasion on spiritual grounds. It was the power and aura ofVinoba which worked magically and a massive land gift was received during
the movement all over India.
The Bhoodan Movement started in 1951 when Telangana peasant
movement on the land question reached at peak. It was a violent struggle
launched by poor peasants against the local landlords. Vinoba looked into
the problem and came out with a novel solution, viz., the landlords’ voluntarygift of land would help in solving the problems of the landlessness in India.
This would pave the way for a non-violent radical solution born out of love
and not out of hatred. In village Pochampalli, in Telangana District RamChandra Reddy created history by donating 100 acres of land to Vinoba in
response to his appeal.  The initial objective of Bhoodan movement was to
secure voluntary donations of land and distribute it to the landless so that theviolent tendencies of society can be rooted out at least on the grounds of
economic disparity among rural mass of India. However, the movement soon
came out with a demand for 1/16th share of land from all land owners. In1952, the movement had widened the concept of Gramdan (village-in-gift)
and had started advocating commercial ownership of land. The first village
to come under Gramdan was Mangroth, Hamirpur District of the then U.P. Ittook more than three years to get another village in gift. The second and
third Gramdans took place in Orissa and the movement started spreading
with emphasis on securing villages in gift. The process of Gramdan startswith an awakening of social consciousness among the villagers (GramUttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 109Bhavana). This is to be followed by an oath to accept the Gramdan as way of
life. In turn it would generate Lok Shakti (Peoples’ Power) something similarto which we call Social Capital today.
Jayaprakash Narain’s joining with the Bhoodan Movement gave a
momentum to it. J.P. was a hero of the 1942 movement who had an all Indiaimage because he was the leader of the Socialist Party. He did not get involved
in power politics after independence. He was regarded as a saintly politician
in the eyes of the public. J.P.’s popularity gave an impetus to the Bhoodanmovement in Bihar. When the first annual Sarvadaya conference was held
in the state at Chandil in 1953, J.P. gave a call for creating a Sarvodaya
society by establishing a nonexploitative and just egalitarian socio-economicorder. It is reported that many students from Allahabad and Calcutta who
attended the conference quit universities and colleges to join the movement.
Most of the land gift came from Bihar, and the target to collect two and ahalf million acres of land gift within a year got transcended. The Bhoodan
movement touched the most sensitive institution of private property and the
need for its redistribution. Property in the form of land got questioned by themovement. That ‘land is a gift of God and it should be utilised by all living
beings’, became a common thinking in the Sarvodaya circle.
 At organisational level, the Sarva Seva Sangh was the highest body in
the Bhoodan movement. Those who were associated with various
constructive-work organisations, inspired and initiated by Gandhi, formed
themselves into an organisation which has come to be known as the SarvaSeva Sangh. The Sarva Seva Sangh was described by Vinoba as “an all Indian
institution of experts for planning and executing programmes”. The members
at the village level were in the Bhoodan Yajna Committee which was in-charge of collection of land and its distribution. This was controlled by the
Sarva Seva Sangh. The Bhoodan movement was inspired by the anti-property
ideology. It affected the interests of the landed elite in locality and Gramdanvillages became a threat to the landed elite. They started opposing the
movement and some of them demanded back their land given as Bhoodan.
This is how the movement was sabotaged.
Unfortunately in early 1970s a conflict arose between Vinoba and J.P.
that resulted in a virtual split in the Sarva Seva Sangh. However, it can be
said that the Bhoodan movement was a novel experiment started on the Indiansoil. It created a new awareness among people. It aimed at creating anLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India110 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011egalitarian society. Gandhi’s framework of social change brought the issue
to the surface. It was realised by one and all that land distribution cannot betackled by the laws of the state alone. Vinoba Bhave developed Gandhi’s
economic thought in a more practical sense. The movement was started also
to dilute the anger of the peasants against the landlords which foundexpression in the Telangana movement.  It is unfortunate that the idealism
so generated could not sustain for a long period. Also, organisationally Sarva
Seva Sangh remained an authoritarian structure. There was hardly anydemocratic discussion within the organisation on the issues affecting the
organisation and the movement could not inculcate democratic values at the
village level.
J P was rather more experimental and wanted to address social issues in
the changing political scenario. Naxalism emerged as new phenomena during
his time. He was perhaps the only Sarvodaya leader who tried to address itin his own way. During 1988 I had the privilege to undertake an interesting
case study which was a part of my academic curriculum I was in. It was a
study to assess the ground impact of a unique experiment on Gandhian line,started and successfully accomplished in the post-Gandhian era in the year
1971. It was none other than JP who took the challenge thrown by Naxals to
kill some of the Gandhian constructive workers of Muzaffarpur District inBihar.  J P could realise the magnitude and extent of the problem and its
possible social repercussions. Without having any specific programme, he
stationed at Mushahari Block of Muzaffarpur District. After making anintensive socio-economic survey of the area he started working with local
people in coordination with the local authorities, and he could manage to
channelize righteous forces of the District through hundreds in the GramSwaraj Sabha. During my visit to these villages in 1988 I found most of
them functional and the social bonds established by the extended movement
were still intact. The degree of awareness among villagers was foundreasonably well as compared to the other villages of Bihar. There were
complaints from all sides about the Government’s apathy. Till then there
was no sign of resurgence of Naxalism either, in the area. However, JP’sencounter with this problem and the methods and techniques he applied to
address it, is well documented in his famous booklet ‘Face to Face’ but due
to absence of canopy of able leadership, this problem escalated to a dangerousstate in other parts of India during the last 40 years. He tried to strengthenUttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 111the Gramsabhas which played a crucial role in the affairs of villages in
Gandhian model of development. This was the part of Gandhi’s politicalplanning where village Panchayats have been viewed as nucleus of the Indian
democracy. He made Gram Sabhas in-char ge of ensuring livelihood for the
landless while functioning as the administrative unit for allocating land andlabour of the village people for community development. He not only
succeeded in restricting Naxal violence from spreading in the district on the
ground level but also countered it on ideological level. This is perhaps aunique example of its kind which needs to be reviewed carefully to derive
possible line of revival in the Sarvodaya movement according to the need of
the hour.
While talking about ideological grounds of Naxal movement and the
method and technique it has adopted, JP’s comment is perhaps most
appropriate. He made his special criticism of Naxalites on two importantcounts. One is the method they are following. He called it terroristic rather
than revolutionary. He felt in all their invocation of Mao’s name, they are
not even Maoist. He also tried to compare it with Guevaraist, but no one hascalled Che Guevara a Marxist-Leninist. Terrorism, he believed, always born
out of frustration, may conceivably create a narrow revolutionary base among
sections of the frustrated youth and backward and embittered tribals and therural poor, but such elements would be too weak, even with foreign assistance,
to make a truly indigenous social revolution by themselves. Terroristic
violence, in fact, is more likely to provoke counter violence from the strongersections of society, leading eventually to some form of despotism. The other
count of his criticism is about their anti-nationalistic approach. He believed
that certain forms of nationalism may be objectionable, such as aggressive,expansionist, and neo-colonialist. But as far as the Indian nationalism is
concerned it certainly does not belong to that category. On the other hand,
Han nationalism of China, particularly as expressed in the claim that anyterritory that at any time was a part, or under the influence of, Imperial Peking,
is forever China, is certainly according to him a variety of not only
objectionable, but dangerous, nationalism. He found that all brands ofcommunism suffer in some measure-the least perhaps the Marxists-from
extra territorial patriotism, but the slogan ‘Chairman Mao is our Chairman
too’ beats them all in toadying to foreign masters. He says, ‘It is one thing toborrow ideas and techniques from others – this we do all the time – and evenLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India112 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011to accept leaders of other countries as one’s ideological leaders, but quite
another to accept a foreign head of State as the head of one’s ownrevolutionary State – to – be.’ Under such an ideological derailment where
this movement is going to lead its cadres can easily be understood.
Today, land is no more a bone of contention. Nobody is interested in
agriculture. Fast easy money has become the motivating factor. At times,
there are expectations for huge amount of money to be earned through even
extortions. This has given rise to factionalism in its cadres. Recent newssuggests that factional feud may lead to split in Maoist ranks. Sources say
that Koteshwar Rao Kishanji from People’s War Group has developed serious
differences with Maoist  Coordination Committee’s Jhantu Mukherji. Thesetwo factions were separate parties which merged to form CPI-Maoist on
September 21, 2004. Last year, Kishanji wrote to Maoist chief Ganpathy
accusing Mukherji of misappropriation of party funds and fuelling factionalfeuds. Mukherji, on the other hand, accused Kishanji of womanizing and
egoism that had dealt a big blow to the Maoist movement in West Bengal.
There are similar claims of insult by cadres of a Maoist Dalit for his casteand language. Sources say many leaders of both factions have now begun
doubting if the merger was a good idea. These are obvious developments of
a movement centred on the ideology of violence.  JP could smell its realcharacter right at the beginning when he said, ‘It should be borne in mind
that all that passes under the cloak of Naxalism is not genuine. There is quite
a mix-up of motivations behind the so called Naxalite violence, ranging fromoutright criminality to personal and family feuds and enmities. It is becoming
common for unmitigated criminals to embellish their crimes with shouts
like “Mao Zindabad”; ..... At the same time, it does seem that there is tosome extent collaboration between criminals, such as dacoits and Naxalite
revolutionaries; perhaps it is in the nature of a marriage of convenience.’
Today, Naxal violence has become a routine affair in India and the loss
of human life and property hardly affects our minds. But the magnitude of
this particular problem can be understood from the assessment of Army which
has expressed the need to deploy 65000 troops to fight Naxals. This viewhas been expressed recently during a meeting of Army Chief and seven Army
Commanders at the Lucknow-based Central Army Command. They are of
the view that six Army divisions will be needed to cover Naxal-affectedareas in West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, parts of Andhra Pradesh,Uttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 113Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra. This proposal seems to have
been signalled by the Home Ministry to go ahead and we may see more
blood bath in the coming days.
Though the present challenge is from Naxalism but the problem is much
wider in the form of poverty, unemployment and a myriad socio-economicinjustices. Government’s failure to implement laws pertaining to land reformshad inevitably led to the growth of rural violence. It was not that the socalled Naxalites had fathered all such violence but those who had persistentlydefied and defeated the reform laws for the past so many years – be theypoliticians, administrators, landlords and corporate houses. Naxalism is apost-independent, rather a new phenomenon, having history of not morethan fifty years, is being perceived today as the greatest threat to law andorder of the Indian states. More than 150 districts are said to be under itsdirect influence and has occupied the minds of tribal/rural poor millionsspread in the hilly and forest regions of eight different States of India. Allstate enforcement agencies including para-military and state police have failedcompletely in tackling the Naxal violence and lawlessness. DantewadaDistrict has witnessed killings of 150 security men excluding civilians intwo different incidents in the beginning of this year followed by many othersimilar incidents so far in Bijapur and in many districts of Bihar andJharkhand. This trend is continuing and recently they killed threeCongressmen and wounded at least fifteen others near Raipur-Orissa Border.
Now this situation demands Civil Society intervention. By leaving all
responsibilities on the state we hardly can provide any solution to the problemof Naxal violence. It would be unfortunate if our armed forces enter into aconflict of civilian nature. A sustained mass mobilization against this menacecan address this problem effectively. And this is only possible when civilsociety involves itself in tackling this problem. It is also true that we do nothave leaders who could focus exclusively on such types of reforms. Tacklingviolence non-violently is a tricky situation which requires a high moralauthority on the part of the Civil Society leadership. Institutions like Sarva-Seva-Sangh and its organs have already become defunct and inactive.Whatever is remaining in its fold is incapable of leading reform movementsof this magnitude. This vacuum has been filled by Civil Society activists ofcomparatively younger generation out of necessity. People from Gandhiantradition are absent in this new form of movement which is very disheartning.They either see the present movement as different from Gandhian frameworkLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India114 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011or susceptive about its success.
Social Movements are essential part of a society which is under
continuous phase of evolution. Social unrest though always undesired butinevitable, provides grounds of internal dynamism of change, suggests
correctional measures to be taken. In that way both have their own
significance and co-relation. This implies, if there is no unrest, no socialmovement is required, but that is not the ideal case here. Social unrest is a
continuous feature of a society which intends to grow out of socio-economic
compulsion of the weaker section of society. If such inherent tendencies ofsociety let loose then these are bound to turn violent. That is why Gandhi
believed in a peaceful but continuous revolution through his twin principles
of satyagraha and constructive programme. His principles are uniform innature. Satyagraha, meant for the active opposition of injustice, reflected
through social unrest where social capital need to be invested to attain justice,
whereas constructive programme is to cater and increase that Social Capitalthrough productive use of such social networking, relation and bondings in
social reforms during the time of peace or when there is no unrest. In that
situation social capital will always be in reserve, ready to be invested in thetimes of need. So there is something which can be learnt from our past
experiences of such movements. There has to be people, part of the civil
society, to address any eventuality of social unrest at the appropriate time. Inthe absence of such vigilant forces the ever growing unreasonable disparity
will escalate to an alarming level and is bound to go out of hands as we see
in the case of naxal violence today in India.
While initiating Sarvodaya Movement, Gandhi and Vinoba must have
envisioned a group of conscious and alert people who will keep vigil on
such tendencies in society leading to social unrest. Those people will acquirethis authority through their services in raising social capital of the society.
They will regulate and invest such reserve of social capital for further increase
in it for the benefit of the society as a whole by primarily addressing violenttendencies for seeking economic or political redressal. The Bhoodan
movement was initially started with this objective only. Once it started getting
land as gift, its focus shifted to provoke the age old mythological belief i.e.,the duty of renunciation, in order to shun the hereditary inclination for the
ownership of private property or land. On the other hand, they were
advocating such donated land to be distributed among landless peasants,Uttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 115which was nothing but merely transfer of private ownership by exploiting
mythological beliefs of a section of the society. So this created a conceptualconfusion in itself. Today, when we have stepped out of socialistic mode of
thinking, such persuasions are meaningless and non-effective. Naxal problem
is no more linked to land issue, instead it survives on the crisis of identityand governments deliberate by surrender the natural resources of the country
to the hands of big corporate houses in the name of development.
Gandhi, Vinoba and JP tried their best to organise the Indian society on
a moral plane. They had learnt the importance of civil society involvement
in the process of social transformation from their hard experiences. The
Institution they have erected during their lifetime was meant to carry on theprocess of reform they had started. But it is unfortunate that they failed to
prepare the second and third generation leadership who could intelligently
find ways to extend their work started with noble intentions by them. Capitalistinfluence on our economy has also affected our thinking process which
stresses more on individualism and private entrepreneurships rather than on
community and fellow feelings. The concept of Bhoodan is still relevant if itis adopted with few modifications. Since a large number of land owners are
left with limited agricultural land, they find agriculture as an unprofitable
venture. Many of them are ready to sell their lands if they are compensatedproperly. In the absence of potential buyers they are continuing with their
lands cultivated by the landless peasantry. They can be persuaded for
collective farming. Such collective farming groups may try their hands inorganic farming which is gaining momentum today. Not one but several
bodies like Sarva Seva Sangh should be re-enacted which should be
empowered with advanced technical knowledge of agriculture with allmodern tools to make a reserve pool of agricultural experts, as visioned by
Vinoba. Undistributed lands acquired during the Bhoodan Movement can
be used and developed as model farming centres where landless labour ofthe surrounding areas can be engaged and trained in the modern techniques
of agriculture. Apart from that, the human and material capital available in
our society, need to be channelized in a way so that the reformative aspect ofSatyagraha may continue without any outside interference. But there comes
a stage in Satyagraha when all leaders may be sent to prison, then Gandhi
says, everybody will be his own leader and will continue with the movementwith their own developed insight of the situation. Today, India needs such aLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India116 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011situation where all components of civil society should function with its
optimum capacity. Similar programmes can be chalked out for urban areasand involvement of younger generation in the process will reduce the chances
of violence in our society.
The ongoing Civil Society movement is indicates that a new kind of
resurgence of mass awakening is about to come when protest and reform
will become unavoidable.  With the abundance of available human capital
and a new kind of tool in the form of information technology, it will not onlyhelp in accelerating the social reforms but also will equip the younger
generation, which is more congenial and sensitive towards social issues, to
counter the Naxal violence as well. Even if the Government goes ahead withrepressive measures, as it seems today, a large number of its cadres has to be
rehabilitated. At that time too a well prepared civil society will have to be
ready to take them into their fold of non-violence and compassion. Bhoodanmovement was inspired by socialist outlook which was the ideology of the
day. Today we are left with no passion for socialism and our focus has shifted
to individual growth. But the Sarvodaya ideology provides a fine blend ofindividual and collective growth because it believes in the development of
every single member of the society.
So the present civil society group must have as understanding of the
masses with an ability to put it in the right direction at the right moment to
achieve maximum advantage of the situation for the permanent settlement
of a social dispute like Naxalism. It is surprising that Bhoodan movementwas never made a part of academic study though being indigenous in nature,
it has lot of content for sociological study . We may study peasants’ movement,
farmers’ movement, women’s movement, even movements related toenvironmental activism in the post-Gandhian era but we hardly get
opportunity to study Bhoodan and other sarvodaya movements which might
provide further grounds for fresh ideas to activate an effective mass movementagainst Naxal  and terroristic violence. In such condition, rise of Civil Society
against corruption in India is an obvious course of action, though not
sufficiently matured. This trend will grow if the present movement succeedsto achieve its objective, and the younger generation, which is more capable
and knowledgeable than their predecessors, is bound to rise with the civil
society to act as true social capital. Civil Society needs to diversify itsactivities and must think about its responsibility towards other social issuesUttam SinhaAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 117which are equally important as corruption in political class today. Any kind
of violence, whether political or otherwise, is merely a reflection of theexisting state of our society. If it occurs concurrently then it will clearly
indicate in the form of loss of Social Capital. That does not mean that we are
losing numbers of human capital in our society. In fact the number of humancapital has increased as compared to the initial post-Gandian phase but the
forces of motivation are absent to activate available resources of Social
Capital.
Contact: Gandhi Museum
Rajghat, New DelhiLoss of Social Capital and Naxal Problem in India118 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Agricultural System, Agricultural Land
and Cottage Industry
(In the context of Gram Swaraj)
Dr. Krishnaswarup Anandi
Earth, water, sky, air and fire; these are the five elements (panch mahabhut)
which are considered to be very important in the Indian philosophy regarding
a way to lead life. It is said that these five elements are essential for theentire creation, environment, consciousness and development of the universe.
Of these, the earth can be considered as being the main basis of the other
four elements.
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi popularly known as Mahatma Gandhi
believed that land, air, water, sunlight and sky are God’s gifts and under no
circumstances should these come under the control of any person, businessgroup, industrial group or any centralised form of power. These belong to
the masses and are public resources. In reality the State is only their trustee
and not their owner as they belong to the people at large. Therefore, in reality,these elements should be made community based, localised and decentralised
and not be brought under government control, centralised or brought under
any corporate.
Ownership of Land
Any conversation or discussion about land does not refer to land on the
surface, rather it refers to what lies above and also below it. We have to takeland in its totality. Gandhi believed that the land should not belong to an
individual or to the State. Rather it should belong to the primary face-to-face
local people’s communities.Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 119Although in the concept of trusteeship there is no space for monopoly,
privilege or individual ownership, Mahatma Gandhi used to believe that afarmer should have that much land which he and his family members could
cultivate. He should have an amount of land which was manageable for him
to grow crops, support cattle from its products as well as enough to retainbio-diversity and capacity to rejuvenate itself. In other words, he wanted the
farmer to consider the earth as his mother. He believed that a farmer should
have an amount of land with which he could subsist his daily earnings honestlyand live a life of dignity. The agriculture being practised should be organic.
Effort should be made to return at least as much as being taken from the soil.
The things being used in agriculture should be labour intensive, appropriateand environment friendly. The tools and implements being used should be
made locally. The source of energy should be decentralised and local.
The farmer should have that much of cultivable land which gives him a
complete and reliable means of livelihood. Those who are real farmers, if
they want, can join hands and form a cooperative or community to cultivate
their lands. However, there should be no use of force in these areas, all effortsshould be spontaneous, arising from within the community and completely
voluntary in nature. Mahatma Gandhi had a similar dream when it came to
the field of animal husbandry.
At the time the entire country was fighting against the British Empire,
Mahatma Gandhi was also concerned with ways to combat against the
aftermath of a long period of subjugation. He used to openly express his visionof new India post-political independence. He used to speak about his thoughts
in various programmes and campaigns that he used to attend. His main focus
was on how to end the colonial state system, because it proved to be asubstantial hurdle in building up a new society in independent India. He
wanted to bridge the gulf between various communities and castes that was
prevalent in the country and therefore he often used to launch satyagraha
against the British Government. His intentions were to unite the people and
demonstrate their power. He believed that for satyagraha , a constructive
programme was necessary, and that during the long period of satyagraha  there
should not be any diversion from the main task at hand. It is for this reason
that during the fight for independence he did not launch any movement for
land reforms in favour of the farmers and landless and against the landlords.
However, post-independence, he wanted to launch a new revolution inAgricultural System, Agricultural Land and Cottage Industry120 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011the field of agriculture. Under this revolution, he wanted to organise, enlighten
and energize the landless farmers. Even small farmers who tilled their ownlittle plots were to be included in this movement. He targeted big zamindars ,
rajas, maharajas , nawabs  and other rich land owners. He wanted that a
satyagraha be started under the leadership of the landless. If due to satyagraha
there was a change of heart among the landowners then it was good, otherwise
the landless would continue to challenge the zamindari  system through non-
violent means. Mahatma Gandhi was of the view that such a s atyagraha
would be pure in its intension and it would not end till zamindari  system
itself ended. He believed that this land satyagraha would pave way for the
government to legislate the banning of zamindari system and redistribution
of land among the landless. At the same time he was equally prepared to
launch a satyagraha  against the government if it did not work in favour of
the rich landowners in any way.
Mahatma Gandhi used to believe that the zamindari system would not
work and the real owners of the land were those who tilled the lands. Also
along with the other natural resources, land should never be under individualownership. The concept of trusteeship would be implemented in all these
spheres. He believed that people had the right to own things that were the
minimum necessity for leading a respectable life, and anything in excess ofthat belonged to the entire society. You are the trustee of the wealth or things,
not its owner. What a person needs to consume and own for his daily needs
would be decided on the level of consumption of the general people at thatpoint. This concept was also applicable in case of land.
Mahatma Gandhi wanted to root out the zamindari system and for this,
he thought that satyagraha was the best means. Even if there was no change
of hearts among the zamindars due to satyagraha , Gandhiji believed that
the satyagraha would change the human values, socio-economic paradigm
in the country, build up the moral character of the people and ultimatelychange the character of the state’s power and its attitude towards the people.
This will result in the formation of new laws.
Agriculture Versus Industrialization
Even when Mahatma Gandhi’s influence was at its peak there were people
who advocated industrialization and urbanization and modernization very
strongly. However, in Gandhi’s conception of Swaraj  (completeDr. Krishnaswarup AnandiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 121independence) agriculture was the cornerstone of all development. He wanted
policies that would help build up agriculture and production of goods essentialfor the people through a network of cottage industries that would generate
employment for the people. Mahatma Gandhi’s model was not centralised
mass production, but production by the masses. Surely, there would be nodifficulty in finding land and other resources for these small cottage industries.
The local bodies and community at large would provide the land. There
would be no need for large scale land acquisition for various schemes andthe problems of displacement, deprivation of means of livelihood,
environmental degradation that are inherent with large projects.
At present, the model of development is industry focussed, which calls
for big machines, plants, townships, business complex, high tech parks etc –
all things that need large amounts of land. And in many of the cases, the land
that is taken over is fertile land and large communities of farmers, tribals,fishermen and other marginalized sections of society are displaced. In many
cases those displaced were the original inhabitants of the area. This
development which is being built on the grave of agriculture and communityis anti-thesis of Mahatma Gandhi’s concept of Swaraj .
Now the question arises: ‘how can projects be implemented as the land
and other resources belong to the community at large?’ For any plants orindustry to be built the people of the area have to come together and decide
on whether they want that plant or unit to come up and if they agree then
they will donate land voluntarily for the industry. Thus, it would be theirown industry and they will run it themselves and it would again be ‘production
by the masses’.
The projects will belong to the people and it would be run for the greater
benefit of the society and nation at large. The role of the state would be to
help in the setting up of the industry by giving finance, technical expertise
and other needed support. However, the project would belong to the people.There will be no multinationals or local industrial houses and this concept is
also much ahead of the ‘public sector’ ‘private sector’ debate. They would
be owned by the Peoples’ sector or the Communitarian sector. This can bethe next step in Mahatma Gandhi’s vision.
The question of land is fundamental to everything and vested interests
are understanding their importance. It is for this reason that investors,corporate groups and other rich people are trying to corner as much of landAgricultural System, Agriculture Land and Cottage Industry122 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011as possible and their land hunger has increased by leaps and bounds. As a
result, farmers are being evicted from their land and non-farmer units arebeing set up there. Instead of farmer tilling the land, it is now corporate
farming or contract farming. Mahatma Gandhi used to say, ‘The land belongs
to the tiller’, but now in this age of globalisation the mantra  has changed to
become, ‘Hand over lands to corporates’.
Contact: 15, MIG – II BHS
Allahpur, Allahabad,
UP, 211006Dr. Krishnaswarup AnandiAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 123ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
The 21st Century and Bhoodan
Dr. Ramji Singh
With changing times, it is possible that the values of society and meaning
of words might also change. Acharya Vinoba Bhave’s philosophy of
Bhoodan was seated in the ancient Indian tradition of ‘danan’ – spiritualclarity. The mythical story of Vaman A vatar of Lord Vishnu in which Raja
Bali donated the entire earth is part of our cultural heritage. Disguised as a
Brahmin, Lord Vishnu had asked for three steps of land and the Lordcovered the entire earth and heaven in two steps. Perhaps, the concept of
land donation was there to reduce inequities in society and build a more
homogenous social structure. Shankaracharya too emphasised land donationin a high pedestal.
Along with donation of land, cattle, gold, silver, well, tree etc were also
in vogue. In some cases, people also donated their bodies and lives, likeRishi Dadhich who donated his body, Ushinar Shitish who donated his life
and Karna who donated his armour.
In the modern era, land donation or Bhoodan started at Pochampalli
village of Andhra Pradesh with the peace march in Telangana under the
guidance of Acharya Vinoba Bhave.
The historical backdrop of the movement was the blood letting that
was taking place in the Telangana region at that time. During the day light
the police and paramilitary forces used to hunt and gun down the extremists
and at night, it was the turn of the extremists ‘Soviets’, as they were called,to kill the landlord and other rich farmers in the Telangana region.
At that time, Sant Vinoba Bhave was in Delhi and he was serving the
refugees who had come from Pakistan. But the violence and the killings in124 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Telangana region moved his heart and compelled him to start on his peace
march.
Jeevan Jakhan Sukaye Jayey Karuna Rasdhara Aiso – The wounds of
life are healed by the balm of piety. I have heard Vinoba speak on this topic
while addressing members of Bihpur Prakhand Panchayat Samiti atBhagalpur. He was speaking and crying at the same time. He said that during
his peace march he went to a village of Harijans and when he asked them
about the cause behind the violence, the villager’s revealed the horrific truththat they were surviving by eating boiled leaves that grow in ponds. That
night Vinoba found it difficult to sleep and in his dream he saw God
commanding him to ask for donation of land.
Next morning when he woke up, he demanded adamantly, “I will have
sweets for breakfast.” People rushed out and brought him sweets, but he
said, “I want donation of 90 acre of land in the form of sweets.”  There were90 Harijans families and he had demanded 90 acre of land; an acre per family.
On the same night, while going to bed, Vinoba wondered, “Duryodhan had
refused to give even one inch of land. Will someone donate me 90 acres?”
“Na Datvayang Sui Agre
Bina Yudhye Ne Keshav”
But thinking that it was a command from the God himself, Vinoba began
begging for land. History is witness to the fact that a farmer of Pochampalli
village, Ramchandra Reddy, immediately donated 100 acre of land and the
Bhoodan movement took its birth.
As the peace march turned into Bhoodan march, Vinoba got a little bit
of land wherevere he went and the Bhoodan movement took wings.
Subsequently, Vinoba started his padyatra\Bhoodan march and walked over40,000 miles all over the country.
Initially, Vinoba got a lot of affection from the people for his movement,
along with some land. But at the same time, he also had to face criticism.His most bitter critics were the socialists who were leading land reform
agitation through Kisan Sabha Sangathan. Noted socialist thinker Dr Ram
Manohar Lohia sarcastically said, “The way Vinobaji is going, it will takehim 250 years to solve the land problem.” In a polite reply, Vinoba observed,
“I used to think that it would take 500 years to solve the land problem as he
was working alone, but now I will also get the support of Dr Lohia andtherefore it will take only 250 years. Similarly, if JP, Z Ahmed, NamoodripadDr. Ramji SinghAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 125etc. put in their bit to solve the land problem, then the task of Bhoodan
would be completed easily.”
History is witness to the fact that slowly the Bhoodan movement became
the biggest national movement of its time and collected about 45 lakh acre
of land. It is true that some of the donated land included mountains, stonyland, forests and poor quality land, which could not be distributed, but now
the value of even those lands has increased.
Vinoba took the concept of Bhoodan to certain level and then converted
it into Gramdan. While Bhoodan was a partial concept based on engendering
the feeling of piety and create a conducive atmosphere among the people,
Gramdan was a complete philosophy. The philosophy of Gramdan wasextensively spread in Bihar.
When a national convention was called in Yelwal, Karnataka, in 1957,
the top leaders of all the political parties came – President Dr Rajendra Prasad,Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, members of the Planning Commission,
Praja Samajwadi Party president Ganga Sharan, Jaiprakash Narayan, Joint
Samajwadi Dal representative Z Ahmed and Namoodripad were also present.At that meeting everyone welcomed Gramdan and decided to include it in
the national planning.
There was also a section that opposed Vinoba’s Bhoodan on account of
their ideology. When Vinoba was in Munger, a socialist came up to him and
said, “Along with this citation I am also giving my land in donation, but that
will not serve the problem because it is impossible that everyone will have achange of heart and donate land.” Vinoba replied, “You were earlier a
Congressman, but now you are a socialist, so how can you say that the other
people will not have a change in heart.”
Vinoba’s science of non-violent revolution requires further qulification.
For total change in the society, there are three main elements that must also
change – one is change of heart, the other is change of thought\philosophyand the third is change in situation. People who are wrapped in ‘Moha’ have
a change in heart. There are many examples like Angulimal, Ashok, and
Ratnakar etc. William James had also accepted that change of heart waspossible, while in the field of religion the concept of change of heart is readily
acceptable – what we call confession. But the biggest change of all is changing
the status quo or situation.
For example, at present those who talk about atom bombs are eitherThe 21st Century and Bhoodan126 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011mad or extremists\terrorists. Similarly the excess of land holding and great
disparity of wealth are socially and culturally against the good of all. Earlierthe communists were firm in their belief about the ‘inevitability of war’, but
in the age of atom bombs, which has changed the concept of destruction,
they have changed to the concept of ‘peaceful coexistence’. Nowadays, Russiaand China have accepted and are moving towards globalisation.
Initially, philosophers and thinkers of the western world used to laugh
at the concept of Bhoodan, and used to say that if a person like Vinoba askeddonation of land in the West, then he would either be put in prison or in
mental asylum. But, when the movement started gaining strength then slowly
they changed their opinion and started learning more about it.
Bhoodan-Gramdan is only a symbol. What Vinoba wanted was to build
a new society where the predominant feeling would be one of giving wealth
not snatching wealth. When the evil side of human beings dominate in asociety, then people snatch other people’s rights and property, but when the
good side dominates then people become Dadhich and Karna.
Therefore, Vinoba talked not only of Bhoodan, but also of donation of
wealth, labour, knowledge, wells, resources etc. so that man really starts
behaving like human. The true human being is a person who dies for humanity.
Therefore, as long as sacrifice is relevant, Bhoodan would also remainrelevant. Gramdan is a total and utilitarian concept, where there is community
ownership in the place of individual ownership. This is something which
people would accept readily and is the best way for building a society.
At present there are two concepts of property – capitalism or socialism.
The wealth is either owned individually or it belongs to the state. Capitalism
talks about ownership of wealth at the individual level for the sake ofindividual freedom and dignity, but using this pretext they also exploit humans
and keep them bonded. It is due to disparities in wealth witnessed by Marx
that made him speak out against individual ownership. It is of course anotherthing that when communists gained power, the rulers created a class of their
own. The ownership of wealth in the hands of the State is a dangerous thing.
Because the State in itself is a centre of power and when political powerjoins hands with economic power and ownership of wealth, then it results in
tyranny.
There have been three other types of ownership of property as opposed
to individual ownership that is prevalent in the capitalist world. The KolkhozDr. Ramji SinghAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 127system in Russia, the commune system in China and Kibbutz of Israeli.
Among these three, there is maximum democracy and socialism in theKibbutz, but Israel itself suffers from racism and militarism. Under these
circumstances, the concept of Gramdan and Gram Swaraj are better as an
ideology and on the grounds of being practical. Under this arrangement,instead of the state, it is the community that owns everything and there is
also scope of individual agriculture. Nowadays both Russia and China are
fast doing like the global capitalists. This will only increase the inequalitiesin the world and increase bitterness and perhaps this will lead to another
world war. Competition in trade and technology and consumerism would
only increase the chances of another world war.
Also, at present, land is not just there for agricultural purpose, but the
forests, river water and minerals under the land are also counted. Not only is
river water being sold, but the mineral wealth is also being given away cheaplyand creating a crisis. Several State governments in collusion with
multinationals are purchasing mountains at throwaway prices and then
reaping huge benefits. This can turn out to be disastrous for the environment.The mineral wealth that was for 200-400 years, is being sold and completely
exploited, leaving nothing for the future generations. This is not only
infringement of rights of the future generation but also a betrayal of trust.The mother earth has provided enough for our needs, but if we want to fulfil
our greed, then the environmental catastrophe will consume everyone around
us. Human greed is unbounded–the only way out is self control.
The concept of Gramdan and Gram Swaraj are based on self control
and cooperation. Today, rulers of States like Jharkhand, Orissa, Chhattisgarh
and Andhra Pradesh, among others, have been trapped in the web ofinternational capitalists and greed. They are selling away the water of their
rivers. They are taking land from the poor and giving it to the multinationals
at cheap rates. In their turn, the multinationals are exploiting the mineralwealth and thus leaving nothing for the future generations.
Therefore, at present, property and land should not be held either by
the state or the individual. State is an incomplete entity and it becomes aninstrument of people who are in power. In contrast, Gram Swaraj is a living
and human system and it cannot go beyond its boundaries. Since the people
of the village will keep an eye on the activities of a person, they can protectthemselves against exploitation. Bhoodan had sowed the seeds of this feelingThe 21st Century and Bhoodan128 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011– that the land, water, forest, minerals etc. all belong to the community. We
can also say that it is God’s wealth. “Sabyai Bhoomi Gopal Ki. Sampatti SabRaghupati Ke Aahi” - When all the land belongs to Gopal then all the property
belongs to Raghupati.
The Bhoodan movement can be seen as an attempt to bring heaven on
to earth, and at the same time the selfishness of the human nature resulted in
some of its curses. Some of them were visible when Vinoba himself was
alive. In their quest for meeting targets, the workers of the Bhoodan movementwere not bothered with what kind of land they got, and whether it was really
cultivable and really belonged to the donor. They were only interested in
getting the signature of the donor in the deed. Many of the land given asBhoodan were disputed and many gave away useless land. In return, they
wrongly gained social prestige and blessing of Vinoba.
It is for this reason that in united Bihar—of the 22 lakh acre of land that
was received under Bhoodan, only 11 lakh acre could be distributed. But of
course, today, the forest and hills have also become valuable and they should
also be distributed. Soon Vinoba elevated the concept of Gramdan to theambitious Bihardan as a result of which numerous problems and
misunderstandings arose. It is perhaps due to this that Vinoba sarcastically
said, ‘B’ for B(V)inoba and ‘B’ for Bogus.
The race for getting land for Bhoodan was grand but the problems that
arose during its distribution cause much pain and distress. While the
distribution of land under Bhoodan gave lakhs of landless the ownership ofland and a means of livelihood and sense of self-respect in society, the
corruption among the members of Bhoodan committee who were paid very
little gave the movement a bad name. Giving the same piece of land todifferent people became a norm. Under these circumstances, the poor landless
farmer had nowhere to appeal. In some cases, thousands of acres of land
were donated to one particular person, on the understanding that he wouldredistribute it, but he never did and kept the land with himself. The
commission set up in Bihar to tackle land problems clearly said that such
land should be redistributed.
The biggest blot on the Bhoodan movement was the illegal sale of
Bhoodan land and minting lakhs of rupees through it. The Bhoodan Act and
also the spirit of Bhoodan was that the land would be given to the landlessand they would be able to live a life of dignity. The Act was perhaps the mostDr. Ramji SinghAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 129progressive and just Act in the realm of revenue Acts. But some vested and
greedy people sold the Bhoodan land to big builders and rich people andtook lakhs and crores of rupees in return. This was not only unethical, but
also a punishable criminal act. Some people have sold the Bhoodan land that
were near the cities and are now shamelessly saying that with that moneythey have purchased land for the landless in the villages. These people do
not have any account of this money. This is a big sin that they have committed.
If the lands were in the cities and the poor and slum dwellers had got it, itwould have given solace to Vinoba’s soul. But some people have made it
their business to earn profit from Bhoodan land.
Under the Bhoodan Act no one has the power to sell the land once
given under Bhoodan. Even the landless farmer who is given the land cannot
sell it or mortgage it to raise money. He can only till it and earn his livelihood.
But the evil deed of selling Bhoodan land was done in several States by
the Bhoodan committee itself, or fake societies that were formed in the name
of Bhoodan. There should be a judicial inquiry into the matter and all the
buildings etc. that have been constructed on these lands should be handedover to the slum dwellers. And those who have sold the Bhoodan land should
be prosecuted at the earliest.
The deed done by the mischievous people are not mere mistakes made
due to some misunderstanding, but they have been done deliberately and are
crimes in both the criminal and civil law. The laundering of Bhoodan land
was mostly done when the land was adjacent to any expanding city and thesky high price of land made it possible for such elements to earn huge amounts
of money.
Therefore, there should be a thorough enquiry into this and it should be
found out under whose authorisation it was sold. The problems being faced
by the Bhoodan movement are not due to problems in the concept, but due
to the narrow minded people who were handling the work of Bhoodanmovement. Bhoodan is pure and it will remain so, and the 21
st Century
Bhoodan will be synonymous with that of Revolution.
Contact: 104 Sanyal Enclave, Budhmarg,
Patna - 800001 (Bihar Pradesh)
Mobile: 09431213974The 21st Century and Bhoodan130 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Historical Analysis of Land Ownership
Rajesh Kumar
The problem of land ownership at present cannot be resolved withoutunderstanding the land ownership structure of the past. The past plays an
important role in shaping our perceptions and ordering our priorites. Naturally,
the solutions we find for the contemporary crisis are affected by our past.Hence, it is important to see how our ancestors understood land ownership.
There is a general consensus among experts that the question of land
ownership came into existence in the post-vedic era because during the Rigvedic era, the Aryans were pastorals and cattle was the main index of wealth.
Land ownership was not prevalent at that time. In the post-vedic era, due to
use of iron implements in agriculture, people started staying in one place.We find reference to land ownership in the post-vedic book Aitareya Brahman
in which it is written that when Vishwakarman Bhuvan donated land to the
purohits for performing yagna, Prithvi protested. This suggests that it wasnot possible to donate land without the consent of the community. In other
words, land ownership was based on community and there was no concept
of individual ownership of land.
According to dharmashastra expert of Mahajanpad period, Gautam, any
property that was the means of livelihood, could not be divided, and this,
most probably, also included land. With the development of villagesinhabitated by a wide spectrum of communities and professionals, the
question of ownership of land that was not attached to an identifiable property
became equally perplexing. The fact that there was common ownership ofland can also be verified in Rishi Jaimini’s Mimamsa sutras. Under this
arrangement, no king can give away all the land of his kingdom since the
earth belongs to all.Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 131During the Maurya era, political philosopher Kautilya was in favour of
the king’s control over all agricultural land, but he did not sponsor the notionthat the king should be the owner of all the land. Possibly, Manu was the
first person to have talked about king’s first right of ownership of the land.
But this does not necessarily mean that he is the absolute owner of all theland. According to Manu, the king owns half of all that comes out of mines,
because he is lord of the earth and protects it. The concept of king’s ownership
over all land was first propounded in the post-Gupta period by Sage Katyayanwho said that the king is the owner of all land and therefore, he has right to
one fourth of all the products of land. At the same time, he also accepts that
one who lives on land, should be the man acknowledged as its owner. Asimilar sentiment is expressed in Narad Smriti. Contrary to this, the Narsingh
Puran clearly says that the land belongs to the king and not to the farmer.
One can say that Narsingh Puran is the first text which gives the king thetotal ownership of land.
According to Narad, if a family has been enjoying the fruits of a land
for three generations, then they have the legal rights over it. However, thewill of the king can facilitate transfer of the land to another farming household.
This implies that the king’s right can infringe upon the individual’s right.
Chinese travellers Fahien who came to India during the Gupta period andHiuen Tsang who came during King Harshvardhan’s rule noted that the land
belonged to the king. Writing in the post-Gupta period, Brihaspati noted that
during the division of ancestral property, shudra putras (lower caste sons) ofupper caste men would not get a share. Besides, the division of grazing land
was also an accepted practice. So, division of land and the continuation of
accepting it as private property started during the Gupta period.
The rules for sale of land were first laid down by Brihaspati. Kautilya
talks only about the sale of house and the land attached to it, but he does not
talk about sale of land per se. After Brihaspati, it was Katyayan who maderules in this regard. According to him, land which is taxed could be sold to
pay the tax. According to Brihaspati, during sale of land one must mention
the number of wells, trees, water sources, fields, ripe crops, fruits, ponds,tax houses etc. Here, one may conjecture that Brihaspati was delienating
terms of selling an entire village.
According to Gautam and Manu, if a plot of land stays under possession
of a person for 10 years or more, then it becomes his property. YagyavallabhHistorical Analysis of Land Ownership132 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011extended this period to 20 years, but none of them talked about land in this
context. Vishnu, Narad, Brihaspati and Katyayan increased this period tothree generations that is 60 years and also included land under this. With the
11
th century Mitakshara law, the time period was increased to a 100 years
and in the 13th century under Smriti Chandrika it was increased to 105 years.
This makes it clear that the concept of individual ownership of land could
not be challenged any further.
So, we see that during the beginning of the ancient period, there was
community ownership of land; by the end of the ancient period the stress
was on the king’s and individual ownership of land, even though it appears
that these two rights are in conflict with one another. Due to king’s ownershipof land, the king could grant land to temple priests, powerful nobles and
employees in return of services rendered to the king. And under the concept
of individual ownership of land, the person who received a grant of landfrom the king could hand it over to farmers on patta.
From the above it appears that since the early middle ages, there were
more than one claimant for land and each had legal backing for it. A similarsituation was prevalent in feudal Europe at that time, though there were
some fundamental differences.
During 1200s, when the Muslim sultanates were established in north
India, there was a change in the pattern of land ownership. The land under
the Sultanate was divided into three parts. The first was ‘khalsa’ land which
was directly under the Centre, the second was ‘Ekta’ which was given to theofficers in lieu of their salary. The officers were expected to take their salary
from the revenue generated from the land and return the remaining to the
Centre. The third type of land was donated to scholars and priests. Sinceland was in plenty, the question of ownership was relatively less intimidating.
Khoot, Mukaddam and Choudhary were the intermediate land owning class.
Of them the Khoots had the status of zamindars, while Mukaddam andChoudhary were heads of villages and were prosperous farmers. This
intermediate land owning class used to collect tax from the farmers and
deposit it in the Central treasury. But, during the era of Allauddin Khilji, thepowers of the intermediate class were taken away and the State’s employees
were given the task of collecting tax directly from the farmers. In the rural
society, the land owning farmers and the landless farmers lived side by side,but only the land owning farmer paid the taxes.Rajesh KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 133During the rule of Sher Shah Suri, the ‘Jabt’ system was introduced and
the tax was based on the size of the holding. All cultivable land was measuredand each farmer was given a title deed in which the tax to be levied was also
mentioned. The direct relation with the state saved the farmer from
exploitation by the zamindars and other intermediaries.
During the Mughal period, the situation remained unclear, as had been
during the Sultanate regime. It is possible that the state and other sections
had right over the same plot of land, but there was no concept of totalownership of land. During this period the influence of the zamindars increased
and they amassed enormous social clout. Akbar divided the land under him
into ‘Khalsa’ and ‘Jagir’. The Mansabdars, whose salaries were derived fromthe revenue of the land given to them, were known as the Jagirdars. Along
with them there was a large class of Zamindars, who, in turn, were divided
into three categories. The farmers were of two types – the ‘Khudkashta’ and‘Pahikashta’. The former were farmers who tilled their own lands and the
latter were landless peasants who tilled other people’s land. One may deduce
that the settlement pattern during the Mughal period led to the rise of severalclaimants to the same plot of land.
The question of land ownership once again came to the forefront during
the British. It was in Bengal that the British rule first tried to solve thisproblem. In the beginning, all the land was considered to be that of the ruler
and revenue collection was based on contract. The highest bidder of a tract
of land was given the right to collect the revenue. After experimenting withseveral models of revenue collection, the then governor general Cornwallis
accepted that the Zamindars had the right of ownership of land and this
ownership passed from father to son. This was done so that if a zamindarfailed to give the promised revenue on time, his land could be auctioned.
When lands of the zamindars were auctioned, it was the traders who usually
purchased them. During the British period, industries had declined and forthe traders there was no safer investment than land. However, the zamindars
lived in the cities and the problem associated with absentee landlordism
started cropping up.
The main aim of the absentee zamindars was to extract the maximum
amount of revenue from the farmers and little from the tillers. Gradually, the
new generation of the zamindars also started living in the cities and theirmotive too was to extract the maximum amount of revenue from the farmers.Historical Analysis of Land Ownership134 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011Apart from Bengal, the ownership of land was given directly to the
farmers in the rest of the country upon the payment of fixed revenue calledmalguzari. If they failed, their land had to be mortgaged or sold to pay the
dues. In south India, the farmers used to deposit the land revenue directly to
the government, while in Punjab and other parts of north India, the Mahal,who represented the farmers, used to collect revenue.
Over a period of time, the British increased their demand for land
revenue and to ensure that it could be collected, they made land a saleableproperty. So whenever a zamindar, farmer or Mahal failed to deposit the
revenue on the given date, his ownership of the land was auctioned and the
land revenue was collected.  Prior to the British rule, such auctions ofconfiscated land was rare. In most of the cases the land on which people
could build houses or land that was to be donated for religious purposes
were bought and sold. Even during the British period, 40 per cent of the areacame under the princely states and the pattern of ownership on this land was
based on concepts that varied from the medieval to modern.
After independence, the question of land was discussed in detail at the
Constituent Assembly and Parliament. Since India had decided to become a
democratic republic, it was decided that a land distribution should be more
just and equitable. Egged on by the Centre, the State governments passedthe Zamindari abolition act and other similar acts to bring about some
regularity in the ownership pattern of land.
After zamindari was abolished, the zamindars were given compensation
of their land and it was distributed among those who had been tilling them.
In most of the States, the zamindari system was abolished by 1956. But the
absence of land records made it difficult to implement laws abolishingzamindari. According to one study, the area under kashtakars (share croppers)
had come down from 42 per cent in 1950-51 to around 20-25 per cent in the
beginning of the 60s. This did not mean that the share croppers had becomeowners, rather it meant that the landowners had evicted them. On the other
hand, the compensation given to the zamindars was often inadequate and
varied from State to State.
There were several hurdles to the abolition of zamindari system. In
Uttar Pradesh, the zamindars were allowed to keep land for their personal
cultivation, but there was no limit to this holding, as a result of which theabsentee landlord could save their land from acquisition. However, some ofRajesh KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 135the bigger landlords did cultivate land on their own and invested in the land,
which were included in goals of land development. The land owners alsotried to block the implementation of the Act by misusing the path of judicial
remedy. However, by 1960, zamindari was abolished in most parts of the
country except in some parts of Bihar. While on the one hand, the biglandowners were the main losers; on the other hand, the sharecroppers who
had been working on the same land for years gained the ownership of the
land. According to a rough estimate, due to abolition of zamindari system,two crore sharecroppers got land.
Efforts were made to improve the sharecropping system and there were
three main ingredients to it. The time period for registering as sharecropperwas kept at six years. Moreover, the land revenue was reduced from one
fourth to one sixth of the production. However, to get ownership rights, the
sharecropper had to deposit a lump sum land revenue. For example, in AndhraPradesh it was only after the payment of eight years’ land revene that a
farmer could acquire rights over the land he tilled. Despite these Acts, the
right of the absentee landowners to start farming and the loosely framedconcept of personal cultivable land meant that many sharecroppers were
evicted from the land. Since the agreements between the farmers and the
landlords were rarely documented, the legality of sharecropper’s claim couldnot be verified. But even then a large section did benefit from it.
To improve the lot of sharecropper, the Operation Barga was launched
in Bengal by the Left government in 1978 and by 1990, over 14 lakh Bargadarswere registered. The main aim of Operation Barga was to provide security
to the sharecropper on the land he tilled. He could no more be evicted on the
land owner’s whim and it also ensured that his rights were passed on to hissuccessor. The division ratio between the sharecropper and land owner was
kept at 75:25 and if the land owner invested in the seeds and fertiliser, then
it was a 50:50 share between the two. Training camps were set up duringOperation Barga where officials from more than 10 departments interacted
with 30 or more agriculture labourers and sharecroppers to devise strategies
on implementing Operation Barga in that area. At first Operation Barga washugely successful, but later it could not sustain its momentum because the
holdings of landowners were no bigger than that of most sharecroppers of
the area and because many started cultivating their own lands.
Under the Hadbandi Act, no family could keep cultivable land above aHistorical Analysis of Land Ownership136 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011certain limit. In 1946, the Akhil Bharatiya Kisan Sabha had kept 25 acres as
the maximum limit of cultivable land a family could keep. However, therewas a great delay in framing the rules under this Act and different State
governments fixed different limits as a result of which the impact of this act
lost its intensity. In a country like India where the average holding of 70 percent of the farmers was less than 5 acres, the threshold limit of land holding
fixed by the State was very high. In Andhra Pradesh it was fixed between
27-132 acres depending on the type of land. In most states the thresholdlimit was fixed on an individual basis and there was provision to increase it.
Even with its limitations, this act was an important milestone in the
programme of land reforms. It greatly succeeded in ending the land marketand concentration of land.
The landowners often took advantage of the loopholes in the land reform
laws. At some places they managed to evict their sharecroppers and to savetheir land from the Hadbandi Act. Moreover, they started keeping land in
fictitious names. It was then that Vinoba Bhave, a close associate of Mahatma
Gandhi, started the Bhoodan movement. The movement appealed to theindividual landowner to donate land to the landless.
The main thrust of the Bhoodan movement was to address the conscience
of the landowner and get him to donate one sixth of his land. The land thusprocured was distributed among the landless. By March 1956, the movement
started losing momentum after getting more than 40 lakh acres of land. It
was found that most of the donated land was either barren or locked inlitigation. Efficient distribution, too could not be ensured. By the end of
1955, the Gramdan movement was also launched. Once again the inspiration
of this movement was Gandhiji who believed that all land belonged to God.Under Gramdan, all the villagers had joint ownership over the land in the
village. This movement started in Orissa. Even though it held a lot of promise,
by the 60s the Bhoodan and Gramdan movement lost their momentum. Butby these movements an effort was made at land reforms which not only
complemented land reform legislations but also encouraged the farmers to
enter politics and increased the number of farmer producers’ cooperativesamong other things.
So, we find that the pattern of land ownership changed from community
ownership in ancient India to individual and then to king’s\ruler’s ownership.In the middle ages the king\sultan and zamindar\farmer had concurrent rightsRajesh KumarAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 137over the same plot of land. In the British era, due to excessive land revenue
extracted from farmers, land became a saleable product. In independent India,the laws of land ownership were framed to ensure that each farmer had a
minimum amount of land with him, but this target could not be reached.
Although, some of the disparities in land ownership were addressed over theyears by movements such as Bhoodan and Gramdan, there are still many
with large tracts of land and many more who are landless while it remains to
see how dexterously the government handles social inequality arising out ofuneven distribution of land. An empathetic approach is sought from the big
land-owners.
(The writer is an engineer and has published four books on history)
Contact: Mobile - 09313541719
email: rajeshjoshu@gmail.comHistorical Analysis of Land Ownership138 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011ANASAKTI DARSHAN
July 2010–June 2011
Impact of Gandhian Thought on the Ideology
of Loknayak Jayaprakash Narayan
Pankaj Kumar Dubey
In the history of the world, Mahatma Gandhi is one person who has changedthe trend of violent revolution. He believed that good aim is achieved onlyby good means. The bad means can not give us a good result. If we want agood society then it is possible only through non-violence and truth. Throughviolence we can not achieve the aim of good society. Therefore, we can seeall violent revolutions have not achieved the aim of social revolution, but itis possible by Gandhian thought. The Gandhian thought is very effective inthe process of social reconstruction.
The sarvodaya, non-violence, truth, spiritualism, creative work and gram
swaraj are the main components of Gandhian thought. The Gandhian thought
attracted the attention of many thinkers. One among them was Jayaprakash
Narayan. Jayaprakash Narayan used Gandhian thought for socialreconstruction after independence of India. Actually the philosophy of
Jayaprakash Narayan is the result of the effect of Gandhian thought on him.
Jayaprakash Narayan was a freedom fighter, social worker and great
socialist thinker of India. His ideology changed from time to time in positive
direction. He gave major contribution in social reconstruction. He was linked
with Bhoodan, gramdan movement.
1 In 1974, he gave a concept of Total
Revolution to change the corrupt, autocratic and rotten system.2 He was one
of those persons who worked on the way of Gandhian thoughts.
Before the independence of India, he was influenced by Marxism but
after independence he understood the depth of the philosophy of Mahatma
Gandhi and accepted it. He tried to complete the dream of Mahatma Gandhi
and the aim of Gandhi ji’s Loksevak Sangh.Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 139Socialism to Sarvodaya –  Sarvodaya is a term meaning ‘universal
uplift’ or ‘progress of all’. The term was first coined by Mohan DasKaramchand Gandhi as the title of his 1908 translation of John Ruskin’s
work on political economy, ‘ unto this last ’ and Gandhi came to use the term
for the ideal of his own political philosophy
3.
Sarvodaya is the main concept of Gandhian thought. Mahatma Gandhi
gave the philosophy of Sarvodaya as a module of development for human
society. Jayaprakash Narayan also accepted the Sarvodaya philosophy forsocial reconstruction after independence of India. But, before independence
of India, he was the strong follower of Marxism. He believed that Marxism
is better than Gandhism. He said, “Freedom still remained the unchanginggoal, but the Marxism as a science of revolution seemed to offer a sure and
quicker road to it than Gandhi’s technique of civil disobedience and non-
cooperation. The thrilling success of the great Lenin, accounts of which weconsumed with unsatiated hunger, seemed to establish beyond doubt the
supremacy of the Marxism way to revolution. At the same time, Marxism
provided another beacon of light for me: equality and brotherhood. Freedomwas not enough. It must mean freedom for all even the lowliest and this
freedom must include freedom from exploitation, from hunger, from
poverty.”
4 In this way, in the effect of Marxism, the philosophy of Jayaprakash
Narayan was developed. Equality and brotherhood was the base of his
philosophy. But after independence of India when Jayaprakash Narayan
understood the philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi, he believed that socialismcould not be established through communism and democratic socialism, it
can be established only through Sarvodaya. According to Jayaprakash
Narayan, the right objective and right philosophy of socialism is found inSarvodaya.
5
He said, “My regret is that I did not reach this point in my life’s Journey
while Gandhi ji was still in our midst. However, some years back it becameclear to me that socialism as we understand it today can not take mankind to
the sublime goals of freedom, equality, brotherhood and peace. Socialism,
no doubt, gives promise to bring mankind closer to those goals than anyother competing social philosophy. But I am persuaded that unless socialism
is transformed into Sarvodaya, those goals would remain beyond its reach;
and just as we had to taste the ashes of independence, so future generationsmay have to taste the ashes of socialism.”
6Impact of Gandhian Thought on the Ideology of Loknayak Jayaprakash Narayan140 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011According to Jayaprakash Narayan, Communism, democratic socialism
and Sarvodaya are the different forms of socialism. Communism is a violentmovement and democratic socialism is government action but Sarvodaya is
a non-violent movement in which socialism is established by ideological
changes in all human beings.
7 So, Jayaprakash Narayan accepted the
Sarvodaya philosophy for social reconstruction.
In this way Jayaprakash Narayan, who was a follower of Marxism at
any time, was now a lecturer of Sarvodaya and Gandhian thought.8
Violent Revolution to Non-Violent Revolution  – Ahimsa (non
violence) is the main component of Gandhian thought. Mahatma Gandhi
believed that Ahimsa (non violence) is an active force and he proved it throughhis non violent revolution during freedom movement. Through his non violent
revolution, Mahatma Gandhi astonished the whole world. He used Ahimsa
in political and social sphere and proved that it could be successfully appliedin all areas of life and at all levels of society and nation.
Jayaprakash Narayan was one of those people who were influenced by
Gandhian concept of non violence. He accepted the way of non violence forsocial reconstruction such as Bhoodan and gramdan and used non violent
revolution during emergency period of 1975-1977 to save democratic values.
During freedom movement, Jayaprakash Narayan did not believe
strongly in non violence. He accepted violent way of revolution for freedom
movement and established Azad Dasta which was a group of violent
revolutionaries for freedom movement. He said that the discussion on violenceand non violence is meaningless; both are good in the reference of freedom
movement.
9
But after independence, when he came in the light of Gandhian thought
he believed in the power and needs of non-violence and devoted his life to
non-violent revolution for social reconstruction which is called sarvodaya
movement.10
He gave the credit for the effect of non violence on him to Gandhi ji.
Jayaprakash Narayan said, “It is our good luck that Gandhi ji was born in
our country who gave us a non-violent way. We can cross any crisis withpeace and this credit goes to Gandhi ji.”
11
Jayaprakash Narayan believed that non-violent revolution is always
better than violent revolution in behavioural term. He said that the objectivescan not be completed with violent revolution, through violent revolution thePankaj Kumar DubeyAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 141opposite results will come.12 He believed that the change in society and
reconstruction of society are possible through non-violence. He said that thechange in society is not possible through violent revolution; it is possible
through non-violent revolution such as sarvodaya.
13
Materialism to Spiritualism –  When Jayaprakash Narayan come in
the effect of Marxism, he believed in materialist philosophy.14 The equality
and brotherhood was the main factor of his thoughts. He said, “At the same
time, Marxism provided another beacon of light for me; equality andbrotherhood freedom was not enough. It must mean freedom for all-even
the lowliest and this freedom must include freedom from exploitation from
hunger, from poverty.”
15
But after independence, when he believed in Gandhian thought then he
moved towards spiritualism.
He said, “I believed in materialist philosophy for a long time. But it is
clear that no inspiration is in materialist philosophy to be a good man. It
means that social reconstruction is not possible through materialist
philosophy.”16 Jayaprakash Narayan rejected materialist philosophy because
he believed that materialism could not achieve the aim of a good society;
materialist philosophy can not give any base for goodness. He said, “It
becomes clear that materialism, as a philosophical outlook, could not provideany basis for ethical conduct and any incentive for goodness.”
17
Jayaprakash Narayan found that the inspiration to be a good man and
social reconstruction are possible through sarvodaya and Gandhian thought.He believed that spiritualism is necessary to be a good man.
18
As a result of the effect of Gandhian thought, he believed that
spiritualism is the root of morality. He said, “The root of morality lies in theendeavour of man to realise this unity of existence, or to put it differently to
realise his self. For one who has experienced this unity, the practice of morality
becomes as natural and effortless as the drawing of breath.”
19
Jayaprakash Narayan believed that spiritualism is a base of non-violence;
without spiritualism non-violence can not exist. According to him,
spiritualism is necessary to have control on science and therefore, spiritualismis necessary for goodness in society. He said, “Gandhi ji has rightly said that
making of a good man is not possible through materialism, it is possible
only through spiritualism.”
20
Creative Work for Non-Violent Revolution of Social ReconstructionImpact of Gandhian Thought on the Ideology of Loknayak Jayaprakash Narayan142 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011– Mahatma Gandhi gave a concept of creative work to establish a non-violent
society, such as khadi. But, he wanted that these creative works should behelpful to change the ideology of every person of society towards non-
violence.
Jayaprakash Narayan accepted this concept of Gandhian thought and
participated in Gramdan and Bhoodan movement. He said, “The main
objective of the creative work of Mahatma Gandhi was to establish a non-
violent society, a violence free world.”
21 Jayaprakash Narayan emphasized
advanced creative work which will be more relevant at present context and
effectively complete the aim of non-violent society. He said, “a special type
of creative work is necessary for non-violent revolution because at presentthe traditional Gandhian work is not completing the objective to establish a
non-violent society; it is far away from the main objective of non-violent
revolution; the khadi, gramodyaog, Harijan and tribal service have been justformal work. The objective of non-violent revolution and non-violent society
is possible through Gramdan and Gramswaraj type of creative work.”
22
Gram Swaraj  – Jayaprakash Narayan gave his major contribution in
the development of democracy in India. He gave a right direction to the
politics in India. The political thought of Jayaprakash Narayan was influenced
by Gandhian thought. He said, “I believe there is no need for me to add thatat no time have I claimed to have made an original contribution to political
thought. I am indebted not only to Roy, but to many others, most of all to
Gandhi ji.”
23
The Gandhian concept of Gram swaraj is a base of social, political and
economic thought of Jayaprakash Narayan. Jayaprakash Narayan believed
that the rural development should be the base of development of this country.He said that Gandhi ji wanted to develop every village as a self dependent
agricultural industrial unit. According to him, “Gandhi ji wanted that in the
democracy, the power should not be in the hands of some selected people,
but the power should be in hands of all people. It is possible only when
gramraj will be the base of democracy.”
24
As a result of the effect of Gandhian thought, Jayaprakash Narayan
gave his thought about gramraj and tried to implement it in his work of
social reconstruction. According to him, the Gramraj means autonomous
village republic, not a panchayat; this Gramraj will be governed by thevillagers, not by government agencies.
25Pankaj Kumar DubeyAnasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011 143Jayaprakash Narayan presented a plan about Gramraj which was a dream
of Mahatma Gandhi. He said, “In order, therefore, to give a true base to ourdemocracy and to involve actively and continuously, the whole people in its
working, it is necessary to go lower down than the panchayat to the people
themselves and to constitute the entire adult membership of the villagecommunity into a statutory collective body; the gram-sabha. The panchayat
should function as an executive of the sabha, which should have power to
set up other committees and teams for specific purposes.”
26
Conclusion – In conclusion, it can be said that due to the impact of
Gandhian thought the ideology of Jayaprakash Narayan had changed from
Marxism to Sarvodaya, from materialism to spiritualism, from violentrevolution to non violent revolution and he gave a vision about creative
work to establish a nonviolent society and gram-swaraj. As a result we can
say that ideology of Jayaprakash Narayan was influenced by Gandhianthought. The work of Jayaprakash Narayan which was based on Gandhian
thought proves that Gandhian thought is more relevant in the present context.
Contact: Research Scholar, Faculty of Education,
 M.G. Kashi Vidyapith, Varanasi, U.P.
References
1. Shah, K. Jayaprakash Narayan Ki Jeevan Ytra, Varanasi: Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan,
2002, p.120.
2. Narayan, J. Sampurna Kranti, Varanasi: Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1999, p.5.
3. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/sarvodaya4. Narayan, J. Socialism to Sarvodaya, Varanasi: Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1998,
p.10.
5. Narayan, J. : Meri Vichar Yatra I , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 2001, p.24.
6. Narayan, J. : Socialism to Sarvodaya , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1998,
p. 27.
7. Narayan, J. : Meri Vichar Yatra I , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 2001, p.73.
8. Shah, K. : Jayaprakash Narayan ki Jeevan Yatra , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh
Prakashan, 2002, p.140.
9. ibid, p.82
10. ibid, p.120
11. Narayan, J. : Meri Vichar Yatra II , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1997, p. 67.
12. Narayan, J. : Meri Vichar Yatra I , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 2001,
p.100.
13. ibid, 180.14. Shah, K. : Jayaprakash Narayan ki Jeevan Yatra , Varanasi : Sarva Seva SanghImpact of Gandhian Thought on the Ideology of Loknayak Jayaprakash NarayanPrakashan, 2002, p.29.
15. Narayan, J. : Socialism to Sarvodaya , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1998,
p.11.
16. Shah, K. : Jayaprakash Narayan ki Jeevan Yatra , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh
Prakashan, 2002, p.110.
17. Narayan, J. : Socialism to Sarvodaya , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1998,
p.28.
18. Shah, K. : Jayaprakash Narayan ki Jeevan Yatra , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh
Prakashan, 2002, p.112.
19. Narayan, J. : Socialism to Sarvodaya , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1998,
p.31.
20. Narayan, J. : Meri Vichar Yatra I , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 2001, p.60.
21. ibid, p.108.22. ibid, p.109.23. Narayan, J. : Swaraj for the people , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1977,
p.VI.
24. Narayan, J. : Meri Vichar Yatra I , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 2001,
p.107.
25. Narayan, J. : Samudayik samaj Roop aur chintan , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh
Prakashan, 2002, p.19.
26. Narayan, J. : Swaraj for the people , Varanasi : Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan, 1977,
p.16.Pankaj Kumar Dubey
144 Anasakti Darshan, July 2010-June 2011SUBSCRIPTION
Correspondence regarding subscription  and payment  may be addressed to:
Manimala
Chief Editor–AnasaktiGandhi Smriti and Darshan SamitiGandhi Darshan Complex, Rajghat, New Delhi-110002Telephone: (011) 23392710, Fax: (011) 23392707
E-mail: 
2010gsds@gmail.com
Subscription Rates
SAARC countries (Including India) Other Countries
Annual IRs. 150 U.S. $ 50
Three Years IRs. 400 U.S. $ 125Five Years IRs. 750 U.S. $ 200Single Copy IRs. 100 U.S. $ 35
Rates of subscription for students of any Indian or foreign university
would be 40 per cent of the general rates given above.
All payments should be made through Local Cheque/Demand Draft in favour of
Director, Gandhi Smriti & Dashan Samiti, payable at New Delhi.