 
 
 
 
 
Anecdotes of Gandhi 
 
Abridged from the book, ‘This Was Bapu’  
 
 
 
 
Compiled by : R. K. Prabhu  
 
 
 
 
 
First Edition : July 1954 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 2  
  
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I wish to acknowledge with gratitude my indebtednes s to all the persons and journals 
mentioned by me in connection with the anecdotes of  Mahatma Gandhi narrated in 
this work. 
My particular thanks are due to Acharya Kaka Kalelk ar for generously writing the 
Foreword and for permitting me to reproduce a brief  chapter of his own reminiscences 
of Gandhiji entitled "An Ideal Prisoner" which appe ars on page 128; to Shri. D. G. 
Tendulkar and Vithalbhai K. Jhaveri for their ready  consent to the inclusion in this 
work of two contributions—one of them by myself—whi ch had appeared in their book 
of tributes entitled Gandhiji, namely "The Prince o f Beggars" (p. 124) and "Lessons in 
Journalistic Ethics" (p. 149); to Shri Gurdial N. M allik for permission to reproduce his 
story "A Walk With Children" (p. 117) which had bee n originally contributed by him to 
Pushpa, the "Children's Own Magazine" published in Bombay; to Shri Pangal Manjunath 
Nayak and his daughter Dr. Nirupma Nayak for their courtesy in permitting me to 
reproduce in facsimile two of the letters which Gan dhiji had written to the latter two 
decades ago; and to Shri M. G. Kamath, Editor, Dhar ti-Ke-Lal, New Delhi, for his 
invaluable help in the initial stage of the prepara tion of this work. 
A special debt of gratitude is due from me to the N avajivan Trust, on whose two 
journals, Young India and Harijan, I have freely dr awn for the sources of a good many 
of the anecdotes of the Father of the Indian Nation  related in this book. 
R. K. Prabhu  This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 10   
  
FOREWORD 
Shri Prabhu is an old and dear friend of mine. It i s more than forty years since we have 
known each other. A common friend, who introduced m e to the poetry of the stars, 
also introduced me to Ramachandra Krishna Prabhu as  a kindred spirit. Prabhu was 
then working on Lokamanya Tilak's theory of 'the Ar ctic Home of the Aryans in the 
Vedas'. My patriotic interest in the history of anc ient Indian culture was greatly 
flattered when I found that another scholar like Pr abhu held the same view, that the 
Vedas were thousands of years old and that we all m igrated from the Polar Regions to 
India which has been the home of the Aryan culture from prehistoric times. The 
common interest in the life, work and teachings of Shri Aurobindo Ghose was yet 
another bond that brought us nearer. 
Being a lover of books Prabhu was then taking his t raining in Library Science under 
Borden whom Sayajirao Gaekwad of Baroda had importe d from America to organize 
and develop the Central Library in his capital. Pra bhu gradually reverted to journalism 
and made it his life-work. He had the good fortune of working with veteran journalists 
like Horniman and Belvi. During all these years he made a deep study of Mahatma 
Gandhi's life and teachings. He has in his possessi on a vast collection of cuttings and 
extracts from Gandhiji's writings, all assorted und er various heads. This will fill many 
volumes. His one book, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi1, has done more to present a 
succinct but comprehensive idea of Gandhiji's teach ings than the host of similar books 
which have appeared in recent times. The Conquest o f Self was the first of a series 
which Prabhu planned for giving an exhaustive surve y of Gandhiji's thoughts and 
conclusions on various contemporary Indian and worl d problems. I wish he would find 
time to complete the series. I need not mention the  other books he has published on 
Gandhiji. I only wanted to show how eminently fitte d Prabhu is to give us a collection 
of anecdotes about Mahatmaji. 
Of all the prophets of humanity, Gandhiji seems to have been the most fortunate. No 
other succeeded in his life time as Gandhiji did, i n spreading his ideas and working 
them out on a vast canvas. No prophet succeeded so well as he did in choosing the 
fields of politics, nationalism and internationalis m for the practical application of his This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 11   
 spiritual message. Starting his career in the benig hted continent of Africa, he sensed 
the racial character of the world- situation and it s conflicts. He was led to form 
thereby the spiritual concept of human brotherhood' , and the necessity of cultivating 
soul-force to oppose the might of empires based on racialism and armed with the 
powers of science, economics and worldwide organiza tion. Gandhiji returned to India 
from South Africa at a juncture when Europe was loc ked in a gigantic struggle of arms 
and India was groping in darkness arising out of a lack of leadership and a sense of 
frustration. Gandhiji, the inheritor of the achieve ments of saintly India, the 
interpreter of India's synthetic culture of ages, a nd the prophet of a new humanism 
that embraced and appealed to the whole world, assu med the leadership of the 
country and gradually collected all the scattered f orces, spiritual, intellectual, 
economic and cultural, to guide them into a great n ational movement for the 
rediscovery and reassertion of the soul of India. H e unified India as no one else had 
done before, and gave a determined fight to the pow erful British Empire through non-
violent means. He saw the world in travail in two g lobal wars, and by freeing India he 
liberated a soul-force that is gradually influencin g world-politics and world-
aspirations. 
Many persons started writing about the life and tim es of the Mahatma. The Christian 
minister Doke and Henry S. L. Polak made the first attempts at portraying his unique 
spiritual life. Friends like Pranjivan Mehta and Mr s Avantika Gokhale collected what 
they could of his writings. G. A. Natesan of Madras  published an excellent volume of 
his selected speeches and writings. Mahatmaji himse lf found time, during his jail life 
in 1924, to write his autobiography and a detailed history of the Satyagraha movement 
in South Africa. Since then writers throughout the world have started writing about 
him from various angles. Romain Rolland, the gifted  genius of French letters, and 
Louis Fischer, the famous American journalist, have  given illuminating pictures of 
Mahatmaji. Tendulkar has brought out a long and exh austive biography in eight big and 
sumptuous volumes, while Pyarelal, who had the rare  fortune of working as one of 
Mahatmaji's private secretaries, is concentrating o n what he loves to call a "full-dress 
biography", documented with authentic letters and i nside knowledge of events.2 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 12   
 Mahatmaji was essentially a man of action. He had n o time to read and produce books. 
Yet his mission forced him to write from time to ti me, and continuously from week to 
week expressing himself on the various topics conce rning India and the world. He can 
also be said to have been 'a man of letters' in the  literal sense of the words. The 
number of letters that he wrote to friends, near an d distant, and correspondents from 
all parts of the world on various matters is legion . They are being gradually collected, 
edited, translated into and published in various la nguages. 
We have thus vast material dealing with Gandhiji's life and times. It is just beginning 
to come to light. The Westerners, always alert to n ew forces in the world, have given 
hasty, and sometimes imperfect and irrelevant descr iptions of Gandhiji and his 
message, and publishers have found it profitable to  popularize them. It is not possible 
to give an adequate idea of the vast literature tha t is being produced, both in India 
and abroad, about Gandhiji. Friends, colleagues and  intimate Coworkers of Gandhiji 
have concentrated their attention on his life as th ey intimately knew it. It is too early 
for them to write the political and cultural histor y of India during the Gandhian Era. In 
fact, the Gandhian Era has just begun showing its w orking on the canvas of all the 
continents of the world. And yet, it is not too ear ly for our people to record the events 
and cultural forces at work during the past one hun dred years that may be said to 
belong to, as the precursor of, the Gandhian Era. I t is a mistake to suppose that the 
Era began with the birth of Gandhiji. It started a little before 1857, and we should be 
able to interpret the history of the past 100 years  as being one of pregnant 
preparation for the renaissance which expressed its elf through the life and work of 
Mahatma Gandhi. 
Anecdotes about Gandhiji will occupy a small but fa vourite corner in this vast 
literature about him, for it has its value in under standing his composite and complex 
personality. An English philosopher has pithily sai d that "trifles make perfection and 
perfection is not a trifle." The same idea, in rela tion to Gandhiji, was expressed by 
Jairamdas Doulatram in the following words: 
"The  true  greatness of  a  person lies  more  in  small  deeds than  in  big 
achievements. It is the small things that count mos t in a man's life and show the stuff 
he is made of. Thus, if anyone wants to know and un derstand Gandhiji, his life and This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 13   
 teachings, he must try to study and find out what t rue humanity is and how it worked 
in Gandhiji's everyday life and teachings." 
Chandrashankar Shukla, one of the young set of Maha tmaji's private secretaries, has 
laid the world under a debt by collecting incidents  from the life of the Mahatma. His 
four volumes, published by Vora & Co., are a treat both for their human interest and 
as historical documents supplementing the various b iographies of Gandhiji. G. 
Ramachandran was perhaps the first in the field wit h his sheaf of anecdotes about 
Mahatmaji. What he has given is interesting and sig nificant, but one feels unsatisfied 
at the paucity of material that makes up the sheaf.  My own little collection, Stray 
Glimpses of Bapu3 was the result of after-lunch talks given to frien ds in the Seoni Jail, 
which came to an abrupt close with my unexpected re lease. I have had no time since 
then to write down further similar incidents. 
And now my friend Prabhu has come out with his bril liant collection of about 150 
anecdotes. Most of these are not to be found in any  of the previous ones. The criticism 
that Horace Alexander levelled at my collection may  apply equally to the present one 
of Prabhu. The stray glimpses which I presented in the little booklet are "like lost 
sheep", says Horace Alexander. "They are not arrang ed chronologically; neither are 
they classified into any appropriate headings." I c ould, with some effort, rearrange my 
glimpses into a chronological order; but I do not f eel that it is necessary. Neither do I 
feel that Prabhu's anecdotes would improve by a sim ilar treatment. He has followed 
the principle of the Buddhist work, Anguttaranikaya . Starting with very short 
anecdotes, he has gradually led up to incidents tha t cover long chapters. I think t hat 
psychologically this is a good arrangement. One is gradually led on and on with 
increasing interest till one does not grudge the ti me required for finishing the entire 
book. 
Not anything and everything that is written about a  great man can pass muster as art 
anecdote or incident, but Prabhu has given the sugg estive caption to his collection: 
This Was Bapu. Any incident or anecdote, to be wort h the name ought to be 
significant. It must haunt your mind long after you  have read it. Most of those 
collected here are strikingly significant. They are  arresting and of sustained interest. 
They throw a flood of light, even of searchlight, o n the character of Mahatma Gandhi. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 14   
 There are, however half-a- dozen ones which are nei ther significant nor striking. 
Fastidious literary critics might wish that these w ere dropped. Devotees of Gandhiji, 
however, would be grateful to Prabhu for having sub ordinated his sense of literary 
aesthetics to the responsibility or dharma of the c hronicler in not dropping these 
incidents. 
Lives of great men have a knack of "growing" with t he passage of time. Anecdotes 
grow and grow in number and in variety till it beco mes difficult to distinguish between 
those which are true and those which are spurious. This happens even during the life 
time of the person about whom the anecdotes are wri tten. Human nature, specially in 
heroworship, is prone to paint occasions according to its mood or taste. Take, for 
instance, the anecdote 146 in this collection. It d escribes the little revolution brought 
about by Mahatmaji during his first appearance in S hantiniketan in January, 1915. I 
was an honorary teacher there at the time and I had  my own share in the little 
revolution, which I have described in my Stray Glimpses. In the anecd ote, as stated in 
the present book, S. K. Roy has put the description , as from the mouth of the poet 
Tagore,  that does not tally with the facts. 
"In the meantime, Gandhiji asked the scavengers not  to do any work for a few days. 
The high-caste boys could never think of doing the work of untouchable scavengers. 
Life in the school became almost impossible with th e odour of night-soil. Then 
Gandhiji himself carried the pots on his own head .  . . and buried the contents 
underground. This super-human act was contagious. S oon the boys of the highest 
castes and rich families were vying with one anothe r to have the honour of doing the 
work of the outcaste scavengers." 
This description is apocryphal and one of pure imag ination. Gandhiji did not ask the 
scavengers to give up their work, nor was there a s ingle day when the latrines were 
not cleaned. We, some of the teachers and students,  in our impatience did demolish a 
permanent latrine because Gandhiji happened to rema rk that the structure was old- 
fashioned, insanitary and hopeless. He had neither the time nor the occasion to carry 
pots of the night-soil on his head. I do not mean t o say that he would not have done it. 
He had done it on many occasions in jails in South Africa. He did it along with us, 
inmates of the ashram, for long periods, but we nev er carried the pots on our heads. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 15   
 We had better methods. 
In  the  anecdote  25,  the  following  sentence  i s  attributed  to  Gandhiji: 
"Whether it is my Gurudev or anybody, my eating goe s on." I think it unlikely that 
Gandhiji could have referred to Tagore as "my Gurud ev". In Shantiniketan we all 
referred to the Poet as "Gurudev". Gandhiji loyally  followed the practice and always 
referred to the Poet as "the Gurudev", just as the latter referred to him as "the 
Mahatma". "My Gurudev", just does not represent the  natural attitude of Mahatma 
Gandhi. There is an element of irreverent familiari ty and possessiveness in the word 
"my" which was foreign to it. 
A friend from Bengal pointed out the inaccuracy of facts that had crept into one of the 
incidents recorded in my Stray Glimpses. One can, t herefore, be never sure whether 
the incidents actually happened, however scrupulous ly exact the writer may be in 
recording the version of it as given to him. But th e common mind loves a good story 
and does not hesitate to invent one, if necessary, to magnify the greatness of the 
object of one's worship though sufficiently great i n itself it may be ! 
One is, therefore, filled with admiration and grati tude at the extreme care with which 
the followers of the Prophet of Islam collected the  anecdotes about him and tested 
rigorously the veracity of each one of them. The be st thing to adopt about the 
anecdotes regarding Mahatma Gandhi would be for his  contemporaries to write down 
all that they know of him as authentic; authors and  publishers to verify whatever 
comes to them; and some time limit to be laid down for the collection of the 
anecdotes. Any appearing after that ought to be acc epted with caution, the burden of 
proving their authenticity being thrown on those wh o produce them. 
I know a friend from Singapore, a great admirer and  devotee of Dr. Ananda K.  
Coomaraswamy, is collecting typical anecdotes about  Mahatma Gandhi which reflect 
the sense of humour as evinced by Mahatmaji through out his life, specially in his 
contacts with non-Indians. For instance, take the a necdote 35, here, in which Gandhiji 
is said to have answered the question regarding the  secret of his power. It is not in 
consonance with the characteristic nature of Gandhi ji as I knew him. It is just possible 
that he might have written some such thing in his e arly days. Somebody must trace out 
this anecdote to its original source. I do not mean  to imply that what is written there This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 16   
 is not the secret of Gandhiji's power. What I doubt  is whether he would have explained 
it in that fashion. 
Some of the anecdotes collected in this book are si mply superb. Take, for instance, 
33, about the postman whom Gandhiji describes as a "man of letters" and Ramsay 
Macdonald as "one of the statesmen true to his clas s, always waiting till circumstances 
force them to move"; 46, where he describes the loi n-cloth as "minus fours", which has 
become classic; 43 is more about the poet Iqbal tha n about Gandhiji, but as an 
anecdote it must be classed Al; 59 is specially imp ortant today (the whole of Japan as 
also the rest of the world being uneasy at the effe cts of the atom bomb—and the 
latest is the H bomb— Gandhiji suggests that the po wer of the soul working through 
prayer is mightier than that of any atom bomb; and 125 shows the power of Gandhiji 
in death as in life). 
Biographers of Gandhiji will do well to study and u tilize these anecdotes, because they 
express the various aspects of his life much more t han long dissertations. I have no 
doubt that some of the anecdotes recorded here will  find a place in school text-books, 
and in anthologies of world's great apophthegms and  of anecdotes about its great 
personalities. 
Let me thank again Shri R. K. Prabhu for serving th e reading public with such a 
delicious repast prepared with deep devotion and ha rd labour of love. 
KAKA KALELKAR 
 
1. It should be stated here that this book as well as The Conquest of Self mentioned in line 5 
from bottom, were jointly compiled by R. K. Prabhu and U. R. Rao. 
2. Under this, Mahatma Gandhi—The Last Phase Vol. I & II have been published. Pub. Navajivan; 
price each vol. Rs. 20. 
3. Published by Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad,  price Rs. 2, postage etc. 81 P. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 17   
  
THIS WAS BAPU 
A DREAM OF DEATH 
"I do not know if the sacrifice of Mr. Ganesh j Sha nkar Vidyarthi has gone in vain. His 
spirit always inspired me. I envy his sacrifice. Is  it not shocking that this country has 
not produced another Ganesh Shankar? None after him  came to fill the gap. Ganesh 
Shankar's Ahimsa was perfect Ahimsa. My Ahimsa will  also be perfect if I could die 
similarly peacefully with axe blows on my head. I h ave always been dreaming of such a 
death, and I wish to treasure this dream. How noble  that death will be,—a daggar 
attack on me from one side; an axe blow from anothe r; a lathi wound administered 
from yet another direction and kicks and abuses fro m all sides and if in the midst of 
these I could rise to the occasion and remain non-v iolent and peaceful and could ask 
others to act and behave likewise, and finally I co uld die with cheer on my face and 
smile on my lips, then and then alone my Ahimsa wil l be perfect and true. I am 
hankering after such an opportunity and also wish C ongressmen to remain in search of 
such an opportunity." 
— Message sent by Mahatma Gandhi on the occasion of  the celebration of the anniversary of the 
martyrdom of Shri Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi, who was  killed in the Hindu-Muslim riot at Kanpur in 
1931. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 18   
  
01. THE SALT OF LIFE 
"Do you think a sense of humour is necessary in lif e?" was a question put to Gandhiji by 
a visitor and his reply was: "If I had no sense of humour, I should long ago have 
committed suicide." 
 
 
02. A BIRTHDAY MESSAGE 
Gandhiji sent the following reply to the organizers  of the World Fellowship of Faiths 
who had requested him to send them a 'message' on t he occasion of his birthday (2nd 
October, 1933): 
"What message can I send through the pen, if I am n ot sending any through the life I 
am living?" 
 
 
03. IS THE WORLD GETTING BETTER? 
"Is the world getting better or worse?" queried an interviewer. 
"So long as I believe in a benevolent God," replied  Gandhiji, "I must believe that the 
world is getting better even though I see evidence to the contrary." 
 
 
04. MAHATMA AND THE CAPITALIST 
A big financier, a captain of business, put this qu estion to Gandhiji once: "Do you want 
me or my money to the Nation's cause?" 
"You," was the straight reply. 
"What task would you assign me if I left off busine ss and joined you?" 
"The Spinning Wheel," replied Gandhiji as he plied the Charkha. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 19   
  
 
05. IN BUCKINGHAM PALACE 
"The climax of Gandhiji's freedom from convention i n the matter of dress was reached 
when I saw him mounting the carpeted stairs of Buck ingham Palace to greet the King 
and Queen, with his blanket round his shoulders, at  the Royal Party in honour of the 
Round Table Conference delegates and other visitors . I do not think the Palace had 
seen a visitor in that costume before, nor is it ea sy to conceive that anyone else would 
have been allowed the same freedom." Sir Abdul Qadi r 
 
 
06. THE POWER OF PRAY ER 
When, during Mahatmaji's 21 days' fast undertaken i n September 1924 for bringing 
about Hindu-Muslim unity, the doctor, noticing the extreme weakness of Gandhiji at 
the end of twelve days of the fast, spoke to the la tter about the perishing of the body, 
Gandhiji, with a smile gleaming in his eyes like su nshine, answered simply, "You have 
forgotten the power of prayer." 
The power of prayer did, indeed, prevail, for Gandh iji survived the ordeal, as the 
world knows. 
 
 
07. VIOLENCE PREFERRED TO COWARDICE 
Gandhiji always made it clear that his creed of non violence was of the brave. But 
where the choice was between cowardice and violence , he was definite that he would 
prefer violence to cowardice. "Thus, when my eldest  son asked me what he should 
have done, had he been present when I was almost fa tally assaulted in 1908, whether 
he should have run away and seen me killed or wheth er he should have used his 
physical force which he could and wanted to use and  defended me, I told him that it 
was his duty to defend me even by using violence," wrote Gandhiji in Young India. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 20   
  
 
08. “PRICE OF FREEDOM IS DEATH” 
"The price of freedom is death" — this almost proph etic observation was contained in 
one of the letters written by Gandhiji not long bef ore his death to Dr. Gope Gurbux of 
Bikaner. Dr. and Mrs. Gope Gurbux were inmates of G andhiji's Ashram at Sevagram for 
a fairly long time and Gandhiji had been personally  instructing and guiding them in 
spinning, latrine cleaning, cooking, etc. When leav ing the Ashram they had received 
the following parting message from him : "Follow whatever commends itself to you in 
my life." 
 
 
09. "BANDE MATARAM" 
During his stay in Calcutta in August 1947, in his post-prayer speeches Gandhiji 
referred to Band Mataram which was sung just before  prayers by a lady. As the song 
started, the vast gathering stood up and reverently  kept standing. 
Mahatma Gandhi was alone seated because, as he rema rked later, he had learnt that 
their culture did not require standing as a mark of  respect when any national song or 
Bhajan was sung. It was an unnecessary importation from the West, he thought. After 
all, it was the mental attitude that mattered, not the superficial appearance. 
 
 
10. LIKE THE TRUE YOGI 
During his Konkan tour Gandhiji happened to reach t he village of Lange at midnight. 
The villagers had been anxiously awaiting his arriv al for hours. In his address to them 
Gandhiji said, "I do not know whether I should pity  you or myself for keeping you 
waiting until this hour. But we have done what the Yogi of the Gita does: 'The night of 
sleep of the ordinary mortals is a day of wakefulne ss for the Yogi.' I congratulate you 
on your Yoga, but you will better deserve my congra tulations if you show that you are This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 21   
 true Yogis by contributing for the poor and by purc hasing our Khadi." There was 
pleased laughter at these witty remarks of Gandhiji. 
 
 
11. POSTMAN BEFORE PREMIER 
According to Mr. S. Winsten, author of Days with Be rnard Shaw, who had become 
acquainted with Gandhiji during the latter's visit to London in 1931, once Mr. Ramsay 
MacDonald, the then British Premier, arrived for an  urgent consultation with Gandhiji, 
but a postman had walked all the way from Bow to Kn ightsbridge because he wanted 
to pay his respects to the great Indian leader. "I' ll see the man of letters first," said 
Gandhiji decisively and then he explained to Mr. Wi nsten: "You see, a statesman can 
wait, for that is his job; he is always waiting till circumstances force him to move."  
 
 
12. ORIGIN OF 'GANDHI CAP' 
Mr. H. S. L. Polak, who was closely associated with  Gandhiji in his South African 
campaign, explained some years ago the "origin" of the "Gandhi Cap" in a letter in The 
Manchester Guardian. He wrote: 
"There are surprisingly few people, even among Indi an Nationalists, who recall the 
origin of the so called 'Gandhi Cap'. It formed par t of the uniform which Mr. Gandhi, as 
a non-White political prisoner, wore during the Sou th African Indian passive resistance 
struggle of 1907 to 1914. He later used it when, on  his return to India, he further 
developed his technique of non-violent Civil Disobedience." 
 
 
13. HARIJAN SEVA 
Shrimati Rameshwari Nehru, writing in the Thakkar B apa Jayanti Commemoration 
Volume, relates that Gandhiji was once addressing i n Wardha the members of the This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 22   
 Harijan Sevak Sangh on how he expected them to disc harge their duties by the 
Harijans. One of the Brahmana members of the Sangh,  highly respected for his 
excellent services to the Harijans, asked the quest ion what Gandhiji expected them to 
do besides what they were doing already. Prompt cam e the counter-question, 'Are you 
married?' On the member's replying in the affirmati ve, "Gandhiji's face brightened up," 
says Shrimati Nehru, "and with great force he decla red, 'Well then, you should get your 
son married to a Harijan girl. Do you now understan d what more I expect you to do?' " 
 
 
14. IQBAL'S TRIBUTE 
Iqbal, the illustrious Muslim poet, was an admirer of Gandhiji, although he did not 
agree with him on certain issues. He used to say th at future generations of Hindus 
would worship Gandhiji as an Incarnation of Divinit y. 
In 1921-22 when the Civil Disobedience and Khilafat  movements were surging ahead, 
John Bull, an English paper, published a cartoon ri diculing Gandhiji. A beautiful ^ 
woman was shown, blindfolded, following Gandhiji on  a rock, beyond which was a 
stormy sea. She was called "Mother India" whom Gand hiji was shown to be leading to 
inevitable death. 
When Iqbal saw this cartoon he wrote under it four lines in Persian and changed the 
entire meaning of the cartoon. The meaning of these  lines was: "Do not linger on the 
shores of the sea, for there The song of life is so ft and slow: 
Plunge into the ocean and fight the waves Eternal life is achieved through struggle." 
 
 
15. POWER OF SILENCE 
During his visit to Gandhiji at Sevagram in Decembe r 1938 Dr. John Mott, the great 
Christian evangelist, asked Gandhiji if he had cont inued to find silence necessary in his 
spiritual quest. 
Answering the question Gandhiji said, "Only a littl e while ago I remained completely This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 23   
 silent nearly two months and the spell of that sile nce has not yet been broken. I broke 
it today when you came. Nowadays I go into silence at prayer time every evening and 
break it for visitors at 2 o'clock. I broke it toda y when you came. It has now become 
both a physical and spiritual necessity for me. Ori ginally it was taken to relieve the 
sense of pressure. Then I wanted time for writing. After, however, I had practised it 
for some time I saw the spiritual value of it. It s uddenly flashed across my mind that 
that was the time when I could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as 
though I was naturally built for silence. Of course , I may tell you that from my 
childhood I have been noted for silence. I was sile nt at school, and in my London days I 
was taken for a silent drone by friends." 
 
 
16. A HUMILIATING SPECTACLE 
During the historical Dandi March in March 1930, Ga ndhiji delivered an introspective 
speech at Bhatgam (Dt. Surat), confessing the lapse s to which some of the pilgrims of 
the March had fallen. In the course of the speech G andhiji made a touching reference 
to a labourer who was made to carry a Kitson burner  for the night marches : 
"We may not consider anybody as low. I observed tha t you had provided for the night 
journey a heavy Kitson burner mounted on a stool wh ich the poor labourer carried on 
his head. This was a humiliating sight. This man wa s being goaded to walk fast. I could 
not bear the sight. I, therefore, put on speed and outraced the whole company. But it 
was no use. The man was made to run after me. The h umiliation was complete. If the 
weight had to be carried, I should have loved to se e someone among ourselves 
carrying it. We would then soon dispense both with the stool and the burner. No 
labourer would carry such a load on his head. We ri ghtly object to beggar (forced 
labour). But what was this if it was not beggar? If  then we do not quickly mend our 
ways, there is no Swaraj such as you and I have put before the people . 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 24   
  
17. "NOTHING TOO SMALL FOR HIM" 
Acharya Kaka Kalelkar, who was with Gandhiji in Bom bay at the time of the Congress 
Session there in 1915 relates the following story r evealing how great the latter could 
be even in small things: 
One day I noticed him searching furiously for somet hing in an agitated mood. 
I asked him, "Bapu, what are you searching for?" "A  small pencil," he answered. 
I took one out of my attache case to give him. 
"No, no. I want the small pencil I am searching for ," Bapuji said.  
"Use this for the moment, Bapuji, and I shall searc h for yours later," I replied. 
"You do not understand, Kaka," he said, "I should n ot lose that pencil. It was given to 
me in Madras by the young son of G. A. Natesan. And  with what affection he ran and 
gave it to me; and how can I afford to lose it?” 
We both searched the rogue of a pencil and Bapuji f elt at ease only after it was found. 
The pencil was hardly one inch long!  
 
 
18. PRAYERS AGAINST ATOM BOMBS 
One of the last foreign press correspondents to int erview Gandhiji before his death 
was Miss Margaret Bourke White of U.S.A. One of the  questions she put to him was: 
"Americans are filled with foreboding, particularly  about atomic bombs. 
How could you use non-violence against atomic bombs ?” 
Gandhiji answered: "How shall I answer that query? Atomic bombs could be met by 
prayerful action.” 
Question: "Would you pray while planes are overhead ?” 
Answer: "I would come out in the open and let the p ilot see that I have not the face of 
evil against him. The pilot, of course, cannot see my face at such a height, but that This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 25   
 longing in my heart that he should not come to harm  would reach up to him and his 
eyes would be opened. If those who were done to dea th in Hiroshima by the atom 
bomb had died with that prayerful action and died o penly with prayer in their hearts 
without uttering a groan, the war would not have en ded as disgracefully as it has. It is 
a question now whether the victors are really victo rs or victims. The world is not at 
peace. It is still more dreadful." 
 
 
19. "MORE BEAUTIFUL THAN ALL ORNAMENTS" 
During his tour of Southern India in connection wit h the anti-untouchability 
movement, an incident took place in Badagara in Mal abar which visibly moved 
Gandhiji. In response to his appeal at the public m eeting there a girl named Kaumudi 
came forward  and  gave  up  her  bangles.  Althoug h Gandhiji was satisfied with it the 
girl was not. She then took out her gold chain from  her neck and gave it to him. 
Gandhiji thought that the presentation would end th ere. But the girl was not to be 
stopped. Her hands almost unconsciously travelled t o her ears and a pair of beautiful 
jewelled ear-rings were passed on to him. 
This incident, said the Mahatma later, touched his heart and gave him fresh 
inspiration. He had tried to conceal his emotion, b ut he could not say how far he 
succeeded. Gandhiji asked if the girl had her paren ts' consent for this presentation. 
Her father was only pleased. All the girl asked for  in return for the ornaments was an 
autograph, but Gandhiji was prepared to give her mu ch more than that. He wrote on a 
piece of paper in Hindi a sentence to the effect th at more beautiful than all 
ornaments she had given up was her willingness for sacrifice, and signed under it. The 
girl was very much pleased and she promised not to replace the ornaments. 
 
A Little Girl's Sacrifice 
When towards the close of his tour Gandhiji arrived  at Udipi, in South Kanara, an 
address in Hindi on behalf of the local Hindi Prach ar Sabha was presented t o him along 
with other public addresses. This Hindi address was  read by a nine- year  old  girl  This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 26   
 named  Nirupama,  daughter  of  a  couple  who  wer e  devoted Congress workers. She 
had been taught by her parents from her childhood t o speak, read and write in Hindi. 
When she had finished reading the address and was p resenting the same to Gandhiji, 
she was asked by the latter whether she would give him the ornaments she was 
wearing along with the address. On this she removed  the gold chain from her neck and 
handed it over to him. "What about this thing?" Gan dhiji asked her, pointing to the 
bangles on her wrists. She extended her hands for h im to remove them, but while he 
began to do so he noticed tears on her cheeks. He r eturned the bangles to her, giving 
a gentle tap on her cheeks and saying, "I see you a re weeping. I cannot accept your 
gift with tears on." 
The girl's parents were not present on the occasion , being busy looking after the 
arrangements for Gandhiji's stay in the town. When she, along with Gandhiji and 
others, arrived later at his residence, her mother,  on hearing of the incident, asked 
her daughter to give away the ornaments. Nirupama t hen gladly removed the bangles 
from her hands and presented them to Gandhiji. She next started removing her ear-
rings, but Gandhiji stopped her saying, "Keep it, t hat is for you. This is enough." He 
expressed his great pleasure at her sacrifice and a sked her whether she would promise 
him that she would not wear any ornaments on her pe rson in future. She readily gave 
him that promise. 
It is full two decades since the incident took plac e. Nirupama is now a practising 
doctor (M.B.B.S.). She has kept her word given to B apu. You will not find a single 
trinket on her person. Bapu kept up correspondence with her for a while and two of 
his letters to her read as follows : 
 
 
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 27   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An English translation of the Hindi letters is give n below : "Chiranjeevi Nirupama, 
I have received your letter. Your language is good.  Ornaments are unnecessary. They 
create in the girls a fascination for outward beaut y. In this land of poverty there 
should be a little (less, attraction for ornaments.  That is why I am opposed to 
ornaments. 
23-5-'34    Bapu's blessings." 
" Chiranjeevi Nirupama, 
I got your letter. Against your tendency to cry the re is a remedy. You are still a child. 
For three or four years more you should not speak i n public. During this period you 
should practise speaking. When you have grown bigge r, you will learn to speak 
automatically. This practice of control will increa se your ability. 
Wardha, 11-6-'35       Bapu's blessings." 
 
 
20. THE GANDHI “TALISMAN” 
To a friend, who was tormented by doubts, Gandhiji wrote a letter. The letter was 
mislaid, but on a later occasion the words were rec alled to memory and transcribed. 
The following is the text of the letter: This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 28   
 "I will give you a talisman. Whenever you are in do ubt, or when the self becomes too 
much with you, try the following expedient: 
"Recall the face of the poorest and the most helple ss man whom you may have seen 
and ask yourself, if the step you contemplate is go ing to be of any use to him. Will he 
be able to gain anything by it? Will it restore him  to a control over his own life and 
destiny? In other words, will it lead to Swaraj or self-rule for the hungry and also 
spiritually starved millions of our countrymen? 
"Then you will find your doubts and yourself meltin g away. 
— M. K. Gandhi" 
 
 
21. A REBUKE TO STUDENTS 
At Sukkur the students presented Gandhiji with an a ddress. Gandhiji was asked to give 
his opinion on some ethical questions that did not seem to be in keeping with the 
atmosphere. Upon cross-examination the students adm itted that they had not been 
consulted about the address before or after it was drafted. The unreality of the whole 
business hurt Gandhiji. He described it as an uncon scious untruth. 
"You have presented me with an address," he told th em, "whose contents you do not 
know. You have praised Khadi in your address but yo u have come dressed in foreign 
cloth. You have asked me questions which appear to be a mere pose. You wasted your 
good time which you could have much better utilized  by sweeping clean the street of 
Shikarpur or doing some other piece of honest labou r and giving the earning to the 
Lalaji Memorial Fund. Knowledge can be imparted to the jijnasu only. But seeing that 
you never knew the contents of the address, you cou ld have no desire to know the 
answers. I must therefore decline to take them seri ously. If the framer wishes to have 
the answers he must seek another opportunity."  
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 29   
  
22. “LIARS ALL” 
In the course of his Bengal tour in 1925, Gandhiji happened to visit Nawabganj. It had 
rained heavily all night, and the school boys (of H aripad Bapu's National School), 
whom, Gandhiji wanted to meet early morning before leaving, could not keep their 
time and were late. Not more than five minutes coul d, therefore, be given them. "You 
all spin and wear Khaddar," said Gandhiji to them, "but tell me how many of you 
always speak the truth and never lie?" A few boys r aised their hands. "Well, now tell 
me how many of you occasionally happen to lie?" Two  boys immediately raised their 
hands, then three, then four and finally, almost al l! 
"Thank you," said Gandhiji, bidding them good-bye, "there will be always hope for 
those of you who know and own that they occasionall y lie. The path of those who 
think they never lie is difficult. I wish both succ ess." 
 
 
23. GANDHI AND THOREAU 
The view prevalent in some quarters that Mahatma Ga ndhi derived his idea of Civil 
Disobedience from the writings of Thoreau was decla red by Gandhiji himself to be 
baseless. In reply to an enquiry he wrote a letter dated 10th September, 1935 to Shri 
P. Kodanda Rao, of the Servants of India Society, w ho was then in America, in the 
course of which he said: 
"The statement in that I had derived my idea of Civ il Disobedience from the writings of 
Thoreau is wrong. The resistance to authority in So uth Africa was well advanced 
before I got the essay by Thoreau on Civil Disobedi ence. But the movement was then 
known as Passive Resistance. As it was incomplete I  had coined the word Satyagraha 
for the Gujarati readers. When I saw the title of T horeau's great essay, I began the use 
of his phrase to explain our struggle to the Englis h readers. But I found that even Civil 
Disobedience failed to convey the full meaning of t he struggle. I, therefore, adopted 
the phrase Civil Resistance. Non-violence was alway s an integral part of our struggle." This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 30   
  
 
24. AN OBJECT-LESSON IN AHIMSA 
During  his  memorable walking  tour  of  Noakhali  District  early  in  1947 Gandhiji 
halted for a few minutes at the house of a Muslim v illager, Asghar Bhuyan, at 
Dharampur. Gandhiji was given a warm reception and was garlanded by the Muslim 
villagers. Children of the house gathered around Ga ndhiji, who patted them and said: 
"You are all my friends." 
Asghar Bhuyan showed Gandhiji one branch of a tree and said: "You see, Gandhiji, this 
branch has two kinds of leaves. Is it not strange?"  he asked. 
Gandhiji gave a laughter and said: "There is nothin g strange about it. It is all God's 
creation. These two different kinds of leaves of on e tree are like Hindus and Muslims 
of the same soil. But see how they are flourishing side by side in the same tree. They 
tell us that we should live as brothers in the same  soil as these two leaves are living in 
the same tree." 
The Muslim villagers were very much impressed at Ga ndhiji's answer and said that 
what Gandhiji said was perfectly right. Hindus and Muslims should live like brothers of 
the same soil. 
 
 
25. AN INVITATION TO COMMIT HARAKIRI 
An English correspondent sent Gandhiji a cutting of  an article headed 'Cheer Up', 
printed in Britannia, (15-2-'29). The article conta ined detailed figures of Britain's 
conquered people, mercantile marine, her exports, a nd boasted, "Ours, the greatest 
mercantile marine ever known, carries more than a m illion pounds worth of machinery 
annually to India, from which country British share holders, creditors and officials draw 
some thirty million pounds a year! 
The correspondent had written the following footnot es : 
"If Mr. Blinking Gandhi saw this lot, he'd probably  cut his throat on one of his own This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 31   
 spinning wheels." 
On this letter this was Gandhiji's comment: 
"I have decided not to cut my throat yet for a whil e. I want to see the spinning wheel 
produce the whole of the billion yards of cloth tha t 'the greatest mercantile marine 
the world has ever known' carries to India from Eng land. Only India has to wake from 
her torpor." 
 
 
26. WHO ARE THE "UNCLEAN"? 
Mahatma Gandhi wrote the following letter in reply to the 'open letter' sent to him by 
Shri Tathachariar, son-in-law of the Ex-President o f the Indian National Congress, Shri 
C. Vijayaraghavachariar of Salem. In this 'open let ter' Shri Tathachariar had stressed 
the need for the 'purification' of the Harijans bef ore they could be granted entry into 
the temples: 
"Dear Friend, 
What you have marked as an 'open letter' has been d uly received by me. I confess that 
your argument does not appeal to me. I hold strongl y the view that it is the caste 
Hindus who have to undergo purification and do pena nce and not the Harijans, as even 
for their outward cleanliness the caste Hindus are responsible. Internally, we do not 
know who is unclean, but we can infer from our past  experience that the privileged 
and powerful are more unclean at heart than the dow n trodden and despised. 
Yours sincerely, 
M. K. Gandhi” 
 
 
27. GANDHIJI AND THE COMMUN ISTS 
The Communists not only did not see eye to eye with  Gandhiji's creed, but also gave a 
good deal of trouble at Congress meetings in the th ird decade of this century. But as This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 32   
 Gandhiji did not have any ill-will against them, he  always tried to win them over. 
While at Meerut in 1929 he expressed his strong des ire to see the Communist prisoners 
lodged in the local jail undergoing trial in connec tion with the famous Meerut 
Conspiracy case. 
And when he visited the jail, the prisoners were su rprised to see a visitor whom they 
expected the least. They greeted Gandhiji with the words, "We frankly did not expect 
you to visit us." 
Gandhiji replied, "Of course, you did not. You do n ot know me. I may have my 
differences with you. You may even cause me trouble  at Congress meetings, but my 
creed teaches me to go out of my way to show regard  to my opponents and thus 
demonstrate to them that I can mean no ill to them. " 
 
 
28. "NON-VIOLENT” HONEY 
Once when Gandhiji made a reference to "innocent ho ney," which he was fond of 
advertising among his friends, one of them asked hi m what he meant by the 
expression. Gandhiji's answer was as follows: 
"Honey scientifically drawn by scientific bee-keepe rs. They keep the bees and make 
them collect honey without killing them. That is wh y I call it innocent or non-violent 
honey. That is an industry which admits of great ex pansion." 
But can you call it absolutely non-violent? You dep rive the bee of its honey,as you 
deprive the calf of its milk," demurred the friend.  
"You are right," remarked Gandhiji, "but the world is not governed entirely by logic. 
Life itself involves some kind of violence, and we have to choose the path of least 
violence. There is violence even in vegetarianism, is there not? Similarly, if I must 
have honey, I must be friendly to the bee and get i t to yield as much honey as it will. 
Moreover, in the scientific bee-culture" the bee is  never deprived of its honey 
altogether." 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 33   
  
29. ORIGIN OF HIS LOIN CLOTH 
How Gandhiji came to discard his full dress which h e was till then wearing and took to 
wearing the loin cloth only was related by him in t he course of an interview. He said: 
"In 1921 Maulana Mahomed Ali was arrested at Waltai r whilst he and I were going on a 
tour to the South. He was torn from Begum Mahomed A li who was travelling with us. I 
was deeply moved. She bore the separation bravely a nd attended meetings in Madras. 
I left her at Madras and went as far as Madura. On the way I saw in our compartment 
crowds that were wholly unconcerned with what had h appened. Almost without 
exception they were bedecked in foreign fineries. I  entered into conversation with 
some of them and pleaded for Khadi. For I had no ot her way open to me to secure the 
release of the Ali Brothers save through Khadi. The y shook their heads as they said, 
'We are too poor to buy Khadi and it is so dear.' I  realized the substratum of truth 
behind the remark. I had my vest, cap and full Dhot i on. When these uttered only 
partial truth, the millions of compulsorily naked m en, save for their lango ti four 
inches wide and nearly as many feet long, gave thro ugh their limbs the naked truth. 
What effective answer could I give them, if it was not to divest myself of every inch of 
clothing I decently could and thus to a still great er extent bring myself in a line with 
ill-clad masses? And this I did the very next morning after the Madura meeting." 
 
 
30. "THEY DESERVE THE CROWN" 
Replying to an address of welcome presented to him and Kasturba in Madras in April 
1915 soon after his return to India from South Afri ca, Gandhiji said: 
"Sir, if one-tenth of the language that has been us ed in this address is deserved by me 
and my wife, what languages do you propose for thos e who have lost their lives, and 
therefore finished their work on behalf of your suf fering countrymen in South Africa? 
What language do you propose to use for Nagappan an d Narayanswamy, lads of 
seventeen or eighteen years, who braved in simple f aith all the trials, all the 
sufferings, and all the indignity for the sake of t he honour of the Motherland? What This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 34   
 language do you propose to use with reference to Va lliamma, that sweet girl of 
seventeen years who was discharged from Maritzburg prison skin and bone, suffering 
from fever to which she succumbed after about a mon th's time? It is a misfortune that 
I and my wife have been obliged to work in the lime light and you have magnified out 
of all proportions this work we have been able to d o. They deserve the crown which 
you would seek to impose upon us.” 
He continued: "These young men deserve all the adje ctives that you have so 
affectionately, but blindly lavished upon us. It wa s not only the Hindus who struggled, 
but there were Mahomedans, Parsis and Christians, a nd almost every part of India was 
represented in the struggle. They realized the comm on danger, and they realized also 
what their destiny was as Indians, and it was they, and they alone who matched the 
soul force against the physical force." 
 
 
31. DUEL WITH A DOCTOR 
During his incarceration in the Aga Khan Palace Gan dhiji had contracted malarial 
fever, but the Delhi authorities would not grant th e request of the Bombay 
Government to place Gandhiji under the treatment of  Dr. B. C. Roy, the noted 
physician of Calcutta (and now Premier of Bengal) w ho happened to be in Bombay at 
the time. After a great deal of correspondence, per mission was obtained for Dr. Roy to 
see Gandhiji at the Palace. 
Dr. Roy: "But, Mahatmaji, whom do you think I have come to treat? I have come to 
treat not Mohandas K. Gandhi, but the person who re presents to me the 400 million. 
Because I feel that, if he dies, the 400 million di e; and if he lives the 400 million live." 
No reply was forthcoming. Gandhiji had no other alt ernative but to give in, and after a 
pause he said, "All right, Dr. Bidhan, you have won ; so I have to place myself at your 
mercy. Give me whatever medicines you like, and I w ill take them. But I wonder why 
did you not study law instead of medicine. You poss ess such a wonderful legal 
acumen." 
Dr. Roy proudly said, "God has made me a medical ma n because He knew that a day This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 35   
 would come when it would be my privilege to treat H is most beloved son, our 
Mahatma Gandhi." 
"Nevertheless, you are arguing like a lawyer," Gand hiji said. 
 
 
32. BAPU THE MISER 
"In the dining-shed in the Ashram at Sevagram there  hangs a board with this 
exhortation in Bapu's name: 'I hope all will regard  the property of the Ashram as 
belonging to themselves and to the poorest of the p oor. Even salt should not be 
allowed to be served in excess of one's needs. Wate r too may not be wasted.' I have 
been witness to this thrift ever since I joined Gan dhiji for the first time in June 1919 
at Mani Bhavan in Bombay. One of my duties then was  to write letters as dictated or 
directed by him. Once after receiving his direction s I took up note-paper and was 
about to begin a letter. But Bapu, who had been obs erving my movements, promptly 
reprimanded me with, 'Will not a card do?' And so i t did. 
"Even before the war began, while paper was neither  dear nor scarce, Bapu would not 
allow paper written on only one side to be thrown i nto the waste- paper basket. All 
such pastis are carefully sifted out from his volum inous incoming correspondence. He 
utilizes the backside for writing out drafts and ot her purposes. He cuts up one note-
paper into half a dozen tiny pieces and writes out as many separate personal letters to 
the several Ashramites, dispatching them all in one  cover. 
"Indeed, the Bapu, not only of the Ashramites but o f the famished millions of India, 
the votary of Daridranarayan, can ill afford to was te even a particle of food or a drop 
of water," observes Shri Appasaheb Patwardhan, narr ating the above-mentioned 
incident.
 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 36   
  
33. A NAMASHUDRA'S FAITH 
At  Dacca  an  old  Namashudra  (an  'untouchable') ,  aged  about  70,  was brought 
before Gandhiji during the latter's East Bengal tou r in 1925. He was wearing Gandhiji's 
photograph in his neck and as soon as he saw Gandhi ji, he fell at his feet and crying 
profusely uttered his thanks over and over again fo r being cured of chronic paralysis. 
He said that when all other remedies had failed he took to uttering Gandhiji's name 
and one day found himself entirely cured. 
"It is not I, but God who has made you whole," said  Gandhiji. But, how could he 
believe? To him God had appeared in Gandhiji's phot ograph. It was vain to argue with 
him. "But, my dear man," said Gandhiji, "will you n ot oblige me by taking that 
photograph off your neck?" That he readily did, and  quietly walked away with the 
name of God on his lips and probably convinced that  the man who had refused to take 
any responsibility for having cured him could certainly not be 'The Gandhi Maharaj' 
who had cured him! 
 
 
34. A PATAUDI STORY 
On the last occasion when the Nawab of Pataudi went  to pay' his respects to Gandhiji, 
the latter, says the Nawab, "wanting a change from discussions on general topics of 
the day, suddenly decided to pull my leg by telling  me that he had made up his mind 
to challenge me at a single wicket cricket match. W ould I accept the challenge? I 
replied that I would on condition that when the mat ch was over he would allow me to 
challenge him in Politics. My proposal having been accepted, I proceeded to tell him 
with a serious face that whereas I was certain he w ould beat me at cricket, I was 
equally certain I would beat him in Politics. Gandh iji laughed like a happy child and 
thumping me affectionately on the back said, 'Nawab  Sahib, apne to abhi se mujhe 
bowled ker dia’ ('Nawab Sahib, you have bowled me o ut already'). What a great man! 
We shall not see his like again." 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 37   
  
35. HE WOULDN'T COPY 
When Mahatma Gandhi was at the high school in the f irst year, an incident occurred at 
the time of examination which is worth recording. M r. Giles, the Educational 
Inspector, had come on a visit of inspection. He ha d set them five words to write as a 
spelling exercise. One of the words was "Kettle". 
Mohandas had miss pelt it. The teacher tried to pro mpt him with the point of his boot, 
but he would not be prompted. It was beyond him to see that the teacher wanted him 
to copy the spelling from his neighbour's slate, fo r he thought that the teacher was 
there to supervise them against copying. 
The result was that all the boys, except him, were found to have spelt every word 
correctly. Only he had been stupid. The teacher tri ed later on to bring this stupidity 
home to him, but without effect. He could never lea rn that art of "copying". 
 
 
36. THE TROUBLESOME TOOTH  
When Gandhiji was staying in London towards the clo se of 1906 pleading with British 
statesmen the cause of his countrymen in South Afri ca, he developed a toothache. He 
was busy with his South African Committee when his vegetarian friend Dr. Joshia 
Oldfield called on him . Coming out from the Committee Gandhiji asked the doctor if 
he could take out the tooth that was worrying him. What followed had better be told 
by the doctor himself: 
"I examined his mouth and found a very painful jaw,  and a tooth difficult to extract. 
'Go to a dentist,' I said. 
'I haven't time,' he replied, 'if you will take it out for me here and now, I'll be very 
grateful, for it disturbs my power of concentration .' 
I went out, borrowed a pair of forceps and returned .  He asked the Committee to 
excuse him a minute, came into his bedroom and, wit hout a sigh or a murmur, or an 
indrawn breath, bore the extraction of as difficult  a tooth as I have ever taken out. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 38   
 For myself I wouldn't have had it out without an an esthetic upon any consideration. He 
sat still for a few minutes, thanked me gently and earnestly, and went back to his 
Committee...." 
 
 
37. A BRITISH NURSE'S TAUNT 
Recounting the life in the Yeravda Jail after his release in 1924, Gandhiji gave to the 
outside world several interesting little known fact s about the happenings behind the 
prison bars. He wrote : 
My very efficient English nurse, whom I loved to ca ll 'Tyrant', because she insisted in 
all loving ways on my taking more food and more sle ep than I did, with a smile curling 
round her lips and insidious twinkle in her eyes, g ently remarked after I was safely 
removed to a private ward escorted by the house sur geon, and herself : "As I was 
shading you with my umbrella I could not help smili ng, that you, a fierce boycotter of 
everything British, probably owed your life to the skill of a British surgeon handling 
British surgical instruments, administering British  drugs, and to the ministrations of a 
British nurse. Do you know that as we brought you h ere, the umbrella that shaded you 
was of a British make ?" 
The gentle nurse as she finished her last triumphan t' sentence evidently expected my 
complete collapse under her loving sermon. But happ ily I was able to confound her 
self-assurance by saying, "When will you people beg in to know things as they are? Do 
you know that I do not boycott anything because it is British ? I simply boycott all 
foreign cloth because the dumping down of foreign c loth in India has reduced millions 
of my people to pauperism." 
I was even able to interest her in the Khaddar move ment. Probably she became a 
convert to it. 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 39   
  
38. BAPU APOLOGIZES  
When Shri Rajagopalachari and Shri Shankarlal Banke r were discussing the possibility 
of Gandhiji's being examined by doctors prior to th e commencement of his 21 days' 
fast for purification, (which was to begin on 8th M ay 1933), Gandhiji said : "I cannot 
agree to any medical examination, as it would be ta ntamount to lack of faith on my 
part." 
"Then," said C. R., "you are conceding nothing and claiming infallibility." 
This irritated Gandhiji, who flared up saying, "You  shall not thus undermine my 
conviction and my faith. I am confident that I am g oing to survive the ordeal. That 
should be enough for me, and you as my friends ough t not to try to weaken my faith. I 
cannot agree to any examination of me by doctors be fore the commencement of the 
fast." 
The friends then left. Both of them were sorry that  they should have irritated 
Gandhiji's soul. 
In the evening, while taking our usual walk, Gandhi ji as in a flash realized his mistake 
and said that he had done a great wrong to two dear  friends. "What a frail erring 
creature is man !" said he, "even on the eve of a p urificatory fast, I gave way to anger 
against my dear friends. I will tender an apology t o them." 
Next morning, accordingly, he sent the following le tter to C. R. : "My dear C. R. You 
are dearer to me than life itself. I wounded you an d Shankarlal deeply yesterday. It is 
no use my saying 'forgive me'. Your forgiveness I h ave, before asking. But I will do the 
very thing that I resisted like an ass. I will subm it to an examination now and at any 
time you like; by any doctor, provided, of course, Government permit it. I feel that 
the result of such an examination should not be pub lished, for fear of political use 
being made of it. I must say, too, that medical exa mination, if it comes, is not likely 
to affect the commencement of the fast. More when w e meet. This is just to relieve 
my soul of the impurity that crept in yesterday. Lo ve to you and Shankarlal. Bapu." 
Next day, however, C. R. came laughing and said, "T here was no occasion for apology. 
The irritation was more on our side than on yours a nd we have now decided to have no This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 40   
 examination." 
- M. D. in Harijan 
 
 
39. WITH THE LEPERS 
A Baptist Missionary in England on furlough from In dia told a Daily News representative 
of an invitation he extended to Mahatma Gandhi to v isit a leper colony in Orissa. 
Gandhiji came in a cab and a loin cloth. He address ed the lepers, and then at the end 
of his speech asked: "Why should I call those my br others if I do not mix with them ?" 
And he insisted that each of the poor stricken lepe rs should be brought to him. 
Disregarding the signs and marks of this most loath some of moral diseases, he shook 
each by the hand, patted their heads, and spoke wor ds of comfort to them. "How 
many men, great or obscure, would do that ?" the mi ssionary asked. 
The late Shri Mahadev Desai too in his pen-pictures  of the Mahatma's life at Sevagram 
has left the following on record : 
"Among the patients in the Ashram at Sevagram there  is a leper. He was a political 
jail-bird with us in Yeravda and got leprosy there,  or had it diagnosed there, I forget 
which. He is a profound Sanskrit scholar and talks with you in Sanskrit, making you 
feel as though it was as easy as your mother tongue . After having wandered for years 
as a castaway, having even gone on an indefinite fa st out of loathing for the fell 
disease which is now in a considerably advanced sta ge, he rolled in here one fine 
morning, saying he wanted to lay his bones here, th at he knew he would have shelter 
here and would not go even if he was turned out. 
'How can I say "no" to you?'  said Gandhiji. 'If I harbor a son-in-law suffering from 
tuberculosis, why should I not harbour you ? There is Ba to look after him. Of Valji 
Desai everyone is fond and I am sure he would be ta ken care of. But who will look 
after you if I don't ? I shall build you a hut righ t near my hut, and you may make the 
place your abode. Even if no one remains here you a t least shall stay.' " 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 41   
  
40. THE FALLEN SISTERS 
The chastity of women was always held by Gandhiji a s a very sacred thing. It was in 
Cocanada in 1921 that he came face to face with the  fallen sisters. Thereafter his 
thoughts consistently turned on the ways and means of ameliorating their lot and 
raising them from the social degradation to which t he brute in man had reduced them. 
Describing his experiences in Andhra Gandhiji wrote  : 
"At Cocanada, just after the great public meeting, on my return to my bungalow at 
about 9 p.m. I had a visit from some women and girl s. The light was very dim when I 
entered. There was something uncanny about their mo ve- ments and their looks. 
Somehow or other the usual greeting, 'Do you spin ?  What will you give me for the 
Tilak Swaraj Fund ?' would not come to my lips. On the contrary I asked my hosts who 
the ladies were. He did not know. He enquired and a fter some hesitation the reply 
came, 'We are dancing girls.' I felt like sinking i nto the bowels of the earth. My host 
soothed me by saying that there was a ceremony atta ched before the commencement 
of life. It made matters worse for me. It gave the damnable thing an .air of 
respectability. I cross-examined. They said in the politest of tones they had come to 
have darshan. 'Will you take up some other occupati on?' 'Yes, if it gave us our 
livelihood.' I had not the heart to close with them  there and then. I felt ashamed of 
my sex. I spoke straight the next morning at Rajahm undry, the next halting places. It 
was one of the most painful experiences in Andhra. I suppose the sin is common 
enough in one shape or another in the rest of India . All I can say is that, if we will 
have Swaraj through self-purification, we may not m ake women a prey to our lust. The 
law of protection of the weak applies here with par ticular force. To me the meaning 
of cow protection includes the protection of the ch astity of our women. We will not 
have a regenerate India, unless we learn to respect  our women as we respect our 
mothers, sisters and daughters. Let us cleanse ours elves of the sins that kill the man in 
us and make us brutes." 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 42   
  
41. "I AM STILL A STUDENT" 
“Mahatma Gandhi, you are here to address a unique g athering representing a variety 
of races and nationalities — people representing 57  countries...; a gathering of 200 
individuals with 200 opinions full of reactions and  incalculable absurdity,” said the 
chairman of the meeting at the International Studen ts' Movement House while 
introducing Gandhiji to a thoroughly international gathering of men and women 
students of London on 16th October, 1931. 
Mahatmaji was cheered in respectful adoration as he  addressed the gathering in an 
affectionate manner as "Fellow Students". He reques ted them to forgive him for his 
desire to pass time that evening in answering quest ions instead of inflicting upon them 
a set speech. He said: 
"I have addressed you as 'Fellow Students'. It is n ot a formula. I regard myself 
essentially as a student and if you are wise, as I am, (laughter) in afterlife you regard 
yourselves as students." 
"Throughout my varied experiences of life," continu ed Gandhiji, "I have come to the 
conclusion that our student life commences after we  leave our Colleges and 
Universities and Law Chambers where we are supposed  to be studying tied down to our 
studies with the key to our knowledge and when we l eave these premises we 
practically forget all that we have learnt. 
"It is really in afterlife that we have to unlearn many things. The so-called student life 
is merely a preparation for the real life of a stud ent. When you are in College or 
anywhere else you have got set subjects. Even in th e optional subjects you have to 
learn them in particular fashion because you are de finitely hidebound. But after that 
stage is over you are free like a bird with wings t o soar high and the higher you soar 
the stronger you become. So I am still a student wh o has not graduated in the world, 
(cheers). 
"When you are buffetted about and thrown on your re sources it becomes a tough job. 
If you give yourselves to study, if you dedicate yo urselves to study, to eternal 
research, there is no limit to joy, there is no lim it to pleasure that you derive from This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 43   
 that study. My study consistently has been the sear ch after Truth. During the early 
days of my study and search I could not consistentl y find Truth unless I invited injury 
against myself and not against others. I could find  Truth only when I eschewed all 
feeling of causing injury to others, but when neces sary, inflicting it on myself. 
Because, as you must be knowing, Truth and Violence  are opposed to each other. 
Violence hides Truth and if you try to find Truth b y Violence you will betray the 
horrible ignorance in the search of Truth and, ther efore, Non-violence without any 
exception whatsoever, I have come to realize, is the essence of life, that is, Ahimsa'.”  
 
 
42. A TRAGEDY 
Though mighty crowds, hardly controllable, surged r ound Gandhiji wherever he 
travelled, he was spared the sight of any serious a ccident. Perhaps the only exception 
was during his tour of Almora District in U.P. in J une 1929. This is how he narrated the 
accident: 
"Throughout a life of continuous bustle lived among  crowds for nearly thirty years I 
cannot recall a serious accident though I can many narrow escapes. But in Almora on 
the day of my entry i.e., 18th instant, and after a  crowded meeting, as I was returning 
to my host's house, a villager named Padamsingh who  came rushing, as villagers do, to 
the car for darshan, met with what proved to be a f atal accident. He could not dodge 
the car in time, he fell and the car ran over him. He was quickly carried by kind 
bystanders to the hospital where he received the ut most attention and hope was 
entertained that he would survive. He was strongly built and brave. He lived for two 
days, his pulse was good, he was taking nourishment . But the heart suddenly stopped 
on the 20th instant at 3-15. Padamsingh died leavin g an orphan boy 12 years old. 
"Death or lesser accidents generally do not give me  more than a momentary shock, but 
even at the time of writing this I have not recover ed from the shock. I suppose it is 
because I feel guilty of being party to Padamsingh' s death. I have found chauffeurs to 
be almost without exception hot-tempered, easily ex citable and impatient, as 
inflammable as the petrol with which they have to c ome in daily contact. The This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 44   
 chauffeur of my car had more than a fair share of a ll these shortcomings. For the 
crowd through which the car was struggling to pass he was driving rashly. I should have 
either insisted on walking, or the car proceeding o nly at a walking pace till we had 
been clear of the crowd. But constant motor ridings  have evidently coarsened me, and 
freedom from serious accidents produces an unconsci ous but unforgivable indifference 
to the safety of pedestrians. This sense of the wro ng is probably responsible for the 
shock. It is well with Padamsingh. Pandit Govind Va llabh Pant has assured me that the 
son will be well looked after. Padamsingh received attention at the hospital which 
moneyed men might have envied. He was himself resig ned and at peace. But his death 
is a lesson to me as, I hope, it would be to motori sts. Although I may be twitted about 
my in- consistency, I must repeat my belief that mo toring in spite of all its advantages 
is an unnatural form of locomotion. It therefore be hoves those who use it to restrain 
their drivers and to realize that speed is not the summum bonum of life and may even 
be no gain in the long run. I have never been clear  in my mind that my mad rush 
through India has been all to the good. Anyway Pada msingh’s death has set me 
thinking furiously.” 
 
 
43. EXPERIMENTS WITH UNCOOKED FOOD 
Gandhiji believed in Nature Cure. Dietetics also in terested him. There was no 
suggestion that he would throw it away as useless u nless it was tried fully and gave 
unfavourable results. He would conduct the experime nt on himself so that he could 
get first-hand information about the pros and cons of the experiment. Here is what he 
described in Young India (13-6-'29) as his experime nts with uncooked food : 
"I have been known as a crank, faddist, madman. Evi dently the reputation is well 
deserved. For, wherever I go, I draw to myself cran ks, faddists, and madmen. Andhra 
has a fair share of these. They often find their wa y to Sabarmati. No wonder then that 
I found these specimens in abundance during my Andh ra tour. But I propose to 
introduce to the reader only the fellow crank who b y his living faith in his mission 
compelled my admiration and induced me to plunge in to a dietetic experiment which I 
had left unfinished at the age of twenty when I was  a student in London. This is This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 45   
 Sundaram Gopalrav of Rajahmundry. The ground was pr epared for him by a survey 
superintendent whom I met in Vizagapatam and who to ld me that he was living 
practically on raw food. Gopalrav has a Nature Cure  establishment in Rajahmundry, to 
which he devotes all his time. He said to me, 'The hipbaths and kindred appliances are 
good so far as they go. But they are artificial. To  be rid of disease it is necessary to do 
away with fire in the preparation of foods. We must  take everything in its vital state 
even as animals do.' 
'Would you advise me to adopt entirely raw diet ?' I asked. 
'Certainly, why not? I have cured cases of chronic dyspepsia in old men and women 
through a balanced diet containing germinated seeds ,' was Gopalrav's reply. 
'But surely there should be a transition stage,' I gently remonstrated. 
'No such stage is necessary,' rejoined Gopalrav. 'U ncooked food including uncooked 
starch and protein are any day more digestible than  cooked. Try it and you will feel all 
the better for it.' 
'Do you take the risk? If the cremation ceremony ta kes place in Andhra, the people will 
cremate your body with mine,' I said. 
'I take the risk,' said Gopalrav. 
'Then send me your soaked wheat. I commence from to day,' I said. 
Poor Gopalrav sent the soaked wheat. Kasturba not k nowing that it could possibly be 
meant for me gave it to the volunteers who finished  it. So I had to commence the 
experiment the next day." 
Gandhiji subsequently gave up the experiment as it had unfavourable effect on his 
health. 
 
 
44. ORIGIN OF MASS PRAY ERS 
The significance and gradual development of the sys tem of mass prayers evolved by 
him was explained by Mahatmaji in one of his speech es at Sodepur Ashram in This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 46   
 December 1945. He said that in 1936 about a dozen J apanese monks paid him a visit 
when he was staying at Maganvadi (Wardha). The lead ing monk suggested to him that 
he intended to send one or two of his disciples to the Ashram, a proposal which he 
approved. First came one and later on another. Of t he two, one was staying with him 
till the war with Japan broke out and as a result h e was taken into custody. This 
Buddhist monk used to do all the tasks he used to b e given punctually and 
methodically. In between his work he used to spend the time at his disposal in singing 
religious songs in the Japanese language, all the t ime beating a drum. This he did 
while taking his rounds. This was a Buddhist religi ous song in praise of the Infinite. 
Gandhiji said that he incorporated the song in his prayer. This was the first item of the 
prayer. 
The second item of the prayer was a Sanskrit Shloka  (verse) and was, according to 
him, universal in its appeal. This was an invocatio n to Mother Earth, sustainer of man. 
If there was any objection to it on any score he wo uld plead that he was helpless. To 
him all faiths were welcome. He believed in all fai ths but he saw no reason to give up 
his own faith. Possibly, said Gandhiji, this Sanskr it Shloka was symbolic but, according 
to him, many noble thoughts and ideas were couched in symbolic language. 
Thirdly, there was the prayer quoted from the Koran . It was incorporated at the 
instance of the daughter of Abbas Tyabji, the well- known Congress leader. She 
possessed a gifted voice. When on a visit to the As hram she expressed the desire to 
propagate the teaching of the Koran to the Ashramit es, Gandhiji said, he readily 
agreed. She suggested a verse from the Koran for in clusion in the prayer and it was 
done. 
The fourth item of the prayer was taken from the Ze nd Avesta written in the Pahlavi 
language. When he was fasting in the Aga Khan Palac e, Dr. Gilder was there as were 
also Dr. Bidhan Roy and some other medical men. Dr.  Gilder was a Parsi and from him 
the verse from the Zend Avesta was taken and includ ed. 
So far as the Bhajan songs were concerned, said Gan dhiji, there was no hard and fast 
rule. It all depended upon the time and place of th e prayer. 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 47   
  
45. MAHATMA GANDH I'S COURTESY 
Bapu was always the soul of courtesy towards young and old, rich and poor. An 
incident illustrative of this side of his character  was described by Giralda Forbes in the 
Catholic World of Calcutta. She had never met Gandh iji before. She had arrived in 
Bombay from England and learned that she was to pro ceed to Lahore by the next 
train. The following afternoon she went to the stat ion to board the train. A porter 
carried her roll of bedding and luggage. There had been some delay on the way and 
she arrived to find the train pulling out. As is we ll known trains in India have separate 
coaches for men and women. There was a single women 's second class coach in the 
train, but all the five berths were occupied. She h urried frantically up and down the 
platform looking for room; there was none. Her eyes  fell on an empty coach. It was 
marked first class, but she decided to pay the diff erence and looked around for the 
guard to make the arrangement. She did not notice i n her hurry that a large placard 
hung from the door at the other end of the coach sh owing that it was 'Reserved'. 
The narrative proceeds: "A knot of Hindu gentlemen were standing talking in front of 
the door, and they turned to look at her. One of th em stopped her on her flight and 
asked if she was in need of help. He was little, ve ry unprepossessing, and had a 
toothless mouth that made his smile look ghastly. T he train gave a warning shriek. The 
little man turned abruptly and made a gesture of au thority, and the guard, who was 
about to wave the flag, blew his whistle instead. T he harassed missionary explained 
her predicament, and the knot of Hindu gentlemen cr owded around and showed signs 
of consternation. The little man fumbled in the fol ds of cloth around his waist and 
produced a ticket. He pressed it into her hand, and  asked for hers. Instantly howls of 
protest rose on every side. The little man hushed t hem, and a crowd collected. The 
station master came running to see what was the mat ter. The little man explained and 
motioned to the coolie to put the luggage of the ne w occupant in the coach, and take 
his out. 
'You see,' he said to her, 'I did not want to trave l first class; but my friends bought this 
accommodation without telling me. I am delighted to  make the exchange. I am going 
to Lahore, and you are going to Lahore, so it is al l right.' This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 48   
 Too dazed to make any protest the missionary accept ed the situation and the 
toothless one led the way chuckling to the rear of the train, utterly indifferent to the 
furious protests of his friends, while the crowd sh outed and laughed, and the station 
master pleaded frantically that he must start the train." 
 
 
46. IN THE LION'S DEN 
When in 1917 Gandhiji stepped into Champaran (Bihar ) to enquire into the condition of 
the agriculturists there and understand their griev ances against the indigo planters, 
there was a hue and cry raised against him by the l atter fully backed up by the Anglo-
Indian Press. The planters demanded his instantaneo us removal from the district and 
even hinted that they would take the law into their  own hands if the authorities did 
not arrest his further progress. It is now a matter  of history how the authorities, 
succumbing to the agitation, served a notice on him  to quit the district immediately, 
how he refused to oblige them, how he was then put under arrest and asked to stand 
his trial, how finally realizing the serious conseq uences that would follow his 
conviction, the Viceroy intervened and had the case  against Gandhiji withdrawn. 
The chagrin of the planters at such a turn of event s could well be imagined, and some 
of them began to hold out threats of direct action.  A day before the interview which 
Gandhiji was to have with the Governor of the Provi nce, the Pioneer published a 
lengthy letter from a leading planter, Mr. W. S. Ir win, Manager of the Motihari 
Factory, in which he wrote as follows : 
"Mr. Gandhi, I believe, is a well-intentioned phila nthropist, but he is a crank and a 
fanatic and is too utterly obsessed with his partia l success in South Africa and his 
belief that he has been ordained by Providence to b e a righter of wrongs to be able to 
realize that he is being made a cat's paw of by ple aders and Mukhtears etc...Mahajans 
and moneylenders...and by Home Rule politicians... For the protection of the property 
of the Champaran planters, one and probably only on e step is essentially necessary 
and that is the removal of Mr. Gandhi from the dist rict. The extreme forbearance of 
the planters has so far prevented the outbreak of a ny serious disturbance, but unless This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 49   
 Government can see its way to protecting them they will unavoidably be forced into 
taking, the steps necessary for their own protectio n." 
The European planters' threats were, however, unava iling as Gandhiji refused to be 
cowed down and ultimately the Bihar Government felt  obliged to appoint a 
commission of enquiry into the grievances of the ag riculturists. 
 
 
47. "THE PRINCE OF BEGG ARS" 
During his travels, Gandhiji played the role of an accomplished beggar. He was 
welcomed by crowds almost at every station. People flocked towards his compartment 
to catch a fleeting glimpse of the Mahatma. How cou ld the distinguished National 
Beggar let such golden opportunities slip by in pas sively acknowledging the devotional 
greetings of the crowd? He must charge the 'price' for his darshan and so his begging 
hand was immediately stretched out of the window. " One pice for the Harijan!" called 
out Gandhiji, and the people experienced glow of jo y and satisfaction in placing 
copper coins in his palm. When one hand was full, t he other was extended, and 
Gandhiji smartly collected a decent amount at every  station, even during nights. A 
clever and experienced beggar as he was Gandhiji to ok special care to learn at least 
the word for 'pice' in every language. He did not f ret or fume at the crowds if they 
woke him up with vociferous cries of 'Mahatma Gandh iki Jai!' The beggar of a poor 
nation could not afford to lie sleeping while there  were people clamouring to give him 
'alms'. And so quietly he got up, opened the window  if it was closed, and commenced 
his work of collection. 
I have witnessed scenes when, sometimes being unusu ally tired, Gandhiji did not wake 
up at a certain station. A few persons entered his compartment and shook him up 
despite protests from the members of his party, and  after placing some coins in his 
hands walked away with "Mahatma Gandhiki Jai!" Gand hiji smiled, again lay down on 
the berth and fell into deep sleep. 
When an ordinary beggar receives any coin he feels delighted; but in the case of this 
strange Prince of Beggars, people feel obliged in p lacing coins in his hands. Sometimes This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 50   
 an old, decrepit woman in torn and tattered garment s would with great difficulty 
make her way through the crowd, put a pice in Gandh iji's palm, look at him intently 
with devotion for a while and thread her way back. 
It was, perhaps, early in 1937 when the Congress wa s still wavering between office-
acceptance and non-cooperation, that a journalist e nquired with curiosity: "Bapuji, 
will the Congress accept office?" "Why, do you wish  to become a minister?" asked 
Gandhiji with a good-humoured chuckle. The poor cor respondent was nonplussed and 
began to recede into the background. But Gandhiji w ould not let him off so easily. 
"Will you please let me use your hat as my begging bowl?" he asked. Of course, the hat 
was immediately surrendered and Gandhiji instantane ously stretched it before the 
owner himself to begin with. And the would-be minis ter had to surrender amid 
laughter a few silver coins too. What a queer and e xtraordinary beggar this half-naked 
Fakir was ! 
It is said that beggars cannot be choosers. But thi s rule did not apply to Gandhiji. With 
him, in fact, it was just the reverse. If you were wealthy, he would demand gold and 
silver; if poor, an honest penny; if you could spar e no coins, he would ask you to pay 
in hand-spun yarn; if you could not do even that yo u have to fast and save and pay. 
Gandhiji was an inexorable beggar, a hard taskmaste r. And yet so sweet, so loving, so 
forgiving. 
- Gandhiji, by Shri D. G. Tendulkar and Vithalbhai K. Jhaveri, 1944 
 
 
48. AN EARLY EXAMPLE OF BAPU'S AHIMSA 
Mahatma Gandhi set a shining example of Ahimsa to t he public world when in 1897 he 
refused, to prosecute his assailants among the whit es of South Africa who had mobbed 
him and brutally assaulted him in Durban. The story  of the assault has been narrated 
by himself in the following manner: 
"A mob followed us. With every step we advanced, it  grew larger and larger. The 
gathering was enormous when we reached West Street.  A man of powerful build took 
hold of Mr. Laughton and tore him away from me. He was not therefore in a position This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 51   
 to come up with me. The crowd began to abuse me and  shower upon me stones and 
whatever else they could lay their hands on. They t hrew down my turban. Meanwhile a 
burly fellow came up to me, slapped me in the face and then kicked me. I was about 
to fall down unconscious when I held on to the rail ings of a house nearby. I took 
breath for a while and when the fainting was over p roceeded on my way. I had almost 
given up the hope of reaching home alive. But I rem ember well that even then my 
heart did not arraign my assailants...." 
On Mr. Escombe, Attorney-General with the Governmen t of Natal, telling Gandhiji, 
"We desire that the offenders should be brought to book. Can you identify any of your 
assailants?" Gandhiji replied: "I might perhaps be able to identify one or two of them. 
But I must say at once before this conversation pro ceeds that I have already made up 
my mind not to prosecute my assailants. I cannot se e that they are at fault. What 
information they had they had obtained from their l eaders. It is too much to expect 
them to judge whether it was correct or otherwise. If all that they heard about me 
was true, it was natural for them to be excited and  do something wrong in a fit of 
indignation. I would not blame them for it. Excited  crowds have always tried to deal 
out justice in that manner. If anyone is to blame i t is the Committee of Whites, you 
yourself and, therefore, the Government of Natal. R euter might have cabled any 
distorted account. But when you knew that I was com ing to Natal, it was your duty 
and the duty of the Committee to question me about the suspicions you entertained 
with regard to my activities in India, to hear what  I had to say and then do what might 
appear proper in the circumstances. Now I cannot pr osecute you or the Committee for 
the assault. And even if I could, I would not seek redress in a court of law. You took 
such steps as seemed advisable to you for safeguard ing the interests of the whites of 
Natal. That is a political matter, and it remains f or me to fight with you in the 
political field to convince you and the whites that  the Indians who constitute a large 
proportion of the population of the. British Empire  wish to preserve their self-respect 
and safeguard their rights without injuring the whites in the least." 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 52   
  
49. AN IDEAL PRISONER 
Acharya Kaka Kalelkar, who was Gandhiji's companion  in Yeravda Jail in 1930, thus 
describes their daily routine: 
We get up early morning at four when the stars are shining in all their glory. By 4-20 
our morning prayer begins. After prayer comes the G ita recitation. The recitation 
finished, I would go for my morning walk and Gandhi ji would spend half an hour in 
reading and writing and then join me. The Gita, the  Ashram ideal, food problem, the 
wheel, my laxity, such are the usual topics during the walk. Exactly at 6 we would sit 
for our breakfast. His breakfast consists of curds (when he took it) and dates soaked in 
water. By the time we finished breakfast, the goats  would come to be milked. 
Gandhiji always enjoys the sight of the kiddies, gr eedily sucking the milk and bleating 
now and then, by way of comma and semi-colon. A gen tle kick from the mother would 
bring the full stop. Without a moment's delay Gandh iji sits at the spinning wheel, and 
the wheel begins to recount the tragic tale of Indi a's woes, and the sure hope of 
deliverance. Have you ever heard the pensive notes of a perfect spinning wheel? Verse 
by verse the epic goes on and it grows upon you. 
With the wheel humming by your side you never feel solitary. With one or two 
necessary breaks the things go on till half past te n. At about seven he takes a cup of 
hot water with lime juice and salt. At half past te n you can see him going for his bath. 
I forget to tell you that every morning he spends s ome time with the carding bow with 
its rhythmic twang. Half an hour's work gives him m ore slivers than he can consume 
during the day. Sardar Vallabhbhai once ran short o f slivers and he sent for some 
through the Superintendent. My stock used to be rat her poor. Gandhiji doubled his 
time at the bow with the joy of a mother cooking fo r her dear children. 
At about 11 we used to take the midday meal. Again it used to be curds mixed with a 
pinch of soda-bicarb, dates or raisins and boiled v egetables. The newspapers came 
about the same time. I would read out the latest ne ws about the lathi charges and the 
ladies of Bombay hoisting the national flags aloft.  We rarely used to discuss the news. 
That was reserved for the evening walk. Dietetics a nd nature cure, used to be the 
main topics at dinner time, because Gandhiji has re ad deeply and experimented This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 53   
 diligently in this field. The wheel must follow the  meal immediately; after it the 
newspapers and then the midday siesta. At half past  one he takes a cupful of water, 
with the sour juice of lemon, neutralized with soda -bicarb. Then comes the reading or 
writing of letters. Hymns from the Ashram prayer bo ok must be translated into English 
for the benefit of Mirabai. At four you will see hi m with the takli — a thing of his own 
manufacture out of a broken tile and a bamboo stick  — walking in the sun and pulling 
the milk-white yarn.  
At the stroke of five would begin our evening meal - curds, dates and some 
vegetables. Again the goats would come and the kids  wagging their tiny tails. Meals 
over, I would wash the utensils and Gandhiji would prepare the dates for the next day 
and soak them in water. Then the evening walk. The colours of the evening sky, the 
glory of the setting sun and the weird shapes of th e fat gray clouds are peculiar 
attraction for Gandhiji. Sometimes he would call me  hurriedly to see some peculiar 
beauty of the skies before my work at the waterpipe  was finished. I have rarely seen 
him inviting anybody in this way to steal a few mom ents from the appointed task... 
At 7 we would begin our evening prayer. During the rains it was timed at 7.30 p.m., 
but with the setting in of winter the Ashram change d the time to 7 p.m. We also 
changed our time so that we may have the satisfacti on of saying our prayers in 
company with the Ashram boys and girls, although se parated by hundreds of miles. 
Only those who know the brotherhood of prayer can  appreciate the change we made. 
 
 
50. THE "HALF-NAKED", "SEDITIOUS FAKIR" 
Arch-imperialist Mr (now, Sir) Winston Churchill , who firmly believed that "the loss of 
India would mark and consummate the downfall of the  British Empire" and that "that 
great organism would pass at a stroke out of life i nto history", and who had declared, 
"We have no intention of casting away that most tru ly bright and precious jewel in the 
crown of the King, which more than all our other Do minions and Dependencies 
constitutes the glory and strength of the British E mpire," could not contain himself 
when he saw the Viceroy of India, Lord Irwin, carry ing on negotiations with Mahatma This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 54   
 Gandhi for a political truce after the latter had l aunched a countrywide campaign of 
civil disobedience. He vented his spleen against th e Mahatma as well as the Viceroy in 
these terms in an address to the Council of the Wes t Essex Unionist Association on 
February 23, 1931:"It is alarming and also nauseati ng to see Mr. Gandhi, an Inner 
Temple lawyer, now become a seditious fakir of a ty pe well known in the East, striding 
half-naked up the steps of the Viceregal Palace, wh ile he is still organizing and 
conducting a defiant campaign of civil disobedience , to parley on equal terms with the 
representative of the King-Emperor." 
He had also thundered: "I am against these conversa tions and agreements between 
Lord Irwin and Mr. Gandhi. . . The truth is that Ga ndhi-ism and all it stands for will 
have to be grappled with and finally crushed." It w as no wonder that Churchill should 
have refused to meet Gandhiji when the latter had g one to England towards the end of 
the same year as a delegate to the Second Round Tab le Conference. 
An echo of Churchill's thunder against Gandhiji was  heard thirteen years after the 
latter's release from detention from the Aga Khan's  Palace in May 1944. Gandhiji, who 
was recouping his health at Panchgani, wrote the fo llowing letter to Churchill, who 
was then Prime Minister of Great Britain: 
" 'Dilkhush' (Panchgani) July 17, 1944 
Dear Prime Minister, 
You are reported to have a desire to crush the simp le 'Naked Fakir' as you are said to 
have described me. I have been long trying to be a 'Fakir' and that naked — a more 
difficult task. I, therefore, regard the expression  as a compliment though unintended. 
I approach you then as such and ask you to trust an d use me for the sake of your 
people and mine and through them those of the world . 
Your sincere friend, M. K. Gandhi" 
How this letter came to be miscarried and delayed i n seeing the light of day was 
related by Gandhiji in a statement issued by him on  June 18, 1945 from Panchgani. 
According to Gandhiji the letter was written in the  small hours of the night of July 17, 
at the same time that he wrote his Gujarati note to  Quide-i-Azam Jinnah and duly 
posted to be sent through the Viceroy. Unfortunatel y, the letter miscarried. Having This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 55   
 waited for a long time, on September 10,1944, Gandh iji sent a letter of enquiry out of 
curiosity, "for the psychological moment had passed ." To his surprise, the Private 
Secretary to the Viceroy wrote in return on Septemb er 13 that the letter in question 
had not been received by him. As Gandhiji attached importance to the letter he sent a 
copy of the missing letter, repeating the request t hat it might be sent to the Prime 
Minister. "My letter of July 17 to Mr. Churchill in  my estimation was of a sacred 
character not meant for the public eye," said Gandh iji, "but I could contemplate an 
occasion or time when it might call, for publicatio n without losing the sacred 
character. I, therefore, requested the Viceroy on D ecember 13, 1944, to enquire from 
the Prime Minister whether I had his permission to publish it in case of need. He 
replied through his Secretary that the Prime Minist er agreed to the publication of my 
letter subject to the fact that it was duly acknowl edged." 
 
 
51. ALL OVER BEEF TEA AND SALT 
When the Zulu 'rebellion' of 1906 had been quelled and Gandhiji's duties in connection 
with the ambulance corps raised by him came to an e nd, he prepared to settle down 
with his family at Phoenix. But before he actually removed himself there Kasturba fell 
seriously ill at Durban. 
Her condition grew worse day by day and Gandhiji co nsented to an operation after 
Kasturba had agreed. She was very weak and the doct or had to perform the operation 
without chloroform. While she was convalescing, Gan dhiji, who was at Johannesburg, 
received a telephone call from the doctor telling h im that his wife's condition was 
getting worse. The doctor told Gandhiji that unless  she received some beef tea, she 
might die and asked Gandhiji's permission to give h er the beef diet. Gandhiji refused 
to give such permission, but told the doctor that i f Kasturba consented to take it, then 
he had no objection. The doctor, however, told Gand hiji that he refused to consult 
the patient, having regard to her condition. He ask ed Gandhiji to come over to Durban 
at once. 
When Gandhiji arrived at Durban he was told by the doctor that he had already given This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 56   
 Kasturba the beef tea. 
"Now, doctor, I call this a fraud," exclaimed Gandh iji, deeply pained. 
"The question of fraud does not arise," the doctor replied. "In fact we doctors consider 
it a virtue to deceive patients or their relatives,  if thereby we can save our patients." 
Gandhiji was deeply pained, but kept cool. He knew that the doctor meant well, 
besides being his personal friend, but he was not p repared to put up with his medical 
morals. Thus, after consultation with his son and K asturba he removed her to Phoenix, 
where, by the simple expedience of a prescription b y Gandhiji himself, she was finally 
cured. 
After a brief respite since her removal to Phoenix,  Kasturba began to suffer again from 
haemorrhage. Gandhiji remembered reading in some bo oks on vegetarianism that salt 
was not a necessary article of diet for man, that o n the contrary saltless diet was 
better for health. So, he suggested to his wife tha t she went on saltless diet. She 
would not agree to this and when Gandhiji persisted , she challenged him, saying that 
even he could not give up salt as an ingredient in his diet although he was advising her 
to do so. 
Gandhiji's reaction to this challenge may best be d escribed in his own words: 
"I was pained and delighted at the same time — deli ghted in that I got an opportunity 
to shower my love on her. I said to her, 'You are m istaken. Were I ailing and advised to 
give up salt or any other article, I would unhesita tingly do so. But there, without any 
advice, medical or otherwise, I give up salt and pu lses for one year, whether you do so 
or not.' " 
Kasturba was shocked at this and begged forgiveness  of him. She knew that her 
husband always meant what he said. She begged him t o take back his vow and 
promised to abstain from salt, explaining, 'This is  too hard on me.' 
Gandhiji was not annoyed with her and consoled her.  He told her that his abstaining 
would assist her and would strengthen him. On this Kasturba broke down in tears, 
knowing that Gandhiji would not retreat. 
And  believe  it  or  not,  Kasturba  began  to  pi ck  up  in  health.  The haemorrhage This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 57   
 stopped completely and soon she regained her usual robust health and, as Gandhiji 
humorously observed, he added somewhat to his reput ation as a 'Quack'. 
 
 
52. GANDHI-ROMAIN ROLLAND MEETING 
To an American friend the great French Savant Romai n Rolland wrote as follows about 
the visit of Mahatma Gandhi to his home at Villeneu ve, Switzerland, in December 
1931: 
How I should have liked to have you here during the  visit of the Indians! They stayed 
five days—from the 5th to 11th December at the Vill a Vionette. The little man 
bespectacled and toothless, was wrapped in his whit e burnouse, but his legs, thin as a 
heron's stilts, were bare. His shaven head with its  few coarse hairs was uncovered and 
wet with rain. He came to me with a dry laugh, his mouth open like a good dog 
panting, and flinging an arm round me leaned his ch eek against my shoulder. I felt his 
grizzled head against my cheek. It was, I amuse mys elf thinking, the kiss of Saint 
Dominie and Saint Francis. 
Then came Mira (Miss Slade), proud of figure and wi th the stately bearing of a 
Demeter, and finally three Indians, one a young son  of Gandhi, Devadas, with a round 
and happy face. He is gentle, but little aware of t he grandeur of his name. The others 
were secretaries — disciples— two young men of rare  qualities of heart and mind: 
Mahadev Desai and Pyarelal. 
As I had contrived shortly beforehand to get a seve re cold on my chest, it was to my 
house and to the chamber on the second floor where I sleep at Villa Olga — you will 
remember it — that Gandhi came each morning for lon g conversations. My sister 
interpreted, with the assistance of Mira, and I had  also a Russian friend and secretary, 
Miss Kondacheff, who took notes on our discussions.  Some good photographs by 
Schlemmer, our neighbour from Montreus, recorded th e aspect of our interview. 
Evenings, at seven o'clock, prayers were held in th e first-floor salon. With lights 
lowered, the Indian seated on the carpet, and the l ittle assembly of the faithful 
grouped about, there was a suite of three beautiful  chants — the first an extract from This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 58   
 the Gita, the second an ancient hymn on the Sanskri t texts which Gandhi has 
translated, and the third canticle of Rama and Sita , intoned by the warm, grave voice 
of Mira. 
Gandhi held other prayers at three o'clock in the m orning, for which, in London, he 
used to wake his harassed staff, although he had no t retired until one. This little man, 
so frail in appearance, is tireless, and fatigue is  a word which does not exist in his 
vocabulary. He could calmly answer for hours the he ckling of a crowd, as he did at 
Lausanne and Geneva, without a muscle of his face t witching. Seated on a table, 
motionless, his voice always clear and calm, he rep lied to his adversaries open or 
masked — and they were not lacking at Geneva — givi ng them rude truths which left 
them silenced and Suffocated. 
The Roman bourgeoisie, and nationalists, who had at  first received him with crafty 
looks, quivered with rage when he left. I believe t hat if his stay had lasted any longer, 
the public meetings would have been forbidden. He p ronounced himself as 
unequivocally as possible on the double questions o f national armaments and the 
conflict between capital and labour. I was largely responsible for steering him on this 
latter course. 
His mind proceeds through successive experiments in to action and he follows a 
straight line, but he never stops, and one would ri sk error in attempting to judge him 
by what he said ten years ago, because his thought is in constant  revolution.  I  will  
give  you  a  little  example  of  it  that  is cha racteristic. 
He was asked at Lausanne to define what he understo od by God. He explained  how  
among  the  noblest  attributes  which  the  Hindu  scriptures ascribed to God, he had 
in his youth chosen the word 'truth' as most truly defining the essential element. He 
had then said, 'God is Truth.' "But," he added, "tw o years ago I advanced another step. 
I now say 'Truth is God'. For, even the atheists do  not doubt the necessity for the 
power of truth. In their passion for discovering th e truth, the atheists have not 
hesitated to deny the existence of God, and from th eir point of view, they are right." 
You will understand from this single trait the bold ness and independence of this 
religious spirit from the Orient. I noted in him tr aits similar to Vivekananda. 
And yet not a single political ruse catches him unp repared. And his own politics are to This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 59   
 say everything that he thinks to everybody, not con cealing a thing. 
On the last evening, after the prayers, Gandhi aske d me to play him a little of 
Beethoven. He does not know Beethoven, but he knows  that Beethoven has been the 
intermediary between Mira and me, and consequently between Mira and himself, and 
that, in the final count, it is to Beethoven that t he gratitude of us all must go. I played 
him the Andante of the Fifth Symphony. To that I ad ded, "Les Champs Elysees" of 
Gluck — the page for the orchestra and the air for the flute. 
He is very sensitive to the religious chants of his  country which somewhat resemble 
the most beautiful of our Gregorian melodies, and h e has worked to assemble them. 
We also exchanged our ideas on art, from which he d oes not separate his conception 
of truth, nor from his conception of truth that of joy, which he thinks truth should 
bring. But it follows of itself that for this heroi c nature joy does not come without 
effort, not even life itself without hardship. 
'The seeker after truth hath a heart tender as the lotus, and hard as granite.' 
Here, my dear friend, are a few hints of those days  of ours together on which I have 
taken much more detailed notes. What I do not dwell  on to you is the hurricane of 
intruders, loiterer, and half-wits which this visit  loosed on our two villas. No, the 
telephone never ceased ringing, photographers in am buscades let fly their fusillades 
from behind every bush. The milkmen's syndicate at Leman informed me that during 
all the time of this sojourn with me of the 'King o f India' they intended to assume 
complete responsibility for his 'victualling'. We r eceived letters from 'Sons of God'. 
Some Italians wrote to the Mahatma beseeching him t o indicate for them the ten lucky 
numbers for the next drawing of his weekly national  lottery! 
My sister, having survived has gone to take ten day s* rest at a cure in Zurich. She 
returns shortly. For my part I have entirely lost t he gift of sleep. If you find it, send it 
to me by registered mail! 
The Nation, New York. 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 60   
  
53. "STABBING TRU TH" 
The following from the pen of Shri Mahadev Desai ap peared in the issue of Harijan of 
16th January 1937: 
During our stay at Faizpur a student secretary of a  Conference came to Gandhiji asking 
for a message. Gandhiji laughed and said: "What new  message can I give you at the 
age of 68? And where is the use of my giving you a message, if you pass a resolution 
there of assassinating me or burning my effigy? Ass assinating the body of course does 
not matter, for out of my ashes a thousand Gandhis will arise. But if .you assassinate 
or burn the principles I have lived for?" 
These words were uttered a day before that great sp eech on the cult of the Charkha, 
and those who can see the fire that burns there wou ld surely understand the pain 
hidden in the laughter when he said the words I hav e just quoted, or the poignancy 
underlying the heading at the top. 
These two words were uttered in Lady Thakersey's co ttage — Parnakuti — at Poona 
soon after our arrival there. The occasion was a se emingly trivial one. Gandhiji, who 
usually has a fair supply of slivers with hint, fou nd in the evening of his arrival in 
Poona that his stock had almost run out, and he ask ed Pyarelal if he had any more 
slivers. He had none. He turned to me: "You have us ually your supply of slivers. 
Haven't you got them?" I was ashamed. I said: "I ha d them at Faizpur." "You thought 
you would get time there, but not here?" There was no reply, there could be none. I 
am a lover of spinning, and during my several years  in jail I do not remember having 
missed my spinning on a single day. Outside I find I cannot keep it up regularly, and 
that is why I had no slivers. "But could not we get  slivers in Poona? Dev spins, 
Premabahen spins, there are others who spin regular ly, and tomorrow we are sure to 
get them." Inquiries were made at all the likely pl aces, but in vain. 
"But what about Ghandrashankar ?" inquired Gandhiji . He had none. "That, Mahadev, 
was a cruel blow indeed," he said, to me soon- afte r the morning prayer the next day. 
"Chandrashankar and his wife, I expected, would be spinning. But if he goes into 
raptures over my speech on the cult of the Charkha and will not spin, what are his This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 61   
 raptures worth to me? If salt loseth its savour, wh erewith shall it be salted? I tell you 
it has been a great blow. And no slivers in the cit y of Poona. But if Ghandrashankar 
has none why should others have them? Dev said, wit hout a blush, that everything 
could be had at Saswad, 20 miles from here, but not  here. And yet we wonder why we 
have no Swaraj." 
I could see that he was boiling as he said this. I quietly retired and told Shankarlal 
everything. He said he too *had his share of the wh ipping. "How am I to help it?" he 
said. "Because I am the secretary of the Spinners' Association Bapu thinks I must see 
that slivers are available everywhere. I quite see his grief, but I hope he will see mine. 
I have been trying to get all the workers in the A.  I. S. A. offices in India to spin 
regularly, but I have yet to succeed. But I must ge t the slivers at once from Bombay." 
He rang up a friend there who sent the slivers and all the carding tackle from 
Navajivan Sangh. In the afternoon some indifferent stuff came from the Poona Khadi 
Bhandar, and in the evening Shri Haribhau Phatak an d Balukaka Kanitkar turned up. 
Both of these friends are supposed to be believers in the Charkha and so Gandhiji said: 
"I have not yet recovered from my shock. Balukaka h as been a severe disappointment. 
You who swore by the Charkha, is this your faith in  the Charkha?"' 
"But did I not tell you," said Balukaka, "that the council programme was sure to kill the 
constructive programme?" 
"That is irrelevant. What has that got to do with y our faith in Khadi and spinning which 
you have repeated times without number? Convictions  are there to  be  lived  for  and  
to  die  for  and  certainly  to  be  worked  for.  But  this conviction, without anything 
to do with it, is meaningless. It is stabbing truth ." 
The words were not misunderstood. Shri Haribhau sai d: "We deserve the cuts you have 
given us, and we have decided to turn a new leaf fr om tomorrow." 
"But you do not know," said Gandhiji, "the cuts I h ave given myself over this tragedy. 
How can we have Swaraj if we care so little for our  convictions? And now you say you 
are going to mend. It is something. To, err is huma n, and to mend is also human. But 
to know that you err and still not to mend it is le ss than human. For brutes don't err. 
But 'less than human' is not the word. To err is hu man, not to err is divine. To try to 
mend is human, but not to try to mend is devilish. That is the proper word. Well, if This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 62   
 you will mend it will be all right. 
But do nothing without conviction. The conviction s hould be yours and not borrowed 
from me." 
'Stabbing truth' — these words went like a stab of fire in our hearts. "I do not ask for 
slivers from those who do not believe in Khadi or C harkha. I never even mention the 
word Charkha to the Rt. Hon. Srinivasa Sastri, thou gh we are bosom friends. For he 
does not believe in it. I honour those people who d o not believe in it and denounce it. 
But you believe in it, and every day of your lives you live a lie. That is stabbing truth 
— than which there is no greater sin." 
 
 
54. LESSONS IN JOURNALISTIC ETHICS 
(By R. K. Prab hu) 
A combination of unforeseen circumstances had place d me, towards the close of the 
year 1918, in editorial charge of Young India — the  weekly journal, which  soon  after  
and  for  years  to  come  was  destined  to  exerc ise  the profoundest influence on the 
course of Indian history. Jamnadas Dwarkadas, who w as the declared editor of the 
journal, then being printed at the Bombay Chronicle  Press, had proposed to me that I 
should look after the editorial affairs of the jour nal and I had consented. Hardly had 
three months passed since I took charge of the jour nal when Horniman, editor of the 
Bombay Chronicle, was suddenly whisked away to Engl and from his sick-bed in Bombay 
and the Bombay Chronicle and its Press were placed under official censorship. In 
consequence, the board of directors of Young India were obliged to suspend the 
publication of the journal. 
This was in February 1919. When, a couple of weeks later, the censorship was ended 
and the Chronicle Press began to function again in a normal manner, offers were made 
to Gandhiji by the directors of both the Bombay Chron icle and Young India to place 
the journals in his hands. Gandhiji declined the of fer of the Chronicle but accepted 
that of Young India, provided he was free to change   the  venue  of  the  publication  
of  the  journal  from  Bombay  to Ahmedabad. When the negotiations for the transfer This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 63   
 of the control of Young India were completed, I was  asked to see Gandhiji with a view 
to handing over my charge and giving him whatever i nformation he might need 
regarding the editorial conduct of the journal. 
At this time, Gandhiji was putting up at Mani Bhava n, Gamdevi, as the guest of 
Revashankarbhai Jhaveri, and I proceeded there, acc ompanied by a journalist 
colleague of mine who was a regular contributor to the columns of Young India. I had 
always a feeling that this colleague of mine had a better command of the English 
vocabulary and idiom than I could claim and I had e nvied his gift. Arriving at Mani 
Bhavan, we introduced ourselves to Gandhiji. Scanni ng the editorial columns of the 
last issue of Young India, of which I handed over t o him a copy, Gandhiji wanted to 
know who the writer of a particular article in it w as. It was, I recollect, some sharp 
criticism of one of Lloyd George's dubious utteranc es about India. I told Gandhiji - that 
I had written the article. Pointing his finger to a nother article, Gandhiji asked who 
had written it. "I wrote it," said my colleague. 
After a brief pause, Gandhiji remarked: "I like thi s first article, whereas I "don't at all 
like the second. In the first, you have said all th at you wanted to say in a direct 
manner, while the writer of the second article indu lges in all sorts of innuendos and 
says things which he does not really mean. "For ins tance, you write," said Gandhiji, 
looking at my colleague," 'we are afraid. . . .' an d so on. I don't like the phrase at all. 
Here, you don't really want the reader to believe t hat you are afraid you mean just 
the contrary, don't you? When you want to say a thi ng, don't beat about the bush, 
don't indulge in euphemisms and pin-pricks but tell  it in a straightforward way." 
These might not be the very words uttered by Gandhi ji but they were to that effect as 
far as my memory goes. Of course, both my colleague  and myself held our peace while 
this brief homily on the ethics of journalism was d elivered to us. My colleague having 
left shortly after, Gandhiji, looking at the page o f Young India which was made up of 
news in brief, asked me who gathered those news ite ms. Being told that I was 
responsible for them, he asked me whence I culled t he news. I said I made the 
clippings from the latest issues of the various Ind ian journals which were received in 
exchange for Young India and the Bombay Chronicle. 
"How much time do you spend in gathering these item s?" he asked. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 64   
 I replied that it took me hardly more than half an hour to clip and paste the news 
items required to make up the page. 
"You spend only half an hour over them," he remarke d in surprise. "Do you know," he 
added, "when I edited Indian Opinion in South Afric a, we received some 200 papers in 
exchange and I used to go through all of them caref ully throughout the week and I 
culled each news item only after I was fully satisf ied that it would be of real service to 
the readers. When one takes up the responsibility o f editorship, one must discharge it 
with a full sense of one's duty. That is the only w ay journalism should be practised — 
don't you agree with me?" 
Shamefacedly I said, "I do." I went on to explain t o Gandhiji that having a very busy 
time throughout the week as a member of the editori al staff of the Chronicle, I had to 
do things hurriedly for Young India. Practically th e major portion of my work for the 
journal, including the writing of editorials, did n ot occupy me more than an afternoon. 
"And  how  much  are  you  paid  for  all  this?"  he  next  asked,  somewhat abruptly. 
I replied that I was paid at the rate of ten rupees  per column — a column, by the way, 
which was hardly a dozen inches long and that too i n fat 10-point type! and that my 
earnings from Young India varied between one hundre d and one hundred fifty rupees a 
month. 
"How much are you paid as a member of the Chronicle  staff?" was the question next 
shot at me by the inexorable inquisitor. 
"Four hundred rupees per month," I answered. 
After  a  brief  pause,  which  appeared  to  me  l ike  eternity,  Gandhiji remarked: "Do 
you think you are justified in taking from Young In dia  the amount that is paid to you? 
You know the journal is not a mercenary concern. It  is a patriotic undertaking and I 
don't think it is even self- supporting. Are you ju stified in adding to the burden of its 
conductors?" 
I replied that I did not compel the proprietors of the journal to pay me what they did. 
Jamnadas Dwarkadas, I said, paid all contributors t o Young I nd ia on a generous scale 
as he did to me. It was all voluntary on his part. I made no stipulation whatsoever 
regarding my remuneration. This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 65   
 "Still, if I were in your position, I would not tak e a pie from Young India," put in 
Gandhiji, and added, "You are handsomely paid at th e Chronicle office for your full- 
time work and what you do for Young India is in you r leisure hours. A person who gets 
paid adequately for his full-time work should not e xpect payment for what he does 
elsewhere during the same period. Don't you think s o?" 
Though he uttered these pointed remarks gently and half smilingly, I could see that he 
made them in all seriousness. I was somewhat dazed by the new lesson in ethics which 
he sought to drive home to me. I could respond to h is query only by a nod of humble 
acquiescence. 
— Courtesy : Gand hiji 
 
 
55. SOME TYPICAL LETTERS OF GANDH IJI To Ashram Children 
Little Birds, 
Ordinary birds cannot fly without wings. With wings , of course, all can fly. But if you, 
without wings, will learn how to fly, then all your  troubles will indeed be at an end 
And I will teach you that. 
See I have no wings, yet I come flying to you every  day in thought. Look, here is 
Vimala, here is Hari and here Dharmakumar. And you also can come flying to me in 
thought. 
There is no need of a teacher for those who know ho w to think. The teacher may 
guide us, but he cannot give us the power of thinki ng. That is latent in us. Those who 
are wise get wise thoughts. 
Tell  me  who,  amongst  you,  are  not  praying  p roperly  in  Prabhubhai's evening 
prayer. 
Send me a letter signed by all, and those who do no t know how to sign may make a 
cross. 
Bapu's Blessings This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 66   
  
To the Father of an Ailing Child 
Dear Friend, 
What can I possibly prescribe for a six months old baby suffering from paralysis? There 
is no prescription but prayer to God. Any medicine is for me unthinkable. You may 
gently massage the affected parts, put the baby in the sun and give him nothing but 
milk and fruit juices. And if God wishes, he will r ecover. If he does not you should 
courageously resign yourself to the separation. 
He who gives, may also take away. 
Yours sincerely, M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Duty of the Living to the Dead 
[To Dr. Jal Pavry and Miss Bapsy Pavry, condoling t hem on the death of their father, 
Dastur Cursetji Pavry, the late Pars! High Priest] 
"One must not grieve excessively over the one who i s gone to the great beyond, for the 
departed one lives in spirit forever, but we who ar e left behind must live to die in the 
service of humanity. 
"The only way to cause rejoicing to the soul of the  departed one is to fulfill his most 
cherished dream in which the spirit of the departed , that is ever present with us, 
definitely gives strength to the living, and only w hen they fulfill that dream of the 
departed, then and then only they prove themselves worthy of the sacred heritage, 
and then and then only will the soul of the departe d rejoice." 
(The last of these letters ends with the words in G ujarati, "M. K. Gandhi's blessings".) 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 67   
  
TO ADOLF HITLER 
Dear Friend, 
That I address you as a friend is no formality. I o wn no foes. My business in life has 
been for the past thirty- three years to enlist the  friendship of the whole humanity by 
befriending mankind, irrespective of race, colour o r creed. 
I hope you will have the time and desire to know ho w a good portion of humanity who 
have been living under the influence of that doctri ne of universal friendship view your 
actions. We have no doubt about your bravery or dev otion to your fatherland, nor do 
we believe that you are the monster described by yo ur opponents. But your own 
writings and pronouncements and those of your frien ds and admirers leave no room for 
doubt that many of your acts are monstrous and unbe coming of human dignity, 
especially in the estimation of men like me who bel ieve in universal friendliness. Such 
are your humiliation of Czechoslovakia, the rape of  Poland and the swallowing of 
Denmark. I am aware that your view of life regards such spoliations as virtuous acts. 
But we have been taught from childhood to regard th em as acts degrading humanity. 
Hence we cannot possibly wish success to your arms.  But ours is a unique position. We 
resist British Imperialism no less than Nazism. If there is a difference, it is in degree. 
One-fifth of the human race has been brought under the British heel by means that 
will not bear scrutiny. Our resistance to it does n ot mean harm to the British people. 
We will convert them, not defeat them on the battle field. Ours is an unarmed revolt 
against the British rule. But whether we convert th em or not we are determined to 
make their rule impossible by non-violent non-co-op eration. It is a method in its 
nature undefeatable. It is based on the knowledge t hat no spoliator can compass his 
end without a certain degree of co-operation, willi ng or compulsory, of the victim. 
Our rulers can have our land and bodies, but not ou r souls. They can have the former 
only by destruction of every Indian, man, woman, an d child. That all may not rise to 
that degree of heroism and that a fair amount of fr ightfulness can bend the back of 
the revolt is true, but the argument would be besid e the point. For, if a fair number of 
men and women can be found in India who would be pr epared without any ill- will 
against the spoliators to lay down their lives rath er than bend the knee to them,  they  This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 68   
 would  have  shown  the  way  to  freedom  from  th e  tyranny  of violence. I ask you 
to believe me when I say that you will find an unex pected number of such men and 
women in India. They have been having that training  for the past twenty years. 
We have been trying for the past half a century to throw off the British rule. The 
movement of independence has been never so strong a s now. The most powerful 
political organization, I mean the Indian National Congress, is trying to achieve this 
end. 
We have attained a very fair measure of success thr ough non-violent effort. We are 
groping for the right means to combat the most orga nized violence in the world, which 
the British power represents. You have challenged i t. It remains to be seen which is 
the better organized, the German or the British. 
We know what the British heel means for us and the non-European races of the world. 
But we would never wish to end British rule with Ge rman aid. We have found in non-
violence a force which, if organized, can without d oubt match itself against a 
combination of all the most violent forces in the w orld. In non-violent technique, as I 
have said, there is no such thing as defeat. It is all "do or die" without killing or 
hurting. It can be used practically without money a nd obviously without the aid of the 
science of destruction, which you have brought to s uch perfection. 
It is a marvel to me that you do not see it is nobo dy's monopoly. If not the British, 
some other power will certainly improve upon your m ethod and beat you with your 
own weapon. You are leaving no legacy to your peopl e of which they would feel proud. 
They cannot take pride in a recital of cruel deeds,  however skilfully planned. 
I, therefore, appeal to you in the name of humanity  to stop the war. You will lose 
nothing by referring all the matters of dispute bet ween you and Great Britain to an 
International Tribunal of your joint choice. If you  attain success in the war, it will not 
prove that you were in the right. It will only prov e that your power of destruction was 
greater, whereas an award, by an imperial tribunal,  will show as far as it is humanly 
possible, which party was in the right. 
You know that not long ago I made an appeal to ever y Briton to accept my method of 
non-violent resistance. I did it because the Britis h know me as a friend, though a This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 69   
 rebel. I am a stranger to you and your people. I ha ve not the courage to make to you 
the appeal I made to every Briton. Not that it woul d not apply to you with the same 
force as to the British. But my present proposal is  much simpler because it is much 
more practical and familiar. 
During this season when the hearts of the peoples o f Europe yearn for peace, we have 
suspended even our peaceful struggle. Is it too muc h to ask you to make an effort for 
peace during a time which may mean nothing to you p ersonally, but must mean much 
to the millions of Europeans, whose dumb cry for pe ace I hear, for my ears are 
attuned to hearing the dumb millions? I had the pri vilege of meeting Signor Mussolini 
when I was in Rome during my visit to England as a delegate to the Round Table 
Conference. I hope he will take this as addressed t o him also with the necessary 
changes. 
I am Your sincere friend, M. K. Gandhi 
(The letter reproduced above was written by Gandhij i in the Christmas week of 1941, 
but the Government of India would not allow it to be tr ansmitted to the Nazi 
dictator.)  
 
 
56. GANDHIJI'S FAVOURITE HYMNS 
[The following were among the favourite hymns of Ga ndhiji and they were usually 
sung at his prayer-gatherings.] 
The True Vaishnava 
He is a real Vaishnava, who "feels the suffering of  others as his own suffering. He is 
ever ready to serve, and is .never guilty of overwe ening pride. He bows before 
everyone despises none, preserves purity in thought , word and deed. Blessed is the 
mother of such a son: in every woman he reveres his  mother. He preserves equanimity 
and never stains his mouth with falsehood, nor touc hes the riches of another. The 
bonds of desire cannot hold him. Ever in harmony wi th Ramanama, his body in itself 
possesses all the places of pilgrimage. He knows ne ither desire nor disappointment, This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 70   
 neither passion nor wrath. 
— Narasimh Mehta 
 
The Path of Love 
"The way of the Lord is open only to heroes, to cow ards it is fast shut. 
"Give up thy life and all that thou hast, so thou m ayst assume the name of the Lord. 
"Only he who leaves his son, his wife, his riches, and his life, shall drink from the 
vessel of God. 
"For in truth, he that would fish for pearls must d rive into the deepest depths of the 
sea and take his life in his hands. 
"Death affrights him not: he forgets all the misery  of body and soul. "He  who stands 
hesitating on the bank and fears to dive, gains nou ght. "But the path of love is trial by 
fire. The coward shrinks back from it. "He who dare s the leap into the fire, attains to 
everlasting bliss." 
- Pritama 
 
 
My Heartfelt Prayer 
"Lord, preserve me from looking on things which aro use evil thoughts. It were better 
for me to be blind.  
"Lord, preserve me from soiling my lips with impure  words. It were better for me to be 
dumb. 
"Lord, preserve me from hearing any word of slander  and insult. It were better for me 
to be deaf. 
"Lord, preserve me from looking with desire on any of those who should be my sisters. 
It were better for me to be dead." 
- Tukaram This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 71   
  
Lead Kindly Light 
 
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom, 
 Lead Thou me on; 
The night is dark, and I am far from home;  
 Lead Thou me on. 
Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see 
The distant scene; one step enough for me. 
I was not ever thus, nor pray'd that Thou  
 Shouldst lead me on; 
I loved to choose, and see my path; but now  
 Lead Thou me on. 
I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears, 
 Pride ruled my will: remember not past years.  
So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still  
 Will lead me on, 
O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent, till 
 The night is gone; 
And with the morn those Angel faces smile, 
 Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile. 
- Cardinal Newma 
 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 72   
  
The Wondrous Cross 
When I survey the wondrous Cross 
 On which the Prince of Glory died,  
My richest gain I count but loss, 
 And pour contempt on all my pride. 
Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast 
 Save in the Cross of Christ, my God;  
All the vain things that charm me most, 
 I sacrifice them to His Blood. 
See from His Head, His Hands, His Feet,  
 Sorrow and love flow mingling down; 
Did e'er such love and sorrow meet, 
 Or thorns compose so rich a crown ?  
Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
 That were an offering far too small;  
Love so amazing, so divine, 
 Demands my soul, my life, my all. 
To Christ, Who won for sinners grace 
 By bitter grief and anguish sore,  
Be praise from all the ransom'd race, 
 Forever and ever more. 
- I. Wa tt s 
 
 This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 73   
  
Rock of Ages 
Rock of Ages, cleft for me,  
Let me hide myself in Thee;  
Let 'the Water and the Blood, 
From Thy riven Side which flow'd, 
Be of sin the double cure, 
Cleanse me from its guilt and power. 
 
Not the labours of my hands  
Can fulfill Thy law's demands;  
Could my zeal no respite know,  
Could my tears for ever flow,  
All for sin could not atone; 
Thou must save, and Thou alone. 
 
Nothing in my hand I bring,  
Simply to Thy Cross I cling;  
Naked, come to Thee for dress;  
Helpless, look to Thee for grace;  
Foul, I to the Fountain fly; 
Wash me, Saviour, or I die. 
 
While I draw this fleeting breath, 
When my eyelids close in death,  This was Bapu 
www .mkg andhi.org  Page 74   
 When I soar through tracts unknown,  
See Thee on Thy Judgment Throne;  
Rock of Ages, cleft for me, 
Let me hide myself in Thee. 
— A. M. Toplady 
 
The Sermon on the Mount 
Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. 
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. 
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteou sness: for they shall be 
filled. 
Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. 
Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. 
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God. 
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' s ake: for theirs is the 
Kingdom of Heaven. 
- Gospel of Mathew 
 