 
Ashram Observance in action  
 
By : M. K. Gandhi  
 
 
 
 
Translated from the original Gujarati by : Valji Go vindji Desai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 15/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91-79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 
E-mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  
Website:    
Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
TRANSLATOR'S NOTE 
Gandhiji believed that character building on the pa rt of every single individual 
is the only sure foundation for nation building. St udents of his philosophy of 
life who would like to have an idea of his Rule for  self-culture would do well 
first of all to read Appendices A and B in this boo k (pages 65-88). They should 
then pass on to a study of  From Yeravda Mandir — Ashram Observances  and of 
the present volume, and at last dip into Appendix C  (pages 89-92), which is 
Gandhiji's last will and testament in so far as Ash ram life is concerned. 
It is a remarkable coincidence that like  From Yeravda Mandir  this book shares 
with  The Pilgrim's Progress  the rare distinction of having been written in 
prison. 
V. G. D. 
St. 2011 Paush krishna 3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
INTRODUCTION  
(Begun on April 5, 1932) 
Ashram here means a community of men of religion. L ooking at the past in the 
light of the present, I feel that an ashram was a n ecessary of life for me. As 
soon as I had a house of my own, my house was an as hram in this sense, for my 
life as a householder was not one of enjoyment but of duty discharged from day 
to day. Again besides the members of my family 1 al ways had some friends or 
others living with me, whose relation with me was s piritual from the first or 
became such later on. This went on unconsciously ti ll 1904 when I read Ruskin's  
Unto This Last,  which made a deep impression on me. I determined t o take  
Indian Opinion  into a forest where I should live with the workers  as members of 
my family. I purchased 100 acres of land and founde d Phoenix Settlement, 
which neither we nor anyone else called an ashram. It had a religious basis, but 
the visible object was purity of body and mind as w ell as economic equality. I 
did not then consider brahmacharya  (chastity) to be essential; on the other 
hand it was expected that co-workers would live as family men and have 
children. A brief account of Phoenix will be found in  Satyagraha in South 
Africa. 
This was the first step. 
The second step was taken in 1906. I learnt in the school of experience that  
brahmacharya  was a s ine qua non  for a life devoted to service. From this time 
onward I looked upon Phoenix deliberately as a reli gious institution. The same 
year witnessed the advent of Satyagraha which was b ased on religion and 
implied an unshakable faith in the God of Truth. Re ligion here should not be 
understood in a narrow sense, but as that which act s as a link between 
different religions and realizes their essential un ity. 
This went on till 1911. All these years the Phoenix  Settlement was progressing 
as an ashram though we did not call it by that name . Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  We took the third step in 1911. So far only those p eople lived at Phoenix who 
were working in the press and the paper. But now as  a part of the Satyagraha 
movement we felt the need of an ashram where Satyag rahi families could live 
and lead a religious life. I had already come in co ntact with my German friend 
Kallenbach. Both of us were living a sort of ashram  life. I was a barrister and 
Kallenbach an architect. However we led a comparati vely very simple life in 
the sparsely populated country, and were religiousl y minded. We might commit 
mistakes out of ignorance, but we were trying to se ek the root of every activity 
in religion. Kallenbach purchased a farm of 1,100 a cres and the Satyagrahi 
families settled there. Religious problems confront ed us now at every step and 
the whole institution was managed from a religious standpoint. Among the 
settlers there were Hindus, Musalmans, Christians a nd Parsis. But I do not 
remember that they ever quarrelled with one another , though each was 
staunch in his own faith. We respected one another' s religion and tried to help 
everybody to follow his own faith and thus to make spiritual progress. 
This institution was not known as Satyagraha Ashram  but as Tolstoy Farm. 
Kallenbach and I were followers of Tolstoy and ende avoured to practise much 
of his doctrine. Tolstoy Farm was closed in 1912 an d the Farmers were sent to 
Phoenix. The history of Tolstoy Farm will also be f ound in  Satyagraha in South 
Africa. 
Phoenix now was no longer meant for the workers of Indian Opinion  only; it was 
a Satyagraha institution. That was only to be expec ted, for  Indian Opinion  owed 
its very existence to Satyagraha. Still it was a gr eat change. The even tenor of 
the lives of the settlers at Phoenix was disturbed,  and they had now to discern 
certainty in the midst of uncertainty like the Saty agrahis. But they were equal 
to the new demands made upon them. As at Tolstoy Fa rm, so also at Phoenix I 
established a common kitchen which some joined whil e others had private 
kitchens of their own. The congregational prayer in  the evening played a large 
part in our lives. And the final Satyagraha campaig n was started by the inmates 
of Phoenix Settlement in 1913. The struggle ended i n 1914. I left South Africa in 
July that year. It was decided that all settlers wh o wanted to go to India should Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  be enabled to go there. Before going to India I had  to meet Gokhale in England. 
The idea was to found a new institution in India fo r those who went there from 
Phoenix. And the communal life commenced in South A frica was to be 
continued in India. I reached India early in 1915 w ith a view to establish an 
ashram though I was still unaware that I would call  it by that name. 
I toured all parts of India for a year, and visited  some institutions from which I 
had much to learn. I was invited by several cities to establish the ashram in 
their neighbourhood with a promise of assistance in  various ways. Ahmedabad 
was selected at last. This was the fourth, and I im agine the last step. Whether 
or not it will always be the last is something of w hich no forecast is possible. 
How was the new institution to be named? What shoul d be its rules and 
regulations? On these points I had full discussions  and correspondence with 
friends, as a result of which we decided to call th e institution Satyagraha 
Ashram. It is an appropriate name if we take its ob ject into consideration. My 
life is devoted to the quest of truth. I would live  and if need be, die in 
prosecuting it, and of course I would take with me as many fellow-pilgrims as I 
could get. 
The Ashram was established in a rented house at Koc hrab on May 25, 1915. 
Some citizens of Ahmedabad undertook to finance it.  At the beginning there 
were about 20 inmates, most of them from South Afri ca. Of these again the 
large majority spoke Tamil or Telugu. The chief act ivity in the Ashram at this 
time was teaching Sanskrit, Hindi and Tamil to the old as well as the young, 
who also received some general education. Hand-weav ing was the principal 
industry with some carpentry as accessory to it. No  servants were engaged; 
therefore cooking, sanitation, fetching water, — ev erything was attended to by 
the Ashramites. Truth and other observances were ob ligatory on them all. 
Distinctions of caste were not observed. Untouchabi lity had not only no place in 
the Ashram, but its eradication from Hindu society was one of our principal 
objectives. Emancipation of women from some customa ry bonds was insisted 
upon from the first. Therefore women in the Ashram enjoy full freedom. Then Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  again it was an Ashram rule that persons following a particular faith should 
have the same feeling for followers of other faiths  as for their co-religionists. 
But for one thing 1 was solely responsible, and I a m indebted to the West for it. 
I refer to my dietetic experiments, which commenced  in 1888 when I went to 
England for studies. I always invite members of my family and other co-workers 
to join in. The experiments were designed to achiev e three objects, viz. (1) to 
acquire control over the palate as a part of self-c ontrol in general; (2) to find 
out which diet was the simplest and the cheapest so  that by adopting it we 
might identify ourselves with the poor; and (3) to discover which diet was 
necessary for perfect health, as maintenance of hea lth is largely dependent 
upon correct diet. 
If in England I had not been under a vow to be a ve getarian, I might perhaps 
never have undertaken experiments in diet. But once  I began to experiment, 
these three objectives took me into deeper waters, and I was led to make 
various kinds of experiments. And the Ashram too jo ined in, though these 
experiments were not a part of Ashram discipline. 
The reader has perhaps now seen that the Ashram set  out to remedy what it 
thought were defects in our national life from the religious, economic and 
political standpoints. As we gathered new experienc es we undertook fresh 
activities. Even now I cannot say that the Ashram h as embarked on all possible 
activities that I can think of. There have been two  limitations. First, we were 
sure we must cut our coat according to our cloth, t hat is, we must manage with 
what funds were placed at our disposal by friends w ithout any special effort in 
collection. Secondly we should not go in search of new spheres of activity, but 
if any activity naturally suggested itself to our m inds, we should go in for it 
without counting the cost. 
These two limitations spring from a religious attit ude. This implies faith in God, 
that is doing everything in dependence upon and und er the inspiration of God. 
The man of religion conducts such activities as are  sent by God with such 
resources as God places at his disposal. He never l ets us see that He Himself 
does anything : He achieves His aims through men in spired by Him. When help Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  was received from unexpected quarters or from frien ds without our asking for 
it, my faith led me to believe that it was sent by God. Similarly when some 
activity came to us unsought so that not to take it  up would have been sheer 
cowardice, laziness or the like, I thought it was a  Godsend. 
The same principle applies to coworkers as to mater ial resources and to 
activities. We may have the funds and know how they  are to be used, but we 
can do nothing in the absence of co-workers. Co-wor kers also should come 
unsought. We did not merely imagine but had a livin g faith that the Ashram was 
God's. If therefore He wished to make the Ashram Hi s instrument as regards any 
activity, it was for Him to place the requisite men  and munitions at the 
Ashram's disposal. Phoenix, Tolstoy Farm and Sabarm ati Ashram have all been 
conducted more or less according to these principle s consciously or 
unconsciously. Ashram rules were observed at first with some laxity, but the 
observance has become stricter from day to day. 
The Ashram population doubled itself in a few month s. Again the Kochrab 
bungalow was a hardly suitable building for an ashr am. It would do for one 
well-to-do family, but not for sixty men, women and  children engaged in 
various activities and observing  brahmacharya  and other vows. However we had 
to manage with what building was available. But ver y soon it became 
impossible to live in it for a number of reasons. A s if God wanted to drive us out 
of it, we had suddenly to go out in search of a new  site and to vacate the 
bungalow. The curious will look up the Autobiography 1 for an account of these 
events. There was one defect in the Ashram at Kochr ab which was remedied 
after we had removed to Sabarmati. An Ashram withou t orchard, farm or cattle 
would not be a complete unit. At Sabarmati we had c ultivable land and 
therefore went in for agriculture at once. 
Such is the prehistory and history of the Ashram. I  now propose to deal with its 
observances and activities in so far as I remember them. My diary is not at 
hand. Even if it is, it takes no note of the person al history of the Ashramites. I 
therefore depend upon the memory alone. This is not hing new for me, as  
Satyagraha in South Africa  and the Autobiography  were written in the same Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  manner. The reader will please bear this limitation  in mind, as he goes through 
these pages. 
 
1 Part Five, Chapters IX and XXI. V. G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
I. TRUTH 
Whenever someone was found telling a lie in the Ash ram, effective steps were 
taken to deal with the situation as symptomatic of a serious disease. The 
Ashram does not believe in punishing wrongdoers, so  much so that hesitation is 
felt even in asking them to leave the institution. Three lines of preventive 
action were therefore adopted. 
The first thing attended to was the purity of the p rincipal workers in charge, 
the idea being that if they were free from fault, t he atmosphere about them 
was bound to be affected by their innocence. Untrut h cannot stand before 
truth like darkness before the light of the sun. 
Secondly, we had recourse to confession. If someone  was found practising 
untruth, the fact was brought to the notice of the congregation. This is a very 
useful measure if it is judiciously adopted. But on e has to be careful about two 
things. The public confession must not be tainted b y even a trace of force; and 
the confession should not lead to the person confes sing taking leave of all sense 
of shame. If he comes to believe that mere confessi on has washed off his sin, 
he is no longer ashamed of it at all. There should be an ever present 
consciousness of the fact that the least little unt ruth is a dangerous thing. 
Thirdly, the worker in charge of the Ashram as well  as the wrongdoer would 
fast as a matter of penance. Of course it is a matt er for the wrongdoer himself 
to decide whether or not he should undertake a fast . But as for the worker in 
charge, he is clearly responsible for intentional a nd unintentional wrongdoing 
in his institution. Untruth is more poisonous and m ore subtle than any poison 
gas whatever, but it dare not enter where the head of the institution is wide 
awake and has a spiritual outlook on life. Still if  it is found to have effected an 
entrance, it is a warning to the principal worker, who may be sure that he must 
bear his share of responsibility for this infection . I for one believe that spiritual 
acts have clearly defined results precisely like co mbinations or processes in the 
natural sciences. Only as we have no such means of measurement in the former 
case as in the latter, we are not ready to believe or we only halfheartedly Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  believe in the spiritual influences. Again, we are inclined to be lenient to 
ourselves with the result that our experiments are unsuccessful and we tend to 
move only in a circle like the oil-miller's bullock . Thus untruth gets a long lease 
of life, and at last we reach the melancholy conclu sion that it is unavoidable. 
And what is unavoidable easily becomes necessary, s o that not truth but 
untruth increases its own prestige. 
When therefore untruth was discovered in the Ashram , I readily pleaded guilty 
for it myself. That is to say, I have not still att ained truth as defined by me. It 
may be due to ignorance, but it is clear that I hav e not fully understood truth 
and therefore neither even thought it out nor decla red it, still less practised it. 
But granting all this, was I to leave the Ashram, a nd resort to some Himalayan 
cave and impose silence upon myself? That would be sheer cowardice. The 
quest of truth cannot be prosecuted in a cave. Sile nce makes no sense where it 
is necessary to speak. One may live in a cave in ce rtain circumstances, but the 
common man can be tested only in society. 
What then is the remedy to be tried to get rid of u ntruth? The only answer 
which suggests itself to me is bodily penance, that  is fasting and the like. 
Bodily penance has a threefold influence, first ove r the penitent, secondly over 
the wrongdoer and thirdly over the congregation. Th e penitent becomes more 
alert, examines the innermost recesses of his own h eart and takes steps to deal 
with any personal weakness that he may discover. If  the wrongdoer has any 
pity, he becomes conscious of his own fault, is ash amed of it and resolves never 
to sin any more in the future. The congregation tak es a course of self-
introspection. 
But bodily penance is only a means to an end, not a n end in itself. By itself it 
cannot bring an erring person to the right path. It  is profitable only if it is 
accompanied by a certain line of thinking, which is  as follows:  
Man tends to become a slave of his own body, and en gages in many activities 
and commits many sins for the sake of physical enjo yment. He should therefore 
mortify the flesh whenever there is an occasion of sin. A man given to physical 
enjoyment is subject to delusion. Even a slight ren unciation of enjoyment in Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  the shape of food will probably be helpful in break ing the power of that 
delusion. Fasting in order to produce this effect m ust be taken in its widest 
sense as the exercise of control over all the organ s of sense with a view to the 
purification of oneself or others. Merely giving up  food does not amount to a 
fast. And fasting for health is no fasting at all i n this sense. 
I have also found that frequent fasting tends to ro b it of its efficacy, for then it 
becomes almost a mechanical process without any bac kground of thought. 
Every fast therefore should be undertaken after due  deliberation. 
I have noted one special effect of fasting in my ow n case. I have fasted 
frequently; therefore my co-workers are nervous and  are afraid that a fresh 
fast may place my life in danger. This fear makes t hem observe certain rules. I 
consider this an undesirable consequence of fasting . I do not however think 
that self-control practised on account of such fear  does any harm. This fear is 
inspired by love, and therefore it is a good thing if a person steers clear of 
wrongdoing even under the influence of such fear. D eliberate and voluntary 
reformation is of course very desirable, but it is only to be welcomed if a 
person avoids sin because he is afraid of causing p ain to elders, as it involves no 
use of brute force. There are many cases of reforma tion undertaken primarily 
only to please one's dear ones becoming a permanent  feature of men's lives. 
One painful consequence of fasting must be taken in to account. People 
sometimes do not avoid sin but only try to hide it for fear that someone else 
may fast if he comes to know of it. 
I hold that penance is necessary in certain cases a nd it has benefited the 
Ashram on the whole. But one who undertakes it must  possess certain 
qualifications: 
1.  The wrongdoer should have love for the penitent. Th e penitent may have 
love for the wrongdoer; but if the wrongdoer is una ware of it or adopts an 
inimical attitude towards the penitent, penance for  him is out of the 
question. As he regards himself as an enemy of the penitent, he hates the 
latter. There is therefore a possibility of the fas t affecting him in a manner 
contrary to all expectations, or acting as brute fo rce employed against him Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  and thus regarded by him as a form of coercion. Mor eover, if everyone is 
supposed to be entitled to undertake penance for th e failings of others 
who do not stand in a special relation to him, ther e would be no end to the 
programme of penance. Penance for the sins of the w hole world might 
befit a mahatma (great soul), but here we are conce rned with the common 
man. 
2.  The penitent himself must be one of the parties wro nged. That is to say, 
one should not do penance for a failing with which he is not in any way 
concerned. Thus, suppose A and B are friends. B is a member of the 
Ashram, but A has nothing to do with it. B has wron ged the Ashram. Here A 
has neither the duty nor the right to undertake a p enance for B's fault. His 
interference might even complicate the situation bo th for the Ashram and 
B. He may not even possess the necessary material t o pronounce a 
judgment on B's conduct. By agreeing to B's admissi on to the Ashram, A 
must be regarded as having transferred to the Ashra m his responsibility for 
B's good conduct. 
3.  A penitent for another's wrongdoing must himself be  guiltless of similar 
misconduct. "The pot may not call the kettle black. " 
4.  The penitent must otherwise also be a man of purity  and appear such to 
the wrongdoer. Penance for another's wrongdoing pre supposes purity; and 
if the guilty man has no respect for the penitent, the latter's fast might 
easily have an unhealthy effect upon him. 
5.  The penitent must not have any personal interest to  serve. Thus, if A has 
promised to pay B ten rupees, nonpayment of it is a  fault. But B may not 
perform penance for A's failure to redeem his promi se. 
6.  The penitent must not have any anger in him. If a f ather commences a fast 
in anger for a fault of his son, that is not penanc e. There should be nothing 
but compassion in penance, the object being the pur ification of oneself as 
well as of the guilty person. 
7.  The Wrong act must be patent, accepted as such by a ll and spiritually 
harmful, and the doer must be aware of its nature. There should be no 
penance for inferential guilt, as it might at times  have dangerous Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  consequences. There should be no room for doubt as regards the fault. 
Moreover, one should not do penance for an act whic h he alone regards as 
wrong. It is possible that what one holds to be wro ng today he might 
regard as innocent tomorrow. So the wrong must be o ne that is accepted 
as such by society. For instance, I might regard th e non-wearing of khadi 
to be very wrong. But my co-worker might see nothin g wrong in it, or 
might not attach much importance to it, and so migh t or might not wear it 
as he wishes. If I regard this as a wrong and fast for it, that is not penance 
but coercion. There can be no penance also where th e wrongdoer is not 
conscious of having done anything wrong. 
The discussion of this topic is necessary for an in stitution in which there is no 
place for punishment or which always strives to act  in a religious spirit. In such 
institutions the penance on the part of the heads o f the Ashram takes the place 
of penal measures. It would be impossible to mainta in its purity in any other 
way. Punishment and disciplinary action might make for an outer show of 
orderliness and progress, but that is all. On the o ther hand penance preserves 
the institution both internally and externally and makes the institution firmer 
day by day. Hence the necessity for some such rules  as those given above. 
Fasts and such other penance have been undertaken i n the Ashram. Still it is 
far, far indeed, from its ideal of truth, and- ther efore, as we shall see later on, 
we now call it by the name of Udyoga Mandir (Temple  of Industry). But we can 
certainly say that the men in charge of the Ashram are wide awake, fully 
conscious of their imperfections and constantly try ing to make sure that 
untruth does not find a foothold anywhere. But in a n institution to which new 
members are being admitted from time to time, and t hat too only on trust, and 
which is frequented by men from all provinces of In dia and some foreign 
countries, it is no easy thing to keep all of them on the straight and narrow 
path. But if only the men at the top are tine to th emselves, the Ashram is sure 
to stand the test, no matter how hard it is. There is no limit to the potency of 
truth, as there is a limit to the power of an indiv idual seeker. But if he is wide 
awake and is striving constantly, there is no limit  to his power as well. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
II. PRAYER 
(i) 
If insistence on truth constitutes the root of the Ashram, prayer is the principal 
feeder of that root. The social (as distinguished f rom the individual) activities 
of the Ashram commence every day with the congregat ional morning worship at 
4:15 to 4: 45 a.m. and close with the evening praye r at 7 to 7: 30 p.m. Ever 
since the Ashram was founded, not a single day has passed to my knowledge 
without this worship. I know of several occasions w hen owing to the rains only 
one responsible person was present on the prayer gr ound. All inmates are 
expected to attend the worship except in the case o f illness or similar 
compelling reason for absence. This expectation has  been fairly well fulfilled at 
the evening prayer, but not in the morning. 
The time for morning worship was as a matter of exp eriment fixed at 4, 5, 6 
and 7 a.m., one after another. But on account of my  persistently strong 
attitude on the subject, it has been fixed at last at 4: 20 a.m. With the first 
bell at 4 every one rises from bed and after a wash  reaches the prayer ground 
by 4: 20. 
I believe that in a country like India the sooner a  man rises from bed the 
better. Indeed millions must necessarily rise early . If the peasant is a late riser, 
his crops will suffer damage. Cattle are attended t o and cows are milked early 
in the morning. Such being the case, seekers of sav ing truth, servants of the 
people or monks may well be up at 2 or 3: it would be surprising if they are 
not. In all countries of the world devotees of God and tillers of the soil rise 
early. Devotees take the name of God and peasants w ork in their fields serving 
the world as well as themselves. To my mind both ar e worshippers. Devotees 
are deliberately such while cultivators by their in dustry worship God unawares, 
as it helps to sustain the world. If instead of wor king in the fields, they took to 
religious meditation, they would be failing in thei r duty and involving 
themselves and the world in ruin. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  We may or may not look upon the cultivator as a dev otee, but where peasants, 
labourers and other people have willy nilly to rise  early, how can a worshipper 
of Truth or servant of the people be a late riser? Again in the Ashram we are 
trying to co-ordinate work and worship. Therefore I  am definitely of opinion 
that all able-bodied people in the Ashram must rise  early even at the cost of 
inconvenience. Four a.m. is not early but the lates t time when we must be up 
and doing. 
Then again we had to take a decision on certain que stions. Where should the 
prayers be offered? Should we erect a temple or mee t in the open air? Then 
again, should we raise a platform or sit in the san ds or the dust? Should there 
be any images? At last we decided to sit on the san ds under the canopy of the 
sky and not to install any image. Poverty is an Ash ram observance. The Ashram 
exists in order to serve the starving millions. The  poor have a place in it no less 
than others. It receives with open arms all who are  willing to keep the rules. In 
such an institution the house of worship cannot be built with bricks and mortar, 
the sky must suffice for roof and the quarters for walls and pillars. A platform 
was planned but discarded later on, as its size wou ld depend upon the 
indeterminate number of worshippers. And a big one would cost a large sum of 
money. Experience has shown the soundness of the de cision not to build a 
house or even a platform. People from outside also attend the Ashram prayers, 
so that at times the multitude present cannot be ac commodated on the biggest 
of platforms. 
Again as the Ashram prayers are being increasingly imitated elsewhere, the sky-
roofed temple has proved its utility. Morning and e vening prayers are held 
wherever I go. Then there is such large attendance,  especially in the evening, 
that prayers are possible only on open grounds. And  if I had been in the habit of 
worshipping in a prayer hall only, I might perhaps never have thought of public 
prayers during my tours. 
Then again all religions are accorded equal respect  in the Ashram. Followers of 
all faiths are welcome there; they may or may not b elieve in the worship of 
images. No image is kept at the congregational wors hip of the Ashram in order Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  to avoid hurting anybody's feelings. But if an Ashr amite wishes to keep an 
image in his room, he is free to do so. 
(ii) 
At the morning prayer we first recite the  shlokas  (verses) printed in  Ashram 
Bhajanavali  (hymnal), and then sing one bhajan  (hymn) followed by  Ramadhun  
(repetition of Ramanama) and  gitapath  (recitation of the Gita). In the evening 
we have recitation of the last 19 verses of the sec ond chapter of the Gita, one  
bhajan  and  Ramadhun  and then read some portion of a sacred book. 
The  shlokas  were selected by Shri Kaka Kalelkar who has been i n the Ashram 
since its foundation. Shri Maganlal Gandhi met him in Shantiniketan, when he 
and the children of the Phoenix Settlement went the re from South Africa while 
I was still in England. Dinabandhu Andrews and the late Mr. Pearson were then 
in Shantiniketan. I had advised Maganlal to stay at  some place selected by 
Andrews. And Andrews selected Shantiniketan for the  party. Kaka was a 
teacher there and came into close contact with Maga nlal. Maganlal had been 
feeling the want of a Sanskrit teacher which was su pplied by Kaka. Chintamani 
Shastri assisted him in the work. Kaka taught the c hildren how to recite the 
verses repeated in prayer. Some of these verses wer e omitted in the Ashram 
prayer in order to save time. Such is the history o f the verses recited at the 
morning prayer all these days. 
The recitation of these verses has often been objec ted to on the ground of 
saving time or because it appeared to some people t hat they could not well be 
recited by a worshipper of truth or by a non-Hindu.  There is no doubt that 
these verses are recited only in Hindu society, but  I cannot see why a non-
Hindu may not join in or be present at the recitati on. Muslim and Christian 
friends who have heard the verses have not raised a ny objection. Indeed they 
need not cause annoyance to anyone who respects oth er faiths as much as he 
respects his own. They do not contain any reflectio n on other people. Hindus 
being in an overwhelming majority in the Ashram, th e verses must be selected 
from the sacred books of the Hindus. Not that nothi ng is sung or recited from Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  non-Hindu scriptures. Indeed there were occasions o n which Imam saheb 
recited verses from the 1Koran. Muslim and Christian hymns are often sung. 
But the verses were strongly attacked from the stan dpoint of truth. An 
Ashramite modestly but firmly argued that the worsh ip of Sarasvati, Ganesh 
and the like was violence done to truth; for no suc h divinities really existed as 
Sarasvati seated on a lotus with a  vina  (kind of musical instrument) in her 
hands, or as Ganesh with a big belly and an elephan t's trunk. To this argument I 
replied as follows: 
'I claim to be a votary of truth, and yet I do not mind reciting these verses or 
teaching them to the children. If we condemn some  shlokas  on the strength of 
this argument, it would be tantamount to an attack on the very basis of 
Hinduism. Not that we may not condemn anything in H induism which is fit for 
condemnation, no matter how ancient it is. But I do  not believe that this is a 
weak or vulnerable point of Hinduism. On the other hand I hold that it is 
perhaps characteristic of our faith. Sarasvati and Ganesh are not independent 
entities. They are all descriptive names of one God . Devoted poets have given a 
local habitation and a name to His countless attrib utes. They have done 
nothing wrong. Such verses worshippers nor others. When a human being 
praises God he imagines Him to be such as he thinks  fit. The God of his 
imagination is there for him. Even when we pray to a God devoid of form and 
attributes we do in fact endow Him with attributes.  And attributes too are 
form. Fundamentally God is indescribable in words. We mortals must of 
necessity depend upon the imagination which makes a nd sometimes mars us 
too. The qualities we attribute to God with the pur est of motives are true for 
us but fundamentally false, because all attempts at  describing Him must be 
unsuccessful. I am intellectually conscious of this  and still I cannot help 
dwelling upon the attributes of God. My intellect c an exercise no influence 
over my heart. I am prepared to admit that my heart  in its weakness hankers 
after a God with attributes. The  shlokas  which I have been reciting every day 
for the last fifteen years give me peace and hold g ood for me. In them I find 
beauty as well as poetry. Learned men tell many sto ries about Sarasvati, Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  Ganesh and the like, which have their own use. I do  not know their deeper 
meaning, as I have not gone into it finding it unne cessary for me. It may be 
that my ignorance is my salvation. I did not see th at I needed to go deep into 
this as a part of my quest of truth. It is enough t hat I know my God, and 
although I have still to realize His living presenc e, I am on the right path to my 
destination.' 
I could hardly expect that the objectors should be satisfied with this reply. An  
ad hoc  committee examined the whole question fully and fi nally recommended 
that the shlokas  should remain as they were, for every possible sel ection would 
be viewed with disfavour by someone or other. 
(iii) 
A hymn was sung after the  shlokas.  Indeed singing hymns was the only item of 
the prayers in South Africa. The shlokas  were added in India. Maganlal Gandhi 
was our leader in song. But we felt that the arrang ement was unsatisfactory. 
We should have an expert singer for the purpose, an d that singer should be one 
who would observe the Ashram rules. One such was fo und in Narayan Moreshvar 
Khare, a pupil of Pandit Vishnu Digambar, whom the master kindly sent to the 
Ashram. Pandit Khare gave us full satisfaction and is now a full member of the 
Ashram. He made hymn-singing interesting, and the  Ashram Bhajanavali  
(hymnal) which is now read by thousands was in the main compiled by him. He 
introduced  Ramadhun,  the third item of our prayers. 
The fourth item is recitation of verses from the Gi ta. The Gita has for years 
been an authoritative guide to belief and conduct f or the Satyagraha Ashram. It 
has provided us with a test with which to determine  the correctness or 
otherwise of ideas and courses of conduct in questi on. Therefore we wished 
that all Ashramites should understand the meaning o f the Gita and if possible 
commit it to memory. If this last was not possible,  we wished that they should 
at least read the original Sanskrit with correct pr onunciation. With this end in 
view we began to recite part of the Gita every day.  We would recite a few 
verses every day and continue the recitation until we had learnt them by heart. 
From this we proceeded to the  parayan.  And the recitation is now so arranged Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  that the whole of the Gita is finished in fourteen days, and everybody knows 
what verses will be recited on any particular day. The first chapter is recited 
on every alternate Friday, and we shall come to it on Friday next (June 10, 
1932). The seventh and eighth, the twelfth and thir teenth, the fourteenth and 
fifteenth, and the sixteenth and seventeenth chapte rs are recited on the same 
day in order to finish 18 chapters in 14 days. 2 
At the evening prayer we recite the last 19 verses of the second chapter of the 
Gita as well as sing a hymn and repeat Ramanama.  These verses describe the 
characteristics of the sthitaprajna  (the man of stable understanding), which a 
Satyagrahi too must acquire, and are recited in ord er that he may constantly 
bear them in mind. 
Repeating the same thing at prayer from day to day is objected to on the 
ground that it thus becomes mechanical and tends to  be ineffective. It is true 
that the prayer becomes mechanical. We ourselves ar e machines, and if we 
believe God to be our mover, we must behave like ma chines in His hands. If the 
sun and other heavenly bodies did not work like mac hines, the universe would 
come to a standstill. But in behaving like machines , we must not behave like 
inert matter. We are intelligent beings and must ob serve rules as such. The 
point is not whether the contents of the prayer are  always the same or differ 
from day to day. Even if they are full of variety, it is possible that they will 
become ineffective. The Gayatri verse among Hindus,  the confession of faith  
(kalma)  among Musalmans, the typical Christian prayer in t he Sermon on the 
Mount have been recited by millions for centuries e very day; and yet their 
power has not diminished but is ever on the increas e. It all depends upon the 
spirit behind the recitation. If an unbeliever or a  parrot repeats these potent 
words, they will fall quite flat. On the other hand  when a believer utters them 
always, their influence grows from day to day. Our staple food is the same. The 
wheat-eater will take other things besides wheat, a nd these additional things 
may differ from time to time, but the wheat bread w ill always be there on the 
dining table. It is the eater's staff of life, and he will never weary of it. If he 
conceives a dislike for it, that is a sign of the a pproaching dissolution of his Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  body. The same is the case with prayer. Its princip al contents must be always 
the same. If the soul hungers after them, she will not quarrel with the 
monotony of the prayer but will derive nourishment from it. She will have a 
sense of deprivation on the day that it has not bee n possible to offer prayer. 
She will be more downcast than one who observes a p hysical fast. Giving up 
food may now and then be beneficial for the body; i ndigestion of prayer for the 
soul is something never heard of. 
The fact is that many of us offer prayer without ou r soul being hungry for it. It 
is a fashion to believe that there is a soul; so we  believe that she exists. Such is 
the sorry plight of many among us. Some are intelle ctually convinced that 
there is a soul, but they have not grasped that tru th with the heart; therefore 
they do not feel the need for prayer. Many offer pr ayer because they live in 
society and think they must participate in its acti vities. No wonder they hanker 
after variety. As a matter of fact however they do not  attend prayer. They 
want to enjoy the music or are merely curious or wi sh to listen to the sermon. 
They are not there to be one with God. 
(iv ) 
Prarthana  (Gujarati word for prayer) literally means to ask for something, that 
is, to ask God for something in a spirit of humilit y. Here it is not used in that 
sense, but in the sense of praising or worshipping God, meditation and self- 
purification. 
But who is God ? God is not some person outside our selves or away from the 
universe. He pervades everything, and is omniscient  as well as omnipotent. He 
does not need any praise or petitions. Being immane nt in all beings, He hears 
everything and reads our innermost thoughts. He abi des in our hearts and is 
nearer to us than the nails are to the fingers. Wha t is the use of telling Him 
anything? 
It is in view of this* difficulty that  prarthana  is further paraphrased as self-
purification. When we speak out aloud at prayer tim e, our speech is addressed 
not to God but to ourselves, and is intended to sha ke off our torpor. Some of us 
are intellectually aware of God, while others are a fflicted by doubt. None has Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  seen Him face to face. We desire to recognise and r ealize Him, to become one 
with Him, and seek to gratify that desire through p rayer. 
This God whom we seek to realize is Truth. Or to pu t it in another way Truth is 
God. This Truth is not merely the truth we are expe cted to speak. It is that 
which alone is, which constitutes the stuff of whic h all things are made, which 
subsists by virtue of its own power, which is not s upported by anything else but 
supports everything that exists. Truth alone is ete rnal, everything else is 
momentary. It need not assume shape or form. It is pure intelligence as well as 
pure bliss. We call it  lshvara  because everything is regulated by Its will. It an d 
the law It promulgates are one. Therefore it is not  a blind law. It governs the 
entire universe. To propitiate this Truth is  prarthana  which in effect means an 
earnest desire to be filled with the spirit of Trut h. This desire should be 
present all the twenty-four hours. But our souls ar e too dull to have this 
awareness day and night. Therefore we offer prayers  for a short time in the 
hope that a time will come when all our conduct wil l be one continuously 
sustained prayer. 
Such is the ideal of prayer for the Ashram, which a t present is far, far away 
from it. The detailed programme outlined above is s omething external, but the 
idea is to make our very hearts prayerful. If the A shram prayers are not still 
attractive, if even the inmates of the Ashram atten d them under compulsion of 
a sort, it only means that none of us is still a ma n of prayer in the real sense of 
the term. 
In heartfelt prayer the worshipper's attention is c oncentrated on the object of 
worship so much so that he is not conscious of anyt hing else besides. The 
worshipper has well been compared to a lover. The l over forgets the whole 
world and even himself in the presence of the belov ed. The identification of 
the worshipper with God should be closer still. It comes only after much 
striving, self-suffering  (tapas) and self-discipline. In a place which such a 
worshipper sanctifies by his presence, no inducemen ts need be offered to 
people for attending prayers, as they are drawn to the house of prayer by the 
force of his devotion. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  We have dealt so far with congregational prayer, bu t great stress is also laid in 
the Ashram on individual and solitary prayer. One w ho never prays by himself 
may attend congregational prayers but will not deri ve much advantage from 
them. They are absolutely necessary for a congregat ion, but as a congregation 
is made up of individuals, they are fruitless witho ut individual prayers. Every 
member of the Ashram is therefore reminded now and then that he should of 
his own accord give himself up to self-introspectio n at all times of the day. No 
watch can be kept that he does this, and no account  can be maintained of such 
silent prayer. I cannot say how far it prevails in the Ashram, but I believe that 
some are making more or less effort in that directi on.  
 
1 Recitation of short passages from the Koran has s ince been made an integral part of the 
Ashram prayer. V. G. D 
2 Later on the Gita recitation was finished every s even instead of every fourteen days, and 
the chapters were distributed among the days as fol lows: Friday, 1 and 2; Saturday, 3. 4 
and 5; Sunday, 6, 7 and 8; Monday, 9. 10, 11 and 12 ; Tuesday. 13. 14 and 15, Wednesday, 
16 and 17; Thursday, 18. V. G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
III. AHIMSA OR LOVE 
The greatest difficulties perhaps were encountered as regards the observance 
of  ahimsa.  There are problems of Truth, but it is not very ha rd to understand 
what Truth is. But in understanding  ahimsa  we every now and then find 
ourselves out of our depth.  Ahimsa  was discussed in the Ashram at greater 
length than any other subject. Even now the questio n often arises whether a 
particular act is violent or non-violent. And even if we know the distinction 
between violence and non-violence, we are often una ble to satisfy the demand 
of non-violence on account of weakness which cannot  easily be overcome.  
Ahimsa  means not to hurt any living creature by thought, word or deed, even 
for the supposed benefit of that creature. To obser ve this principle fully is 
impossible for men, who kill a number of living bei ngs large and small as they 
breathe or blink or till the land. We catch and hur t snakes or scorpions for fear 
of being bitten and leave them in some out-of-the-w ay place if we do not kill 
them. Hurting them in this way may be unavoidable, but is clearly  himsa  as 
defined above.  
If I save the food I eat or the clothes I wear or t he space I occupy, it is obvious 
that these can be utilized by someone else whose ne ed is greater than mine. As 
my selfishness prevents him from using these things , my physical enjoyment 
involves violence to my poorer neighbour. When I ea t cereals and vegetables in 
order to support life, that means violence done to vegetable life.  
Surrounded thus as I am by violence on all sides, h ow am I to observe non-
violence ? Fresh difficulties are bound to rise at every step as I try to do so.  
The violence described above is easily recognised a s such. But what about our 
being angry with one another? A teacher inflicting corporal punishment on his 
pupils, a mother taking her children to task, a man  losing his temper in his 
intercourse with equals, all these are guilty of vi olence, and violence of a bad 
type, which is not easy to tackle. Violence is ther e where there is attachment 
on the one hand and dislike on the other. How are w e to get rid of it?  Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  The first lesson therefore that we in the Ashram mu st learn is that although to 
sever some person's head from his body for the sake  of the country or the 
family or oneself is indeed a violent act, the subt le violence involved in injuring 
the feelings of other people day in and day out is possibly very much worse 
than that. Murders committed in the world will seem  to be numerous when 
considered by themselves and not so numerous when c ompared with the 
number of deaths due to other causes; but the subtl e violence involved in daily 
loss of temper and the like defies all attempts at calculation. 
We are constantly striving in the Ashram to deal wi th all these kinds of 
violence. All of us realize our own weakness. All o f us including myself are 
afraid of snakes for instance. We therefore as a ru le catch them and put them 
out of harm's way. But if someone kills a snake out  of fear, he is not taken to 
task. There was once a snake in the cowshed, and it  was impossible to catch it 
where it was. It was a risky thing to keep the catt le there; the men also were 
afraid of working thereabouts. Maganlal Gandhi felt  helpless and permitted 
them to kill that snake. I approved of his action w hen he told me about it. I 
believe that even if I had been there on the spot, I could not have done 
anything other than what he did. My intellect tells  me that I must treat even a 
snake as my kinsman and at the risk of losing my li fe I must hold the snake in 
my hands and take it away from those who are afraid  of it. But in my heart I do 
not harbour the necessary love, fearlessness and re adiness to die of snakebite. I 
am trying to cultivate all these qualities but have  not still succeeded in the 
attempt. It is possible that if I am attacked by a snake, I may neither resist nor 
kill it. But I am not willing to place anyone else' s life in danger. 
Once in the Ashram the monkeys made a terrible nuis ance of themselves and 
did extensive damage to the crops. The watchman tri ed to frighten them by 
making a show of hurling stones from a sling but in  vain. He then actually threw 
stones and injured and crippled one of the monkeys.  I thought this even worse 
than killing it. I therefore held discussions with co-workers in the Ashram, and 
finally we took the decision that if we could not g et rid of the monkeys by 
gentle means short of wounding them, we must kill o ne or two of them and end Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  the nuisance. Before this decision was taken there was a public discussion in 
the columns of Navajivan 1 which may be consulted by the curious. 
No one outside India thinks that one should not kil l even a violent animal. Some 
individuals like St. Francis observed this rule, bu t the common people did not, 
so far as I am aware. The Ashram believes in the pr inciple, but it is a pity that 
we have not succeeded in putting it into practice. We have not still acquired 
the art of doing this. It is possible that many men  will have to lay down their 
lives before this art is mastered. For the present it is only a consummation 
devoutly to be wished for. The principle has long b een accepted in India but 
the practice is very imperfect on account of our la ziness and self-deception. 
Mad dogs are killed in the Ashram, the idea being t hat they die after much 
suffering and never recover. Our people torture mad  dogs instead of killing 
them and deceive themselves into thinking that they  observe non-violence. As a 
matter of fact they only indulge in greater violenc e. 
Non-violence sometimes call's upon us to put an end  to the life of a living 
being. For instance a calf in the Ashram dairy was lame and had developed 
terrible sores; it could not eat and breathed with difficulty. After three days' 
argument with myself and my co-workers I had poison  injected into its body and 
thus put an end to its life. That action was nonvio lent, because it was wholly 
unselfish inasmuch as the sole purpose was to achie ve the calf's relief from 
pain. It was a surgical operation, and I should do exactly the same thing with 
my child, if he were in the same predicament. 
Many Hindus were shocked at this, but their reactio n to the incident only 
betrays their ignorance of the nature of ahimsa,  which has for us long ceased to 
be a living faith, and has been degraded into forma lities complied with when 
not very inconvenient. 
Here we must take leave of the Ashram experiments w ith ahimsa  as regards 
subhuman species. 
Ahimsa  as regards sub-human life is from the Ashram point  of view an 
important aspect but still only one aspect of this comprehensive principle. Our Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  dealings with our fellowmen are still more importan t than that. The commonest 
form of human intercourse is either violent or non- violent. Fortunately for 
humanity non-violence pervades human life and is ob served by men without 
special effort. If we had not borne with one anothe r, mankind would have been 
destroyed long ago.  Ahimsa  would thus appear to be the law of life, but we ar e 
not thus far entitled to any credit for observing i t. 
Whenever there is a clash of ephemeral interests, m en tend to resort to 
violence. But with a deliberate observance of non-v iolence a person 
experiences a second birth or 'conversion'. We in t he Ashram are out to observe  
ahimsa intelligently. In so doing we meet with numerous ob stacles, 
disappointments and trials of faith. We may not be satisfied with observing  
ahimsa  in deed only. Not to think badly of anyone, not to  wish ill to him though 
we have suffered at his hands, not to hurt him even  in thought, — this is an 
uphill task, but therein lies the acid test of our  ahimsa. 
Thieves have visited the Ashram from outside, and t here have been thieves in 
the Ashram itself. But we do not believe in inflict ing punishment on them. We 
do not inform the police; we put up with the losses  as best we may. This rule 
has been infringed at times. A thief was once caugh t red-handed by day. The 
Ashramite who caught him bound him with a rope and treated him 
contemptuously. I was in the Ashram at the time. I went to the thief, rebuked 
him and set him free. But as a matter of fact  ahimsa  demands from us 
something more than this. We must find out and appl y methods which would 
put a stop to thieving altogether. For one thing we  must diminish the number of 
our 'possessions' so as not to tempt others. Second ly we must bring about a 
reformation in the surrounding villages. And thirdl y the Ashram ministry should 
be extended in scope so that the bad as well as the  good would learn to look 
upon the settlement as their own. 
We thus find that it is impossible for a man with ' possessions' to observe  ahimsa  
even in the gross meaning of that term. A man of pr operty must adopt 
measures for its security involving the punishment of whoever tries to steal it. 
Only he can observe  ahimsa  who holds nothing as his own and works away in a Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  spirit of total detachment. If there are many such individuals and organizations 
in society, violence will not be much in evidence. As gunpowder has a large 
place in a society based on violence and a soldier who can handle it with skill 
becomes entitled to honour and rewards, even so in a non-violent society self-
suffering and self-control are its 'munitions of wa rand persons endowed with 
these qualities are its natural protectors. The wor ld at large has not still 
accepted  ahimsa  in this sense. India has accepted it more or less but not in a 
comprehensive manner. The Ashram holds that  ahimsa  should be universal in 
scope, and that society can be built up on the foun dations of ahimsa.  It 
conducts experiments with this end in view, but the se have not been very 
successful. I have been unable to cite in this chap ter much that would hearten 
the votary of ahimsa.  This does not apply of course to  ahimsa  as applied to 
politics, to which I propose to devote a separate 2 chapter. 
 
1 Since reprinted in  Ahimsa,  p. 123 ff. V. G. D. 
2 This chapter was never written. V. G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
IV. BRAHMACHARYA OR CHASTITY 
This observance does not give rise to ever so many problems and dilemmas as  
ahimsa  does. Its meaning is generally well understood, bu t understanding it is 
one thing: practising it is quite another thing and  calls forth all our powers. 
Many of us put forth a great effort but without mak ing any progress. Some of us 
even lost ground previously won. None has reached p erfection. But everyone 
realizes its supreme importance. My striving in thi s direction began before 1906 
when I took the vow. There were many ups and downs.  It was only after I had 
burnt my fingers at times that I realized the deepe r meaning of brahmacharya.  
And then I found that expositions made in books can not be understood without 
actual experience, and wear a fresh aspect in the l ight of it. Even in the case of 
a simple machine like the spinning-wheel, it is one  thing to read the directions 
for plying it, and it is another thing to put the d irections into practice. New 
light dawns upon us as soon as we commence our prac tice. And what is true of 
simple tangible things like the wheel is still more  true of spiritual slates. 
A brahmachari  is one who controls his organs of sense in thought , word and 
deed. The meaning of this definition became somewha t clear after I had kept 
the observance for some time, but it is not quite c lear even now, for I do not 
claim to be a perfect  brahmachari , evil thoughts having been held in restraint 
but not eradicated. When they are eradicated, I wil l discover further 
implications of the definition. 
Ordinary  brahmcicharya  is not so difficult as it is supposed to be. We ha ve 
made it difficult by understanding the term in a na rrow sense. Many of us play 
with brahmacharya  like fools who put their hands in the fire and sti ll expect to 
escape being burnt. Very few realize that a brahmachari  has to control not one 
but all the organs of sense. He is no  brahmachari  who thinks that mere control 
of animal passion is the be-all and end-all of  brahmacharya. No wonder if he 
finds it very difficult. He who attempts to control  only one organ and allows all 
the others free play must not expect to achieve suc cess. He might as well 
deliberately descend into a well and expect to keep  his body dry. Those who Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  would achieve an easy conquest of animal passion mu st give up all unnecessary 
things which stimulate it. They must control their palate and cease to read 
suggestive literature and to enjoy all luxuries. I have not the shadow of a doubt 
that they will find  brahmacharya  easy enough after such renunciation. 
Some people think that it is not a breach of brahmacharya  to cast a lascivious 
look at one's own or another's wife or to touch her  in the same manner; but 
nothing could be farther from the truth. Such behav iour constitutes a direct 
breach of  brahmacluuya  in the grosser sense of the term. Men and women wh o 
indulge in it deceive themselves and the world, and  growing weaker day by 
day, make themselves easily susceptible to disease.  If they stop short of a full 
satisfaction of desire, the credit for it is due to  circumstances and not to 
themselves. They are bound to fall at the very firs t opportunity. 
In  brahmachaiya  as conceived by the Ashram those who are married b ehave as 
if they were not married. Married people do well to  renounce gratification 
outside the marital bond; theirs is a limited  brahmacharya.  But to look upon 
them as  brahmacharis  is to do violence to that glorious term. 
Such is the complete Ashram definition of brahmacharya.  However there are 
men as well as women in the Ashram who enjoy consid erable freedom in 
meeting one another. The ideal is that one Ashramit e should have the same 
freedom in meeting another as is enjoyed by a son i n meeting his mother or by 
a brother in meeting his sister. That is to say, th e restrictions that are generally 
imposed for the protection of  brahmacharya  are lifted in the Satyagraha 
Ashram, where we believe that  brahmacharya  which ever stands in need of 
such adventitious support is no brahmacharya  at all. The restrictions may be 
necessary at first but must wither away in time. Th eir disappearance does not 
mean that a  brahmachari  goes about seeking the company of women, but it 
does mean that if there is an occasion for him to m inister to a woman, he may 
not refuse such ministry under the impression that it is forbidden to him. 
Woman for a  brahmachari  is not the 'doorkeeper of hell' but is an incarnat ion of 
our Mother who is in Heaven. He is no  brahmachari  at all whose mind is 
disturbed if he happens to see a woman or if he has  to touch her in order to Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  render service. A  brahmachari 's reaction to a living image and to a bronze 
statue is one and the same. But a man who is pertur bed at the very mention of 
woman and who is desirous of observing  brahmacharya,  must fly even from a 
figurine made of metal. 
An Ashram, where men and women thus live and work t ogether, serve one 
another and try to observe brahmacharya,  is exposed to many perils. Its 
arrangements involve to a certain extent a delibera te imitation of life in the 
West. I have grave doubts about my competence to un dertake such an 
experiment. But this applies to all my experiments.  It is on account of these 
doubts that I do not look upon anyone else as my di sciple. Those who have 
joined the Ashram after due deliberation have joine d me as co-workers, fully 
conscious of all the risks involved therein. As for  the young boys and girls, I look 
upon them as my own children, and as such they are automatically drawn 
within the pale of my experiments. These experiment s are undertaken in the 
name of the God of Truth. He is the Master Potter w hile we are mere clay in His 
all-powerful hands. 
My experience of the Ashram so far has taught me th at there is no ground for 
disappointment as regards the results of this pursu it of  brahmacharya  under 
difficulties. Men as well as women have on the whol e derived benefit from it, 
but the greatest benefit has in my opinion accrued to women. Some of us have 
fallen, some have risen after sustaining a fall. Th e possibility of stumbling is 
implicit in all such experimentation. Where there i s cent per cent success, it is 
not an experiment but a characteristic of omniscien ce. 
I now come to a point of vital importance which I h ave reserved for treatment 
towards the end of the discussion. We are told in t he Bhagavadgita (II : 59) that 
'when a man starves his senses, the objects of thos e senses disappear from him, 
but not the yearning for them; the yearning too dep arts when he beholds the 
Supreme,' that is to say, the Truth or  Brahma  (God). The whole truth of the 
matter has here been set forth by the experienced K rishna. Fasting and all 
other forms of discipline are ineffective without t he grace of God. What is the 
vision of the Truth or God ? It does not mean seein g something with the physical Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  eye or witnessing a miracle. Seeing God means reali zation of the fact that God 
abides in one's heart. The yearning must persist un til one has attained this 
realization, and will vanish upon realization. It i s with this end in view that we 
keep observances, and engage ourselves in spiritual  endeavour at the Ashram. 
Realization is the final fruit of constant effort. The human lover sacrifices his 
all for his beloved, but his sacrifice is fruitless  inasmuch as it is offered for the 
sake of momentary pleasure. But the quest of Truth calls for even greater 
concentration than that of the human beloved. There  is joy ineffable in store 
for the aspirant at the end of the quest. Still ver y few of us are as earnest as 
even the human lover. Such being the facts of the c ase, what is the use of 
complaining that the quest of truth is an uphill ta sk? The human beloved may 
be at a distance of several thousand miles; God is there in the tabernacle of 
the human heart, nearer to us than the finger nails  are to the fingers. But what 
is to be done with a man who wanders all over the w ide world in search of 
treasure which as a matter of fact is buried under his very feet ? 
The  brahmachaiya  observed by a self-restraining person is not somet hing to be 
despised. It certainly serves to weaken the force o f the yearning for the 
'fleshpots of Egypt.' One may keep fasts or adopt v arious other methods of 
mortifying the flesh, but the objects of sense must  be compelled to disappear. 
The yearning will get itself in readiness to go as this process is on. Then the 
seeker will have the beatific vision, and that will  be the signal for the yearning 
to make its final exit. The treasure supposed to be  lost will be recovered. He 
who has not put all his strength into his effort ha s no right to complain that he 
has not 'seen' Brahma.  Observing  brahmacharya  is one of the means to the end 
which is seeing  Brahma.  Without  brahmacharya  no one may expect to see Him, 
and without seeing Him one cannot observe  brahmacharya  to perfection. The 
verse therefore does not rale out self-discipline b ut only indicates its 
limitations.  
All members of the Ashram, young as well as old, ma rried as well as unmarried, 
try to observe  brahmacharya, but only a few will observe it for life. When the 
young people come to years of discretion, they are told that they are not bound Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  to observe  brahmachaiya  any longer against their will, and that whoever fe els 
that he is unable to put forth the requisite effort  has a right to marry. And 
when he makes the request, the Ashram helps him in finding out a suitable 
partner in life. This position is very well underst ood, and the results have been 
uniformly good. The young men have persisted in lar ger numbers. The girls too 
have done pretty well. None of them married before she was fifteen, and many 
married only after they were nineteen. 
Those who wish to marry with Ashram assistance must  rest satisfied with the 
simplest of religious ceremonies. There are no dinn ers, no guests invited from 
outside, no beating of drums. Both bride and brideg room are dressed in 
handspun and hand woven khadi. There are no ornamen ts in gold or silver. 
There is no marriage settlement and no dowry except  a few clothes and a 
spinning-wheel. The function hardly costs even ten rupees, and takes not more 
than one hour. The bride and bridegroom recite in t heir own language the  
mantras  (Vedic verses) of the Saptapadi the purport of whi ch has already been 
explained to them. On the day fixed tor the marriag e, the bride and 
bridegroom keep a fast, water trees, clean the cows hed and the Ashram well 
and read the Gita before the ceremony. Those who gi ve away the bride also 
fast until they have made the gift. We now insist t hat the Ashram will not help 
to arrange a marriage between members of the same s ub-caste, and everyone 
is encouraged to seek his mate outside his own subc aste. 1 
 
1. This was written in 1932. In 1948 Gandhiji said a marriage could be celebrated in his 
presence only if one of the parties was a Harijan a nd the other a caste Hindu. V. G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33   
V. NON-STEALING, AND NON-POSSESSION OR POVERTY 
These two, along with  truth, ahimsa  and  brahmacharya that have gone before, 
constitute the five  mahavratas (primary observances) of old and have been 
included in the Ashram observances as they are nece ssary for one who seeks 
self-realization. But they do not call for any leng thy discussion. 
 
1. NON-STEALING 
To take something from another without his permissi on is theft of course. But it 
is also theft to use a thing for a purpose differen t from the one intended by the 
lender or to use it for a period longer than that w hich has been fixed with him. 
The profound truth upon which this observance is ba sed is that God never 
creates more than what is strictly needed for the m oment. Therefore whoever 
appropriates more than the minimum that is really n ecessary for him is guilty of 
theft. 
 
2. NON-POSSESSION OR POVERTY 
This is covered by Non-stealing. We may neither tak e nor keep a superfluous 
thing. It is therefore a breach of this observance to possess food or furniture 
which we do not really need. He who can do without chairs will not keep them 
in his house. The seeker will deliberately and volu ntarily reduce his wants and 
cultivate progressively simple habits. 
Non-stealing and Non-possession are mental states o nly. No human being can 
keep these observances to perfection. The body too is a possession, and so long 
as it is there, it calls for other possessions in i ts train. But the seeker will 
cultivate the spirit of detachment and give up one possession after another. 
Every one cannot be judged by the same standard. An  ant may fall from grace if 
it stores two grains instead of one. An elephant on  the other hand will have a 
lot of grass heaped before itself and yet it cannot  be charged with having 'great 
possessions'. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  These difficulties appear to have given rise to the  current conception of  
sannyasa  (renunciation of the world), which is not accepted  by the Ashram. 
Such  sannyasa  may be necessary for some rare spirit who has the power of 
conferring benefits upon the world by only thinking  good thoughts in a cave. 
But the world would be ruined if everyone became a cave-dweller. Ordinary 
men and women can only cultivate mental detachment.  Whoever lives in the 
world and lives in it only for serving it is a  sannyasi. 
We of the Ashram hope to become  sannvasis  in this sense. We may keep 
necessary things but should be ready to give up eve rything including our bodies. 
The loss of nothing whatever should worry us at all . So long as we are alive, we 
should render such service as we are capable of. It  is a good thing if we get 
food to eat and clothes to wear; it is also a good thing if we don't. We should so 
train our minds that no Ashramite will fail to give  a good account of himself 
when testing time comes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35   
VI. BREAD LABOUR 
The Ashram holds that every man and woman must work  in order to live. This 
principle came home to me upon reading one of Tolst oy's essays. Referring to 
the Russian writer Bondaref, Tolstoy observes that his discovery of the vital 
importance of bread labour is one of the most remar kable discoveries of 
modern times. The idea is that every healthy indivi dual must labour enough for 
his food, and his intellectual faculties must be ex ercised not in order to obtain 
a living or amass a fortune but only in the service  of mankind. If this principle 
is observed everywhere, all men would be equal, non e would starve and the 
world would be saved from many a sin. 
It is possible that this golden rule will never be observed by the whole world. 
Millions observe it in spite of themselves without understanding it. But their 
mind is working in a contrary direction, so that th ey are unhappy themselves 
and their labour is not as fruitful as it should be . This state of things serves as 
an incentive to those who understand and seek to pr actise the rule. By 
rendering a willing obedience to it they enjoy good  health as well as perfect 
peace and develop their capacity for service. 
Tolstoy made a deep impression on my mind, and even  in South Africa I began 
to observe the rule to the best of my ability. And ever since the Ashram was 
founded, bread labour has been perhaps its most cha racteristic feature. 
In my opinion the same principle has been set forth  in the third chapter of the 
Gita. I do not go so far as to say that the word ya jna (sacrifice) there means 
body-labour. But when the Gita says that 'rain come s from sacrifice' (verse 14), 
I think it indicates the necessity of bodily labour . The 'residue of sacrifice' 
(verse 13) is the bread that we have won in the swe at of our brow. Labouring 
enough for one's food has been classed in the Gita as a  yajna.  Whoever eats 
more than is enough for sustaining the body is a th ief, for most of us hardly 
perform labour enough to maintain themselves. I bel ieve that a man has no 
right to receive anything more than his keep, and t hat everyone who labours is 
entitled to a living wage. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  This does not rule out the division of labour. The manufacture of everything 
needed to satisfy essential human wants involves bo dily labour, so that labour 
in all essential occupations counts as bread labour . But as many of us do not 
perform such labour, they have to take exercise in order to preserve their 
health. A cultivator working on his farm from day t o day has not to take 
breathing exercise or stretch his muscles. Indeed i f he observes the other laws 
of health, he will never be afflicted with illness.  
God never creates more than what is strictly needed  for the moment, with the 
result that if anyone appropriates more than he rea lly needs, he reduces his 
neighbour to destitution. The starvation of people in several parts of the world 
is due to many of us seizing very much more than th ey need. We may utilize 
the gifts of nature just as we choose, but in her b ooks the debits are always 
equal to the credits. There is no balance in either  column. 
This law is not invalidated by the fact that men ra ise bigger crops by 
mechanizing agriculture and using artificial fertil izers, and similarly increase 
the industrial output. This only means a transforma tion of natural energy. Try 
as we might, the balance is always nil. 
Be that as it may, the observance best kept in the Ashram is that of bread 
labour, and no wonder. Its fulfillment is easy with  ordinary care. For certain 
hours in the day, there is nothing to be done but w ork. Work is therefore bound 
to be put in. A worker may be lazy, inefficient or inattentive, but he works for 
a number of hours all the same. Again certain kinds  of labour are capable of 
yielding an immediate product and the worker cannot  idle away a considerable 
amount of his time. In an institution where body la bour plays a prominent part 
there are few servants. Drawing water, splitting fi rewood, cleaning and filling 
lamps with oil, sanitary service, sweeping the road s and houses, washing one's 
clothes, cooking, — all these tasks must always be performed. 
Besides this there are various activities carried o n in the Ashram as a result of 
and in order to help fulfillment of the observances , such as agriculture, 
dairying, weaving, carpentry, tanning and the like which must be attended to 
by many members of the Ashram. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  All these activities may be deemed sufficient for k eeping the observance of 
bread labour, .but another essential feature of  yajna (sacrifice) is the idea of 
serving others, and the Ashram will perhaps be foun d wanting from this latter 
standpoint. The Ashram ideal is to live to serve. I n such an institution there is 
no room for idleness or shirking duty, and everythi ng should be done with right 
goodwill. If this were actually the case, the Ashra m ministry would be more 
fruitful than it is. But we are still very far from  such a happy condition. 
Therefore although in a sense every activity in the  Ashram is of the nature of  
yajna,  it is compulsory for all to spin for at least one hour in the name of God 
incarnated as the Poor ( Daridranarayan). 
People often say that in an institution like the As hram where body labour is 
given pride of place there is no scope for intellec tual development, but my 
experience is just the reverse. Everyone who has be en to the Ashram has made 
intellectual progress as well; I know of none who w as the worse on account of a 
sojourn in the Ashram. 
Intellectual development is often supposed to mean a knowledge of facts 
concerning the universe. I freely admit that such k nowledge is not laboriously 
imparted to the students in the Ashram. But if inte llectual progress spells 
understanding and discrimination, there is adequate  provision for it in the 
Ashram. Where body labour is performed for mere wag es, it is possible that the 
labourer becomes dull and listless. No one tells hi m how and why things are 
done; he himself has no curiosity and takes no inte rest in his work. But such is 
not the case in the Ashram. Everything including sa nitary service must be done 
intelligently, enthusiastically and for the love of  God. Thus there is scope for 
intellectual development in all departments of Ashr am activity. Everyone is 
encouraged to acquire full knowledge of his own sub ject. Anyone who neglects 
to do this must answer for it. Everyone in the Ashr am is a labourer; none is a 
wage-slave. 
It is a gross superstition to imagine that knowledg e is acquired only through 
books. We must discard this error. Reading books ha s a place in life, but is 
useful only in its own place. If book-knowledge is cultivated at the cost of body Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  labour, we must raise a revolt against it. Most of our time must be devoted to 
body labour, and only a little to reading. As in In dia, today the rich and the so-
called higher classes despise body labour, it is ve ry necessary to insist on the 
dignity of labour. Even for real intellectual devel opment one should engage in 
some useful bodily activity. 
It is desirable if at all possible that the Ashram should give the workers some 
more time for reading. It is also desirable that il literate Ashramites should have 
a teacher to help them in their studies. But it app ears that time for reading 
and the like cannot be given at the cost of any of the present activities of the 
Ashram. Nor can we engage paid teachers, and so lon g as the Ashram cannot 
attract more men who are capable of teaching ordina ry school subjects, we 
have to manage with as many such as we have got in our midst. The school- and 
college-educated men who are in the Ashram have not  still fully acquired the 
skill of correlating the three R's with body labour . This is a new experiment for 
all of us. But we shall learn from experience, and those of us who have 
received ordinary education will by and by find out  ways and means of 
imparting their knowledge to others. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39   
VII. SWADESHI 
At the Ashram we hold that Swadeshi is a universal law. A man's first duty is to 
his neighbour. This does not imply hatred for the f oreigner or partiality for the 
fellow- countryman. Our capacity for service has ob vious limits. We can serve 
even our neighbour with some difficulty. If everyon e of us duly performed his 
duty to his neighbour, no one in the world who need ed assistance would be left 
unattended. Therefore one who serves his neighbour serves all the world. As a 
matter of fact there is in Swadeshi no room for dis tinction between one's own 
and other people. To serve one's neighbour is to se rve the world. Indeed it is 
the only way open to us of serving the world. One t o whom the whole world is 
as his family should have the power of serving the universe without moving 
from his place. He can exercise this power only thr ough service rendered to his 
neighbour. Tolstoy goes further and says that at pr esent we are riding on other 
people's backs; it is enough only if we get down. T his is another way of putting 
the same thing. No one can serve others without ser ving himself. And whoever 
tries to achieve his private ends without serving o thers harms himself as well 
as the world at large. The reason is obvious. All l iving beings are members one 
of another so that a person's every act has a benef icial or harmful influence on 
the whole world. We cannot see this, nearsighted as  we are. The influence of a 
single act of an individual on the world may be neg ligible. But that influence is 
there all the same, and an awareness of this truth should make us realize our 
responsibility. 
Swadeshi therefore does not involve any disservice to the foreigner. Still 
Swadeshi does not reach everywhere, for that is imp ossible in the very nature 
of things. In trying to serve the world, one does n ot serve the world and fails to 
serve even the neighbour. In serving the neighbour one in effect serves the 
world. Only he who has performed his duty to his ne ighbour has the right to 
say, "All are akin to me.' But if a person says, 'A H are akin to me,' and 
neglecting his neighbour gives himself up to self-i ndulgence, he lives to himself 
alone. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  We find some good men who leave their own place and  move all over the world 
serving non-neighbours. They do nothing wrong, and their activity is not an 
exception to the law of Swadeshi. Only their capaci ty for service is greater. To 
one man, only he who lives next door to him is his neighbour. For a second man 
his neighbourhood is coextensive with his village a nd for a third with ten 
surrounding villages. Thus every one serves accordi ng to his capacity. A 
common man cannot do uncommon work. Definitions are  framed with an eye 
to him alone, and imply everything which is not con trary to their spirit. When 
he observes the law of Swadeshi, the ordinary man d oes not think that he is 
doing service to any others. He deals with the neig hbouring producer, as it is 
convenient for him. But an occasion may arise when this is inconvenient. One 
who knows that Swadeshi is the law of life will obs erve it even on such 
occasions. Many of us at present are not satisfied with the quality of goods 
made in India, and are tempted to buy foreign goods . It is therefore necessary 
to point out that Swadeshi does not simply minister  to our convenience but is a 
rule of life. Swadeshi has nothing to do with hatre d of the foreigner. It can 
never be one's duty to wish or to do ill to others.  
Khadi has been conceived as the image of Swadeshi, because India has 
committed a heinous sin by giving it up and thus fa iling in the discharge of her 
natural duty. 
The importance of khadi and the spinning-wheel firs t dawned on me in 1908, 
when I had no idea of what the wheel was like and d id not even know the 
difference between the wheel and the loom. I had on ly a vague idea of the 
condition of India's villages, but still I clearly saw that the chief cause of their 
pauperization was the destruction of the spinning-w heel, and resolved that I 
would try to revive it when I returned to India. 
I returned in 1915 with my mind full of these ideas . Swadeshi was one of the 
observances ever since the Ashram was started. But none of us knew how to 
spin. We therefore rested content with setting up a  hand loom. Some of us still 
retained a liking for fine cloth. No Swadeshi yarn of the requisite fineness for 
women's  sadis  was available in the market. For a very short time  therefore Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  they were woven with foreign yarn. But we were soon  able to obtain fine yarn 
from Indian mills. 
It was no easy job even to set up the handloom at t he Ashram. None of us had 
the least idea of weaving. We obtained a loom and a  weaver through friends. 
Maganlal Gandhi undertook to learn weaving. 
I conducted experiments at the Ashram and at the sa me time carried on 
Swadeshi propaganda in the country. But it was like  Hamlet  without the Prince 
of Denmark so long as we could not spin yarn. At la st however I discovered the 
spinning-wheel, found out spinners and introduced t he wheel in the Ashram. 
The whole story has been unfolded in the Autobiography.1 
But that did not mean that our difficulties were at  an end. On the other hand 
they increased, as such of them as were hidden till  now became manifest. 
Touring in the country I saw that people would not take to the spinning-wheel 
as soon as they were told about it. I knew that not  much money could be made 
by spinning, but I had no idea of how little it was . Then again the yarn that was 
spun would not at once be uniform as well as fine. Many could spin only coarse 
and weak yarn. Not all kinds of cotton were suitabl e for spinning. The cotton 
must be carded and made into slivers, and in cardin g much depended upon the 
condition of the cotton. Any and every spinning-whe el would not do. To revive 
the spinning-wheel thus meant the launching of a bi g scheme. Money alone 
could not do the trick. As for manpower too hundred s of workers would be 
needed, and these men should be ready to learn a ne w art, to be satisfied with 
a small salary and to live out their lives in villa ges. But even that was not 
enough. The rural atmosphere was surcharged with id leness and lack of faith 
and hope. The wheel could make no headway if this d id not improve. Thus a 
successful revival of the wheel could be brought ab out only with an army of 
single-minded men and women equipped with infinite patience and strong 
faith. 
At first I was alone in having this faith. Faith in deed was the only capital that I 
had, but I saw that if there is faith, everything e lse is added unto it. Faith 
enlightens the intellect and induces habits of indu stry. It was clear that all Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  experiments should be conducted at and through the Ashram which indeed 
existed for that very purpose. I realized that spin ning should be the principal 
physical activity of the Ashram. Thus only could it  be reduced to a science. 
Therefore spinning was at last recognised as a  mahayajna (primary sacrifice), 
and everyone who joined the Ashram had to learn spi nning and to spin regularly 
everyday. 
But  yajna  implies skill in action ( कम/glyph110सु कौशलम्। ). To spin some yarn somehow 
cannot be called a  yajna.  At first the rule was that the members should spin  for 
at least half an hour everyday. But it was soon fou nd that if the spinning- wheel 
went out of order, one could not spin even a couple  of yards in half an hour. 
Therefore the rule was modified and members were as ked to spin at least 160 
rounds, one round being equal to 4 feet. Again yarn  was no good if it was not 
uniform as well as strong. Tests of strength and un iformity were therefore 
devised, and we have now made such progress that sp inning yarn coarser than 
20s does not count as  yajna. 
But granted that good yarn is spun, who would make use of it? I was sure from 
the first that the person who did spinning as a sac rament must not use his own 
yarn, but I was unable to carry conviction to other s. Where was the harm if the 
spinner paid the wages and purchased his yarn for h imself ? I deceived myself 
and agreed that one who paid the wages and brought his own yarn should be 
considered a spinning-sacrificer. This error has no t still been fully rectified. 
Errors not dealt with with a strong hand at their f irst appearance tend to 
become permanent, and are difficult to eradicate li ke chronic diseases. 
As a consequence of this  yajna  spinning has made great strides in India, but it 
has still to take root in each of our villages. The  reason is obvious. My faith was 
not coupled with knowledge. Some knowledge was acqu ired after mistakes had 
been committed. Co-workers have joined me, but are too few for the great 
task in hand. There are hundreds of workers, but pe rhaps they have not in 
them the requisite faith and knowledge. The root be ing thus weak, one may 
not expect to enjoy the ripest fruit. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  But for this I cannot find fault with anybody. The work is new and wide as the 
ocean and it bristles with difficulties. Therefore though the result of our 
activity is not gratifying, it is still sufficient for sustaining our faith. We have 
every right to hope for complete success. Faithful workers, men as well as 
women, have joined in adequate numbers and have acc umulated a fund of 
valuable experience, so that this movement is certa inly destined not to perish. 
Khadi has given rise to quite a number of other act ivities at the Ashram as well 
as elsewhere in the country which cannot here be de alt with at any length. 
Suffice it to say that cotton crops are raised, spi nning-wheels are made, cloth 
is dyed, and simple hand-operated machines are manu factured for all the 
processes from ginning to weaving. These machines a re being improved from 
time to time. The progress made in producing a more  efficient type of 
spinning-wheel is a piece of poetry to my mind. 
 
1. Part Five, Chapter XXXIX. V. G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44   
VIII. REMOVAL OF UNTOUCH ABILITY 
The Ashram was founded in order to serve and if nec essary to die in the service 
of Truth. If therefore while holding that untouchab ility is a sinful thing, it did 
not do something positive in order to end it, it co uld hardly deserve the name 
of Satyagraha (adherence to Truth) Ashram. Even in South Africa we recognised 
untouchability as a sin. When the Ashram therefore was founded in India, 
removal of untouchability easily became one of its major activities. 
Within a month of the foundation of the Ashram, Dud abhai applied for 
admission along with his family. I had no idea that  the testing time of the 
Ashram would arrive so soon. Dudabhai's application  was supported by Shri 
Amritlal Thakkar. I felt bound to admit a family wh ich was recommended by 
him. 
The arrival of Dudabhai was the signal for a storm breaking upon the placid 
atmosphere of the Ashram, Kasturba, Maganlal Gandhi  and Mrs Mlaganlal had 
each of them some scruples in living with so-called  untouchables. Things came 
to such a pass that Kasturba should either observe Ashram rules or else leave 
the Ashram. But the argument that a woman in follow ing in her husband's 
footsteps incurs no sin appealed to her and she qui eted down. I do not hold 
that a wife is bound to follow her husband in what she considers sinful. But I 
welcomed my wife's attitude in the present case, be cause I looked upon the 
removal of untouchability as a meritorious thing. N o one could uphold 
untouchability and still lives in the Ashram. It wo uld have been extremely 
painful to me if my wife had had to leave the Ashra m, seeing that she had been 
my companion all these days at the cost of great su ffering. It was hard to be 
separated from her, but ones must put up with every  hardship that comes his 
way in the discharge of his duty. I had therefore n o hesitation in accepting my 
wife's denunciation of untouchability not as an ind ependent person but only as 
a faithful wife. 
Maganlal Gandhi's case was harder than mine. He pac ked up his things and 
came to me to told goodbye. But who was I to bid hi m goodbye? I put him on Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  his guard. 1 told him that the Ashram was his creat ion as much as mine, and 
would be destroyed if he left it. But he certainly did not want that it should 
perish. He did not need to seek my permission to le ave an institution which he 
himself had brought into existence. But to leave th e Ashram should be 
something unthinkable for him. This appeal did not fall on deaf ears. Perhaps 
Maganlal had thought of Heaving in order to give me  a free hand. I could 
endure to be separated from all the world besides b ut not from Maganlal. I 
therefore suggested that he should go to Madras wit h family. He and his wife 
would learn more of weaving there and would have mo re time to ponder over 
the situation that had developed. So they went and lived in Madras for six 
months. They mastered the art of weaving and after mature consideration also 
washed their hearts clean of untouchability. 
The internal storm thus blew over. But there was a storm outside the Ashram 
too. The chief person who financed the Ashram disco ntinued his assistance. 
There was even a possibility that the Ashramites wo uld not be allowed any 
more to draw water from the neighbour's well. But a ll difficulties were 
surmounted by and by. As regards finance, something  happened which was not 
unlike Narasinha Mehta's  hundi  (bill of exchange) being honoured at Dvaravati. 
A sum of thirteen thousand rupees was received from  an unexpected source. 
Thus the Ashram ordeal in keeping Dudabhai at any c ost was not so severe as it 
might well have been. The Ashram passed the test as  regards its opposition to 
untouchability. 'Untouchable' families come to the Ashram freely and live in it. 
Dudabhai's daughter Lakshmi has become a full membe r of the family. 
Three callings followed by the so-called untouchabl es are practised in the 
Ashram, and improved methods are devised in each. E veryone in the Ashram 
has in turns to do sanitary service, which is looke d upon not as a special calling 
but a universal duty. No outside labour is engaged for this work, which is 
carried on lines suggested by Dr Poore. Nightsoil i s buried in shallow trenches 
and is thus converted into manure in only a few day s. Dr Poore says that the 
soil is living up to a depth of twelve inches. Mill ions of bacteria are there to Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  clean up dirt. Sunlight and air penetrate the groun d to that depth. Therefore 
nightsoil buried in the upper layer readily combine s with the earth. 
Closets are so constructed that they are free from smell and there is no 
difficulty in cleaning them. Everyone who visits th em covers the nightsoil with 
plenty of dry earth, so that the top is always dry.  
Then again we have handloom weaving. Coarse khadi w as manufactured in 
Gujarat by Harijan weavers only. The industry was a lmost on the verge of 
destruction, and many weavers were compelled to tak e up scavenging for a 
living. But now there has been a revival of this ha ndicraft. 
Thirdly we have tanning. We shall deal with it in t he chapter on the Ashram 
dairy. 
The Ashram does not believe in subcastes. There are  no restrictions on inter-
dining and all Ashramites sit to dinner in the same  line. But no propaganda in 
favour of interdining is carried on outside the Ash ram, as it is unnecessary for 
the removal of untouchability, which implies the li fting of bans imposed on 
Harijans in public institutions and discarding the superstition that a man is 
polluted by the touch of certain persons by reason of their birth in a particular 
caste. This disability can also be removed by legis lation. Inter-dining and 
intermarriage are reforms of a different type which  cannot be promoted by 
legislation or social pressure. The Ashramites ther efore feel themselves free to 
take permitted food with everyone else but do not c arry on any such 
propaganda. 
Schools are established and wells sunk for Harijans  through the Ashram which 
chiefly finds the finance for such activities. The real anti-untouchability work 
carried on in the Ashram is the reformed conduct of  the Ashramites. There is 
no room in the Ashram for any ideas of high and low . 
However the Ashram believes that  varnas  and  ashramas are essential elements 
of Hinduism. Only it puts a different interpretatio n on these time-honoured 
terms. Four  varnas and four  ashramas  are an arrangement not peculiar to 
Hinduism but capable of world-wide application, and  a universal rule, the Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  breach of which has involved humanity in numerous d isasters. The four  
ashramas  are  brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanaprasthya  and  sannyasa. 
Brahmacharya  is the stage during which men as well as women pro secute their 
studies, and should not only observe  brahmacharya but should also be free 
from any other burden except that of studies. This lasts till at least the twenty-
fifth year, when the student becomes a householder if he wishes. Almost all 
the students thus become householders. But this sta ge should close at the age 
of fifty. During that period the householder enjoys  the pleasures of life, makes 
money, practises a profession and rears a family. F rom fifty to seventy-five 
wife and husband should live apart and wholly devot e themselves to the service 
of the people. They must leave their families and t ry to look upon the world as 
a big family. During the last 25 years they should become  sannyasis,  live apart, 
set to the people an example of ideal religious lif e and maintain themselves 
with whatever the people choose to give them. It is  clear that society as a 
whole would be elevated if many carried out this sc heme in their lives. 
So far as I am aware, the  ashrama  arrangement is unknown outside India, but 
even in India it has practically disappeared at pre sent. There is no such thing 
now as] brahmacharya,  which is intended to be the foundation of life. Fo r the 
rest we have  sannyasis , most of them such only in name, with nothing of  
sannyasa  about them except the orange robe. Many of them ar e ignorant, and 
some who have acquired learning are not knowers of  brahma  but fanatics. 
There are some honourable exceptions but even these  well- conducted monks 
lack th lustre we love to associate with sannyasa.  It is possible that some real  
sannyasis  lead a solitary life. But it is obvious that  sannyasa  as a stage in life 
has fallen into desuetude. A society which is serve d by able  sannyasis  would not 
be poor in spirit, unprovided even with the necessa ries of life, and politically 
dependent* as Hindu society is at present. If  sannyasa  were with us a living 
thing, it would exert a powerful influence on neigh bouring faiths, for the  
sannyasi  is a servant not only of Hinduism but of all the f aiths of mankind. 
But we can never hope to see such  sannyasis  unless brahmacharya  is observed 
in the country. As for vanaprasthya , there is no trace of it. The last stage we Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  have to consider is that of the householder. But ou r householders are given to 
unregulated self-indulgence. Householders in the ab sence of the three other  
ashramas  live like brutes. Self-restraint is the one thing which differentiates 
man from beast, but it is practised no longer. 
The Ashram is engaged in the great endeavour to res uscitate the four  
ashramas.  It is like an ant trying to lift a bag of sugar. T his effort though 
apparently ridiculous is part of the Ashram quest o f truth. All the inmates of 
the Ashram therefore observe  brahmacharya.  Permanent members must 
observe it for life. All the inmates are not member s in this sense. Only a few 
are members, the rest are students. If this effort is crowned with success, we 
may hope to see a revival of the  ashrama  scheme of life. The sixteen years 
during which the Ashram has functioned are not a su fficiently long period for 
the assessment of results. I have no idea of the ti me when such assessment will 
be possible. I can only say that there is nothing l ike dissatisfaction with the 
progress achieved up to date. 
If the  ashrama  scheme has broken down, the plight of the varnas  is equally 
bad. At first there were four  varnas (classes); but now there are innumerable 
sections or only one. If we take it that there are as many  varnas  as there are 
castes and subcastes, their name is legion; on the other hand if as I think  
varnas  have nothing to do with caste, there is only a sin gle  varna  left and that 
is the Shudra. We are here not finding fault with a nybody but only stating the 
facts of the case. Shudras are those who serve and are dependent upon others. 
India is a dependency 1; therefore every Indian is a Shudra. The cultivato r does 
not own his land, the merchant his merchandise. The re is hardly a Kshatriya or 
a Brahman who possesses the virtues which the Shast ras attribute to his  varna.  
My impression is that there was no idea of high and  low when the  varna  system 
was discovered. No one is high and no one is low in  this world; therefore he 
who thinks he belongs to a high class is never high -class, and he who believes 
himself to be low is merely the victim of ignorance . He has been taught by his 
masters that he is low. If a Brahman has knowledge,  those who are without it 
will respect him as a matter of course. But if he i s puffed up by the respect Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  thus shown to him and imagines himself to belong to  a high class, he directly 
ceases to be a Brahman. Virtue will always command respect, but when the 
man of virtue thinks much of himself, his virtue ce ases to have any significance 
for the world. Talents of all kinds are a trust and  must be utilized for the 
benefit of society. The individual has no right to live unto himself. Indeed it is 
impossible to live unto oneself. We fully live unto  ourselves when we live unto 
society. 
No matter what was the position in ancient times, n o one can nowadays go 
through life claiming to belong to a high class. So ciety will not willingly admit 
any such claim to superiority, but only under dures s. The world is now wide 
awake. This awakening has perhaps given rise to som e licence, but even so 
public opinion is not now prepared to accept any di stinctions of high and low, 
which are being attacked on all sides. There is eve r increasing realization that 
all are equal as human souls. The fact that we are all the creatures of one God 
rules out all ideas of high and low. When we say th at no one is high-born or 
low-born, it does not mean that all have or ought t o have equal talents. All 
have not equal talents, equal property or equal opp ortunities. Still all are equal 
like brothers and sisters of different dispositions , abilities and ages. 
If therefore the  varna  system is a spiritual arrangement, there cannot be  any 
place in it for high and low. 
Thus there are four  varnas,  all equal in status, and they are determined by 
birth. They can be changed by a person choosing ano ther profession, but if  
varnas  are not as a rule determined by birth, they tend t o lose all meaning. 
The  varna  system is ethical as well as economic. It recognis es the influence of 
previous lives and of heredity. All are not born wi th equal powers and similar 
tendencies. Neither the parents nor the state can m easure the intelligence of 
each child. But there would be no difficulty if eac h child is prepared for the 
profession indicated by heredity, environment and t he influence of former 
lives; no time would be lost in fruitless experimen tation, there would be no 
soul-killing competition, a spirit of contentment w ould pervade society and 
there would be no struggle for existence. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  The  varna  system implies the obliteration of all distinction s of high and low. If 
the carpenter is held to be superior to the shoemak er and the pleader or doctor 
is superior to both of them, no one would willingly  become a shoemaker or 
carpenter and all would try to become pleaders or d octors. They would be 
entitled to do so and to be praised for doing so. T hat is to say, the  varna  
system would be looked upon as an evil and abolishe d as such. 
But when it is suggested that everyone should pract ise his father's profession, 
the suggestion is coupled with the condition that t he practitioner of every 
profession will earn only a living wage and no more . If the carpenter earns 
more than a shoemaker and the pleader or doctor mor e than both, everyone 
would become a lawyer or doctor. Such is the case a t present with the result 
that hatred has increased and there are more lawyer s and doctors than are 
necessary. It may be that society needs the lawyer or doctor even as it needs 
the shoemaker and the carpenter. These four profess ions are here taken only 
as illustrations and for comparison. It would be ir relevant to stop to consider 
whether society has particular need or no need at a ll for this, that or the other 
profession. 
This principle then is an integral part of the  varna  system that learning is not a 
trade and may not be used in order to amass riches.  Therefore in so far as his 
ministrations may be necessary, the lawyer or docto r ought by practising his 
profession to earn only a living wage. And such was  actually the case formerly. 
The village  vaidya  (physician) did not earn more than the carpenter b ut only a 
living wage. In short the emoluments of all crafts and professions should be 
equal and amount to a living wage. The number of varnas  has no sanctity about 
it; their value is due to the fact that they define  the duties of man.  Varnas  may 
be supposed to be one or more just as we like. The scriptures enumerate four 
of them. But when once we have assigned equal statu s to all, it makes little 
difference whether we think that there are four of them or that there is only 
one. 
Such is the  varna  system which the Ashram is trying to resuscitate. It is like 
Dame Partington with her mop, trying to push back t he Atlantic Ocean. I have Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  already mentioned its two fundamental principles, n amely that there are no 
high and low, and everyone is entitled to a living wage, the living wage being 
the same for all. In so far as these principles win  acceptance, they will render 
a positive service to society. 
It may be objected that if such a plan is accepted there will be no incentive for 
the acquisition of knowledge. But the object with w hich knowledge is acquired 
nowadays tends to corrupt it, and therefore the abs ence of an incentive will be 
entirely beneficial. Knowledge truly so called is i ntended for one's salvation, 
that is to say, service of mankind. Whoever has a d esire to render service will 
certainly try to equip himself with the requisite k nowledge, and his knowledge 
will be an ornament to himself as well as to societ y. Again when the 
temptation to amass riches is removed, there will b e a change for the better in 
the curriculum of studies as well as in the methods  of education. There is much 
misuse of knowledge at present. This misuse will be  reduced to the minimum in 
the 'new order'. 
Even then there will be scope for competition in tr ying to be good and helpful. 
And there will be no discontent or disorder as all will receive a living wage. 
Varna  is wrongly understood today. That wrong understand ing must make way 
for the principles outlined above. Untouchability m ust go, and  varnas  should 
have nothing to do with inter-dining or intermarria ge. A person will dine with 
and marry whom he likes. But as a rule he will marr y someone who belongs to 
the same  varna  as himself. But if he marries a person belonging t o another 
varna,  his act will not count as a sin. A person will be boycotted not by the  
varna  but by society at large when his conduct justifies  such a measure. Society 
will be better constituted than it is at present, a nd the impurity and hypocrisy 
which infest it now will be dislodged. 
 
1. Written in 1932. V. G. D. 
2. Written in 1932. V. G. D. 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52   
IX. AGRICULTURE 
This department of Ashram activities owes its exist ence to Maganlal Gandhi. 
But for him I would not have had the courage to tak e up agriculture at all, 
although an Ashram without it would be something li ke  Hamlet  without the 
Prince of Denmark. For we had not the requisite ski ll and environment for it as 
I thought Agriculture is a very big undertaking and  would call for a lot of land, 
money and manpower. I was afraid that it would dist ract our attention from 
other necessary things which could be done and woul d not wait. But Maganlal 
was insistent and I yielded to him. 'Let me do it,'  he said, 'if only for my own 
diversion.' Maganlal hardly ever argued with me. He  thought it his duty to carry 
out my ideas. If he did not understand them or if h e disagreed, he would tell 
me so. If even then I stuck to my may be susceptibl e of some slight 
improvement, but nothing definite can be said about  it, as the Ashram has not 
the time to apply its mind to the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53   
X. DAIRY 
The Ashram ideal is to do without milk, as it holds  that the milk of animals like 
meat is no food for mankind. For a year and more no  milk or  ghi  was used in 
the Ashram, but as the health of the children as we ll as the adults suffered 
under this regime, first  ghi  and then milk had to be added to the Ashram 
dietary. And when this was done, it was clear that we must keep cattle in the 
Ashram. 
The Ashram believes in  goraksha  (cow protection) as a religious duty. But the 
word  goraksha  savours of pride. Man is incompetent to 'protect' animals, being 
himself in need of protection from God who is the p rotector of all life. The 
word  goraksha  was therefore replaced by  goseva  (cow service). But as the 
experiment of doing without milk or  ghi and thus serving the cow without any 
selfish considerations did not succeed, cattle were  kept in the Ashram. We had 
buffaloes as well as cows and bullocks at first, as  we had not yet realized that 
it was our duty to keep cows and bullocks only to t he exclusion of the buffalo. 
But it became clear day by day that cow service alo ne at present stood for the 
service of all sub-human life. It is the first step  beyond which we have not the 
resources to go for the time being. Again cow slaug hter is very often the cause 
of Hindu-Muslim tension. The Ashram believes that i t is not the duty of a 
Hindu, nor has he the right to take away a Muslim's  cow by force. There is no 
service to or protection of the cow in trying to sa ve her by force; on the other 
hand it only expedites slaughter. Hindus can save t he cow and her progeny only 
by doing their duty to her and thus making her slau ghter a costly act which no 
one can afford to do. Hindu society does not discha rge this duty at present. 
The cow suffers from neglect. The buffalo gives mor e and richer milk than the 
cow, and keeping a buffalo costs less than keeping a cow. Again if the buffalo 
brings forth a bull calf, people do not care what b ecomes of him because 
buffalo 'protection' or 'service' is not a religiou s duty for them. Hindu society 
has thus been short-sighted, cowardly, ignorant and  selfish enough to neglect 
the cow and has installed the buffalo in her place,  injuring both of them in the Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  process. The buffalo's interest is not served by ou r keeping her, but is in her 
freedom. To keep the buffalo means torturing its bu ll calf to death. This is not 
the case in all the provinces, but where the buffal o bull is useless for 
agricultural purposes as in Gujarat for instance, i t is doomed to a premature 
death. 
On account of these considerations, buffaloes were disposed of and the Ashram 
now insists on keeping cows and bullocks only. Impr ovement of breed, 
increasing the quantity and enriching the quality o f milk by giving various 
feeds, the art of preserving milk and extracting bu tter from it more easily, 
least painful methods of castrating bull calves, — all these things are attended 
to. It is in an experimental stage, but the Ashram does believe that the cow 
will pay for its keep if she is well treated and al l her products are fully utilized. 
Many perhaps are not aware that a man cannot simply  afford to keep a cow and 
slaughter is inevitable so long as that is the case . Mankind is not so benevolent 
that it will die to save the cow or allow it to liv e on itself as a parasite. The 
cattle population at present is so large that if it  is well fed, the human 
population will not have enough food left for itsel f. We must therefore prove 
the proposition that the cow if well kept is capabl e of greater production. 
If this proposition is to be proved, Hindu society must discard some 
superstitions masquerading as religion. Hindus do n ot utilize the bones etc. of 
dead cows; they do not care what becomes of cattle when they are dead. 
Instead of looking upon the occupation of a tanner as sacred, they think it 
unclean. Emaciated cattle are exported to and slaug htered in Australia where 
their bones are converted into manure, their flesh into meat extract and their 
hides into boots and shoes. The meat extract, the m anure and the shoes are 
then re-exported to India and used without any comp unction. 
This stupidity makes for the destruction of the cow , and puts the country to 
huge economic losses. This is not religion but the very negation of it. Tanning 
has therefore been introduced in the Ashram. None o f us is still a skilled 
tanner. No tanner from outside who would keep the A shram rules has been 
available. But all the same tanning is an integral part of Ashram industry, and Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  we have every hope that it will be developed and pr opagated like spinning. The 
cow will cease to be a burden to the country only i f dead cattle are fully 
utilized. Even then there will not be any profits. Religion is never opposed to 
economics, but it is always ranged in opposition to  profits. If the cow is to pay 
for its keep, dead cattle should not be allowed to go to waste or to swell the 
profits of large-scale tanneries. This cannot be do ne by force. But Hindu 
society should keep the cow, treat her and her prog eny well so long as they are 
alive, cherish them in their old age, and fully uti lize their carcases when they 
are dead. Thus alone can the cow be saved, and in s aving her we shall perhaps 
learn how to save the rest of the sub-human creatio n. Thanks to our ignorance, 
laziness and hatred, the cow today is hastening to her destruction. As for the 
other cattle, the less said about them, the better.  
The Ashram suggests that all  goshalas  and  panjrapoles should be organized 
religiously and scientifically. The rich should hav e their own  goshalas  and insist 
on using cow's milk and  ghi only. Trading in cow's milk should be looked upon as 
a sin, and the well-to-do should manage public goshalas  so as to make both 
ends meet. The cow would then soon be saved. 
The Ashram at present has a limited object in view:  to conduct a model  
goshala  at the Ashram, to breed good cows and bullocks, to  utilize their 
carcases fully when they are dead so as to show tha t cowkeeping is an 
economic proposition, to train workers and provide for their employment upon 
the completion of their training. This work is goin g on at present. There are 
many difficulties, but we are fully confident of su ccess. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56   
XI. EDUCATION 
This word is here used in a special as well as the current sense. The Ashram 
experiment in education was a trial for us as nothi ng else was.  
We saw at once that the women and children in the A shram should be taught to 
read and write, and a little later on that there sh ould be similar facilities for 
even the illiterate men that came to the Ashram. Th ose who had already 
joined the Ashram could not undertake to teach. If capable teachers were to 
be attracted to the Ashram, the rule of  brahmacharya  had to be relaxed in 
their case. The Ashram was therefore divided into t wo sections, the teachers' 
quarters and the Ashram proper.  
Human beings cannot overcome their weakness all at once. As soon as the two 
sections came into beins, a feeling of superiority and inferiority poisoned the 
Ashram atmosphere in spite of all our efforts to sc otch it. The Ashramites 
developed spiritual pride, which the teachers could  not tolerate. This pride 
was an obstacle in the attainment of the Ashram ide al and therefore an aspect 
of untruth as well. If  brahmacharya  was to be observed in its perfection, the 
division was inevitable. But the  brahmacharis had no reason to think too highly 
of themselves. It may be that the  brahmacharis  who sinned mentally in spite of 
themselves were retrogressing while those who did n ot claim to be  
brahmacharis  but liked  bralimacharya  were making progress. This was clear to 
the intellect but it was not easy for all of us to put it into practice.  
Then again there were differences of opinion as reg ards the method of 
education which gave rise to difficulties in admini stration. There were bitter 
discussions, but at last all calmed down and learne d the lesson of forbearance. 
This was in my view a triumph of truth, the goal of  all Ashram endeavour. 
Those who held divergent views harboured no evil in tentions in their minds, 
and were indeed grieved at the divergence. They wis hed to practise truth as 
they saw it. Their partiality for their own standpo int came in the way of their 
giving due weight to the arguments of their opponen ts. Hence the quarrels 
which put our charity to a severe test.  Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  I have my own perhaps peculiar views on education w hich have not been 
accepted by my colleagues in full, and here they ar e:  
1.  Young boys and girls should have co-education till they are eight years of 
age. 
2.  Their education should mainly consist in manual tra ining under the 
supervision of an educationist. 
3.  The special aptitudes of each child should be recog nised in determining 
the kind of work he or she should do. 
4.  The reasons for every process should be explained w hen the process is 
being carried on. 
5.  General knowledge should be imparted to each child as he begins to 
understand things. Learning to read or write should  come later. 
6.  The child should first be taught to draw simple geo metrical figures, and 
when he has learnt to draw these with ease, he shou ld be taught to write 
the alphabet. If this is done, he will write a good  hand from the very first. 
7.  Reading should come before writing. The letters sho uld be treated as 
pictures to be recognised and later on to be copied . 
8.  A child taught on these lines will have acquired co nsiderable knowledge 
according to his capacity by the time he is eight. 
9.  Nothing should be taught to a child by force. 
10.  He should be interested in everything taught to him . 
11.  Education should appear to the child like play. Pla y is an essential part of 
education. 
12.  All education should be imparted through the mother - tongue. 
13.  The child should be taught Hindi-Urdu as the nation al language, before he 
learns letters. 
14.  Religious education is indispensable and the child should get it by watching 
the teacher's conduct and by hearing him talk about  it. 
15.  Nine to sixteen constitutes the second stage in the  child's education. 
16.  It is desirable that boys and girls should have coe ducation during the 
second stage also as far as possible. 
17.  Hindu children should now be taught Sanskrit, and M uslim children Arabic. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  18.  Manual training should be continued during the seco nd stage. Literary 
education should be allotted more time as is necess ary. 
19.  The boys during this stage should be taught their p arents' vocation in such 
a way that they will by their own choice obtain the ir livelihood by 
practising the hereditary craft. This does not appl y to the girls. 
20.  During this stage the child should acquire a genera l knowledge of world 
history and geography, botany, astronomy, arithmeti c, geometry, and 
algebra. 
21.  Each child should now be taught to sew and to cook.  
22.  Sixteen to twenty-five is the third stage, during w hich every young person 
should have an education according to his or her wi shes and 
circumstances. 
23.  During the second stage (9-16) education should be self-supporting; that is, 
the child, all the time that he is learning, is wor king upon some industry, 
the proceeds of which will meet the expenditure of the school. 
24.  Production starts from the very beginning, but duri ng the first stage it does 
not still catch up with the expenditure. 
25.  Teachers should be paid not very high salaries but only a living wage. They 
should be inspired by a spirit of service. It is a despicable thing to take any 
Tom, Dick or Harry as a teacher in the primary stag e. All teachers should 
be men of character. 
26.  Big and expensive buildings are not necessary for e ducational institutions. 
27.  English should be taught only as one of several lan guages. As Hindi is the 
national language, English is to be used in dealing  with other nations and 
international commerce. 
As for women's education I am not sure whether it s hould be different from 
men's and when it should begin. But I am strongly o f opinion that women should 
have the same facilities as men and even special fa cilities where necessary. 
There should be night schools for illiterate adults . But I do not think that they 
must be taught the three R's; they must be helped t o acquire general Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  knowledge through lectures etc., and if they wish, we should arrange to teach 
them the three R's also. 
Experiments in the Ashram have convinced us of one thing, viz. that industry in 
general and spinning in particular should have prid e of place in education, 
which must be largely self-supporting as well as re lated to and tending to the 
betterment of rural life. 
In these experiments we have achieved the largest m easure of success with the 
women who have imbibed the spirit of freedom and se lf-confidence as no other 
class of women have done to my knowledge. This succ ess is due to the Ashram 
atmosphere. Women in the Ashram are not subject to any restraint, which is 
not imposed on the men as well. They are placed on a footing of absolute 
equality with the men in all activities. Not a sing le Ashram task is assigned to 
the women, to the exclusion of the men. Cooking is attended to by both. 
Women are of course exempted from work which is bey ond their strength; 
otherwise men and women work together everywhere. T here is no such thing as 
pardah or  laj  in the Ashram. No matter from where she has come, a woman, as 
soon as she enters the Ashram, breathes the air of freedom and casts out all 
fear from her mind. And I believe that the Ashram o bservance of  brahmacharya  
has made a big contribution to this state of things . Adult girls live in the 
Ashram as virgins. We are aware that this experimen t is fraught with risk, but 
we feel that no awakening among women is possible w ithout incurring it. 
Women cannot make any progress so long as there are  child marriages. All girls 
are supposed to be in duty bound to marry and that too before menstruation 
commences, and widow remarriage is not permitted. W omen, therefore, when 
they join the Ashram, are told that these social cu stoms are wrong and 
irreligious. But they are not shocked as they find the Ashram practising what it 
preaches. 
Not much of what is usually called education will b e observed in the Ashram. 
Still we find that the old as well as the young, wo men as well as men are eager 
to acquire knowledge and complain that they have no  time for it. This is a good 
sign. Many who join the Ashram are not educated or even interested in Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  education. Some of them can hardly read or write. T hey had no desire for 
progress so long as they had not joined the Ashram.  But when they have lived 
in the Ashram for a little while, they conceive a d esire for increasing their 
knowledge. This is a great thing, as to create a de sire for knowledge is very 
often the first step to be taken. But I do not regr et it very much that there are 
insufficient facilities in the Ashram calculated to  satisfy this desire. The 
observances kept in the Ashram will perhaps prevent  a sufficient number of 
qualified teachers from joining it. We must therefo re rest satisfied with such 
Ashramites as can be trained to teach. The numerous  activities of the Ashram 
may come in the way of their acquiring the requisit e qualifications at all or at 
an early date. But it does not matter much, as the desire for knowledge can be 
satisfied later as well as sooner, being independen t of a time limit. Real 
education begins after a child has left school. One  who has appreciated the 
value of studies is a student all his life. His kno wledge must increase from day 
to day while he is discharging his duty in a consci entious manner. And this is 
well understood in the Ashram. 
The superstition that no education is possible with out a teacher is an obstacle 
in the path of educational progress. A man's real t eacher is himself. And now-a-
days there are numerous aids available for self-edu cation. A diligent person can 
easily acquire knowledge about many things by himse lf and obtain the 
assistance of a teacher when it is needed. Experien ce is the biggest of all 
schools. Quite a number of crafts cannot be learnt at school but only in the 
workshop. Knowledge of these acquired at school is often only parrot-like. 
Other subjects can be learnt with the help of books . Therefore what adults 
need is not so much a school as a thirst for knowle dge, diligence and self- 
confidence. 
The education of children is primarily a duty to be  discharged by the parents. 
Therefore the creation of a vital educational atmos phere is more important 
than the foundation of numerous schools. When once this atmosphere has been 
established on a firm footing, the schools will com e in due course. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  This is the Ashram ideal of education which has bee n realized to some extent, 
as every department of Ashram activity is a veritab le school. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62   
XII. SATYAGRAHA 
[This section Gandhiji had proposed to devote to Sa tyagraha as the golden 
sword to be wielded against 'co-workers, relatives,  society, the state or the 
world". But the manuscript ends here on July 11, 19 32. V. G. D.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63   
APPENDIX A 
SATYAGRAHA ASHRAM 
Founded on Vaishakha Shudi 11, Samvat 1971, — May 2 5, 1915 — at Kochrab, 
Ahmedabad and since removed to Sabarmati, a junctio n station near 
Ahmedabad. 
Object  
The object of this Ashram is that its members shoul d qualify themselves for, 
and make a constant endeavour towards, the service of the country, not 
inconsistent with the universal welfare. 
Observances  
The following observances are essential for the ful fillment of the above object:  
1.  Truth 
Truth is not fulfilled by mere abstinence from tell ing or practising an untruth in 
ordinary relations with fellow-men. But Truth is Go d, the one and only Reality. 
All other observances take their rise from the ques t for, and the worship of, 
Truth. Worshippers of Truth must not resort to untr uth, even for what they may 
believe to be the good of the country, and they may  be required, like Prahlad, 
civilly to disobey the orders even of parents and e lders in virtue of their 
paramount loyalty to Truth.  
2.  Non-violence or Love 
Mere non-killing is not enough. The active part of Non-violence is Love. The law 
of Love requires equal consideration for all life f rom the tiniest insect to the 
highest man. One who follows this law must not be a ngry even with the 
perpetrator of the greatest imaginable wrong, but m ust love him, wish him well 
and serve him. Although he must thus love the wrong -doer, he must never 
submit to his wrong or his injustice, but must oppo se it with all his might, and 
must patiently and without resentment suffer all th e hardships to which the 
wrong-doer may subject him in punishment for his op position. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  3.  Chastity (Brahmacharya) 
Observance of the foregoing principles is impossibl e without the observance of 
celibacy. It is not enough that one should not look  upon any woman or man 
with a lustful eye; animal passion must be so contr olled as to be excluded even 
from the mind. If married, one must not have a carn al mind regarding one's 
wife or husband, but must consider her or him as on e's lifelong friend, and 
establish relationship of perfect purity. A sinful touch, gesture or word is a 
direct breach of this principle. 
4.  Control of the Palate 
The observance of  brahmacharya  has been found, from experience, to be 
extremely difficult so long as one has not acquired  mastery over taste. Control 
of the palate has therefore been placed as a princi ple by itself. Eating is 
necessary only for sustaining the body and keeping it a fit instrument for 
service, and must never be practised for self- indu lgence. Food must therefore 
be taken, like medicine, under proper restraint. In  pursuance of this principle 
one must eschew exciting foods, such as spices and condiments. Meat, liquor, 
tobacco,  bhang  etc. are excluded from the Ashram. This principle requires 
abstinence from feasts or dinners which have pleasu re as their object. 
5.  Non-stealing 
It is not enough not to take another's property wit hout his permission. One 
becomes guilty of theft even by using differently a nything which one has 
received in trust for use in a particular way, as w ell as by using a thing longer 
than the period for which it has been lent. It is a lso theft if one receives 
anything which he does not really need. The fine tr uth at the bottom of this 
principle is that Nature provides just enough and n o more, for our daily need. 
6.  Non-possession or Poverty 
This principle is really a part of No. V. Just as o ne must not receive, so must 
one not possess anything which one does not really need. It would be a breach 
of this principle to possess unnecessary foodstuffs , clothing, or furniture. For Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  instance one must not keep a chair if one can do wi thout it. In observing this 
principle one is led to a progressive simplificatio n of one's own life. 
7.  Physical Labour 
Physical labour is essential for the observance of Non- stealing and Non-
possession. Man can be saved from injuring society,  as well as himself, only if 
he sustains his physical existence by physical labo ur. Able-bodied adults must 
do all their personal work themselves, and must not  be served by others, 
except for proper reasons. But they must at the sam e time remember, that 
service of children, as well as of the disabled, th e old and the sick, is a duty 
incumbent on every person who has the required stre ngth. 
8.  Swadeshi 
Man is not omnipotent. He therefore serves the worl d best by first serving his 
neighbour. This is Swadeshi, a principle which is b roken when one professes to 
serve those who are more remote in preference to th ose who are near. 
Observance of Swadeshi makes for order in the world  ; the breach of it leads to 
chaos. Following this principle, one must as far as  possible purchase one's 
requirements locally and not buy things imported fr om foreign lands, which can 
easily be manufactured in the country. There is no place for self-interest in 
Swadeshi, which enjoins the sacrifice of oneself fo r the family, of the family for 
the village, of the village for the country, and of  the country for humanity. 
9.  Fearlessness 
One cannot follow Truth or Love so long as one is s ubject to fear. As there is at 
present a reign* of fear in the country, meditation  on and cultivation of 
fearlessness have a particular importance. Hence it s separate mention as an 
observance. A seeker after Truth must give up the f ear of parents, caste, 
government, robbers etc., and he must not be fright ened by poverty or death. 
10.  Removal of Untouchability 
Untouchability, which has taken such deep root in H induism, is altogether 
irreligious. Its removal has therefore been treated  as an independent principle. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  The so-called untouchables have an equal place in t he Ashram with other 
classes. The Ashram does not believe in caste which , it considers, has injured 
Hinduism, because its implications of superior and inferior status, and of 
pollution by contact are contrary to the law of Lov e. The Ashram however 
believes in  varnashrama dharma.  The division of  varncis  is based upon 
occupation, and therefore, a person should maintain  himself by following the 
hereditary occupation, not inconsistent with fundam ental morals, and should 
devote all his spare time and energy to the acquisi tion and advancement of 
true knowledge. The  ashramas  (the four stages) spoken of in the  smritis  are 
conducive to the welfare of mankind. Though, theref ore, the Ashram believes 
in varnashrama dharma.  there is no place in it for distinction of  varnas  as the 
Ashram life is conceived in the light of the compre hensive and non-formal  
sannyasa  of the Bhagavadgita.  
11.  Tolerance 
The Ashram believes that the principal faiths of th e world constitute a 
revelation of Truth, but as they have all been outl ined by imperfect man, they 
have been affected by imperfections and alloyed wit h untruth. One must 
therefore entertain the same respect for the religi ous faiths of others as one 
accords to one's own. Where such tolerance becomes a law of life, conflict 
between different faiths .becomes impossible, and s o does all effort to convert 
other people to one's own faith. One can only pray that the defects in the 
various faiths may be overcome, and that they may a dvance, side by side, 
towards perfection. 
Activities  
As a result of and in order to help fulfillment of these observances, the 
following activities are carried on in the Ashram: 
I.  Worship 
The social (as distinguished from the individual) a ctivities of the Ashram 
commence every day with the congregational morning worship at 4: 15 to 4: 45 
and close with the evening prayer at 7 to 7: 30. Al l inmates are expected to Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  attend the worship. This worship has been conceived  as an aid to self- 
purification and dedication of one's all to God. 
II.  Sanitary Service 
This is an essential and sacred service and yet it is looked down upon in society, 
with the result that it is generally neglected and affords considerable scope for 
improvement. The Ashram, therefore, lays special st ress upon engaging no 
outside labour for this work. The members themselve s attend in turns to the 
whole of the sanitation. New entrants are generally  first of all attached to this 
department. Trenches are sunk to the depth of nine inches, and the nightsoil is 
buried in them and covered with the excavated earth . It thus becomes 
converted into valuable manure. Calls of nature are  attended to only at places 
assigned for the purpose. Care is taken that the ro ads and paths should not be 
spoilt by spitting or otherwise. 
III.  Sacrificial Spinning 
Today Indians most urgent problem is the growing st arvation of her millions, 
which is chiefly due to the deliberate destruction,  by alien rule, of her 
principal auxiliary industry of hand-spinning. With  a view to its rehabilitation in 
national life, spinning has been made the central a ctivity of the Ashram, and is 
compulsory for all members as a national sacrifice.  The following are the 
various branches of work in this department:  
I.  Cotton cultivation 
II.  Workshop for making and repairing spinning wheels, spindles, carding bows 
et cetera; 
III.  Ginning; 
IV.  Carding; 
V.  Spinning; 
VI.  Weaving cloth, carpets, tape, rope, et cetera ; 
VII.  Dyeing and printing. 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  IV.  Agriculture 
Cotton for the khadi work and fodder crops for the cattle are the chief 
activities of this department. Vegetables fruit are  also grown in order to make 
the Ashram as far as possible self-contained. 
V.  Dairy 
An attempt is being made to convert into a model da iry the Ashram dairy which 
supplies milk to the inmates. Since last year this dairy is being carried on in 
consonance with the principles of and with the pecu niary help of the All-India 
Cow Protection Association, but as an integral part  of the Ashram itself. There 
are at present 27 cows, 47 calves and young stock, 10 bullocks and 4 bulls. The 
average daily output of milk is 200 pounds. 
VI.  Tannery 
At the instance and with the help of the All-India Cow Protection Association, a 
tannery has been established for the tanning of dea d-cattle hides. There is 
attached to it a sandal and shoe-making department.  The dairy and tannery 
have been established because the Ashram believes, in spite of the claim 
Hindus make to the protection of the cow, that Indi an cattle will further and 
further deteriorate and ultimately die out, carryin g man along with them, 
unless vigorous attention is paid to cattle-breedin g, cattle-feeding and the 
utilization in the country of dead-cattle hides. 
VII.  National Education 
An attempt is made in the Ashram to import such edu cation as is conducive to 
national welfare. In order that spiritual, intellec tual and physical development 
may proceed side by side, an atmosphere of industry  has been created, and 
letters are not given more than their due importanc e. Character building is 
attended to in the smallest detail. 'Untouchable' c hildren are freely admitted. 
Women are given special attention with a view to im proving their status, and 
they are accorded the same opportunities for self-c ulture as the men. The 
Ashram accepts the following principles of the Guja rat Vidyapith: Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  1.  The principal object of the Vidyapith shall be to p repare workers of 
character, ability, education and conscientiousness , necessary for the 
conduct of the movements connected with the attainm ent of Swaraj. 
2.  All the institutions conducted by and affiliated to  the Vidyapith shall be 
fully non-co-operating and shall therefore have not hing to do with any help 
from Government.* 
3.  Whereas the Vidyapith has come into being in connec tion with the Swaraj 
movement, and non-violent non- co-operation as a me ans thereof, its 
teachers and trustees shall restrict themselves to those means only which 
are not inconsistent with truth and non-violence an d shall consciously 
strive to carry them out. 
4.  The teachers and the trustees of the Vidyapith, as also all the institutions 
affiliated to it, shall regard untouchability as a blot on Hinduism, shall 
strive to the best of their power for its removal, and shall not exclude a 
boy or girl for reason of his or her untouchability  nor shall give him or her 
differential treatment having once accorded admissi on to him or her. 
5.  The teachers and the trustees of, and all the insti tutions affiliated to, the 
Vidyapith shall regard hand spinning as an essentia l part of the Swaraj 
movement and shall therefore spin regularly, except  when disabled, and 
shall habitually wear Khadi. 
6.  The language of the province shall have the princip al place in the 
Vidyapith and shall be the medium of instruction.  
Explanation : Languages other than Gujarati may be taught by direct method. 
7.  The teaching of Hindi-Hindustani shall be compulsor y in the curricula of 
the Vidyapith. 
8.  Manual training shall receive the same importance a s intellectual training 
and only such occupations as are useful for the lif e of the nation shall be 
taught. 
9.  Whereas the growth of the nation depends not on its  cities but its villages, 
the bulk of the funds of the Vidyapith and a majori ty of the teachers of Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70  the Vidyapith shall be employed in the propagation of education conducive 
to the welfare of the villages. 
10.  In laying down the curricula, the needs of village dwellers shall have 
principal consideration. 
11.  There shall be complete toleration of all establish ed religions in all 
institutions conducted by and affiliated to the Vid yapith; and for the 
spiritual development of the pupils, religious inst ruction shall be imparted 
in consonance with truth and non-violence. 
12.  For the physical development of the nation physical  exercise and physical 
training shall be compulsory in all the institution s conducted by and 
affiliated to the Vidyapith. 
Note :  Hindi-Hindustani means the language commonly spoke n by the masses of 
the North — both Hindu and Musalman — and written i n the Devanagari or the 
Arabic script. 
VIII.  8. Khadi Technical School 
A separate technical school is conducted, which pre pares candidates for the 
Khadi Service on behalf of the All-India Spinners' Association. . . . The 
curriculum is as follows :  
21 weeks spinning... 
7 weeks carding... 
2 weeks ginning... 
Handloom weaving... 
Carpentry... 
The average monthly food bill per student amounts t o about 12 rupees. . . . 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  Daily Routine 
4 a.m.  
4:15 to 4.45 
5 to 6:10 
6:10 to 6:30  
6.30 to 7 
7 to 10:30 
10:45 to 11:15 
11:15 to 12 
12 to 4:30 
4.30 to 5:30 
5:30 to 6 
6 to 7 
7 to 7:30 
7.30 to 9 
9 Rising from bed  
Morning prayer  
Bath, exercise, study  
Breakfast 
Women's prayer class 
Body labour, education and sanitation 
Dinner 
Rest 
Body labour including classes 
Recreation 
Supper 
Recreation 
Common worship 
Recreation 
Retiring bell 
Note :  These hours are subject to change whenever necessa ry. 
 
1. A reference to British rule in India. V. G. D. 
2. Refers to the British Government. V. G. D. 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72   
APPENDIX B 
GANDHIJI ON THE OBSERVANCES 
To many of the students who came here last year to converse with me, I said I 
was about to establish an institution —  ashram  — somewhere in India, and it is 
about that place that I am going to talk to you thi s morning*. I feel and I have 
felt during the whole of my public life that what w e need, what a nation needs, 
but we perhaps of all the nations of the world need  just now, is nothing else 
and nothing less than character-building. And this is the view propounded by 
that great patriot, Mr Gokhale (cheers). As you kno w, in many of his speeches 
he used to say that we would get nothing, we would deserve nothing, unless we 
had character to back what we wished for. Hence his  founding of the great 
body, the Servants of India Society. And as you kno w, in the prospectus that has 
been issued in connection with the Society, Mr Gokh ale has deliberately stated 
that it is necessary to spiritualize the political life of the country. You know 
also that he used to say often that our average was  less than the average of so 
many European nations. I do not know whether that s tatement by him, whom 
with pride I consider my political guru, has founda tion in fact, but I do believe 
that there is much to be said to justify it in so f ar as educated India is 
concerned; not because we, the educated portion of the community, have 
blundered, but because we have been creatures of ci rcumstances. Be that as it 
may, this is the maxim of life which I have accepte d, namely, that no work 
done by any man, no matter how great he is, will re ally prosper unless he has a 
religious backing. But what is religion? — the ques tion will be immediately 
asked. I for one would answer: Not the religion whi ch you will get after reading 
all the scriptures of the world; it is not really a  grasp by the brain, but it is a 
heart-grasp. It is a thing which is not alien to us , but which has to be evolved 
out of us. It is always within us, with some consci ously so, with others quite 
unconsciously. But it is there; and whether we wake  up this religious instinct in 
us through outside assistance or by inward growth, no matter how it is done, it Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  has got to be done if we want to do anything in the  right manner and anything 
that is going to persist. 
Our scriptures have laid down certain rules as maxi ms of life and as axioms 
which we have to take for granted as self- evident truths. The  shastras  tell us 
that without living according to these maxims, we a re incapable even of having 
a reasonable perception of religion. Believing in t hese implicitly for all these 
long years and having actually endeavoured to reduc e to practice these 
injunctions of the shastras,  I have deemed it necessary to seek the association  
of those who think with me in founding this institu tion. And I shall venture this 
morning to place before you the rules that have bee n drawn up and that have 
to be observed by everyone who seeks to be a member  of that  ashram.  
Five of these are known as  yamas , and the first and foremost is Truth. 
Truth  
Not truth simply as we ordinarily understand it, th at as far as possible we ought 
not to resort to a lie; that is to say, not truth w hich merely answers the saying 
"Honesty is the best policy" implying that if it is  not the  best  policy, we may 
depart from it. But Truth, as it is conceived here,  means that we have to rule 
our life by this law of Truth at any cost. In order  to clarify the definition, I have 
drawn upon the celebrated illustration of the life of Prahlad. For the sake of 
Truth, he dared to oppose his own father, and he de fended himself, not by 
retaliation, by paying his father back in his own c oin, but in defence of Truth as 
he knew it, he was prepared to die without caring t o return the blows that he 
received from his father or from those who were cha rged with his father's 
instructions. Not only that; he would not even parr y the blows. On the 
contrary, with a smile on his lips, he underwent th e innumerable tortures to 
which he was subjected, with the result that at las t Truth rose triumphant. Not 
that Prahlad suffered the tortures because he knew that some day or other in 
his very lifetime he would be able to demonstrate t he infallibility of the law of 
Truth. The fact was there; but if he had died in th e midst of tortures, he would 
still have adhered to Truth. That is the Truth whic h I would like to follow. 
There was an incident I noticed yesterday. It was a  trifling incident, but I think Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  these trifling incidents are like straws which show  which way the wind is 
blowing. It happened like this. I was talking to a friend who wanted to talk to 
me aside, and we were engaged in a private conversa tion. Another friend 
dropped in, and he politely asked whether he was in truding. The friend to 
whom I was talking said: "Oh, no; there is nothing private here." I felt taken 
aback a little, because as I was taken aside, I kne w that so far as this friend 
was concerned, the conversation was private. But he  immediately out of 
politeness, I would call it over-politeness, said t hat there was no private 
conversation and that he (the other friend) could j oin. I suggest to you that this 
is a departure from my definition of Truth. I think  that the friend should have, 
in the gentlest manner possible, but still openly a nd frankly said, "Yes, just 
now, as you rightly say, you would be intruding," w ithout giving the slightest 
offence to the person if he was himself a gentleman  — and we are bound to 
consider everybody a gentleman unless he proves to be otherwise. But I may be 
told that the incident, after all, proves the genti lity of the nation. I think that 
it is over-proving the case. If we continue to say these things out of politeness, 
we really become a nation of hypocrites. I recall a  conversation I had with an 
English friend. He was comparatively a stranger. He  is principal of a college and 
has been in India for several years. He was compari ng notes with me, and he 
asked me whether I would admit that we, unlike most  Englishmen, would not 
dare to say no when it was not that we meant. And I  must confess that I 
immediately said yes; I agreed with that statement.  We do hesitate to say no 
frankly and boldly, when we want to pay undue regar d to the sentiment of the 
person whom we are addressing. In this Ashram we ma ke it a rule that we must 
say no when we mean no, regardless of consequences.  This then is the first 
rule. Then we come to  ahimsa.  
Ahimsa  
Literally  ahimsa  means non-killing. But to me it has a world of mea ning and 
takes me into realms much higher, infinitely higher , than the realm to which I 
would go if I merely understood by  ahimsa  non-killing.  Ahimsa  really means 
that you may not offend anybody, you may not harbou r an uncharitable thought Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  even in connection with one who may consider himsel f to be your enemy. Pray 
notice the guarded nature of this thought. I do not  say "whom you consider your 
enemy," but "who may consider himself your enemy." For one who follows the 
doctrine of  ahimsa  there is no room for an enemy; he denies the exist ence of 
an enemy. But there are people who consider themsel ves to be his enemies, 
and he cannot help it. So it is held that we may no t harbour an evil thought 
even in connection with such persons. If we return blow for blow, we depart 
from the doctrine of  ahimsa.  But I go further. If we resent a friend's action o r 
the so-called enemy's action, we still fall short o f this doctrine. But when I say 
we should not resent, I do not say that we should a cquiesce. By resenting I 
mean wishing that some harm should be done to the e nemy, or that he should 
be put out of the way, not even by any action of ou rs, but by the action of 
somebody else, or say by divine agency. If we harbo ur even this thought, we 
commit a breach of  ahimsa.  Those who join the Ashram have literally to accept  
that meaning. That does not mean that we practise t his doctrine in its entirety. 
Far from it. It is an ideal which we have to reach,  and it is an ideal to be 
reached even at this very moment if we were capable  of doing so. But it is not 
a proposition in geometry to be learnt by heart; it  is not even like solving 
difficult problems in higher mathematics; it is inf initely more difficult than 
that. Many of you have burnt the midnight oil in so lving those problems. If you 
want to follow out this doctrine, you will have to do much more than burn the 
midnight oil. You will have to pass many a sleeples s night, and go through many 
a mental torture and agony before you can reach, be fore you can even be 
within measurable distance of this goal. It is the goal, and nothing less than 
that, you and I have to reach, if we want to unders tand what religious life 
means. I will not say more on this doctrine than th is; that a "man who believes 
in the efficacy of this doctrine finds, in the ulti mate stage when he is about to 
reach the goal, the whole world at his feet. Not th at he wants the whole world 
at his feet, but it must be so. If you express your  love — ahimsa  — in such a 
manner that it impresses itself indelibly upon your  so-called enemy, he must 
return that love. Another thought which comes out o f this is that under this 
rule there is no room for organized assassinations,  and there is no room for Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  murders even openly committed, and there is no room  for any violence even 
for the sake of your country, and even for guarding  the honour of precious ones 
that may be in your charge. After all that would be  a poor defence of honour. 
This doctrine of ahimsa  tells us that we may guard the honour of those who  are 
in our charge by delivering ourselves into the hand s of the man who would 
commit the sacrilege. And that requires far greater  physical and mental 
courage than the delivering of blows. You may have some degree of physical 
power, — I do not say courage, — and you may use th at power. But after that is 
expended, what happens? The other man is filled wit h wrath and indignation, 
and you have made him more angry by matching your v iolence against his ; and 
when he has done you to death, the rest of his viol ence is delivered against 
your charge. But if you do not retaliate but stand your ground between your 
charge and the opponent, simply receiving the blows  without retaliating, what 
happens? I give you my promise that the whole of hi s violence will be expended 
on you and your charge will be left unscathed. Unde r this plan of life there is 
no conception of patriotism which justifies such wa rs as you witness today in 
Europe. 
Then there is celibacy. 
Celibacy 
Those who want to perform national service, or thos e who want to have a 
glimpse of real religious life, must lead a celibat e life, no matter whether 
married or unmarried. Marriage but brings a woman c loser to the man. and 
they become friends in a special sense, never to be  parted either in this life or 
in the lives that are to come. I do not think, that  in our conception of 
marriage, our lust should necessarily enter. Be tha t as it may, this is what is 
placed before those who come to the Ashram. 
Then we have control of the palate. 
Control of the Palate 
A man who wants to control animal passion does so m ore easily if he controls 
his palate. I am afraid this is a rather difficult observance. I am just now Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  coming after having inspected the Victoria hostel.  I saw there not to my 
dismay, — though it should be to my dismay, — but I  am used to it now, that 
there are so many kitchens, not kitchens that are e stablished in order to serve 
caste restrictions but kitchens that have become ne cessary in order that people 
can have the condiments and the exact weight of the  condiments to which they 
are accustomed in the places from which they have c ome. And therefore we 
find that for the Brahmans themselves there are dif ferent compartments and 
different kitchens catering for the delicate tastes  of all those different groups. 
I suggest that this is simply slavery to the palate , rather than mastery over it. I 
may say this. Unless we take our minds off from thi s habit, unless we shut our 
eyes to the tea shops and coffee shops and all thes e kitchens, unless we are 
satisfied with foods that are necessary for the mai ntenance of health, and 
unless we are prepared to rid ourselves of stimulat ing, heating and exciting 
condiments that we mix with our food, we shall cert ainly not be able to control 
the overabundant and unnecessary stimulation that w e may have. If we do not 
do that, the result naturally is that we abuse ours elves and we abuse even the 
sacred trust given to us, and we become inferior to  animals. Eating, drinking 
and indulging in passion we share in common with th e animals; but have you 
ever seen a horse or a cow indulging in the abuse o f the palate as we do? Do 
you suppose that it is a sign of civilization, a si gn of real life that we should 
multiply our eatables so far that we do not even kn ow where we are and seek 
dish after dish until at last we have become absolu tely mad and run after the 
newspaper sheets which give us advertisements about  these dishes? 
Then we have Non-stealing. 
Non-stealing 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take a nything that I do not need for 
my own immediate use and keep it, I steal it from s omebody else. I venture to 
suggest that it is the fundamental law of Nature wi thout exception, that she 
produces enough for our wants from day to day, and if everybody took enough 
for himself and nothing more, there would be no pau perism, there would be no 
man dying of starvation in this world. But so long as we have got this Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  inequality, so long we are stealing. I am no social ist, and I do not want to 
dispossess those who have got possessions; but I do  say that those of us who 
want to see light out of darkness have to follow th is rule in their own lives. I do 
not want to dispossess anybody, for J should then b e departing from the rule of  
ahimsa.  If somebody else possesses more than I do, let him . But so far as my 
own life has to be regulated. I do say that I dare not possess anything which I 
do not need. In India we have got millions of peopl e living on one meal a day, 
and that meal consisting of a  chapati with no fat spread on it and a pinch of 
salt. You and I have no right to anything more unti l these millions are clothed 
and fed better. You and I, who ought to know better , must adjust our wants, 
and even undergo voluntary starvation, in order tha t they may be fed and 
clothed. 
Then there is Non-possession which follows as a mat ter of course. 
Next is Swadeshi. 
Swadeshi 
Swadeshi is an essential observance. I suggest that  we are departing from one 
of the sacred laws of our being when we leave our n eighbour and go out 
somewhere else in order to satisfy our wants. If a man comes from Bombay 
here and offers you wares, you are not justified in  supporting the Bombay 
merchant so long as you have got a merchant at your  very door, born and bred 
in Madras. That is my view of Swadeshi. In your vil lage, so long as you have got 
your village barber, you are bound to support him t o the exclusion of the 
finished barber who may come to you from Madras. If  you find it necessary that 
your village barber should reach the attainments of  the barber from Madras, 
you may train him to that. Send him to Madras by al l means, if you wish, in 
order that he may learn his calling. Until you do t hat you are not justified in 
going to another barber. That is Swadeshi. So when we find that there are 
many things that we cannot get in India, we must tr y to do without them. We 
have to do without many things which we may conside r necessary; but believe 
me, when you are in that frame of mind, you will fi nd a great burden taken off 
your shoulders, even as the Pilgrim did in the inim itable book,  The Pilgrim's Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  Progress.  There came a time when the mighty burden that the Pilgrim was 
carrying on his shoulders dropped from him, and he felt a freer man than he 
was when he started on the journey. So will you fee l freer men than you are 
now, immediately you adopt Swadeshi.  
We then have Fearlessness. 
Fearlessness 
I found throughout my wanderings in India, that Ind ia, educated India is seized 
with a paralysing fear. We may not open our lips in  public; we may not declare 
our confirmed opinions in public; we may hold those  opinions and may talk 
about them secretly, but they are not for public co nsumption. If we had taken 
a vow of silence, I would have nothing to say. But when we open our lips in 
public, we say things we do not really believe in. I do not know whether this is 
not true of almost every public man who speaks in I ndia. I then suggest to you 
that there is only one Being, — if Being is the pro per term to be used, — whom 
we have to fear, and that is God. When we fear God,  we shall fear no man, no 
matter how highly placed he may be. And if you want  to follow the vow of 
Truth in any shape or form, you must be fearless. A nd so you find, in the 
Bhagavadgita, fearlessness is designated the first essential quality of a good 
man. We fear consequences, and therefore we are afr aid to tell the truth. A 
man who fears God will certainly not fear any earth ly consequence. Before we 
can aspire to understand what religion is, and befo re we can aspire to guide 
the destinies of India, do you not see that we shou ld adopt this habit of 
fearlessness? Or shall we overawe our countrymen, e ven as we are overawed? 
We thus see how important fearlessness is. 
Then we come to the removal of untouchability. 
Removing Untouchability 
Untouchability is a blot that Hinduism today carrie s with it. I decline to believe 
that it has been handed to us from immemorial times . I think that this 
miserable, wretched, enslaving spirit of untouchabi lity must have come to us 
when we were in the cycle of our lives at our lowes t ebb, and that evil has still Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  stuck to us and it still remains with us. It is to my mind a curse, that has come 
to us, and as long as that curse remains with us, s o long I think we are bound to 
hold that every affliction that we labour under in this sacred land is a fit and 
proper punishment for this great crime that we are committing. That any 
person should be considered untouchable because of his calling passes one's 
comprehension; and you, the student world who recei ve all this modern 
education, if you become a party to this crime, it were better that you 
received no education whatsoever. 
Of course, we are labouring under a very heavy hand icap. Although you may 
realize that there cannot be a single human being o n this earth who should be 
considered untouchable, you cannot react upon your families, you cannot react 
upon your surroundings, because all your thought is  conceived in a foreign 
tongue, and all your energy is devoted to it. There fore we have also introduced 
a rule in this Ashram, that the medium of instructi on shall be the mother 
tongue. 
Education through the Mother Tongue 
In Europe every cultured man learns, not only his l anguage, but also other 
languages, sometimes three or four. And even as the y do in Europe, in order to 
solve the problem of language in India, we in this Ashram make it a point to 
learn as many Indian languages as we can. And I ass ure you that the trouble of 
learning these languages is nothing compared with t he trouble that we have to 
take in mastering English. Indeed we never master E nglish: with some 
exceptions it has not been possible for us to do so : we can never express 
ourselves as clearly in English as in the mother to ngue. How dare we rub out of 
our memory all the years of our infancy? But that i s precisely what we do, when 
we commence our higher education, as we call it, th rough the medium of a 
foreign tongue. This creates a breach in our life, for which we shall have to pay 
dearly and heavily. And you will see now the connec tion between these two 
things, — education and untouchability — this persi stence of the spirit of 
untouchability even at this time of the day in spit e of the spread of education. 
Education has enabled us to see the horrible crime.  But we are seized with fear Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  and therefore we cannot take this doctrine to our h omes. And we have got a 
superstitious veneration for our family traditions and for the members of our 
family. You say, "My parents will die if I tell the m that I at least can no longer 
participate in this crime." I say that Prahlad neve r feared that his father would 
die if he took the holy name of Vishnu. On the cont rary, he made the whole 
house ring from one corner to another, by repeating  that name even in the 
sacred presence of his father. And so you and I may  do this thing in the 
presence of our parents. If, after receiving this r ude shock, some of them 
expire, I think that would be no calamity. It may b e that some rude shocks of 
this kind might have to be delivered. So long as we  persist in these things which 
have been handed down to us for generations, these incidents may happen. But 
there is a higher law of Nature, and in due obedien ce to that higher law, my 
parents and myself should make that sacrifice. 
And next we come to hand weaving. 
Hand Weaving 
You may ask: "Why should  we  use our hands?" and say, "Manual work must be 
done by those who are illiterate. I can only occupy  myself with reading 
literature and political essays." But I think we ha ve to realize the dignity of 
labour. If a barber or shoe-maker attends a college , he ought not to abandon 
the profession of barber or shoe-maker. I hold that  a barber's profession is just 
as good for instance as that of medicine. 
Politics 
Last of all, when you have observed these rules, th ink that then, and not till 
then, you may come to politics and dabble in them t o your heart's content, and 
certainly you will then never go wrong. Politics, d ivorced of religion, has 
absolutely no meaning. If the student world crowd t he political platforms of 
this country, to my mind it is not necessarily a he althy sign of national growth. 
But that does not mean that you, in your student li fe, ought not to study 
politics. Politics are a part of our being; we ough t to understand our national 
institutions, and we ought to understand our nation al growth and all those 
things. We may do it from our infancy. So, in our A shram, every child is taught Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  to understand the political institutions of our cou ntry, and to know how the 
country is vibrating with new emotions, with new as pirations, with a new life. 
But we want also the steady light, the infallible l ight, of religious faith, not a 
faith which appeals to the intelligence, but a fait h which is indelibly inscribed 
on the heart. First, we want to realize that religi ous consciousness; and once 
we have done that, I think all departments of life are open to us and it should 
then be a sacred privilege of students as well as o thers, to participate in the 
whole of life, so that when they grow to manhood an d when they leave their 
colleges, they may do so as men properly equipped f or the battle of life. Today 
what happens is this. Much of the political life is  confined to student life; 
immediately the students leave their colleges and c ease to be students, they 
sink into oblivion, they seek miserable employment,  carrying miserable 
emoluments, rising no higher in their aspirations, knowing nothing of God, 
knowing nothing of fresh air or bright light, and n othing of the real vigorous 
independence that comes out of obedience to these l aws that I have ventured 
to place before you. 
[This address has been reported very badly, but the  report has been passed 
with only some essential corrections, as the discer ning reader will not find it 
difficult to understand what Gandhiji meant to say.  
V. G. D.] 
 
1. Address delivered at the Y. M. C. A. Auditorium,  Madras, on February 6, 1916 ( Speeches 
and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi. Natesan, Madras). 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83   
APPENDIX C 
RULES FOR SEVAGRAM ASHRAM 
Life members of the Ashram are those who believe in  the necessity of keeping 
the eleven observances, and endeavour to do so to t he best of their ability, and 
who will stay in the Ashram even after Gandhiji's d eath and render lifelong 
service through the activities of the Ashram. 
The names of those who come under this category sho uld be placed on record. 
They should sign the following pledge: 
"We the undersigned believe in the necessity of kee ping the eleven 
observances, and will endeavour to do so to the bes t of our ability. We will live 
in the Ashram till death even when Gandhiji is no l onger with us in the flesh 
and will perform the duties assigned to us." 
The second class of inmates is those who have joine d the Ashram for service. 
They are non-permanent members. And the third class  is visitors and guests 
who come to the Ashram for a short time. 
One of the life members shall be the manager. He wi ll be selected by Gandhiji. 
After his [Gandhiji'sj death, and on the manager ce asing for some reason to 
hold that office, the life members shall elect a ne w manager. 
The manager shall have charge of the entire adminis tration of the Ashram and 
assign to the inmates their respective duties. As f ar as possible, the manager 
will try to obtain the consent of the life members in doing this. 
The Ashram accounts shall be duly kept, and audited  once a year. The 
statement of accounts shall be sent to the trustees  of the Ashram and to the 
President of the Gandhi Seva Sangh. 
The rules deducible from the observances and essent ial for a well-regulated 
Ashram life are as follows: 
All members — whether permanent or otherwise — will  turn every minute of 
their time to good account. They will take part in every corporate activity of Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  the Ashram. When free from Ashram work they will sp in or carry out some other 
process connected with cotton. They will prosecute their private studies from 8 
to 9 p.m., or during daytime, when they have no Ash ram work to do and have 
spun for at least one hour. 
They may not spin when they are ill or otherwise un able to spin owing to 
circumstances beyond their control. 
No one should talk idly or in a loud voice. The Ash ram must bear the impress of 
perfect peace as well as of truth. Our relations wi th one another must be 
characterized by affection and restraint and with g uests and visitors by 
courtesy. Whether a visitor is dressed in rags or i n gorgeous robes, we should 
treat him with uniform respect. We must not make an y distinction between the 
rich and the poor, the noble and the simple. This d oes not mean that we may 
expect a delicately nurtured guest to live as simpl y as ourselves. That is to say, 
in waiting upon guests, we must always take into co nsideration their habitual 
mode of life. This is true courtesy. If an unknown visitor arrives at the Ashram 
we must ask him the purpose of his visit, and if ne cessary, take him to the 
manager. 
Our every word and every act should be well thought  out. Whatever we do we 
must do with a will and complete identification wit h what we are doing at the 
moment. For instance we must not talk at meals or w hile cutting vegetables. 
Food must be taken like medicine, under proper rest raint, only for sustaining 
the body and keeping it a fit instrument for servic e. We must therefore take 
food in moderation or even abstemiously. We must be  content with what food 
we get. If it is insufficiently or badly cooked, we  must not talk about it at 
meals, but courteously speak about it later to the manager of the kitchen. Bad 
or imperfectly cooked food should not be eaten. 
We must not smack the lips while eating. We must ea t our food slowly, 
decorously and neatly in a spirit of thankfulness t o God. 
Everyone must wash his own dish thoroughly and keep  it in its place. Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  Guests and visitors are requested to bring their ow n plate, drinking pot, bowls 
and spoon, as well as lantern, bedding, mosquito ne t and napkins. They must 
not have more clothes than necessary. Their clothes  should be made of khadi. 
Other things must be as far as possible village-mad e or at least Swadeshi. 
Everything must be kept in its proper place. All re fuse must be put into the 
dustbin. 
Water must not be wasted. Boiled water is used for drinking purposes. Pots and 
pans are finally washed with boiled water. Unboiled  water of the Ashram wells 
is not safe to drink. It is necessary to learn the distinction between boiling 
water and hot water. Boiling water is that with whi ch pulses are cooked, and 
which gives out lots of steam. No one can drink boi ling water. 
We should not spit or clean the nose on the road, b ut only in an out of the way 
place where no one is likely to walk. 
Nature's needs must be attended to only at the appo inted place. It is necessary 
to clean oneself after answering both the calls of nature. The receptacle for 
the solid contents is, as it should always be, diff erent from that for the liquid 
contents of latrines. After a visit to the latrine,  we must wash our hands with 
pure earth and pure water and wipe them with a clea n napkin. The night soil 
must be fully covered with dry earth so as not to a ttract flies and in such a way 
that nothing but dry earth is visible. 
One must sit carefully on the latrine seat, so that  the seat does not get dirty. A 
lantern must be carried if it is dark. 
Everything which can attract the fly should be prop erly covered. 
The teeth must be cleaned with care at the proper p lace. The end of the twig 
must be well chewed into a soft brush, and the teet h and the gums must be 
brushed with it both ways. The saliva discharged du ring brushing, must be 
spitted out. After the teeth are well brushed, the twig must be split into two to 
clean the tongue with- Then the mouth should be car efully washed. The split 
twigs should be washed well, and collected in a pot . When they dry up, they Ashram Observance in action  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  should be used for starting a fire, the idea being that nothing which can be 
used should be thrown away. 
Waste paper, which cannot be used for writing on th e other side, should be 
burned. Nothing else should be mixed with it. 
The fragments of vegetables must be kept separate a nd converted into manure. 
Broken glass should be thrown into a pit at a safe distance from houses. 
(Translated from Gandhiji's original hindustani) 
Harijan,  October 31. 1948 