 
Abridged Autobiography 
 
 
 
Abridged by:  Bharatan Kumarappa 
 
 
 
Rs. 15/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com 
Website: www.navajivantrust.org 
 
Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
EDITOR'S NOTE 
Gandhiji's  Autobiography  in English as originally published and his  History of 
Satyagraha in South Africa together run into almost 1000 printed pages. An 
attempt has been made here for the first time to co ndense the matter of these 
two books into the space of the present volume. The  task has not been easy as 
Gandhiji's style is itself condensed. Besides, ever ything he says has a purpose 
and is important, so that one has to think twice be fore cutting out anything he 
has written. 
And yet the modern reader wants Gandhiji's  Autobiography in a handy form. It 
is to meet his need and that of young people in sch ools and colleges that this 
volume has been prepared. It cannot of course take the place of the originals. 
But it is hoped that it will at least stimulate the  reader to undertake a study at 
leisure of the more detailed original accounts. 
The originals were written by Gandhiji in Gujarati,  but translated later by 
others into English. The English translations were,  however, seen and approved 
by him. This abridgement is naturally of the Englis h version. 
It seeks to include all the important events in his  life, to keep in mind the 
spiritual purpose for which he wrote these books, a nd to adhere strictly to 
Gandhiji's own words. Only in a few places have his  words been changed where 
the abridgement required it, and even then, it migh t be claimed, without in 
any way altering his meaning. In the work of abridg ing,  My Early Life,  edited by 
Mahadev Desai, was found helpful. 
Bombay     Bharatan Kumarappa 
November 1951 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
INTRODUCTION 
It is not my purpose to attempt a real autobiograph y. I simply want to tell the 
story of my numerous experiments with truth; and as  my life consists of nothing 
but those experiments, the story will take the shap e of an autobiography. But I 
shall not mind, if every page of it speaks only of my experiments. I believe, or 
at any rate Hatter myself with the belief, that a c onnected account of all these 
experiments will not be without benefit to the read er. My experiments in the 
political field are now known. But I should certain ly like to narrate my 
experiments in the spiritual field which are known only to myself, and from 
which I have derived such power as I possess for wo rking in the political field. If 
the experiments are really spiritual, then there ca n be no room for self-praise. 
They can only add to my humility. The more I reflec t and look back on the past, 
the more vividly do I feel my limitations. 
What I want to achieve - what I have been striving and pining to achieve these 
thirty years, - is self-realization, to see God fac e to face, to attain  Moksha.  I 
live and move and have my being in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of 
speaking and writing, and all my ventures in the po litical field, are directed to 
this same end. But as I have all along believed tha t what is possible for one is 
possible for all, my experiments have not been cond ucted in the closet, but in 
the open; and I do not think that this fact detract s from their spiritual value. 
There are something which are known only to oneself  and one's Maker. These 
are clearly incommunicable. The experiments I am ab out to relate are not 
such. But they are spiritual, or rather moral; for the essence of religion is 
morality. 
Only those matters of religion that can be comprehe nded as much by children 
as by older people, will be included in this story.  If I can narrate them in a 
dispassionate and humble spirit many other experime nts will find in them 
provision for the onward march. Far be it from me t o claim any degree 
perfection for these experiments. I claim for them nothing more than does a 
scientist who, though he conducts his experiments w ith the utmost accuracy, Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  forethought and minuteness, never claims any finali ty about his conclusions, 
but keeps an open mind regarding them. I have gone through deep self-
introspection, searched myself through and through,  and examined and 
analysed every psychological situation. Yet I am fa r from claiming any finality 
or infallibility about my conclusions. One claim I do indeed make and it is this. 
For me they appear to be absolutely correct and see m for the time being to be 
final. For if they were not, I should base no actio n on them. But at every step I 
have carried out the process of acceptance or rejec tion and acted accordingly. 
And so long as my acts satisfy my reason and my hea rt, I must firmly adhere to 
my original conclusions. 
The experiments narrated should be regarded as illu strations, in the light of 
which everyone may carry on his own experiments acc ording to his own 
inclinations and capacity. I trust that to this lim ited extent the illustrations will 
be really helpful; because I am not going either to  conceal or understate any 
ugly things that must be told. I hope to acquaint t he reader fully with all my 
faults and errors. My purpose is to describe experi ments in the science of 
Satyagraha, not to say how good I am. In judging my self I shall try to be as 
harsh as truth, as I want 6thers also to be. 
The Ashram, Sabarmati. 
26th November, 1925       M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I : CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
01. BIRTH AND PARENTAGE 
Uttamchand Gandhi,  alias  Ota Gandhi, my grandfather, must have been a man 
of principle. State intrigues compelled him to leav e Porbandar, where he was 
Diwan, and to seek refuge in Junagadh. There he sal uted the Nawab with the 
left hand. Someone, noticing the apparent discourte sy, asked for an 
explanation, which was given thus: "The right hand is already pledged to 
Porbandar." 
Ota Gandhi married a second time, having lost his f irst wife. He had four sons 
by his first wife, and two by his second wife. The fifth of these six brothers was 
Karamchand Gandhi,  alias  Kaba Gandhi, and the sixth was Tulsidas Gandhi. 
Both these brothers were Prime Ministers in Porband ar, one after the other. 
Kaba Gandhi was my father. 
Kaba Gandhi married four times in succession, havin g lost his wife each time by 
death. His last wife, Putlibai, bore him a daughter  and three sons, I being the 
youngest. 
My father was a lover of his clan, truthful, brave and generous, but short-
tempered. His loyalty to the State was well known. An Assistant Political Agent 
spoke insultingly of the Rajkot Thakore Saheb, his chief, and he stood up to the 
insult. The Agent was angry and asked Kaba Gandhi t o apologize. This he 
refused to do and was therefore kept under detentio n for a few hours. But 
when the Agent saw that Kaba Gandhi was adamant, he  ordered him to be 
released. 
My father never had any ambition to accumulate rich es and left us very little 
property. 
He had no education, save that of experience. At be st, he might be said to 
have read up to the fifth Gujarati standard. Of his tory and geography he was 
innocent. But his rich experience of practical affa irs stood him in good stead in 
the solution of the most intricate questions and in  managing hundreds of men. 
Of religious training he had very little, but he ha d that kind of religious culture Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  which frequent visits to temples and listening to r eligious discourses make 
available to many Hindus. In his last days he began  reading the Gila at the 
instance of a learned Brahman friend of the family,  and he used to repeat aloud 
some verses every day at the time of worship. 
The outstanding impression my mother has left on my  memory is that of 
saintliness. She was deeply religious. She would no t think of taking her meals 
without her daily prayers, going to  Haveli  - the Vaishnava temple - was one of 
her daily duties. As far as my memory can go back, I do not remember her 
having ever missed the  Chaturmas.  She would take the hardest vows and keep 
them without flinching. Illness was no excuse for r elaxing them. I can recall her 
once falling ill when she was observing the  Chandrayana  vow, but the illness 
was not allowed to interrupt the observance. To kee p two or three consecutive 
fasts was nothing to her. Living on one meal a day during  Chaturmas  was a 
habit with her. Not content with that she fasted ev ery alternate day during one 
Chaturmas.  During another  Chaturmas  she vowed not to have food without 
seeing the sun. We children on those days would sta nd, staring at the sky, 
waiting to announce the appearance of the sun to ou r mother. Everyone knows 
that at the height of the rainy season the sun ofte n does not condescend to 
show his face. And I remember days when, at his sud den appearance, we would 
rush and announce it to her. She would run out to s ee with her own eyes, but 
by that time the fugitive sun would be gone, thus d epriving her to her meal. 
"That does not matter," she would say cheerfully. " God did not want me to eat 
today.” And then she would return to her round of d uties. 
My mother had strong common sense. She was well inf ormed about all matters 
of State, and ladies of the court thought highly of  her intelligence. Often I 
would accompany her, exercising the privilege of ch ildhood, and I still 
remember many lively discussions she had with the w idowed mother of the 
Thakore Saheb. 
Of these parents I was born at Porbandar, otherwise  known as Sudamapuri, on 
the 2 nd  October, 1869. 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
02. AT SCHOOL 
I passed my childhood in Porbandar. I recollect hav ing been put to school. It 
was with some difficulty that I got through the mul tiplication tables. The fact 
that I recollect nothing more of those days than ha ving learnt, in company with 
other boys, to call our teacher all kinds of names,  would strongly suggest that 
my intellect must have been sluggish and my memory raw. 
I must have been about seven when my father left Po rbandar for Rajkot to 
become a member of the Rajasthanik Court. There I w as put into a primary 
school, and I can well recollect those days, includ ing the names and other 
particulars of the teachers who taught me. As at Po rbandar, so here, there is 
hardly anything to note about my studies. I could o nly have been a mediocre 
student. From this school I went to the suburban sc hool and thence to the high 
school, having already reached my twelfth year. I d o not remember having ever 
told a lie, during this short period, either to my teachers or to my school-
mates. I used to be very shy and avoided all compan y. My books and my lessons 
were my sole companions. To be at school at the str oke of the hour and to run 
back home as soon as the school closed - that was m y daily habit. I literally ran 
back, because I could not bear to talk to anybody. I was even afraid lest anyone 
should poke fun at me. 
There is an incident which occurred at the examinat ion during my first year at 
the high school and which is worth recording. Mr. G iles, the Educational 
Inspector, had come on a visit of inspection. He ha d set us five words to write, 
as a spelling exercise. One of the words was 'kettl e'. I had misspelt it. The 
teacher tried to prompt me with the point of his bo ot, but I would not be 
prompted. It was beyond me to see that he wanted me  to copy the spelling 
from my neighbour's slate, for I had thought that t he teacher was there to 
supervise us against copying. The result was that a ll the boys, except myself, 
were found to have spelt every word correctly. Only  I had been stupid. The 
teacher tried later to bring this stupidity home to  me, but without effect. I 
never could learn the art of 'copying'. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  Yet the incident did not in the least diminish my r espect for my teacher. I was 
by nature, blind to the faults of elders. Later I c ame to know of many other 
failings of this teacher, but my regard for him rem ained the same. For I had 
learnt to carry out the orders of elders, not to sc an their actions. 
Two other incidents belonging to the same period ha ve always clung to my 
memory. As a rule I had distaste for any reading be yond my school books. The 
daily lessons had to be done, because I disliked be ing taken to task by my 
teacher as much as I disliked deceiving him. Theref ore, I would do the lessons, 
but often without my mind in them. Thus when even t he lessons could not be 
done properly, there was of course no question of a ny extra reading. But 
somehow my eyes fell on a book purchased by my fath er. It was Shravana 1 
Pitribhakti Natak  (a play about Shravana's devotion to his parents).  I read it 
with intense interest. There came to our place abou t the same time itinerant 
showmen. One of the pictures I was shown was of Shr avana carrying, by means 
of slings fitted for his shoulders, his blind paren ts on a pilgrimage. The book 
and the picture left an indelible impression on my mind. 'Here is an example for 
you to copy', I said to myself. The agonized lament  of the parents over 
Shravana's death is still fresh in my memory. The m elting tune moved me 
deeply, and I played it on a concertina which my fa ther had purchased for me.' 
There was a similar incident connected with another  play. Just about this time, 
I had secured my father's permission to see a play performed by a certain 
dramatic company. This play –  Harishchandra 2 - captured my heart. I could 
never be tired of seeing it. But how often should I  be permitted to go? It 
haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to m yself times without 
number. 'Why should not all be truthful like Harish chandra?' was the question I 
asked myself day and night. To follow truth and to go through all the ordeals 
Harishchandra went through was the one ideal it ins pired in me. I literally 
believed in the story of Harishchandra. The thought  of it all often made me 
weep. My common sense tells me today that Harishcha ndra could not have been 
a historical character. Still both Harishchandra an d Shravana are living realities Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  for me, and I am sure I should be moved as before i f I were to read those plays 
again today. 
I was not regarded as a dunce at the high school. I  always enjoyed the affection 
of my teachers. Certificates of progress and charac ter used to be sent to the 
parents every year. I never had a bad certificate. In fact I even won prizes after 
I passed out of the second standard. In the fifth a nd sixth I obtained 
scholarships of rupees four and ten respectively, a n achievement for which I 
have to thank good luck more than my merit. For the  scholarships were not 
open to all. But reserved for the best boys amongst  those coming from the 
Sorath Division of Kathiawad. And in those days the re could not have been 
many boys from Sorath in a class of forty to fifty.  
My own recollection is that I had not any high rega rd for my ability. I used to be 
astonished whenever I won prizes and scholarships. But I very jealously guarded 
my character. The least little blemish drew tears f rom my eyes. When I 
merited, or seemed to the teacher to merit-, a rebu ke, it was unbearable for 
me. I remember having once received corporal punish ment. I did not so much 
mind the punishment, as the fact that it was consid ered my desert. I wept 
piteously. That was when I was in the first or seco nd standard. There was 
another such incident during the time when I was in  the seventh standard. 
Dorabji Edulji Gimi was the headmaster then. He was  popular among boys, as 
he was a disciplinarian, a man of method and a good  teacher. He had made 
gymnastics and cricket compulsory for boys of the u pper standards. I disliked 
both. I never took part in any exercise, cricket or  football, before they were 
made compulsory. My shyness was one of the reasons for this aloofness, which I 
now see was wrong. I then had the false notion that  gymnastics had nothing to 
do with education. Today I know that physical train ing should have as much 
place in the curriculum as mental training. 
I may mention, however, that I was none the worse f or abstaining from 
exercise. That was because I had read in books abou t the benefits of long walks 
in the open air, and having liked the advice, I had  formed a habit of taking Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  walks, which has still remained with me. These walk s gave me a fairly hardy 
constitution. 
The reason of my dislike for gymnastics was my keen  desire to serve as nurse to 
my father. As soon as the school closed, I would hu rry home and begin serving 
him. Compulsory exercise came directly in the way o f this service. I requested 
Mr. Gimi to exempt me from gymnastics so that I mig ht be free to serve my 
father. But he would not listen to me. Now it so ha ppened that one Saturday, 
when we had school in the morning, I had to go from  home to the school for 
gymnastics at 4 o'clock in the afternoon. I had no watch, and the clouds 
deceived me. Before I reached the school the boys h ad all left. The next day 
Mr. Gimil, examining the roll, found me marked abse nt. Being asked the reason 
for absence, I told him what had happened. He refus ed to believe me and 
ordered me to pay a fine of one or two annas (I can not now recall how much). 
I was convicted of lying! That deeply pained me. Ho w was I to prove my 
innocence? There was no way. I cried in deep anguis h. I saw that a man of truth 
must also be a man of care. This was the first and last instance of my 
carelessness in school. I have a faint recollection  that I finally succeeded in 
getting the fine remitted. The exemption from exerc ise was of course obtained, 
as my father wrote himself to the headmaster saying  that he wanted me at 
home after school. 
But though I was none the worse for having neglecte d exercise, I am still paying 
the penalty of another neglect. I do not know whenc e I got the notion that good 
handwriting was not a necessary part of education. 
Two more reminiscences of my school days are worth recording. I had lost one 
year because of my marriage, and the teacher wanted  me to make good the 
loss, by skipping the class - a privilege usually a llowed to industrious boys. I 
therefore had only six months in the third standard  and was promoted to the 
fourth after the examinations which are followed by  the summer vacation. 
English became the medium of instruction in most su bjects from the fourth 
standard. I found myself completely at sea. Geometr y was a new subject in 
which, I was not particularly strong, and the Engli sh medium made it still more Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  difficult for me. The teacher taught the subject ve ry well but I could not follow 
him. Often I would lose heart and think of going ba ck to the third standard, 
feeling that the packing of two years' studies into  a single year was too 
ambitious. But this would discredit not only me, bu t also the teacher; because, 
counting on my industry, he had recommended my prom otion. So the fear of 
the double discredit kept me at my post. When howev er, with much effort I 
reached the thirteenth proposition of Euclid, the u tter simplicity of the subject 
was suddenly revealed to me. A subject which only r equired a pure and simple 
use of one's reasoning powers could not be difficul t. Ever since that time 
geometry has been both easy and interesting for me.  
Sanskrit, however, proved a harder task. In geometr y there was nothing to 
memorize, whereas in Sanskrit, I thought, everythin g had to be learnt by heart. 
This subject also was commenced from the fourth sta ndard. As soon as I 
entered the sixth I became disheartened. The teache r was a hard taskmaster, 
anxious, as I thought, to force the boys. There was  a sort of rivalry going on 
between the Sanskrit and the Persian teachers. The Persian teacher was 
lenient. The boys used to talk among themselves tha t Persian was very easy and 
the Persian teacher very good and considerate to th e students. The 'easiness' 
tempted me and one day I sat in the Persian class. The Sanskrit teacher was 
grieved. He called me to his side and said: 'How ca n you forget that you are the 
son of a Vaishnava father? Won't you learn the lang uage of your own religion? If 
you have any difficulty, why not come to me? I want  to teach you students 
Sanskrit to the best of my ability. As you proceed further, you will find in it 
things of absorbing interest. You should not lose h eart. Come and sit again in 
the Sanskrit class.' 
This keenness put me to shame. I could not disregar d my teacher's affection. 
Today I cannot but think with gratitude of Krishnas hankar Pandya. For if I had 
not acquired the little Sanskrit that I learnt then , I should have found it 
difficult to take any interest in our sacred books.  In fact I deeply regret that I 
was not able to acquire a more thorough knowledge o f the language, because I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  have since realized that every Hindu boy and girl s hould possess sound Sanskrit 
learning. 
It is now my opinion that in all Indian curricula o f higher education there should 
be a place for Hindi, Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic and  English, besides of course the 
vernacular. This big list need not frighten anyone.  If our education were more 
systematic, and the boys free from the burden of ha ving to learn their subjects 
through a foreign medium, I am sure learning all th ese languages would not be 
an irksome task, but a perfect pleasure. A scientif ic knowledge of one language 
makes a knowledge of other languages comparatively easy. 
 
1 Shravana, a young ascetic, was extremely devoted to his blind parents, whom he carried 
in a hammock for a pilgrimage. On his way he was un wittingly shot dead by Rama's father. 
King Dasharatha. 
2 Harishchandra, according to Hindu epics was a kin g of the solar dynasty. He was famous 
for his liberality, probity and unflinching adheren ce to truth. The celebrated sage 
Vishvamitra decided to test the king and subjected him to very severe tests including 
compulsion to put his own wife to death as a witch!  The king, however, stood the test 
with exemplary courage and truthfulness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
03. MARRIAGE 
It is my painful duty to have to record here my mar riage at the age of thirteen. 
As I see the youngsters of the same age about me wh o are under my care, and 
think of my own marriage, I am inclined to pity mys elf and to congratulate 
them on having escaped my lot. I can see no moral a rgument in support of such 
a preposterously early marriage. 
I do not think it meant to me anything more than th e prospect of good clothes 
to wear, drum beating, marriage processions, rich d inners and a strange girl to 
play with. We gradually began to know each other, a nd to speak freely 
together. We were the same age. But I took no time in assuming the authority 
of a husband. 
I had absolutely no reason to suspect my wife's fid elity, but jealousy does not 
wait for reasons. I must needs be forever on the lo ok-out regarding her 
movements, and therefore she could not go anywhere without my permission. 
This sowed the seeds of a bitter quarrel between us . The restraint was virtually 
a sort of imprisonment. And Kasturba was not the gi rl to brook any such thing. 
She made it a point to go out whenever and wherever  she liked. More restraint 
on my part resulted in more liberty being taken by her, and in my getting more 
and more cross. Refusal to speak to one another thu s became the order of the 
day with us, married children. I think it was quite  innocent of Kasturba to have 
taken those liberties with my restrictions. How cou ld a guileless girl brook any 
restraint on going to the temple or on going on vis its to friends? If I had the 
right to impose restrictions on her, had not she al so a similar right? All this is 
clear to me today. But at that time I had to make g ood my authority as a 
husband! 
Let not the reader think, however, that ours was a life of unrelieved bitterness. 
For my severities were all based on love. I wanted to make my wife an ideal 
wife. My ambition was to make her live a pure life,  learn what I learnt, and 
identify her life and thought with mine. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  I do not know whether Kasturba had any such ambitio n. She was illiterate. By 
nature she was simple, independent, persevering and . with me at least, 
reticent. She was not impatient of her ignorance an d I do not recollect my 
studies having ever spurred her to go in for a simi lar adventure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16   
04. A TRAGIC FRIENDSHIP 
Amongst my few friends at the high school I had, at  different times, two who 
might be called intimate. One of these  friendships did not last long, though I 
never forsook my friend. He forsook me because I ma de friends with the other. 
This latter friendship I regard as a tragedy in my life. It lasted long. I formed it 
in the spirit of a reformer. 
This companion was originally my elder brother's fr iend. They were classmates. 
I knew his weaknesses, but I regarded him as a fait hful friend. My mother, my 
eldest brother, and my wife warned me that I was in  bad company. I was too 
proud to heed my wife's warning. But I dared not go  against the opinion of my 
mother and my eldest brother. Nevertheless I pleade d with them saying, "I 
know he has the weaknesses you attribute to him, bu t you do not know his 
virtues. He cannot lead me astray, as my associatio n with him is meant to 
reform him. For I am sure that if he reforms his wa ys, he will be a splendid 
man. I beg you not to be anxious on my account.' 
I do not think this satisfied them, but they accept ed my explanation and let me 
go my way. 
I have seen since that I had calculated wrongly. A reformer cannot afford to 
have close intimacy with him whom he seeks to refor m. True friendship is an 
identity of souls rarely to be found in this world.  Only between like natures can 
friendship be altogether worthy and enduring. Frien ds react on one another. 
Hence in friendship there is very little scope for reform. I am of opinion that all 
exclusive intimacies are to be avoided; for man tak es in vice far more readily 
than virtue. And he who would be friends with God m ust remain alone, or make 
the whole world his friend. I may be wrong, but my effort to cultivate an 
intimate friendship proved a failure. 
A wave of 'reform' was sweeping over Rajkot at the time when I first came 
across this friend. He informed me that many of our  teachers were secretly 
taking meat and wine. He also named many well-known  people of Rajkot as Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  belonging to the same company. There were also, I w as told, some high school 
boys among them. 
I was surprised and pained. I asked my friend the r eason and he explained it 
thus: "We are a weak people because we do not eat m eat. The English are able 
to rule over us, because they are meat-eaters. You know how hardy I am, and 
how great a runner too. It is because I am a meat-e ater. Meat-eaters do not 
have boils or tumours, and even if they sometimes h appen to have any, these 
heal quickly. Our teachers and other distinguished people who cat meat are no 
fools. They know its virtues. You should do likewis e. There is nothing like 
trying. Try, and see what strength it gives." 
All these pleas on behalf of meat-eating were not a dvanced at a single sitting. 
They represent the substance of a long and elaborat e argument which my 
friend was trying to impress upon me from time to t ime. My elder brother had 
already fallen. He therefore supported my friend's argument. I certainly looked 
feeble-bodied by the side of my brother and this fr iend. They were both 
hardier, physically stronger, and more daring. This  friend's exploits cast a spell 
over me. He could run long distances and extraordin arily fast. He was an adept 
in high and long jumping. He could put up with any amount of corporal 
punishment. He would often display his exploits to me and, as one is always 
dazzled when he sees in others the qualities that h e lacks himself, I was 
dazzled by this friend's exploits. This was followe d by a strong desire to be like 
him. I could hardly jump or run. Why should not I a lso be as strong as he? 
Moreover, I was a coward. I used to be haunted by t he fear of thieves, ghosts 
and serpents. I did not dare to stir out of doors a t night. Darkness was a terror 
to me. It was almost impossible for me to sleep in the dark, as I would imagine 
ghosts coming from one direction, thieves from anot her and serpents from a 
third. I could not therefore bear to sleep without a light in the room. How 
could I disclose my fears to my wife, no child, but  already at the threshold of 
youth, sleeping by my side? I knew that she had mor e courage than I, and I felt 
ashamed of myself. She knew no fear of serpents and  ghosts. She could go out 
anywhere in the dark. My friend knew all these weak nesses of mine He would Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  tell me that he could hold in his hand live serpent s, could defy thieves and did 
not believe in ghosts. And nil this was, of course,  the result of eating meat. 
A doggerel of the Gujarati poet Narmad was in vogue  amongst us schoolboys, as 
follows: Behold the mighty Englishman He rules the Indian small, Because being 
a meat-eater He is five cubits tall. 
All this had its due effect on me. I was beaten. It  began to grow on me that 
meat-eating was good, that it would make me strong and daring, and that, if 
the whole country took to meat-eating, the English could be overcome. 
A day was thereupon fixed for beginning the experim ent. It had to be 
conducted in secret as my parents were staunch Vais hnavas, and I was 
extremely devoted to them. I knew that the moment t hey came to know of my 
having eaten meat, they would be shocked to death. Moreover, my love of 
truth made me extra cautious. I cannot say that I d id not know then that I 
should have to deceive my parents if I began eating  meat. But my mind was 
bent on the 'reform'. It was not a question of plea sing the palate. I did not 
know that it had a particularly good relish. I wish ed to be strong and daring and 
wanted my countrymen also to be such so that we mig ht defeat the English and 
make India free. The word 'Swaraj' I had not yet he ard. But I knew what 
freedom meant. The frenzy of the 'reform' blinded m e. And having ensured 
secrecy, I persuaded, myself that mere hiding the d eed from parents was no 
departure from truth. 
So the day came. It is difficult fully to describe my condition. There were, on 
the one hand, the zeal for 'reform', and the novelt y of making a momentous 
departure in life. There was, on the other, the sha me of hiding like a thief to 
do this very thing. I cannot say which of the two s wayed me more. We went in 
search of a lonely spot by the river, and there I s aw, for the first time in my 
life, meat. There was baker's bread also. I relishe d neither. The goat's meat 
was as tough as leather. I simply could not eat it.  I was sick and had to leave 
off eating. 
I had a very bad night afterwards. A horrible night mare haunted me. Every time 
I dropped off to sleep it would seem as though a li ve goat were bleating inside Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  me, and I would jump up full of remorse. But then I  would remind myself that 
meat-eating was a duty and so become more cheerful.  
My friend was not a man to give in easily. He now b egan to cook various 
delicacies with meat, and dress them neatly. And fo r dining, no longer was the 
secluded spot on the river chosen, but a State hous e, with its dining hall, and 
tables and chairs, about which my friend had made a rrangements in collusion 
with the chief cook there. 
This bait had its effect. I got over my dislike for  bread, forswore my compassion 
for the goats, and became a relisher of meat-dishes , if not of meat itself. This 
went on for about a year. But not more than half a dozen meat-feasts were 
enjoyed in all; because the State house was not ava ilable every day, and there 
was the obvious difficulty about frequently prepari ng expensive savoury meat-
dishes. I had no money to pay for this 'reform'. My  friend had therefore always 
to find the wherewithal. I had no knowledge where h e found it. But find it he 
did, because he was bent on turning me into a meat- eater. But even his means 
must have been limited, and hence these feasts had necessarily to be few and 
far between. 
Whenever I had occasion to indulge in these surrept itious feasts, dinner at 
home was out of the question. My mother would natur ally ask me to come and 
take my food and want to know the reason why I did not wish to eat. I would 
say to her. 'I have no appetite today; there is som ething wrong with my 
digestion.' It was not without compunction that I d evised these pretexts. I knew 
I was lying, and lying to my mother. I also knew th at, if my mother and father 
came to know of my having become a meat-eater, they  would be deeply 
shocked. This knowledge was gnawing at my heart. 
Therefore I said to myself: 'Though it is essential  to eat meat, and also essential 
to lake up food 'reform' in the country, yet deceiv ing and lying to one's father 
and mother is worse than not eating meat. In their lifetime, therefore, meat- 
eating must be out of the question. When they are n o more and I have found 
my freedom, I will eat meat openly, but until that moment arrives I will abstain 
from it.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  This decision I communicated to my friend, and I ha ve never since gone back to 
meat. My parents never knew that two of their sons had become meat-eaters. 
I abjured meat out of the purity of my desire not t o lie to my parents, but I did 
not abjure the company of my friend. My zeal for re forming him had proved 
disastrous for me, and all the time I was completel y unconscious of the fact. 
The same company would have led me into faithlessne ss to my wife. But I was 
saved by the skin of my teeth. My friend once took me to a brothel. He sent me 
in with the necessary instructions. It was all prea rranged. The bill had already 
been paid. I went into the jaws of sin, but God in His infinite mercy protected 
me against myself. I was almost struck blind and du mb in this den of vice. I felt 
as though my manhood had been injured, and wished t o sink into the ground for 
shame. But I have ever since given thanks to God fo r having saved me. 
One of the reasons of my differences with my wife w as undoubtedly the 
company of this friend. I was both a devoted and a jealous husband, and this 
friend fanned the flame of my suspicions about my w ife. I never could doubt his 
veracity. And I have never forgiven myself the viol ence of which I have been 
guilty in often having pained my wife by acting on his information. Perhaps only 
a Hindu wife would tolerate these hardships, and th at is why I have regarded 
woman as an incarnation of tolerance. A servant wro ngly suspected may throw 
up his job, a son in the same case may leave his fa ther's roof, and a friend may 
put an end to the friendship. The wife, if she susp ects her husband, will keep 
quiet but if the husband suspects her, she is ruine d. Where is she to go? A Hindu 
wife may not seek divorce in a law-court. 1 Law has no remedy for her. And I 
can never forget or forgive myself for having drive n my wife to that 
desperation. 
The canker of suspicion was rooted out only when I understood  Ahimsa  in all its 
bearings. I saw then the glory of Brahmacharya  and realized that the wife is not 
the husband's bondslave, but his companion and his helpmate, and an equal 
partner in all his joys and sorrows - as free as th e husband to choose her own 
path. Whenever I think of those dark days of doubts  and suspicions, I am filled Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  with loathing of my folly and my lustful cruelty, a nd I deplore my blind 
devotion to my friend. 
 
1 This has now been made possible under Free India.  - Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
5. STEALING AND ATONEMENT 
I have still to relate some of my failings during t his meat- eating period and 
also previous to it, which date from before my marr iage or soon after. 
A relative and I became fond of smoking. Not that w e saw any good in smoking, 
or were enamoured of the smell of a cigarette. We s imply imagined a sort of 
pleasure in emitting clouds of smoke from our mouth s. My uncle had the habit, 
and when we saw him smoking, we thought we should c opy his example. But we 
had no money. So we began pilfering stumps of cigar ettes thrown away by my 
uncle. 
The stumps, however, were not always available, and  could not emit much 
smoke either. So we began to steal coppers from the  servant's pocket money in 
order to purchase Indian cigarettes. But the questi on was where to keep them. 
We could not of course smoke in the presence of eld ers. We managed somehow 
for a few weeks on these stolen coppers. In the mea ntime we heard that the 
stalks of a certain plant were porous and couid be smoked like cigarettes. We 
got them and began this kind of smoking. 
But we were far from being satisfied with such thin gs as these. Our want of 
independence began to smart. It was unbearable that  we should be unable to 
do anything without the elders' permission. At last , in sheer disgust, we decided 
to commit suicide! 
But how were we to do it? From where were we to get  the poison? We heard 
that  Dhatura  seeds were an effective poison. Off we went to the  jungle in 
search of these seeds and got them. Evening was tho ught to be the auspicious 
hour. We went to  Kedarji Mondir,  put  ghee  in the temple-lamp, had the 
darshan  and then looked for a lonely corner. But our coura ge failed us. 
Supposing we were not instantly killed? And what wa s the good of killing 
ourselves? Why not rather put up with the lack of i ndependence? But we 
swallowed two or three seeds nevertheless. We dared  not take more. Both of us Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  fought shy of death, and decided to go to  Ramji Mandir  to compose ourselves, 
and to dismiss the thought of suicide. 
I realized that it was not as easy to commit suicid e as to contemplate it. And 
since then, whenever I have heard of someone threat ening to commit suicide, 
it has had little or no effect on me. 
The thought of suicide ultimately resulted in both of us bidding good-bye to the 
habit of smoking stumps of cigarettes and of steali ng the servant's coppers for 
the purpose of smoking. 
Ever since I have been grown up, I have never desir ed to smoke and have 
always regarded the habit of smoking as barbarous, dirty and harmful. I have 
never understood why there is such a rage for smoki ng throughout the world. I 
cannot bear to travel in a compartment full of peop le smoking. I become 
choked. 
But much more serious than this theft was the one I  was guilty of a little later. I 
pilfered the coppers when I was twelve or thirteen,  possibly less. The other 
theft was committed when I was fifteen. In this cas e I stole a bit of gold out of 
my meat-eating brother's armlet. This brother had r un into a debt of about 
twenty-five rupees. He had on his arm an armlet of solid gold. It was not 
difficult to clip a bit out of it. 
Well, it was done, and the debt cleared. But this b ecame more than I could 
bear. I resolved never to steal again. I also made up my mind to confess it to 
my father. But I did not dare to speak. Not that I was afraid of my father 
beating me. No. I do not recall his ever having bea ten any of us. I was afraid of 
the pain that I should cause him. But I felt that t he risk should be taken; that 
there could not a cleansing without a clean confess ion. 
I decided at last to write out the confession, to s ubmit it to my father, and ask 
his forgiveness. I wrote it on a slip of paper and handed it to him myself. In this 
note not only did I confess my guilt, but I asked a dequate punishment for it, 
and closed with a request to him not to punish hims elf for my offence. I also 
pledged myself never to steal in future. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  I was trembling as I handed the confession to my fa ther. He was then suffering 
from a fistula and was confined to bed. His bed was  a plain wooden plank. I 
handed him the note and sat opposite the plank. 
He read it through, and pearl-drops trickled down h is cheeks, wetting the 
paper. For a moment he closed his eyes in thought a nd then tore up the note. 
He had sat up to read it. He again lay down. I also  cried. I could see my father's 
agony. If I were a painter I could draw a picture o f the whole scene today. It is 
still so vivid in my mind. 
Those pearl-drops of love cleansed my heart, and wa shed my sin away. Only he 
who has experienced such love can know what it is. As the hymn says: 
'Only he  
Who is smitten with the arrows of love. 
Knows its power.' 
This was, for me, an object-lesson in  Ahimsa.  Then I could read in it nothing 
more than a father's love, but today I know that it  was pure  Ahimsa.  When such  
Ahimsa  becomes all embracing, it transforms everything it  touches. There is no 
limit to its power. 
This sort of sublime forgiveness was not natural to  my father. I had thought 
that he would be angry, say hard things, and strike  his forehead. But he was so 
wonderfully peaceful, and I believe this was due to  my clean confession. A 
clean confession, combined with a promise never to commit the sin again, 
when offered before one who has the right to receiv e it, is the purest type of 
repentance. I know that my confession made my fathe r feel absolutely safe 
about me, and increased his affection for me beyond  measure. 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
6. MY FATHER'S ILLNESS AND DEATH 
The time of which I am now speaking is my sixteenth  year. My father, as we 
have seen, was bed-ridden, suffering from a fistula . My mother, an old servant 
of the house and I were his principal attendants. I  had the duties of a nurse, 
which mainly consisted in dressing the wound, givin g my father his medicine, 
and compounding drugs whenever they had to be made up at home. Every night 
I massaged his legs and retired only when he asked me to do so or after he had 
fallen asleep. I loved to do this service. I do not  remember ever having 
neglected it. All the time at my disposal, after th e performance of the daily 
duties, was divided between school and attending on  my father. I would only go 
out for an evening walk either when he permitted me  or when he was feeling 
well. 
The dreadful night came. It was 10-30 or II p. m. I  was giving the massage. My 
uncle offered to relieve me. I was glad and went st raight to the bedroom. My 
wife, poor thing, was fast asleep. But how could sh e sleep when I was there. I 
woke her up. In five or six minutes, however, the s ervant knocked at the door. I 
started with alarm. 'Get up.' he said. 'Father is v ery ill.' I knew of course that he 
was very ill, and so I guessed, what 'very ill' mea nt at that moment. I sprang out 
of bed. 
'What is the matter? Do tell me!' 
'Father is no more.' 
So all was over! I had but to wring my hands. I fel t deeply ashamed and 
miserable. I ran to my father's room. I saw that if  animal passion had not 
blinded me, I should have been spared the torture o f separation from my father 
during his last moments. It is a blot I have never been able to efface or forget, 
and I have always thought that, although my devotio n to my parents knew no 
bounds and I would have given up anything for it, y et it was weighed and found 
unpardonably wanting because my mind was at the sam e moment in the grip of 
lust. It took me long to get free from the shackles  of lust, and I had to pass 
through many ordeals before I could overcome it. Le t all those who are married 
be warned by my example. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
7. GLIMPSES OF RELIGION 
Being born in the Vaishnava faith, I had often to g o to the Haveli.  But it never 
appealed to me. I did not like its glitter and pomp . Also I heard rumours of 
immorality being practised there, and lost all inte rest in it. Hence I could gain 
nothing from the  Haveli.  
But what I failed to get there I obtained from my n urse, an old servant of the 
family, whose affection for me I still recall. I ha ve said before that there was in 
me a fear of ghosts and spirits. Rambha, for that w as her name, suggested, as a 
remedy for this fear, the repetition of  Ramanama.  I had more faith in her than 
in her remedy, and so at a tender age I began repea ting  Ramanama  to cure my 
fear of ghosts and spirits. This was of course shor t-lived, but the good seed 
sown in childhood was not sown in vain. I think it is due to the seed sown by 
that good woman Rambha that today  Ramanama  is an infallible remedy for me. 
During part of his illness my father was in Porband ar. There every evening he 
used to listen to the  Ramayana.  The reader was a great devotee of Rama. He 
had a melodious voice. He would sing the  Dohas  (couplets and  Chopais 
(quatrains), and explain them, losing himself in th e discourse and carrying his 
listeners along with him. I must have been thirteen  at that time, but I quite 
remember being enraptured by his reading. That laid  the foundation of my 
deep devotion to the  Ramayana.  Today I regard the  Ramayana  of Tulsidas as 
the greatest book in all devotional literature. 
In Rajkot I got an early grounding in toleration fo r all branches of Hinduism and 
sister religions. For my father and mother would vi sit the  Haveli  as also Shiva's 
and Rama's temples, and would take or send us young sters there. Jain monks 
also would pay frequent visits to my father, and wo uld even go out of their way 
to accept food from us - non-Jains. They would have  talks with my father on 
subjects religious and mundane. 
He had, besides, Musalman and Parsi friends, who wo uld talk to him about their 
own faiths, and he would listen to them always with  respect, and often with Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  interest. Being his nurse, I often had a chance to be present at these talks. 
These many things combined to inculcate in me a tol eration for all faiths. 
Only Christianity was at the time an exception. I d eveloped a sort of dislike for 
it. And for a reason. In those days Christian missi onaries used to stand in a 
corner near the high school and hold forth, pouring  abuse on Hindus and their 
gods. I could not endure this. I must have stood th ere to hear them once only, 
but that was enough to dissuade me from repeating t he experiment. About the 
same time, I heard of a well-known Hindu having bee n converted to 
Christianity. It was the talk of the town that, whe n he was baptised, he had to 
eat beef and drink liquor, that he also had to chan ge his clothes, and that 
thenceforth he began to go about in European costum e including a hat. These 
things got on my nerves. Surely, thought I, a relig ion that compelled one to eat 
beef, drink liquor, and change one's own clothes di d not deserve the name. I 
also heard that the new convert had already begun a busing the religion of his 
ancestors, their customs and their country. All the se things created in me a 
dislike for Christianity. 
But the fact that I had learnt to be tolerant to ot her religions did not mean that 
I had any living faith in God. But one thing took d eep root in me - the 
conviction that morality is the basis of things, an d that truth is the substance of 
all morality. Truth became my sole objective. It be gan to grow in magnitude 
everyday, and my definition of it also has been eve r widening. 
A Gujarati didactic stanza likewise gripped my mind  and heart. Its precept - 
return good for evil - became my guiding principle.  It became such a passion 
with me that I began numerous experiments in it. He re are those (for me) 
wonderful lines: 
For a bowl of water give a goodly meal; 
For a kindly greeting bow thou down with zeal; 
For a simple penny pay thou back with gold; 
If thy life be rescued, life do not withhold: 
Thus the words and actions of the wise regard; Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  Every little service tenfold they reward. 
But the truly noble know all men as one, 
And return with gladness good for evil done. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29   
08. PREPARATION FOR ENGLAND 
My elders wanted me to pursue my studies at college  after the matriculation. 
There was a college in Bhavnagar as well as in Bomb ay, and as the former was 
cheaper, I decided to go there and join the Samalda s College. I went, but found 
myself entirely at sea. Everything was difficult. I  could not follow, let alone 
taking interest in, the professors' lectures. It wa s no fault of theirs. The 
professors in that college were regarded as first-r ate. But I was so raw. At the 
end of the first term, I returned home. 
We had in Mavji Dave, who was a shrewd and learned Brahman, an old friend 
and adviser of the family. He had kept up his conne ction with the family even 
after my father's death. He happened to visit us du ring my vacation. In 
conversation with my mother and elder brother, he i nquired about my studies. 
Learning that I was at Samaldas College, he said: ' The times are changed. And 
none of you can expect to succeed to your father's  gadi  without having had a 
proper education. Now as this boy is still pursuing  his studies, you should all 
look to him to keep the  gadi.  It will take him four or five years to get his B.A . 
degree, which will at best qualify him for a sixty rupees' post, not for a 
Diwanship. If like my son he went in for law, it wo uld take him still longer, by 
which time there would be a host of lawyers aspirin g for a Diwan's post. I would 
far rather that you sent him to England. Think of t hat barrister who has just 
come back from England. How stylishly he lives! He could get the Diwanship for 
the asking. I would strongly advise you to send Moh andas,to England this very 
year. Kevalram has numerous friends in England. He will give notes of 
introduction to them, and Mohandas will have an eas y time of it there.' 
Joshiji - that is how we used to call old Mavji Dav e - turned to me with 
complete assurance, and asked: "Would you not rathe r go to England than study 
here?' Nothing could have been more welcome to me. I was fighting shy of my 
difficult studies. So I jumped at the proposal and said that the sooner I was sent 
the better. My elder brother was greatly exercised in his mind. How was he to 
find the wherewithal to send me? And was it proper to trust a young man like Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  me to go abroad alone? My mother was sorely perplex ed. She did not like the 
idea of parting with me. She had begun making minut e inquiries. Someone had 
told her that young men got lost in England. Someon e else had said that they 
took to meat; and yet another that they could not l ive there without liquor. 
'How about all this?' she asked me. I said: 'Will y ou not trust me? I shall not lie 
to you. I swear that I shall not touch any of those  things. If there were any such 
danger, would Joshiji let me go?' 
M can trust you,' she said. 'But how can I trust yo u in a distant land? I am dazed 
and know not what to do. I will ask Becharji Swami. ' 
Becharji Swami was originally a Modh Bania, but had  now become a Jain monk. 
He too was a family adviser like Joshiji. He came t o my help, and said, 'I shall 
get the boy solemnly to take the three vows, and th en he can be allowed to go.' 
He administered the oath and I vowed not to touch w ine, woman and meat. 
This done, my mother gave her permission. 
The high school had a send-off in my honour. It was  an uncommon thing for a 
young man of Rajkot to go to England. I had written  out a few words of thanks. 
But I could scarcely stammer them out. I remember h ow my head reeled and 
how my whole frame shook as I stood up to read them . 
With my mother's permission and blessings, I set of f exultantly for Bombay, 
leaving my wife with a baby of a few months. But on  arrival their friends told 
my brother that the Indian Ocean was rough in June and July, and as this was 
my first voyage, I should not be allowed to sail un til November. 
Meanwhile my caste-people were agitated over my goi ng abroad. A general 
meeting of the caste was called and I was summoned to appear before it. I 
went. How I suddenly managed to muster up courage I  do not know. Nothing 
daunted, and without the slightest hesitation, I ca me before the meeting. The 
Sheth - the headman of the community - who was dist antly related to me and 
had been on very good terms with my father, thus ac costed me: 
'In the opinion of the caste, your proposal to go t o England is not proper. Our 
religion forbids voyages abroad. We have also heard  that it is not possible to Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  live there without compromising our religion. One i s obliged to eat and drink 
with Europeans!' To which I replied: 'I do not thin k it is at all against our 
religion to go to England. I intend going there for  further studies. And I have 
already solemnly promised to my mother to abstain f rom three things you fear 
most. I am sure the vow will keep me safe.' 
'But we tell you,' rejoined the Sheth, 'that it is not possible to keep our religion 
there. You know my relations with your father and y ou ought to listen my 
advice.' 
'I know those relations,' said I. 'And you are as a n elder to me. But I am helpless 
in this matter. I cannot alter my resolve to go to England. My father's friend and 
adviser, who is a learned Brahman, sees no objectio n to my going to England, 
and my mother and brother have also given me their permission.' 'But will you 
disregard the orders of the caste?' i am really hel pless. I think the caste should 
not interfere in the matter.' 
This incensed the Sheth. He swore at me. I sat unmo ved. So the Sheth 
pronounced his order: 'This boy shall be treated as  an outcaste from today. 
Whoever helps him or goes to see him off at the doc k shall be punishable with a 
tine of one rupee four annas.' 
The order had no effect on me, and I took my leave of the Sheth. But I 
wondered how my brother would take it. Fortunately he remained firm and 
wrote to assure me that I had his permission to go,  the Sheth's order 
notwithstanding. 
A berth was reserved for me by my friends in the sa me cabin as that of Shri 
Tryambakrai Mazmudar, the Junagadh vakil. They also  commended me to him. 
He was an experienced man of mature age and knew th e world. I was yet a 
stripling of eighteen without any experience of the  world. Shri Mazmudar told 
my friends not to worry about me. 
I sailed at last from Bombay on the 4th of Septembe r. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
09. ON BOARD THE SHIP 
I was quite unaccustomed to talking English, and ex cept for Shri Mazmudar all 
the other passengers in the second saloon were Engl ish. I could not speak to 
them. For I could rarely follow their remarks when they came up to speak to 
me and even when I understood I could not reply. I had to frame every 
sentence in my mind, before I could bring it out. I  was innocent of the use of 
knives and forks and had not the boldness to inquir e what dishes on the menu 
were free of meat. I therefore never took meals at table but always had them 
in my cabin, and they consisted principally of swee ts and fruits which I had 
brought with me. Shri Mazmudar had no difficulty, a nd he mixed with 
everybody. He would move about freely on deck, whil e I hid myself in the cabin 
the whole day, only venturing up on deck when there  were but few people. Shri 
Mazmudar kept pleading with me to associate with th e passengers and to talk 
with them freely. He told me that lawyers should ha ve a long tongue, and 
related to me his legal experience. He advised me t o take every possible 
opportunity of talking English, and not to mind mak ing mistakes which were 
obviously unavoidable with a foreign tongue. But no thing could make me 
conquer my shyness. 
An English passenger, taking kindly to me, drew me into conversation. He was 
older than I. He asked me what I ate, what I was, w here I was going, why I was 
shy, and so on. He also advised me to come to table . He laughed at my 
insistence on abjuring meat, and said in a friendly  way when we were in the 
Red Sea: 'It is all very well so far but you will h ave to revise your decision in the 
Bay of Biscay. And it is so cold in England that on e cannot possibly live there 
without meat.' 
'But I have heard that people can live there withou t eating meat,' I said. 
'Rest assured it is a fib,' said he. 'No one, to my  knowledge, lives there without 
being a meat-eater. Don't you see that I am not ask ing you to take liquor, 
though I do so? But I do think you should eat meat,  for you cannot live without 
it.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  i thank you for your kind advice, but I have solemn ly promised to my mother 
not to touch meat, and therefore I cannot think of taking it. If it be found 
impossible to get on without it, I will far rather go back to India than eat meat 
in order to remain there.' 
We entered the Bay of Biscay, but I did not begin t o feel the need either of 
meat or liquor. We reached Southampton, as far as I  remember, on a Saturday. 
On the boat I had worn a black suit, the white flan nel one, which my friends 
had got me, having been kept especially for wearing  when I landed. I had 
thought that white clothes would suit me better whe n I stepped ashore, and 
therefore I did so in white flannels. Those were th e last days of September, and 
I found I was the only person wearing such clothes.  I left in charge of an agent 
of Grindlay and Co. all my kit, including the keys,  seeing that many others had 
done the same and I must follow suit. 
I had four notes of introduction: to Dr. P. J. Meht a, to Shri Dalpatram Shukla, 
to Prince Ranjitsinhji and to Dadabhai Naoroji. Som eone on board had advised 
us to put up at the Victoria Hotel in London. Shri Mazmudar and I accordingly 
went there. The shame of being the only person in w hite clothes was already 
too much for me. And when at the Hotel I was told t hat I should not get my 
things from Grindlay's the next day, it being a Sun day, I was exasperated. 
Dr. Mehta to whom I had wired from Southampton, cal led at about eight o'clock 
the same evening. He gave me a hearty greeting. He smiled at my being in 
flannels. As we were talking, I casually picked up his top hat, and trying to see 
how smooth it was, passed my hand over it the wrong  way and disturbed the 
fur. Dr. Mehta looked somewhat angrily at what I wa s doing and stopped me. 
But the mischief had been done. The incident was a warning for the future. 
This was my first lesson in European etiquette, int o the details of which Dr. 
Mehta humorously initiated me. 'Do not touch other people's things,' he said. 'Do 
not ask questions as we usually do in India on firs t acquaintance; do not talk 
loudly; never address people as "sir' whilst speaki ng to them as we do in India; 
only servants and subordinates address their master s that way.' And so on and 
so forth. He also told me that it was very expensiv e to live in a hotel and Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  recommended that I should live with a private famil y. We deferred 
consideration of the matter until Monday. 
Shri Mazmudar and I found the hotel to be a trying affair. It was also very 
expensive. There was, however, a Sindhi fellow-pass enger from Malta who had 
become friends with Shri Mazmudar, and as he was no t a stranger to London, he 
offered to find rooms for us. We agreed, and on Mon day, as soon as we got our 
baggage, we paid up our bills and went to the rooms  rented for us by the Sindhi 
friend. I remember my hotel bill came to £3, an amo unt which shocked me. And 
I had practically starved in spite of this heavy bi ll! For I could relish nothing. 
When I did not like one thing, I asked for another,  but had to pay for both just 
the same. The fact is that all this while I had dep ended on the provisions which 
I had brought with me from Bombay. 
I was very uneasy even in the new rooms. I would co ntinually think of my home 
and country. My mother's love always haunted me. At  night the tears would 
stream down my cheeks, and home memories of all sor ts made sleep out of the 
question. It was impossible to share my misery with  anyone. And even if I could 
have done so, where was the use? I knew of nothing that would soothe me. 
Everything was strange - the people, their ways, an d even their dwellings. I was 
a complete novice in the matter of English etiquett e and continually had to be 
on my guard. There was the additional inconvenience  of the vegetarian vow. 
Even the dishes that I could eat were tasteless and  insipid. I thus found myself 
between Scylla and Charybdis. 1 England I could not bear, but to return to India 
was not to be thought of. Now that I had come, I mu st finish the three years, 
said the inner voice. 
 
1 Scylla is a monster, according to Greek legend, l iving on the Italian side of the Straits of 
Messina and opposite to it is Charybdis, a whirlpoo l. So the phrase means, being faced 
with two equally unpleasant alternatives. - Ed. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II : IN ENGLAND AS STUDENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
10. IN LONDON 
Dr. Mehta went on Monday to the Victoria Hotel expe cting to find me there. He 
discovered that we had left, got our new address, a nd met me at our rooms. 
Dr. Mehta inspected my room and its appointments an d shook his head in 
disapproval. This place won't do,' he said. 'We com e to England not so much for 
the purpose of studies as for gaining experience of  English life and customs. 
And for this you need to live with a family. But be fore you do so, I think you 
had better serve a period of apprenticeship with -.  I will take you there.' 
I gratefully accepted the suggestion and removed to  the friend's rooms. He was 
all kindness and attention. He treated me as his ow n brother, initiated me into 
English ways and manners, and accustomed me to talk ing the language. My 
food, however, became a serious question. I could n ot relish boiled vegetables 
cooked without salt or condiments. The landlady was  at a loss to know what to 
prepare for me. We had oatmeal porridge for breakfa st, which was fairly filling, 
but always I starved at lunch and dinner. The frien d continually reasoned with 
me to eat meat, but I always pleaded my vow and the n remained silent. But for 
luncheon and dinner we had spinach and bread and ja m too. I was a good cater 
and had a capacious stomach; but I was ashamed to a sk for more than two or 
three slices of bread, as it did not seem correct t o do so. Added to this, there 
was no milk either for lunch or dinner. The friend once got disgusted with this 
state of things, and said: 'Had you been my own bro ther, I would have sent you 
packing. What is the value of a vow made before an illiterate mother, and in 
ignorance of conditions here? It is no vow at all. It would not be regarded as a 
vow in law. It is pure superstition to stick to suc h a promise. And I tell you this 
persistence will not help you to gain anything here . You confess to having eaten 
and relished meat. You took it where it was absolut ely unnecessary, and will 
not where it is quite essential. What a pity!' 
But I was adamant. 
Day in and day out the friend would argue, but I ha d an eternal negative to 
face him with. The more he argued, the more uncompr omising I became. Daily I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  would pray for God's protection and get it. Not tha t I had any idea of God. It 
was faith that was at work - faith of which the seed had been sown by the good 
nurse Rambha. 
One day the friend began to read to me Bentham's  Theory of Utility.  I was at 
my wit's end. The language was too difficult for me  to understand. He began to 
expound it. I said: 'Pray excuse me. These abstruse  things are beyond me. I 
admit it is necessary to eat meat. But I cannot bre ak my vow. I cannot argue 
about it. I am sure I cannot meet you in argument. But please give me up as 
foolish or obstinate. I appreciate your love for me  and I know you to be my 
well-wisher. I also know that you are telling me ag ain and again about this 
because you feel for me. But I am helpless. A vow i s a vow. It cannot be 
broken.' 
The friend looked at me in surprise. He closed the book and said: 'All right. I 
will not argue anymore.' I was glad. He never discu ssed the subject again. But 
he did not cease to worry about me. He smoked and d rank, but he never asked 
me to do so. In fact he asked me to remain away fro m both. His one anxiety 
was lest I should become very weak without meat, an d thus be unable to feel 
at home in England. 
That is how I served my apprenticeship for a month.  The friend's house was in 
Richmond, and it was not possible to go to London m ore than once or twice a 
week. Dr. Mehta and Shri Dalpatram Shukla therefore  decided that I should be 
put with some family. Shri Shukla hit upon an Anglo -Indian's house in West 
Kensington and placed me there. The landlady was a widow. I told her about 
my vow. The old lady promised to look after me prop erly, and I took up my 
residence in her house. Here too I practically had to starve. I had sent for 
sheets and other eatables from home, but nothing ha d yet come. Everything 
was insipid. Every day the old lady asked me whethe r I liked the food, but what 
could she do? I was still as shy as ever and dared not ask for more than was put 
before me. She had two daughters. They insisted on serving me with an extra 
slice or two of bread. But little did they know tha t nothing less than a loaf 
would have filled me. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  But I had found my feet now. I had not yet started upon my regular studies. I 
had just begun reading newspapers, thanks to Shri S hukla. In India I had never 
read a newspaper. But here I succeeded in cultivati ng a liking for them by 
regular reading. I always glanced over  The Daily News, The Daily Telegraph  and  
The Pall Mall Gazette.  This took me hardly an hour. I therefore began to 
wander about. I launched out in search of a vegetar ian restaurant. The landlady 
had told me that there were such places in the city . I would trot ten or twelve 
miles each day, go into a cheap restaurant and eat my fill of bread, but would 
never be satisfied. During these wanderings I once hit on a vegetarian 
restaurant in Farrington Street. The sight of it fi lled me with the same joy that 
a child feels on getting a thing after its own hear t. Before I entered I noticed 
books for sale exhibited under a glass window near the door. I saw among them 
Salt's  Plea for Vegetarianism. This I purchased for a shilling and went straight 
to the dining room. This was my first hearty meal s ince my arrival in England. 
God had come to my aid. 
I read Salt's book from cover to cover and was very  much impressed by it. From 
the date of reading this book, I may claim to have become a vegetarian by 
choice. I blessed the day on which I had taken the vow before my mother. I had 
all along abstained from meat in the interests of t ruth and of the vow I had 
taken, but had wished at the same time that every I ndian should be a meat-
eater, and had looked forward to being one myself f reely and openly some day, 
and to enlisting others in the cause. The choice wa s now made in favour of 
vegetarianism, the spread of which henceforward bec ame my mission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
11. PLAYING THE ENGLISH GENTLEMAN 
Meanwhile my friend had not ceased to worry about m e. He one day invited me 
to go to the theatre. Before the play, we were to d ine together at the Holborn 
Restaurant. The friend had planned to take me to th is restaurant evidently 
imagining that modesty would forbid any questions. And it was a very big 
company of diners in the midst of which my friend a nd I sat sharing a table 
between us. The first course was soup. I wondered w hat it might be made of 
but durst not ask the friend about it. I therefore summoned the waiter. My 
friend saw the movement and sternly asked across th e table what was the 
matter. With considerable hesitation I told him tha t I wanted to inquire if the 
soup was a vegetable soup. 'You are too clumsy for decent society,' he 
passionately exclaimed. 'If you cannot behave yours elf, you had better go. Feed 
in some other restaurant and await me outside.' Thi s delighted me. Out I went. 
There was a vegetarian restaurant close by, but it was closed. So I went 
without food that night. I accompanied my friend to  the theatre, but he never 
said a word about the scene I had created. On my pa rt of course there was 
nothing to say. 
That was the last friendly tussle we had. It did no t affect our relations in the 
least. I could see and appreciate the love by which  all my friend's efforts were 
actuated, and my respect for him was all the greate r on account of our 
differences in thought and action. 
But I decided that I should put him at ease, that I  should assure him that I 
would be clumsy no more, but try to become polished  and make up for my 
vegetarianism by cultivating other accomplishments which fitted one for polite 
society. And for this purpose I undertook the all t oo impossible task of 
becoming an English gentleman. 
The clothes after the Bombay cut that I was wearing  were, I thought, 
unsuitable for English society, and I got new ones at the Army and Navy Stores. 
I also went in for a chimneypot hat costing ninetee n shillings - an excessive 
price in those days. Not content with this, I waste d ten pounds on an evening Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  suit made in Bond Street, the centre of fashionable  life in London; and got my 
good and noble-hearted brother to send me a double watch chain of gold. It 
was not correct to wear a ready-made tie and I lear nt the art of tying one for 
myself. While in India, the mirror had been a luxur y permitted on the days 
when the family barber gave me a shave. Here I wast ed ten minutes every day 
before a huge mirror, watching myself arranging my tie and parting my hair in 
the correct fashion. My hair was by no means soft, and every day it meant a 
regular struggle with the brush to keep it in posit ion. Each time the hat was put 
on and off, the hand would automatically move towar ds the head to adjust the 
hair, not to mention the other civilized habit of t he hand every now and then 
operating for the same purpose when sitting in poli shed society. 
As if all this were not enough to make me look the thing, I directed my 
attention to other details that were supposed to go  towards the making of an 
English gentleman. I was told it was necessary for me to take lessons in 
dancing, French and elocution. French was not only the language of 
neighbouring France, but it was the  lingua franca  of the Continent over which I 
had a desire to travel. I decided to take dancing l essons at a class and paid 
down £3 as fees for a term. I must have taken about  six lessons in three weeks. 
But it was beyond me to achieve anything like rhyth mic motion. I could not 
follow the piano and hence found it impossible to k eep time. What then was I 
to do? The recluse in the fable kept a cat to keep off the rats, and then a cow 
to feed the cat with milk, and a man to keep the co w and so on. My ambitions 
also grew like the family of the recluse. I thought  I should learn to play the 
violin in order to cultivate an ear for Western mus ic. So I invested £3 in a violin 
and something more in fees. I sought a third teache r to give me lessons in 
elocution and paid him a preliminary fee of a guine a. He recommended Bell's  
Standard Elocutionist  as the text-book, which I purchased. And I began w ith a 
speech of Pitt's. 
But Mr. Bell rang the bell of alarm in my ear and I  awoke. I had not to spend a 
lifetime in England, I said to myself. What then wa s the use of learning 
elocution? And how could dancing make a gentleman o f me? The violin I could Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  learn even in India. I was a student and ought to g o on with my studies. I should 
qualify myself to join the Inns of Court. If my cha racter made a gentleman of 
me, so much the better. Otherwise I should forego t he ambition. 
These and similar thoughts possessed me, and I expr essed them in a letter 
which I addressed to the elocution teacher, request ing him to excuse me from 
further lessons. I had taken only two or three. I w rote a similar letter to the 
dancing teacher, and went personally to the violin teacher with a request to 
dispose of the violin for any price it might fetch.  She was rather friendly to me, 
so I told her how I had discovered that I was pursu ing a false idea. She 
encouraged me in the determination to make a comple te change. 
This infatuation must have lasted about three month s. The punctiliousness in 
dress persisted for years. But henceforward I becam e a student. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42   
12. CHANGES 
Let no one imagine that my experiments in dancing a nd the like marked a stage 
of indulgence in my life. The reader will have noti ced that even then I had my 
wits about me. The period of infatuation was not un relieved by a certain 
amount of self-introspection and my expenses were c arefully calculated. 
As I kept strict watch over my way of living I coul d see that it was necessary to 
economize. So I decided to take rooms on my own acc ount, instead of living any 
longer in a family, and also to remove from place t o place according to the 
work I had to do, thus gaining experience at the sa me time. The rooms were so 
selected as to enable me to reach the place of busi ness on foot in half an hour, 
and so save fares. Before this I had always taken s ome kind of conveyance 
whenever I went anywhere, and had to find extra tim e for walks. The new 
arrangement combined walks and economy, as it meant  a saving of fares and 
gave me walks of eight or ten miles a day. It was m ainly this habit of long walks 
that kept me practically free from illness througho ut my stay in England and 
gave me a fairly strong body. 
Thus I rented a suite of rooms; one for a sitting r oom and another for a 
bedroom. This was the second stage. The third was y et to come. 
These changes saved me half the expenses. But how w as I to utilize the time? I 
knew that Bar examinations did not require much stu dy, and I therefore did not 
feel pressed for time. My weak English was a perpet ual worry to me. I should, I 
thought, not only be called to the Bar, but have so me literary degree as well. I 
inquired about the Oxford and Cambridge University courses, consulted a few 
friends, and found that, if I elected to go to eith er of these places, that would 
mean greater expense and a much longer stay in Engl and than I was prepare 
for. A friend suggested that, if I really wanted to  have the satisfaction of taking 
a difficult examination, I should pass the London M atriculation. It meant a good 
deal of labour and much addition to my stock of gen eral knowledge, without 
any extra expense worth the name. I welcomed the su ggestion. But the syllabus 
frightened me. Latin and a modern language were com pulsory! How was I to Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  manage Latin? But the friend entered a strong plea for it: 'Latin is very valuable 
to lawyers. Knowledge of Latin is very useful in un derstanding law-books. And 
one paper in Roman Law is entirely in Latin. Beside s a knowledge of Latin 
means greater command over the English language.' I t went home and I decided 
to learn Latin, no matter how difficult it might be . French I had already begun, 
so I thought that should be the modern language. I joined a private 
Matriculation class. Examinations were held every s ix months and I had only 
five months at my disposal. It was an almost imposs ible task for me. But the 
aspirant after being an English gentleman chose to convert himself into a 
serious student. I framed my own timetable to the m inute; but neither my 
intelligence nor memory promised to enable me to ta ckle Latin and French 
besides other subjects within the given period. The  result was that I was 
ploughed in Latin. I was sorry but did not lose hea rt. I had acquired a taste for 
Latin, also I thought my French would be all the be tter for another trial and I 
would select a new subject in the science group. Ch emistry which was my 
subject in science had no attraction for want of ex periments, whereas it ought 
to have been a deeply interesting study. It was one  of the compulsory subjects 
in India and so I had selected it for the London Ma triculation. This time, 
however, I chose Heat and Light instead of Chemistr y. It was said to be easy 
and I found it to be so. 
With my preparation for another trial, I made an ef fort to simplify my life still 
further. I felt that my way of living did not yet b efit the modest means of my 
family. The thought of my struggling brother, who n obly responded to my 
regular calls for monetary help deeply pained me. I  saw that most of those who 
were spending from eight to fifteen pounds monthly had the advantage of 
scholarships. I had before me examples of much simp ler living. I came across a 
fair number of poor students living more humbly tha n I. One of them was 
slaying in the slums in a room at two shillings a w eek and living on two pence 
worth of cocoa and bread per meal from Lochart's ch eap Cocoa Rooms. It was 
far from me to think of emulating him, but I felt I  could surely have one room 
instead of two and cook some of my meals at home. T hat would be a saving of 
four to five pounds each month. I also came across books on simple living. I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  gave up the suite of rooms and rented one instead, invested in a stove, and 
began cooking my breakfast at home. The process sca rcely took me more than 
twenty minutes for there was only oatmeal porridge to cook and water to boil 
for cocoa. I had lunch out and for dinner bread and  cocoa at home. Thus I 
managed to live on a shilling and three pence a day . This was also a period of 
intensive study. Plain living saved me plenty of ti me and I passed my 
examination. 
Let not the reader think that this living made my l ife by any means a dreary 
affair. On the contrary the change harmonized my in ward and outward life. It 
was also more in keeping with the means of my famil y. My life was certainly 
more truthful and my soul knew no bounds of joy. 
As soon as, or even before, I made alterations in m y expenses and my way of 
living. I began to make changes in my diet. I stopp ed taking the sweets and 
condiments I had go from home. The mind having take n a different turn, the 
fondness for condiments wore away, and I now relish ed the boiled spinach 
which in Richmond tasted insipid, cooked without co ndiments. Many such 
experiments taught me that the real scat of taste w as not the tongue but the 
mind. 
The economic consideration was of course constantly  before me. There was in 
those days a body of opinion which regarded tea and  coffee as harmful and 
favoured cocoa. And as I was convinced that one sho uld eat only articles that 
sustained the body, I gave up tea and coffee as a r ule and substituted cocoa. 
There were many minor experiments going on along wi th the main as for 
example, giving up starchy foods at one time, livin g on bread and fruit alone at 
another, and once living on cheese, milk and eggs. This last experiment is 
worth noting. It lasted not even a fortnight. The r eformer who advocated 
starchless food had spoken highly of eggs and held that eggs were not meat. It 
was apparent that there was no injury done to livin g creatures in taking eggs. I 
was taken in by this plea and took eggs in spite of  my vow. But the lapse was 
momentary. I had no business to put a new interpret ation on the vow. The 
interpretation of my mother who administered the vo w was there for me. I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  knew that her definition of meat included eggs. And  as soon as I saw the true 
import of the vow I gave up eggs and the experiment  alike. 
My experiments in England were conducted from the p oint of view of economy 
and hygiene. The religious aspect of the question w as not considered until I 
went to South Africa where I undertook strenuous ex periments which will be 
narrated later.  
Full of the neophyte's zeal for vegetarianism, I de cided to start a vegetarian 
club in my locality, Bayswater. I invited Sir Edwin  Arnold, who lived there, to 
be Vice-President. Dr. Old Held who was Editor of  The Vegetarian  became 
President. I myself became the Secretary. The club went well for a while, but 
came to an end in the course of a few months. For I  left the locality, according 
to my custom of moving from place to place periodic ally. But this brief and 
modest experience gave me some little training in o rganizing and conducting 
institutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46   
13. SHYNESS MY SHIELD 
I was elected to the Executive Committee of the Veg etarian Society, and made 
it a point to attend every one of its meetings, but  I always felt tongue-tied. It 
was only in South Africa that I got over this shyne ss, though I never completely 
overcame it. It was impossible for me to speak  impromptu.  I hesitated 
whenever I had to face strange audiences and avoide d making a speech 
whenever I could. 
I must say that, beyond occasionally exposing me to  laughter, my constitutional 
shyness has been no disadvantage whatever. In fact I can see that, on the 
contrary, it has been all to my advantage. My hesit ancy in speech, which was 
once an annoyance, is now a pleasure. Its greatest benefit has been that it has 
formed the habit of restraining my thoughts. Experi ence has taught me that 
silence is part of the spiritual discipline of a vo tary of truth. Proneness to 
exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, wittin gly or unwittingly, is a 
natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary i n order to surmount it. A 
man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his speech; he will measure 
every word. We find so many people impatient to tal k. All this talking can 
hardly be said to be of any benefit to the world. I t is so much waste of time. My 
shyness has been in reality my shield and buckler. It has allowed me to grow. It 
has helped me in my discernment of truth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
14. THE CANKER OF UNTRUTH 
There were, comparatively few Indian students in En gland forty years, ago. It 
was a practice with them to affect the bachelor eve n though they might be 
married. School or college students in England are all bachelors, studies being 
regarded as incompatible with married life. Indian youths in England, therefore 
fell ashamed to confess that they were married. The re was also another reason 
for dissembling, namely that in the event of the fa ct being known it would be 
impossible for the young man to go about or, flirt with the young girls of the 
family in which they lived. The flirting was more o r less innocent. Parents even 
encouraged it; and that sort of association between  young men and young 
women, may even be a necessity there in view of the  fact that every young 
man has to choose his mate. If, however, Indian you ths on arrival in England 
indulge in these relations, quite natural to Englis h youths, the result is likely to 
be disastrous, as has often been found. I saw that our youths had succumbed to 
the- temptation and chosen a life of untruth for th e sake of companionships 
which, however innocent in the case of English yout hs, were for them 
undesirable. I too caught the contagion. I did not hesitate to pass myself off as 
a bachelor though i was married and the father, of a son. But I was none the 
happier for being a dissembler. 
It was customary in families like, the one in which  I was staying at Ventnor for 
the daughter of the landlady to take out guests for  a walk. My landlady's 
daughter took me one day to the lovely hills round Ventnor. I was no slow 
walker, but my companion walked even faster, draggi ng me after her and 
chattering away all the while. I responded to her c hatter sometimes with a 
whispered 'yes' or 'no', or the most 'yes, how beau tiful!' She was flying like a 
bird whilst I was wondering when I should get back home. We thus reached the 
top of a hill. How to get down again was the questi on. In spite of her high-
heeled, boots this sprightly young lady of twenty-f ive darted down the hill like 
an arrow. I was shamefacedly struggling to get down . She stood at the foot 
smiling and cheering me and offering to come and dr ag me. How could I be so Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  chicken-hearted? With the greatest difficulty, and crawling at intervals, I 
somehow managed to scramble to the bottom. She loud ly laughed 'bravo' and' 
shamed me all the more as well she might. 
But I could not escape scatheless everywhere. For G od wanted to rid me of the 
canker of untruth. I once went to Brighton, another  watering-place like 
Ventnor. This was before the Ventnor visit. I met t here at a hotel an old widow 
of moderate means. This was my first year in Englan d. The courses on the menu 
were all described in French, which I did not under stand.. I sat at the same 
table as the old lady. She saw that I was a strange r and puzzled, and 
immediately came to my aid. 'You seem to be a stran ger,' she said, 'and look 
perplexed. Why have you not ordered anything?' I wa s spelling through the 
menu and preparing to ascertain the ingredients of the courses from the 
waiter, when the good lady thus intervened. I thank ed her, and explaining my 
difficulty told her that I was at a loss to know wh ich of the courses were 
vegetarian as I did not understand French. 
'Let me help you,' she said. T shall explain the ca rd to you and show you what 
you may eat.' I gratefully availed myself of her he lp. This was the beginning of 
an acquaintance that ripened into friendship and wa s kept up all through my 
stay in England and long after. She gave me her Lon don address and invited me 
to dine at her house every Sunday. On special occas ions also she would invite 
me, help me to conquer my bashfulness and introduce  me to young ladies and 
draw me into conversation with them. Particularly m arked out for these 
conversations was a young lady who stayed with her,  and often we would be 
left entirely alone together. 
I found all this very trying at first. I could not start a conversation nor could I 
indulge in any jokes. But she put me in the way. I began to learn; and in course 
of time looked forward to every Sunday and came to like the conversations with 
the young friend. 
The old lady went on spreading her net wider every day. She felt interested in 
our meetings. Possibly she had her own plans about us. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  I was in a quandary. 'How I wished I had told the g ood lady that I was married!' I 
said to myself. 'She would then have not thought of  an engagement between us. 
It is, however, never too late to mend. If I declar e the truth, I might yet be 
saved more misery.' With these thoughts in my mind,  I wrote a letter to her 
somewhat to this effect: 
'Ever since we met at Brighton you have been kind t o me. You have taken care 
of me even as a mother of her son. You also think t hat I should get married and 
with that view you have been introducing me to youn g ladies. Rather than allow 
matters to go further, I must confess to you that I  have been unworthy of your 
affection. I should have told you when I began my v isits to you that I was 
married. I knew that Indian students in England dis sembled the fact of their 
marriage and I followed suit. I now see that I shou ld not have done so. I must 
also add that I was married while yet a boy, and am  the father of a son. I am 
pained that I should have kept this knowledge from you so long. But I am glad 
God has now given me the courage to speak out the t ruth. Will you forgive me? 
I assure you I have taken no improper liberties wit h the young lady you were 
good enough to introduce to me. I knew my limits. Y ou, not knowing that I was 
married, naturally desired that we should be engage d. In order that things 
should not go beyond the present stage, I must tell  you the truth.  
'If on receipt of this, you feel that I have been u nworthy of your hospitality, I 
assure you I shall not take it amiss. You have laid  me under an everlasting debt 
of gratitude by your kindness and solicitude. If, a fter this, you do not reject me 
but continue to regard me as worthy of your hospita lity, which I will spare no 
pains to deserve, I shall naturally be happy and co unt it a further token of your 
kindness.' 
Let the reader know that I could not have written s uch a letter in a moment. I 
must have drafted and redrafted it many times over.  But it lifted a burden that 
was weighing me down. Almost by return post came he r reply somewhat as 
follows: 
'I have your frank letter. We were both very glad a nd had a hearty laugh over 
it. The untruth you say you have been guilty of is pardonable. But it is well that Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  you have acquainted us with the real state of thing s. My invitation still stands 
and we shall certainly expect you next Sunday and l ook forward to hearing all 
about your child-marriage and to the pleasure of la ughing at your expense. 
Need I assure you that our friendship is not in the  least affected by this 
incident?' 
I thus purged myself of the canker of untruth, and I never thenceforth hesitated 
to talk of my married state wherever necessary. 
During the last year, as far as I can remember, of my stay in England, that is in 
1890, there was a Vegetarian Conference at Portsmou th to which an Indian 
friend and I were invited. Portsmouth is a sea-port  with a large naval 
population. It has many houses with women of ill fa me, women not actually 
prostitutes, but at the same time, not very scrupul ous about their morals. We 
were put up in one of these houses. Needless to say , the Reception Committee 
did not know anything about it. 
We returned from the Conference in the evening. Aft er dinner we sat down to 
play a rubber of bridge, in which our landlady join ed, as is customary in 
England even in respectable households. Every playe r indulges in innocent jokes 
as a matter of course, but here my companion and ou r hostess began to make 
indecent ones as well. I did not know that my frien d was an adept in the art. It 
captured me and I also joined in. Just when I was a bout to go beyond the limit, 
leaving the cards and the game to themselves, God t hrough the good 
companion uttered the blessed warning: 'Whence this  devil in you, my boy? Be 
off, quick!' 
I was ashamed. I took the warning and expressed wit hin myself gratefulness to 
my friend. Remembering the vow I had taken before m y mother, I fled from the 
scene. To my room I went quaking, trembling, and wi th beating heart, like a 
quarry escaped from its pursuer. 
I did not then know the essence of religion or of G od, and how He works in us. 
Only vaguely I understood that God had saved me on that occasion. On all 
occasions of trial He has saved me. When every hope  is gone, 'when helpers fail 
and comforts flee,' I find that help arrives someho w, from I know not where. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  Supplication, worship, prayer are no superstition; they are acts more real than 
the acts of eating, drinking, sitting or walking. I t is no exaggeration to say that 
they alone are real, all else is unreal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52   
15. ACQUAINTANCE WITH RELIGIONS 
Towards the end of my second year in England I came  across two Theosophists, 
brothers, and both unmarried. They talked to me abo ut the  Gita.  They were 
reading Sir Edwin Arnold's translation -  The Song Celestial  and they invited me 
to read the original with them. I felt ashamed, as I had read the divine poem 
neither in Sanskrit nor in Gujarati. I was constrai ned to tell them that I had not 
read the  Gita,  but that I would gladly read it with them, and tha t though my 
knowledge of Sanskrit was meagre, still I hoped to be able to understand the 
original to the extent of telling where the transla tion failed to bring out the 
meaning. I began reading the Gita  with them. The verses in the second chapter 
If one  
Ponders on objects of the sense, there springs  
Attraction; from attraction grows desire,  
Desire flames to fierce passion, passion breeds  
Recklessness; then the memory - all betrayed –  
Lets noble purpose go, and saps the mind,  
Till purpose, mind, and man are all undone. 
made a deep impression on my mind, and they still r ing in my ears. The book 
struck me as one of priceless worth. The impression  has ever since been 
growing on me with the result that I regard it toda y as the book  par excellence  
for the knowledge of Truth. It has afforded me inva luable help in my moments 
of gloom. 
The brothers also recommended  The Light of Asia  by Sir Edwin Arnold, whom I 
knew till then as the author only of The Song Celestial , and I read it with even 
greater interest than I did the  Bhagavadgita.  Once I had begun it I could not 
leave off. 
They also took me on one occasion to the Blavatsky Lodge arid introduced me 
to Madame Blavatsky and Mrs. Besant. The latter had  just then joined the Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  Theosophical Society, and I was following with grea t interest the controversy 
about her conversion. The friends advised me to joi n the Society, but I politely 
declined Saying, 'With my meagre knowledge of my ow n religion I do not want 
to belong to any religious body.' I recall having r ead, at the brothers' instance, 
Madame Blavatsky's  Key to Theosophy.  This book stimulated in me the desire to 
read books on Hinduism and disabused me of the noti on fostered by the 
missionaries that Hinduism was rife with superstiti on. 
About the same time I met a good Christian from Man chester in a vegetarian 
boarding house. He talked to me about Christianity.  I narrated to him my 
Rajkot recollections. He was pained to hear them. H e said, 'I am a vegetarian. I 
do not drink. Many Christians are meat-eaters and d rink, no doubt; but neither 
meat-eating nor drinking is enjoined by Scripture. Do please read the Bible.'1 I 
accepted his advice, and he got me a copy. I began reading it, but I could not 
possibly read through the Old Testament. I read the  book of Genesis, and the 
chapters that followed invariably sent me to sleep.  But just for the sake of 
being able to say that I had read it, I plodded thr ough the other books with 
much difficulty and without the least interest or u nderstanding. I disliked 
reading the book of Numbers. 
But the New Testament produced a different impressi on, especially the Sermon 
on the Mount 2 which went straight to my heart. I compared it wit h the  Gita.  
The verses, 'But I say unto you, that ye resist not  evil: but whosoever shall 
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the othe r also. And if any man takes 
away thy coat let him have thy cloak too,' delighte d me beyond measure and 
put me in mind of Shamal Bhatt's: 'For a bowl of wa ter, give a goodly meal' etc. 
My young mind tried to unify the teaching of the  Gita,  the  Light of Asia and the 
Sermon on the Mount. That renunciation was the high est form of religion 
appealed to me greatly. 
Beyond this acquaintance with religion I could not go at the moment, as 
reading for the examination left me scarcely any ti me for outside subjects. But 
I took mental note of the fact that I should read m ore religious books and 
acquaint myself with all the principal religions. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54   
1 The Scripture of the Christians. It is in two par ts - firstly, the Old Testament, containing 
several books relating to the period prior to Jesus  Christ, begins with the book of Genesis; 
and secondly, the New Testament, containing books a fter the time of Jesus Christ. The 
first four books of the New Testament are called th e Gospels and contain the story and 
teachings of Jesus. - Ed. 
 
2 Jesus' teachings delivered on a mountain side. Se e Matthew Chapters V to VI1. - Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART III : IN INDIA AS BARRISTER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
16. BACK IN INDIA 
I passed my examinations, was called to the Bar on the 10th June 1891, and 
enrolled in the High Court on the 11th. On the 12th  I sailed for home. 
But notwithstanding my study there was no end to my  helplessness and fear. I 
did not feel myself qualified to practise law. I ha d read the laws, but not learnt 
how to practise law. Besides, I had learnt nothing at all of Indian law. I had not 
the slightest idea of Hindu and Mahommedan Law. I h ad not even learnt how to 
draft a plaint, and felt completely at sea. I had s erious misgivings as to whether 
I should be able even to earn a living by the profe ssion. 
The sea had been choppy all the way from Aden. Almo st every passenger was 
sick; I alone was in perfect form, staying on deck to see the stormy surge, and 
enjoying the splash of the waves. 
The outer storm was to me a symbol of the inner. Bu t even as the former left 
me unperturbed, I think I can say the same thing ab out the latter. 
My elder brother had come to meet me at the dock in  Bombay. I was pining to 
see my mother. My brother had kept me ignorant of h er death, which took 
place whilst I was still in England. He wanted to s pare me the blow in a foreign 
land. The news, however, was none the less a severe  shock to me. My grief was 
even greater than over my father's death. Most of m y cherished hopes were 
shattered. But I remember that I did not give mysel f up to any wild expression 
of grief. I could even check the tears, and took to  life just as though nothing 
had happened.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57   
17. HOW I BEGAN LIFE 
The storm in my caste over my foreign voyage was st ill brewing. It had divided 
the caste into two camps, one of which immediately readmitted me, while the 
other was bent on keeping me out. I never tried to seek admission to the 
section that had refused it. Nor did I feel even me ntal resentment against any 
of the headmen of that section. Some of these regar ded me with dislike, but I 
scrupulously avoided hurting their feelings. I full y respected the caste 
regulations about excommunication. According to the se, none of my relations, 
including my father-in-law and mother-in-law, and e ven my sister and brother-
in-law, could entertain me; and I would not so much  as drink water at their 
houses. They were prepared secretly to evade the pr ohibition, but it went 
against the grain with me to do a thing in secret t hat I would not do in public. 
The result of my scrupulous conduct was that I neve r had occasion to be 
troubled by the caste; nay, I have experienced noth ing but affection and 
generosity from the general body of the section tha t still regards me as 
excommunicated. They have even helped me in my work , without ever 
expecting me to do anything for the caste. It is my  conviction that all these 
good things are due to my non-resistance. Had I agi tated for being admitted to 
the caste, had I attempted to divide it into more c amps, had I provoked the 
castemen, they would surely have retaliated, and in stead of steering clear of 
the storm, I should, on arrival from England, have found myself in a whirlpool 
of agitation, and perhaps a party to dissimulation.  
To start practice in Rajkot would have meant sure r idicule. I had hardly the 
knowledge of a qualified vakil and yet I expected t o be paid ten times his fee! 
No client would be fool enough to engage me. And ev en if such a one was to be 
found , should I add arrogance and fraud to my ignorance, and increase the 
burden of debt I owed to the world? 
Friends advised me to go to Bombay for some time in  order to gain experience 
of the High Court, to study Indian law and to try a nd get what briefs I could. I 
took up the suggestion and went. But it was impossi ble for me to get along in Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  Bombay for more than four or five months, there bei ng no income to square 
with the ever-increasing expenditure, about this ti me, I took up the case of one 
Mamibai. It was a 'small cause'. 'You will have to pay some commission to the 
tout,' I was told. I emphatically declined. I gave no commission but got 
Mamibai's case all the same. It was an easy case. I  charged Rs. 30 for my fees. 
The case was not likely to last longer than a day. 
This was my  debut  in the Small Cause Court. I appeared for the defen dant and 
had thus to cross-examine the plaintiff's witness. I stood up, but my heart sank 
into my boots. My head was reeling and I felt as th ough the whole court was 
doing likewise. I could think of no question to ask . The judge must have 
laughed, and the vakils no doubt enjoyed the specta cle. But I was past seeing 
anything. I sat down and told the agent that I coul d not conduct the case, that 
he had better engage Patel and have the fee back fr om me. Mr. Patel was duly 
engaged for Rs. 51 to him, of course, the case was child's play. 
I hastened from the Court, not knowing whether my c lient won or lost her case, 
but I was ashamed of myself and decided not to take  up any mere cases until I 
had courage enough to conduct them. So I thought I might take up a teacher's 
job. My knowledge of English was good enough, and I  should have loved to 
teach English to Matriculation boys in some school.  In this way I could have met 
part at least of the expenses. I came across an adv ertisement in the papers: 
'Wanted an English teacher to teach one hour daily.  Salary Rs. 75.' The 
advertisement was from a famous high school. I appl ied for the post and was 
called for an interview. I went there, in high spir its, but when the principal 
found that I was not a graduate, he regretfully ref used me. 
'But I have passed the London Matriculation with La tin as my second language.' 
True, but we want a graduate.' 
There was no help for it. I wrung my hands in despa ir. My brother also felt 
much worried. We both came to the conclusion that i t was no use spending 
more time in Bombay. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  Disappointed, I left Bombay and went to Rajkot, whe re I set up my own office. 
Here I got along moderately well. Drafting applicat ions and memorials brought 
me, on an average, Rs. 300 a month. For this work I  had to thank influence 
rather than my own ability, for my brother's partne r had a settled practice. All 
applications, etc. which were, really or to his min d of an important character, 
he sent to big barristers. To my lot fell the appli cations to be drafted on behalf 
of his poor clients. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60   
18. THE FIRST SHOCK 
My brother had been secretary and the adviser to th e late Ranasaheb of 
Porbandar before he was installed on his  gadi, and hanging over his head at this 
time was the charge of having given wrong advice wh en in that office. The 
matter had gone to the Political Agent who was prej udiced against my brother. 
Now I had known this officer when in England, and h e may be said to have been 
fairly friendly to me. My brother thought that I sh ould avail myself of the 
friendship and, putting in a good word on his behal f, try to disabuse the 
Political Agent of his prejudice. I did not at all like this idea. I should not, I 
thought, try to take advantage of a trifling acquai ntance in England. If my 
brother was really at fault, what use was my recomm endation? If he was 
innocent, he should submit a petition in the proper  course and, confident of his 
innocence, face the result. 
My brother did not relish this advice. 'You do not know Kathiawad' he said, 'and 
you have yet to know the world. Only influence coun ts here. It is not proper for 
you, a brother, to shirk your duty, when you can cl early put in a good word 
about me to an officer you know.' 
I could not refuse him, so I went to the officer mu ch against my will. I knew I 
had no right to approach him and was fully consciou s that I was compromising 
my self-respect. But I sought an appointment and go t it. I reminded him of the 
old acquaintance, but I immediately saw that Kathia wad was different from 
England; that an officer on leave was not the same as an officer on duty. The 
Political Agent owned the acquaintance, but the rem inder seemed to stiffen 
him. 'Surely you have not come here to abuse that a cquaintance, have you?' 
appeared to be the meaning of that stiffness, and s eemed to be written on his 
brow. Nevertheless I opened my case. The  sahib  was impatient. 'Your brother is 
an intriguer. I want to hear nothing more from you.  I have no time. If your 
brother has anything to say, let him apply through the proper channel.' The 
answer was enough, was perhaps deserved. But selfis hness is blind. I went on 
with my story. The  sahib  got up and said: 'You must go now.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  'But please hear me out,' said I. That made him mor e angry. He called his peon 
and ordered him to show me the door. I was still he sitating when the peon 
came in, placed his hands on my shoulders and put m e out of the room. 
The  sahib  went away as also the peon, and I departed frettin g and fuming. I at 
once wrote out and sent over a note to this effect:  'You have insulted me. You 
have assaulted me through your peon. If you make no  amends, I shall have to 
proceed against you.' 
Quick came the answer through his  sowar:  
'You were rude to me. I asked you to go and you wou ld not. I had no option but 
to order my peon to show you the door. Even after h e asked you to leave the 
office, you did not do so. He therefore had to use just enough force to send you 
out. You are at liberty to proceed as you wish.' 
With this answer in my pocket, I came home crestfal len, and told my brother 
all that had happened. He was grieved, but was at a  loss as to how to console 
me. He spoke to his" vakil friends. For I did not k now how to proceed against 
the sahib.  Sir Pherozeshah Mehta happened to be in Rajkot at this time, having 
come down from Bombay for some case. But how could a junior barrister like 
me dare to see him? So I sent him the papers of my case, through the vakil who 
had engaged him, and begged for his advice. 'Tell G andhi.' he said, 'such things 
are the common experience of many vakils and barris ters. He is still fresh from 
England, and hot-blooded. He does not know British officers. If he would earn 
something and have an easy time here, let him tear up the note and pocket the 
insult. He will gain nothing by proceeding against the  sahib,  and on the 
contrary will very likely ruin himself; Tell him he  has yet to know life.' 
The advice was as bitter as poison to me, but I had  to swallow it. I pocketed 
the insult, but also profited by it. 'Never again s hall I place myself in such a 
false position, never again shall I try to exploit friendship in this way,' said I to 
myself, and : since then I have never been guilty of a breach of  that 
determination. This shock changed the course of my life. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  I was no doubt at fault in having gone to that offi cer. But his impatience' and 
overbearing anger were out of all proportion to my mistake. It did not warrant 
expulsion. Now most of my work would naturally be i n his court. It was beyond 
me to conciliate him. I had no desire to curry favo ur with him. Indeed, having 
once threatened to proceed against him. I did not l ike to remain silent. 
Meanwhile I began to learn something of the petty p olitics of the country. 
Kathiawad, being a conglomeration; of small States,  naturally had its rich crop 
of politicals. Petty intrigues between States, and intrigues of officers for power 
were the order of the day. Princes were always at t he mercy of others and 
ready to lend their ears to sycophants. Even the  sahib's peon had to be cajoled, 
and the  sahib's shirastedar  was more than his master, as he was his eyes, his 
ears and his interpreter. The  shirastedar's  will was law, and his income was 
always reputed to be more than the  sahib's.  This may have been an 
exaggeration, but he certainly lived beyond his sal ary. 
This atmosphere appeared to me to be poisonous, and  how to remain unscathed 
was a perpetual problem for me. 
I was thoroughly depressed and my brother clearly s aw it. We both felt that, if I 
could secure some job, I should be free from this a tmosphere of intrigue. But 
without intrigue a ministership or judgeship was ou t of the question. And the 
quarrel with the sahib  stood in the way of my practice. 
I was exasperated. In the meantime a Meman firm fro m Porbandar wrote to my 
brother making the following offer: 'We have busine ss in South Africa. Ours is a 
big firm, and we have a big case there in the Court , our claim being £40,000. It 
has been going on for a long time. We have engaged the services of the best 
vakils and barristers. If you sent your brother the re, he would be useful to us 
and also to himself. He would be able to instruct o ur counsel better than 
ourselves. And he would have the advantage of seein g a new part of the world 
and of making new acquaintances.' 
'How long do you require my services?' I asked. 'An d what will be the payment?' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  'Not more than a year. We will pay you a first clas s return 'are and a sum of 
£105, all found.' 
This was hardly going there as a barrister. It was going as a servant of the firm. 
But I wanted somehow to leave India. There was also  the tempting opportunity 
of seeing a new country, and of having new experien ce. Also I could send £105 
to my brother and help in the expenses of the house hold. I closed with the 
offer without any higgling, and got ready to go to South Africa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART IV : IN SOUTH AFRICA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65   
19. ARRIVAL IN SOUTH AFRICA 
The port of Natal is Durban also known as Port Nata l. Abdulla Sheth was there 
to receive me. As the ship arrived at the quay and I watched the people coming 
on board to meet their friends, I observed-that the  Indians were not held in 
much respect. I could not fail to notice a sort of snobbishness about the manner 
in which those who knew Abdulla Sheth behaved towar ds him, and it stung me. 
Abdulla Sheth had got used to it. Those who looked at me did so with a certain 
amount of curiosity. My dress marked me out from ot her Indians. I had a frock-
coat and a turban, an imitation of the Bengal  pugree.  
I was taken to the firm's quarters and shown into t he room set apart for me, 
next to Abdulla Sheth's. He did not understand me. I could not understand him. 
He read the papers his brother had sent through me,  and felt more puzzled. He 
thought his brother had sent him a white elephant. My style of dress and living 
struck him as being expensive like that of the Euro peans. There was no 
particular work then which could be given to me. Th eir case was going on in the 
Transvaal. There was no meaning in sending me there  immediately. And how 
far could he trust my ability and honesty? He would  not be in Pretoria to watch 
me. The defendants were in Pretoria, and for aught he knew they might bring 
undue influence to hear on me. And if work in conne ction with the case in 
question was not to be entrusted to me, what work c ould I be given to do, as 
all other work could be done much better by his cle rks? The clerks could  be 
brought to book, if they did wrong. Could I be, if I also happened to err? So if 
no work in connection with the case could be given me, I should have to be 
kept for nothing. 
Abdulla Sheth was practically unlettered, but he ha d a rich fund of experience. 
He had an acute intellect and was conscious of it. By practice he had picked up 
just sufficient English for conversational purposes , but that served him for 
carrying on all his business, whether it was dealin g with Bank Managers and 
European merchants or explaining his case to his co unsel The Indians held him Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  in very high esteem. His firm was then the biggest,  or at any rate one of the 
biggest, of the Indian firms. 
On the second or third day of my arrival, he took m e to see the Durban court. 
There he introduced me to several people and seated  me next to his attorney. 
The Magistrate kept staring at me and finally asked  me to take off my turban. 
This I refused to do and left the court. 
So here too there was fighting in store for me. 
I wrote to the press about the incident and defende d the wearing of my turban 
in the court. The question was very much discussed in the papers, which 
described me as an 'unwelcome visitor'. Thus the in cident gave me an 
unexpected advertisement in South Africa within a f ew days of my arrival 
there. Some supported me while others severely crit icized my temerity. My 
turban stayed with me practically until the end of my stay in South Africa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67   
20. TO PRETORIA 
The firm received a letter from their lawyers sayin g preparations should be 
made for the case, and that Abdulla Sheth should go  to Pretoria himself or send 
a representative. Abdulla Sheth gave me this letter  to read, and asked me if I 
would go to Pretoria. 'I can only say after I have understood the case from you,' 
said I. 'At present I am at a loss to know what I h ave to do there.' He thereupon 
asked his clerks to explain the case to me. 
On the seventh or eighth day after my arrival, I le ft Durban. A first class seat 
was booked for me. It was usual there to pay five s hillings extra, if one needed 
a bedding. Abdulla Sheth insisted that I should boo k a bedding, but, out of 
obstinacy and pride and with a view to saving five shillings, I declined. Abdulla 
Sheth warned me, 'Look, now,' said he, 'this is a d ifferent country from India. 
Thank God, we have enough and to spare. Please do n ot stint yourself in 
anything that you may need.' I thanked him and aske d him not to be anxious. 
The train reached Maritzburg, the capital of Natal,  at about 9 p.m. Beddings 
used to be provided at this station. A railway serv ant came and asked me if I 
wanted one. 'No,' said I. 'I have one with me.' He went away. But a passenger 
came next, and looked me up and down. He saw that I  was a 'coloured' man. 
This disturbed him. Out he went and came in again w ith one or two officials. 
They all kept quiet, when another official came to me and said, 'Come along, 
you must go to the van compartment.' 
'But I have a first class ticket,' said I. 
'That doesn't matter,' rejoined the other. 'I tell you, you must go to the van 
compartment.' 
'I tell you, I was permitted to travel in this comp artment at Durban, and I insist 
on going on in it.' 
'No, you won't,' said the official. 'You must leave  this compartment, or else I 
shall have to call a police constable to push you o ut.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  'Yes, you may. I refuse to get out voluntarily.' 
The constable came. He took me by the hand and push ed me out. My luggage 
was also taken out. I refused to go to the other co mpartment and the train 
steamed away. I went and sat in the waiting room, k eeping my hand-bag with 
me and leaving the other luggage where it was. The railway authorities had 
taken charge of it. 
It was winter, and winter in the higher regions of South Africa is severely cold. 
Maritzburg being at a high altitude, the cold was e xtremely bitter. My overcoat 
was in my luggage, but I did not dare to ask for it  lest I should be insulted 
again, so I sat and shivered. There was no light in  the room. A passenger came 
in at about midnight and possibly wanted to talk to  me. But I was in no mood to 
talk. 
I began to think of my duty. Should I fight for my rights or go back to India, or 
should I go on to Pretoria without minding the insu lts, and return to India after 
finishing the case? it would be cowardice to run ba ck to India without fulfilling 
my obligation. The hardship to which I was subjecte d was superficial - only a 
symptom of the deep disease of colour prejudice. I should try, if possible, to 
root out the disease and suffer hardships in the pr ocess. Redress for wrongs I 
should seek only to the extent that would be necess ary for the removal of the 
colour prejudice. 
So I decided to take the next available train to Pr etoria. 
The following morning I sent a long telegram to the  General Manager of the 
Railway and also informed Abdulla Sheth, who immedi ately met the General 
Manager. The Manager justified the conduct of the r ailway authorities, but 
informed him that he had already instructed the Sta tion Master to see that I 
reached my destination. Abdulia Sheth wired to the Indian merchants in 
Maritzburg and to friends in other places to meet m e and look after me. Ihe 
merchants came to see me at the station and tried t o comfort me by narrating 
their own hardships and explaining that what had ha ppened to me was nothing 
unusual. They also said that Indians travelling fir st or second class had to 
expect trouble from railway officials and white pas sengers. The day was thus Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  spent in listening to these tales of woe. The eveni ng train arrived . There was a 
reserved berth for me. I now purchased at Maritzbur g the bedding ticket I had 
refused to book at Durban. 
The train reached Charlestown in the morning. There  was no railway, in those 
days, between Chariestown and Johannesburg but only  a stage-coach, which 
halted at Slanderton for the night  en route.  I possessed a ticket for the coach, 
which was not cancelled by the break of the journey  at Maritzburg for a day; 
besides. Abdulla Sheth had sent a wire to the coach  agent at Charlestown. 
But the agent only needed a pretext for putting me off, and so, when he 
discovered me to be a stranger, he said, 'Your tick et is cancelled.' I gave him 
the proper reply. The reason at the back of his min d was not want of 
accommodation, but quite another. Passengers had to  be accommodated inside 
the coach, but as I was regarded as a 'coolie' and looked a stranger, it would be 
proper, thought the 'leader', as the white man in c harge of the coach was 
called, not to seat me with the white passengers. T here were seats on either 
side of the coachbox. The leader sat on one of thes e as a rule. Today he sat 
inside and gave me his seal. I knew it was sheer in justice and an insult, but I 
thought it better lo pocket it. I could not have fo rced myself inside, and if I had 
raised a protest, the coach would have gone off wit hout me. This would have 
meant the loss of another day, and Heaven only know s what would have 
happened the next day. So, much as I fretted within  myself, I prudently sat 
next the coachman. 
At about three o'clock the coach reached Pardekoph.  Now ihe leader desired to 
sit where I was seated, as he wanted to smoke and p ossibly to have some fresh 
air. So he took a piece of dirty sack-cloth from th e driver, spread it on the 
footboard and, addressing me said, Sami. you sit on  this, I want to sit near the 
driver.' The insult was more than I could bear. In fear and trembling I said to 
him, 'It was you who seated me here, though I shoul d have been accommodated 
inside. I put up with the insult. Now that you want  to sit outside and smoke, 
you would have me sit at your feet. I will not do s o, but I am prepared to sit 
inside.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  As I was struggling through these sentences, the ma n came down upon me and 
began heavily to box my ears. He seized me by the a rm and tried to drag me 
down. I clung to the brass rails of the coachbox an d was determined to keep my 
hold even at the risk of breaking my wristbones. Th e passengers were 
witnessing the scene - the man swearing at me, drag ging and belabouring me, 
and I remaining still. He was strong and I was weak . Some of the passengers 
were moved to pity and exclaimed: 'Man, let him alo ne. Don't beat him. He is 
not to blame. He is right. If he can't stay there, let him come and sit with us.' 
'No fear,' cried the man, but he seemed somewhat cr estfallen and stopped 
beating me. He let go my arm, swore at me a little more, and asking the 
Hottentot servant who was sitting on the other side  of the coachbox to sit on 
the footboard, took the seat so vacated. 
The passengers took their seats and, the whistle gi ven the coach rattled away. 
My heart was beating fast within my breast, and I w as wondering whether I 
should ever reach my destination alive. The man cas t an angry look at me now 
and then and, pointing his finger at me, growled: T ake care, let me once get to 
Standerton and I shall show you what I do.' I sat s peechless and prayed to God 
to help me. 
After dark we reached Standerton and I heaved a sig h of relief on seeing some 
Indian faces. As soon as I got down, these friends said: 'We are here to receive 
you and take you to Isa Sheth's shop. We have had a  telegram from Dada 
Abdulia.' I was very glad, and we went to Sheth Isa  Haji Sumar's shop. The Sheth 
and his clerks gathered round me. I told them all t hat I had gone through. They 
were very sorry to hear it and comforted me by rela ting to me their own bitter 
experiences. 
I wanted to inform the agent of the Coach Company o f the whole affair. So I 
wrote him a letter, narrating everything that had h appened, and drawing his 
attention to the threat his man had held out. I als o asked for an assurance that 
he would accommodate me with the other passengers i nside the coach when 
we started the next morning. To which the agent rep lied to this effect: 'From 
Standerton we have a bigger coach with different me n in charge. The man Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  complained of will not be there tomorrow, and you w ill have a seat with the 
other passengers.' This somewhat relieved me. I had , of course, no intention of 
proceeding against the man who had assaulted me, an d so the chapter of the 
assault closed there. 
In the morning Isa Sheth's man took me to the coach , I got a good seat and 
reached Johannesburg quite safely that night. 
Standerton is a small village and Johannesburg a bi g city. Abdulla Sheth had 
wired to Johannesburg also and given me the name an d address of Muhammad 
Kasam Kamruddin's firm there. Their man had come to  receive me at the stage, 
but neither did I see him nor did he recognize me. So I decided to go to a hotel. 
I knew the names of several. Taking a cab I asked t o be driven to the Grand 
National Hotel. I saw the Manager and asked for a r oom. He eyed me for a 
moment, and politely saying, 'I am very sorry, we a re full up,' bade me good-
bye. So I asked the cabman to drive to Muhammad Kas am Kamrruddin's shop. 
Here I found Abdul Gani Sheth expecting me, and he gave me a cordial 
greeting. He had a hearty laugh over the story of m y experience at the hotel. 
'How ever did you expect to be admitted to a hotel? ' he said. 
'Why not?' I asked. 
'You will come to know after you have stayed here a  few days,' said he. 'Only 
we can live in a land like this, because, for makin g money, we do not mind 
pocketing insults, and here we are.' With this he n arrated to me the story of 
the hardships of Indians in South Africa. 
Of Sheth Abdul Gani we shall know more as we procee d. 
He said: 'This country is not for men like you. Loo k now, you have to go to 
Pretoria tomorrow. You will have to travel third cl ass. Conditions in the 
Transvaal are worse than in Natal. First and Second  Class tickets are never 
issued to Indians.' 
'You cannot have made persistent efforts in this di rection.' 
We have sent representations, but I confess our own  men too do not want as a 
rule to travel first or second.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  I sent for the railway regulations and read them. T here was a loophole. The 
language of the old Transvaal enactments was not ve ry exact or precise; that of 
the railway regulations was even less so. 
I said to the Sheth: 'I wish to go first class, and  if I cannot, I shall prefer to take 
a cab to Pretoria, a matter of only thirty- seven m iles.' 
Sheth Abdul Gani drew my attention to the extra tim e and money this would 
mean, but agreed to my proposal to travel first, an d accordingly we sent a note 
to the Station Master. I mentioned in my note that I was a barrister and that I 
always, travelled first, I also stated in the lette r that I needed to reach Pretoria 
as early as possible, that as there was no time to await his reply I would receive 
it in person at the station, and that I should expe ct to get a first class ticket. 
There was of course a purpose behind asking for the  reply in person. I thought 
that, if the Station Master gave a written reply, h e would certainly say 'no', 
especially because he would have his own notion of a 'coolie' barrister. I would 
therefore appear before him in faultless English dr ess, talk to him and possibly 
persuade him to issue a first class ticket. So I we nt to the Station Master in a 
frock-coat and necktie, placed a sovereign for my f are on the counter and 
asked for a first class ticket. 
'You sent me that note?' he asked. 
'That is so. I shall he much obliged if you will gi ve me a ticket. I must reach 
Pretoria today.' 
He smiled and. moved to pity, said: 'I am not a Tra nsvaaler. I am a Hollander. I 
appreciate your feelings, and you have my sympathy,  I do want to give you a 
ticket - on one condition, however, that, if the gu ard should ask you to shift to 
the third class, you will not involve me in the aff air, by which I mean that you 
should not proceed against the Railway Company. I w ish you a safe journey. I 
can see you are a gentleman.' 
With these words he booked the ticket. I thanked hi m and gave him the 
necessary assurance. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  Sheth Abdul Gani had come to see me off at the stat ion. The incident gave him 
an agreeable surprise, but he warned me saying: 'I shall be thankful if you reach 
Pretoria all right. I am afraid the guard will not leave you in peace in the first 
class and even if he does, the passengers will not. ' 
I took my seat in a first class compartment and the  train started. At Germiston 
the guard came to examine the tickets. He was angry  to find me there, and 
signalled to me with his finger to go to the third class. I showed him my first 
class ticket. That does not matter,' said he, remov e to the third class.' 
There was only one English passenger in the compart ment. He took the guard to 
task. 'What do you mean by troubling the gentleman?1 he said. Don't you see he 
has a first class ticket? I do not mind in the leas t his travelling with me.' 
Addressing me, he said, 'You should make yourself c omfortable where you are.' 
The guard muttered: 'If you want to travel with a c oolie, what do I care?' and 
went away. 
At about eight o'clock in the evening the train rea ched Pretoria. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74   
21. FIRST DAY IN PRETORIA 
Pretoria station in 1893 was quite different from w hat it was in 1914. The lights 
were burning dimly. The travellers were few. I let all the other passengers go 
and thought that, as soon as the ticket collector w as fairly free, I would hand 
him my ticket and ask him if he could direct me to some small hotel or any 
other such place where I might go; otherwise I woul d spend the night at the 
station. I must confess I shrank from asking him ev en this, for I was afraid of 
being insulted. 
The station became clear of all passengers. I gave my ticket to the ticket 
collector and began my inquiries. He replied to me courteously, but I saw that 
he could not be of any considerable help. But an Am erican Negro who was 
standing nearby broke into the conversation. 
'I see,' said he, 'that you are an utter stranger, here, without any friends. If you 
will come with me, I will take you to a small hotel , of which the proprietor is 
an American who is very well known to me. I think h e will accept you.' 
I had my own doubts about the offer, but I thanked him and accepted his 
suggestion. He took me to Johnston's Family Hotel. He drew Mr. Johnston aside 
to speak to him, and the latter agreed to accommoda te me for the night, on 
condition that I should have my dinner served in my  room. 
'I assure you,' said he, 'that I have no colour pre judice. But I have only European 
custom, and, if I allowed you to eat in the dining room, my guests might be 
offended and even go away.' 
Thank you,' said I, 'even for accommodating me for the night. I am now more or 
less acquainted with the conditions here, and I und erstand your difficulty. I do 
not mind your serving the dinner in my room. I hope  to be able to make some 
other arrangement tomorrow.' 
I was shown into a room, where I now sat waiting fo r the dinner and musing, as 
I was quite alone. There were not many guests in th e hotel, and I had expected 
the waiter to come very shortly with the dinner. In stead Mr. Johnston Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  appeared. He said: 'I was ashamed of having asked y ou to have your dinner 
here. So I spoke to the other guests about you, and  asked them if they would 
mind having your dinner in the dining room. They sa id they had no objection, 
and that they did not mind your staying here as lon g as you liked. Please, 
therefore, come to the dining room, if you will, an d stay here as long as you 
wish.' 
I thanked him again, went to the dining room and ha d a hearty dinner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76   
22. CHRISTIAN CONTACTS 
Next morning I called on the attorney, Mr. A. W. Ba ker. Abdulla Sheth had 
given me some description of him, so his cordial re ception did not surprise me. 
He received me very warmly and made kind inquiries.  I explained all about 
myself. Thereupon he said: 'We have no work for you  here as barrister, for we 
have engaged the best counsel. The case is a prolon ged and complicated one, 
so I shall take your assistance only to the extent of getting necessary 
information. And of course you will make communicat ion with my client easy 
for me, as I shall now ask for all the information I want from him through you. 
That is certainly an advantage. I have not yet foun d rooms for you. I thought I 
had better do so after having seen you. There is a fearful amount of colour 
prejudice here, and therefore it is not easy to fin d lodgings for such as you. But 
I know a poor woman. She is the wife of a baker. I think she will take you and 
thus add to her income at the same time. Come, let us go to her place.' 
So he took me to her house. He spoke with her priva tely about me, and she 
agreed to accept me as a boarder at 35 shillings a week. 
Mr. Baker, besides being an attorney, was a staunch  lay preacher. He is still 
alive and now engaged purely in missionary work, ha ving given up the legal 
profession. He is quite well-to-do. He still corres ponds with me. In his letters 
he always dwells on the same theme. He upholds the excellence of Christianity 
from various points of view, and contends that it i s impossible to find eternal 
peace, unless one accepts Jesus as the only son of God and the Saviour of 
mankind. 
During the very first interview Mr. Baker ascertain ed my religious views. I said 
to him: 'I am a Hindu by birth. And yet I do not kn ow much of Hinduism, and I 
know less of other religions. In fact I do not know  where I am. and what is and 
what should be my belief. I intend to make a carefu l study of my own religion 
and. as far as I can, of other religions as well.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77  Mr. Baker was glad to hear all this, and said: 'I a m one of the Directors of the 
South Africa General Mission. I have built a church  at my own expense, and 
deliver sermons in it regularly. I am free from col our prejudice. I have some co-
workers, and we meet at one o'clock everyday for a few minutes and pray for 
peace and light. I shall be glad if you will join u s there. I shall introduce you to 
my co-workers who will be happy to meet you, and I dare say you will also like 
their company.' I thanked Mr. Baker and agreed to a ttend the one o'clock 
prayers as regularly as possible. 
The next day at one o'clock I went to Mr. Baker's p rayer-meeting. There I was 
introduced to Miss Harris, Miss Gabb. Mr. Coates an d ethers. The Misses Harris 
and Gabb were both elderly maiden ladies. Mr. Coate s was a Quaker. 1 The two 
ladies lived together, and they gave me a standing invitation to four delock tea 
at their house every Sunday. When we met on Sundays , I used to give Mr. 
Coates my religious diary for the week, and discuss  with him the books I had 
read and the impression they had left on me. Mr. Co ates was a frank-hearted 
staunch young man. We went out for walks together, and he also took me to 
other Christian friends. As we came closer to each other, he began to give me 
books of his own choice, until my shelf was filled with them. I read a number of 
such books in 1893. 
He had great affection for me. He saw, round my nec k, the Vaishnava necklace 
of Tulsi beads. He thought it to be superstition an d was pained by it. This 
superstition does not become you. Come, let me brea k the necklace.' 
'No. you will not. It is a sacred gift from my moth er.' 
'But do you believe in it?' 
I do not know its mysterious significance. I do not  think I should come to harm 
if I did not wear it. But I cannot, without suffici ent reason, give up a necklace 
that she put round my neck out of love and in the c onviction that it would be 
conducive to my welfare. When, with the passage of time, it wears away and 
breaks of in own accord, I shall have no desire to get a new one. But this 
necklace cannot be broken.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  Mr. Coates could not appreciate my argument, as he had no regard for my 
religion. He was looking forward to delivering me f rom the abyss of ignorance, 
lie wanted to convince me that, no matter whether t here was some truth in 
other religions, salvation was impossible for me un less I accepted Christianity 
which represented the truth, and that my sins would  not be washed away 
except by the intercession of Jesus, and that all g ood works were useless. 
Mr. Baker was getting anxious about my future. He t ook me to the Wellington 
Convention. The Convention lasted for three days. I  could understand and 
appreciate the devoutness of those who attended it.  But I saw no reason for 
changing my belief - my religion. It was impossible  for me to believe that I 
could go to heaven or attain salvation only by beco ming a Christian. When I 
frankly said so to some of the good Christian frien ds they were shocked. But 
there was no help for it. 
My reason was not ready to believe literally that J esus by his death and by his 
blood redeemed the sins of the world. Metaphoricall y there might be some 
truth in it. Again, according to Christianity only human beings had souls, and 
not other living beings, for whom death meant compl ete extinction; while I 
held a contrary belief. I could accept Jesus as a m artyr, and embodiment of 
sacrifice, and a divine teacher, but not as the mos t perfect man ever born. 
The pious lives of Christians did not give me anyth ing that the lives of men of 
other faiths had failed to give. I had seen in othe r lives just the same 
reformation that I had heard of among Christians. P hilosophically there was 
nothing extraordinary in Christian principles. From  the point of view of 
sacrifice, it seemed to me that the Hindus greatly surpassed the Christians. 
Thus if I could not accept Christianity either as a  perfect, or the greatest 
religion, neither was I then convinced of Hinduism being such. Hindu defects 
were pressingly visible to me. If untouchability co uld be a part of Hinduism, it 
could but be a rotten part or an excrescence. I cou ld not understand the raison 
d'etre  of a multitude of sects and castes. What was the m eaning of saying that 
the Vedas were the inspired Word of God? If they we re inspired, why not also 
the Bible and the Koran? Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  I' expressed my difficulties in a letter to Raychan dbhai. I also corresponded 
with other religious authorities in India and recei ved answers from them. 
Raychandbhai's letter somewhat pacified me. He aske d me to be patient and to 
study Hinduism more deeply. One of his sentences wa s to this effect: 'On a 
dispassionate view of the question I am convinced t hat no other religion has the 
subtle and profound thought of Hinduism, its vision  of the soul, or its charity.' 
As Christian friends were endeavouring to convert m e, even so were Musalman 
friends. Abdulla Sheth had kept on inducing me to s tudy Islam. I purchased 
Sale's translation of the Koran and began reading i t. I also obtained other books 
on Islam. 
I communicated with Christian friends in England. O ne of them introduced me 
to Edward Maitland, with whom I opened corresponden ce. He sent me  The 
Perfect Way,  a book he had written in collaboration with Anna K ingsford. The 
book was a repudiation of the current Christian bel ief. He also sent me another 
book,  The New Interpretation of the Bible.  I liked both. They seemed to 
support Hinduism. Tolstoy's  The Kingdom of God Is within You  overwhelmed 
me. It left an abiding impression on me. 
Though I took a path my Christian friends had not i ntended for me, I have 
remained for ever indebted to them for the religiou s quest that they awakened 
in me. I shall always cherish the memory of their c ontact. 
 
1 The Quakers, also called Friends, are a sect of C hristians, known chiefly for their belief 
in Pacifism and attitude of friendliness to all. - Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80   
23. GETTING ACQUAINTED WITH THE INDIAN PROBLEM 
Sheth Tyeb Haji Khan Muhammad had in Pretoria the s ame position as was 
enjoyed by Dada Abdulla in Natal. There was no publ ic movement that could be 
conducted without him. I made his acquaintance the very first week and told 
him of my intention to get in touch with every Indi an in Pretoria. I expressed a 
desire to study the conditions of Indians there, an d asked for his help in my 
work, which he gladly agreed to give. 
My first step was to call a meeting of all the Indi ans in Pretoria and to present 
to them a picture of their condition in the Transva al. I suggested the formation 
of an association to make representations to the au thorities concerned in 
respect of the hardships of the Indian settlers, an d offered to place at its 
disposal as much of my time and service as was poss ible. It was decided to hold 
such meetings, as far as I remember, once a week or , may be, once a month. 
These were held more or less regularly, and on thes e occasions there was a free 
exchange of ideas. The result was that there was no w in Pretoria no Indian I did 
not know, or whose condition I was not acquainted w ith. 
This prompted me in turn to make the acquaintance o f the British Agent in 
Pretoria, Mr. Jacobus de Wet. He had sympathy for t he Indians, but he had very 
little influence. However, he agreed to help us as best as he could, and invited 
me to meet him whenever I wished. 
I now communicated with the railway authorities and  told them that, even 
under their own regulations, the disabilities about  travelling under which the 
Indians laboured could not be justified. I got a le tter in reply to the effect that 
first and second class tickets would be issued to I ndians who were properly 
dressed. This was far from giving adequate relief, as it rested with the Station 
Master to decide who was 'properly dressed'. 
The British Agent showed me some papers dealing wit h Indian affairs. Tyeb 
Sheth had also given me similar papers. I learnt fr om them how cruelly the 
Indians were hounded out from the Orange Free State . Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  In short my stay in Pretoria enabled me to make a d eep study of the social, 
economic and political condition of the Indians in the Transvaal and the Orange 
Free State. I had no idea that this study was to be  of invaluable service to me 
in the future. For I had thought of returning home by the end of the year, or 
even earlier, if the case was finished before the y ear was out. But God disposed 
otherwise. 
It would be out of place here to describe fully the  condition of Indians in the 
Transvaal and the Orange Free State. I would sugges t that those who wish to 
have a full idea of it may turn to my  History of Saryagraha in South Africa.  
It was provided under the amended law that all Indi ans should pay a poll tax of 
£3 as fee for entry into the Transvaal. They might not own land except in 
locations set apart for them, and in practice even that was not to be 
ownership. They had no franchise. All this was unde r the special law for 
Asiatics, to whom the laws for the coloured people were also applied. 
Under these latter, Indians might not walk on publi c footpaths, and might not 
move out of doors after 9 p.m. without a permit. I often went out at night for a 
walk with Mr. Coates, and we rarely got back home m uch before ten o'clock. 
What if the police arrested me? Mr. Coates was more  concerned about this than 
I. He had to issue passes to his Negro servants. Bu t how could he give one to 
me? Only a master might issue a permit to a servant . If I had wanted one, and 
even if Mr. Coates had been ready to give it, he co uld not have done so, for it 
would have been fraud. 
So Mr. Coates or some friend of his took me to the State Attorney, Dr. Krause. 
We turned out to be barristers of the same Inn. The  fact that I needed a pass to 
enable me to be out of doors after 9 p.m. was too m uch for him. He expressed 
sympathy for me. Instead of ordering for me a pass,  he gave me a letter 
authorizing me to be out of doors at all hours with out police interference. I 
always kept this letter on me whenever I went out. The fact that I never had to 
make use of it was a mere accident. 
The consequences of the regulation regarding the us e of footpaths were rather 
serious for me. I always went out for a walk throug h President Street to an Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82  open plain. President Kruger's house was in this st reet - a very modest, 
unostentatious building, without a garden, and not distinguishable from other 
houses in its neighbourhood. 
Only the presence of a police patrol before the hou se indicated that it 
belonged to some official. I nearly always went alo ng the footpath past this 
patrol without the slightest hitch or hindrance. 
Now the man on duty used to be changed from time to  time. Once one of these 
men, without giving me the slightest warning, witho ut even asking me to leave 
the footpath, pushed and kicked me into the street.  I was dismayed. Before I 
could question him as to his behaviour, Mr. Coates,  who happened to be passing 
the spot on horseback, hailed me and said: 
'Gandhi, I have seen everything. I shall gladly be your witness in court if you 
proceed against the man. I am very sorry you have b een so rudely assaulted.' 
'You need not be sorry.' I said. 'What does the poo r man know? All coloured 
people are the same to him. He no doubt treats Negr oes just as he has treated 
me. I have made it a rule not to go to court in res pect of any personal 
grievance. So I do not intend to proceed against hi m.' 
'That is just like you,' said Mr. Coates, 'but do t hink it over again. We must 
teach such men a lesson.' He then spoke to the poli ceman and reprimanded 
him. I could not follow their talk, as it was in Du tch, the policeman being a 
Boer. But he apologized to me, for which there was no need. I had already 
forgiven him. 
But I never again went through this street. There w ould be other men coming in 
this man's place and, ignorant of the incident, the y would behave likewise. Why 
should I unnecessarily court another kick? I theref ore selected a different walk. 
I saw that South Africa was no country for a self-r especting Indian, and my mind 
became more and more occupied with the question as to how this state of 
things might be improved. But my principal duty for  the moment was to attend 
to the case of Dada Abdulla. 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83   
24. THE CASE 
I saw that the facts of Dada Abdulla's case made it  very strong indeed, and that 
the law was bound to be on his side. But I also saw  that the litigation, if it were 
persisted in, would ruin the plaintiff and the defe ndant, who were relatives and 
both belonged to the same city. No one knew how lon g the case might go on. 
Should it be allowed to continue to be fought out i n court, it might go on 
indefinitely and to no advantage of either party. B oth, therefore, desired an 
immediate termination of the case, if possible. 
I approached Tyeb Sheth and requested and advised h im to go to arbitration. I 
recommended him to see his counsel. I suggested to him that if an arbitrator 
commanding the confidence of both parties could be appointed, the case would 
be quickly finished. The lawyers' fees were so rapi dly mounting up that they 
were enough to devour all the resources of the clie nts, big merchants as they 
were. The case occupied so much of their attention that they had no time left 
for any other work. In the meantime mutual ill-will  was steadily increasing. I 
became disgusted with the profession. As lawyers th e counsel on both sides 
were bound to rake up points of law in support of t heir own clients. I also saw 
for the first time that the winning party never rec overs all the costs incurred. 
Under the Court Fees Regulation there was a fixed s cale of costs to be allowed 
as between party and party, the actual costs as bet ween attorney and client 
being very much higher. This was more than I could bear. I felt that my duty 
was to befriend both parties and bring them togethe r. I strained every nerve to 
bring about a compromise. At last Tyeb Sheth agreed . An arbitrator was 
appointed, the case was argued before him, and Dada  Abdulla won. 
But that did not satisfy me. If my client were to s eek immediate execution of 
the award, it would be impossible for Tyeb Sheth to  meet the whole of the 
awarded amount, and there was an unwritten law amon g the Porbandar 
Memans living in South Africa that death should he preferred to bankruptcy. It 
was impossible for Tyeb Sheth to pay down the whole  sum of about £ 37,000 
and costs. He meant to pay not a pie less than the amount, and he did not want Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  to be declared bankrupt. There was only one way. Da da Abdulla should allow 
him to pay in moderate installments. He was equal t o the occasion, and 
granted Tyeb Sheth installments spread over a very long period. It was more 
difficult for me to secure this concession of payme nt by installments than to 
get the parties to agree to arbitration. But both w ere happy over the result, 
and both rose in the public estimation. My joy was boundless. I had learnt the 
true practice of law. I had learnt to find out the better side of human nature 
and to enter men's hearts. I realized that the true  function of a lawyer was to 
unite parties riven asunder. The lesson was so inde libly burnt into me that a 
large part of my time during the twenty years of my  practice as a lawyer was 
occupied in bringing about private compromises of h undreds of cases. I lost 
nothing thereby - not even money, certainly not my soul. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85   
25. MAN PROPOSES, GOD DISPOSES 
The case having been concluded, I had no reason for  staying in Pretoria. So I 
went back to Durban and began to make preparations for my return home. Bui 
Abdulla Sheth was not the man to let me sail withou t a send-off. He gave a 
farewell party in my honour at Sydenham. 
It was proposed to spend the whole day there. Whils t I was turning over the 
sheets of some of the newspapers I found there, I c hanced to see a paragraph 
in a corner of one of them under the caption 'India n Franchise'. It was with 
reference to the Bill then before the House of Legi slature, which sought to 
deprive the Indians of their right to elect members  of the Natal Legislative 
Assembly. I was ignorant of the Bill, and so were t he rest of the guests who had 
assembled there. 
I inquired of Abdulla Sheth about it. He said: 'Wha t can we understand in these 
matters? We can only understand things that affect our trade.' But I was on the 
point of returning home and hesitated to express wh at was passing through my 
mind in this matter. I simply said to Abdulla Sheth : This Bill, if it passes into 
law, will make our lot extremely difficult. It is t he first nail into our coffin. It 
strikes at the root of our self-respect.' 
The other guests were listening to this conversatio n with attention. One of 
them said: 'Shall I tell you what should be done? Y ou cancel your passage by this 
boat, stay here a month longer, and we will fight a s you direct us.' All the 
others chimed in. 
I worked out in my own mind an outline of the campa ign. I ascertained the 
names of those who were on the list of voters, and made up my mind to stay on 
for a month. 
Thus God laid the foundation of my life in South Af rica and sowed the seed of 
the fight for national self-respect. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86  The first thing we did was to dispatch a telegram t o the Speaker of the 
Assembly requesting him to postpone further discuss ion of the Bill. A similar 
telegram was sent to the Premier. 
The petition to be presented to the Legislative Ass embly was drawn up. I took 
considerable pains over drawing it up. I read all t he literature available on the 
subject. Ten thousand signatures were obtained in t he course of a fortnight. To 
secure this number of signatures from the whole of the province was no light 
task, especially when we consider that the men were  perfect strangers to the 
work. Specially competent volunteers had to be sele cted for the work, as it had 
been decided not to take a single signature without  the signatory fully 
understanding the petition. The villages were scatt ered at long distances. The 
work could be done promptly only if a number of wor kers put their whole heart 
into it. And this they did. 
The petition was at last submitted. A thousand copi es had been printed for 
circulation and distribution. It acquainted the Ind ian public for the first time 
with conditions in Natal. I sent copies to all the newspapers and publicists I 
knew. 
The Times of India , in a leading article on the petition, strongly su pported the 
Indian demands. Copies were sent to journals, and p ublicists in England 
representing different parties. The London  Times  supported our claims, and we 
began to entertain hopes of the Bill being vetoed. 
It was now impossible for me to leave Natal. The In dian friends surrounded me 
on all sides and importuned me to remain there perm anently. Thus I settled in 
Natal. 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87   
26. NATAL INDIAN CONGRESS 
The dispatch of the petition regarding the disfranc hising bill was not sufficient 
in itself. Sustained agitation was essential for ma king an impression on the 
Secretary of State for the Colonies. For this purpo se it was thought necessary to 
bring into being a permanent organization. So I con sulted Sheth Abdulla and 
other friends, and we all decided to have a public organization of a permanent 
character, and on the 22nd May the Natal Indian Con gress came into being. 
Although the members of the Natal Indian Congress i ncluded the Colonial-born 
Indians and the clerical class, the unskilled wage- earners, the indentured 
labourers, 1 were still outside its pale. The Congress was not yet theirs. They 
could not afford to belong to it by paying the subs cription and becoming its 
members. The Congress could win their attachment on ly by serving them. An 
opportunity offered itself when neither the Congres s nor I was really ready for 
it. I had put in scarcely three or four months' pra ctice, and the Congress also 
was still in its infancy, when a Tamil man in tatte red clothes, head-gear in 
hand, two front teeth broken and his mouth bleeding , stood before me 
trembling and weeping. He had been heavily belabour ed by his master. I learnt 
all about him from my clerk, who was a Tamilian. Ba lasundaram - as that was 
the visitor's name - was serving his indenture unde r a well-known European 
resident of Durban. The master, getting angry with him, had lost self-control, 
and had beaten Balasundaram severely, breaking two of his teeth. 
I sent him to a doctor. In those days only white do ctors were available. I 
wanted a certificate from the doctor about the natu re of the injury 
Baiasundaram had sustained. I secured the certifica te, and straightway took the 
injured man to the magistrate, to whom I submitted his affidavit. The 
magistrate was indignant when he read it, and issue d a summons against the 
employer. 
It was far from my desire to get the employer punis hed. I simply wanted 
Baiasundaram to be released from him. I read the la w about indentured labour. 
If an ordinary servant left service without giving notice, he was liable to be Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88  sued by his master in a civil court. With the inden tured labourer the case was 
entirely different. He was liable, in similar circu mstances, to be proceeded 
against in a criminal court and to be imprisoned on  conviction. That is why Sir 
William Hunter called the indenture system almost a s bad as slavery. Like the 
slave the indentured labourer was the property of h is master. 
There were only two ways of releasing Baiasundaram;  either by getting the 
Protector of indentured labourers to cancel his ind enture or transfer him to 
someone else, or by getting Balasundarams employer to release him. I called on 
the latter and said to him: 'I do not want to proce ed against you and get you 
punished. I think you realise that you have severel y beaten the man. I shall be 
satisfied if you will transfer the indenture to som eone else.' To this he readily 
agreed. I next saw the Protector. He also agreed, o n condition that I found a 
new employer. 
So I went off in search of an employer. He had to b e a European, as no Indians 
could employ indentured labour. At that time I knew  very few Europeans. I met 
one of them. He very kindly agreed to take on Balas undaram. I gratefully 
acknowledged his kindness. The magistrate convicted  Balasundaram's employer, 
and recorded that he had undertaken to transfer the  indenture to someone 
else. 
Balasundaram's case reached the ears of every inden tured labourer, and I came 
to be regarded as their friend. I hailed this conne ction with delight. A regular 
stream of indentured labourers began to pour into m y office, and I got the best 
opportunity of learning their joys and sorrows. 
The echoes of Balasundaram's case were heard in far  off Madras. Labourers 
from different parts of the province, who went to N atal on indenture, came to 
know of this case through their indentured brethren . 
There was nothing extraordinary in the case itself,  but the fact that there was 
someone in Natal to espouse their cause and publicl y work for them gave the 
indentured labourers a joyful surprise and inspired  them with hope. 
 
1 Labourers under a system of indenture or contract  to work on plantations for a fixed 
period of years. - Ed. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89   
27. THE £ 3 TAX 
About the year I860 the Europeans in Natal, finding  that there was considerable 
scope for sugarcane cultivation, felt themselves in  need of labour. Without 
outside labour the cultivation of cane and the manu facture of sugar were 
impossible, as the Natal Zulus were not suited to t his form of work. The Natal 
Government therefore corresponded with the Indian G overnment, and secured 
their permission to recruit Indian labour. These re cruits were to sign an 
indenture to work in Natal for five years, and at t he end of the term they were 
to be at liberty to settle there and to have full r ights of ownership of land. 
Those were the inducements held out to them. 
But the Indians gave more than had been expected of  them. They grew large 
quantities of vegetables. They introduced a number of Indian varieties and 
made it possible to grow the local varieties cheape r. They also introduced the 
mango. Nor did their enterprise stop at agriculture . They entered trade. They 
purchased land for building, and many raised themse lves from the status of 
labourers to that of owners of land and houses. Mer chants from India followed 
them and settled there for trade. The late Sheth Ab ubakar Amod was first 
amongst them. He soon built up an extensive busines s. 
The white traders were alarmed. When they first wel comed the Indian 
labourers, they had not reckoned with their busines s skill. They might be 
tolerated as independent agriculturists but their c ompetition in trade could not 
be brooked. 
This sowed the seed of the antagonism to Indians. M any other factors 
contributed to its growth. Through legislation this  antagonism found its 
expression in the disfranchising bill and the bill to impose a tax on the 
indentured Indians. Independent of legislation a nu mber of pinpricks had 
already been started. 
The first suggestion was that the Indian labourers should be forcibly 
repatriated, so that the term of their indenture mi ght expire in India. The Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90  Government of India was not likely to accept the su ggestion. Another proposal 
was therefore made to the effect that - 
1. the indentured labourer should return to India on t he expiry of his 
indenture; or that 
2. he should sign a fresh indenture every two years, a n increment being given 
at each renewal; and that 
3. in the case of his refusal to return to India or re new the indenture he 
should pay an annual tax of £25. 
A deputation composed of Sir Henry Binns and Mr. Ma son was sent to India to 
get the proposal approved by the Government there. The Viceroy at that time 
was Lord Elgin. He disapproved of the £25 tax, but agreed to a poll tax of £3. I 
thought then, as I do even now, that this was a ser ious blunder on the part of 
the Viceroy. To levy a yearly tax of £12 from a fam ily of four - husband, wife 
and two children -when the average income of the hu sband was never more 
than 14 month, was atrocious and unknown anywhere e lse in the world. 
We organised a fierce campaign against this tax. Ha d the community given up 
the struggle, had the Congress abandoned the campai gn and submitted to the 
tax as inevitable, the hated impost would have cont inued to be levied from the 
indentured Indians until this day, to the eternal s hame of the Indians in South 
Africa and of the whole of India. 
By now I had been three years in South Africa. I ha d got to know the people and 
they had got to know me. In 1896 I asked permission  to go home for six months, 
for I saw that I was in for a long stay there. I ha d established a fairly good 
practice, and could see that people felt the need o f my presence. So I made up 
my mind to go home, fetch my wife and children, and  then return and settle 
out there. I also saw that, if I went home, I might  be able to do there some 
public work by educating public opinion and creatin g more interest in the 
Indians in South Africa. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART V : VISIT TO INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92   
28. IN INDIA 
I went straight to Rajkot without halting at Bombay  and began to make 
preparations for writing a pamphlet on the situatio n in South Africa. The 
writing and publication of the pamphlet took about a month. It had a green 
cover and came to be known afterwards as the Green Pamphlet. In it I drew a 
purposely subdued picture of the condition of India ns in South Africa. Ten 
thousand copies were printed and sent to all the pa pers and leaders of every 
party in India.  The Pioneer was the first to notice it editorially. A summary o f 
the article was cabled by Reuter to England, and a summary of that summary 
was cabled to Natal by Reuter's London office. This  cable was not longer than 
three lines in print. It was a miniature, but exagg erated, edition of the picture 
I had drawn of the treatment accorded to the Indian s in Natal, and it was not in 
my words. We shall see later on the effect this had  in Natal. In the meanwhile 
every paper of note commented at length on the ques tion. 
To get these pamphlets ready for posting was no sma ll matter. It would have 
been expensive too, if I had employed paid help for  preparing wrappers etc. 
But I hit upon a much simpler plan. I gathered toge ther all the children in my 
locality and asked them to volunteer two or three h ours' labour of a morning, 
when they had no school. This they willingly agreed  to do. I promised to bless 
them and give them, as a reward, used postage stamp s which I had collected. 
They got through the work in no time. That was my f irst experiment of having 
little children as volunteers. 
Two of those little friends are my co-workers today . 
Whilst busy in Rajkot with the pamphlet on South Af rica, I had an occasion to 
pay a flying visit to Bombay. It was my intention t o educate public opinion in 
cities on this question by organizing meetings, and  Bombay was the first city I 
chose. First of all I met Justice Ranade, who liste ned to me with attention and 
advised me to meet Sir Pherozeshah Mehta. 1 In due course I met him. I was 
prepared to be awed by his presence, I had heard of  the popular titles that he 
had earned, and knew that I was to see the 'Lion of  Bombay', the 'Uncrowned Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  King of the Presidency'. But the king did not overp ower me. He met me, as a 
loving father would meet his grownup son. Sir Phero zeshah carefully listened to 
me. I told him that I had seen Justices Ranade and Tyabji. 'Gandhi,' said he, 'I 
see that I must help you. I must call a public meet ing here.' With this he turned 
to Mr. Munshi, the secretary, and told him to fix t he date of the meeting. The 
date was settled, and he made me goodbye. 
The meeting was held in the hall of the Sir Cowasji  Jehangir Institute. I had 
heard that when Sir Pherozeshah Mehta addressed mee tings the hall was always 
packed, chiefly by the students intent on hearing h im leaving not an inch of 
room. This was the first meeting of the kind in my experience. Sir Pherozeshah 
liked the speech. I was supremely happy. 
Sir Pherozeshah had made my way easy. So from Bomba y I went to Poona. Here 
there were two parties. I wanted the help of people  of every shade of opinion. 
First I met Lokamanya Tilak. 2 He said: 'You are quite right in seeking the help of 
all parties. There can be no difference of opinion on the South African 
question. But you must have a non-party man for you r president. Meet 
Professor Bhandarkar. He has been taking no part of  late in any public 
movement. But this question might possibly draw him  out. See him and let me 
know what he says. I want to help you to the fulles t extent. Of course you will 
meet me whenever you like. I am at your disposal.' 
This was my first meeting with the Lokamanya. It re vealed to me the secret of 
his unique popularity. 
Next I met Gokhale. 3 I found him on the Fergusson College grounds. He g ave me 
an affectionate welcome, and his manner immediately  won my heart. With him 
too this was my first meeting, and yet it seemed as  though we were renewing 
an old friendship. Sir Pherozeshah had seemed to me  like the Himalaya, the 
Lokamanya like the ocean. But Gokhale was as the Ga nges. One could have a 
refreshing bath in the holy river. The Himalaya was  unscalable, and one could 
not easily launch forth on the sea, but the Ganges invited one to its bosom. It 
was a joy to be on it with a boat and an oar. Gokha le closely examined me, as a 
schoolmaster would examine a candidate seeking admi ssion to a school. He told Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  me whom to approach and how to approach them. He as ked to have a look at 
my speech. He showed me over the college, assured m e that he was always at 
my disposal, asked me to let him know the result of  the interview with Dr. 
Bhandarkar and sent me away exultantly happy. 
Dr. Bhandarkar received me with the warmth of a fat her. It was noon when I 
called on him. The very fact that I was busy seeing  people at that hour 
appealed greatly to this indefatigable savant, and my insistence on a non-party 
man for the president of the meeting had his ready approval. 
Without any ado this erudite and selfless band of w orkers in Poona held a 
meeting in an unostentatious little place, and sent  me away rejoicing and more 
confident of my mission. 
I next proceeded to Madras. It was wild with enthus iasm. The Balasundaram 
incident made a profound impression on the meeting.  My speech was printed 
and was, for me, fairly long. But the audience list ened to every word with 
attention. At the close of the meeting there was a regular run on the 'Green 
Pamphlet'. I brought out a second and revised editi on of 10,000 copies. They 
sold like hot cakes. 
From Madras, I proceeded to Calcutta. There I recei ved the following cable 
from Durban: 'Parliament opens January. Return soon . 
Dada Abdulla had just then purchased the steamship  Courland  and insisted on 
my travelling on that boat, offering to take me and  my family free of charge. I 
gratefully accepted the offer, and in the beginning  of December set sail a 
second time for South Africa, now with my wife and two sons and the only son 
of my widowed sister. Another steamship  Naderi also sailed for Durban at the 
same time. The agents of the Company were Dada Abdu lla and Co. The total 
number of passengers these boats carried must have been about eight hundred, 
half of whom were bound for the Transvaal. 
 
1 A great leader of Bombay, associated with the Ind ian National Congress from its very 
inception and instrumental in shaping its policies;  a moderate in politics. -Ed. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95  2 An extremist in politics, he organized meetings a nd festivals all over Maharashtra, 
revived the memory of Shivaji, who successfully rev ived Hindu rule as over against Muslim 
rule under the Moguls, and stimulated patriotism am ongst the people. -Ed. 
3 Founder of the Servants of India Society; moderat e in politics; a great patriot and lover 
of the poor. -E:d. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART VI : BACK IN SOUTH AFRICA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97   
29. STORMY ARRIVAL IN SOUTH AFRICA 
The two ships cast anchor in the port of Durban on or about the I8th of 
December. No passengers are allowed to land at any of the South African ports 
before being subjected to a thorough medical examin ation. If the ship has any 
passenger suffering from a contagious disease, she has to undergo a period of 
quarantine. As there had been plague in Bombay when  we set sail, we feared 
that we might have to go through a brief quarantine . The doctor came and 
examined us. He ordered a five days' quarantine bec ause, in his opinion, plague 
germs took twenty-three days at the most to develop . Our ship was therefore 
ordered to be put in quarantine until the twenty-th ird day of our sailing from 
Bombay. But this quarantine order had more than hea lth reasons behind it. 
The white residents of Durban had been agitating fo r our repatriation, and the 
agitation was one of the reasons for the order. Dad a Abdulla and Co. kept us 
regularly informed about the daily happenings in th e town. The whites were 
holding monster meetings every day. They were addre ssing all kinds of threats 
and at times offering even inducements to Dada Abdu lla and Co. They were 
ready to indemnify the Company if both the ships sh ould be sent back. But 
Dada Abdulla and Co. were not the people to be afra id of threats. Sheth Abdul 
Karim Haji Adam was then the managing partner of th e firm. He was 
determined to moor the ships at the wharf and disem bark the passengers at any 
cost. He was daily sending me detailed letters. For tunately the late Sjt. 
Mansukhlal Naazar was then in Durban, having gone t here to meet me. He was 
capable and fearless and guided the Indian communit y. Their advocate Mr. 
Laughton was an equally fearless man. He condemned the conduct of the white 
residents and advised the community, not merely as their paid advocate, but 
also as their true friend. 
Thus Durban had become the scene of an unequal duel . On one side there was a 
handful of poor Indians and a few of their English friends, and on the other 
were ranged the white men, strong in arms, in numbe rs, in education and in 
wealth. They had also the backing of the State, for  the Natal Government Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  openly helped them. Mr. Harry Excombe, who was the most influential of the 
members of the Cabinet, openly took part in their m eetings. 
We arranged all sorts of games on the ships for the  entertainment of the 
passengers. I took part in the merriment, but my he art was in the combat that 
was going on in Durban. For I was the real target. There were two charges 
against me:  
1. that whilst in India I had indulged in unmerited  condemnation of the Natal 
whites; 
2. that with a view to swamping Natal with Indians I had specially brought the 
two shiploads of passengers to settle there. 
I was conscious of my responsibility. I knew that D ada Abdulla and Co. had 
incurred grave risks on my account, the lives of th e passengers were in danger, 
and by my bringing my family with me I had put them  likewise in jeopardy. 
But I was absolutely innocent. I had induced no one  to go to Natal. I did not 
know the passengers when they embarked. And with th e exception of a couple 
of relatives, I did not know the name and address o f even one of the hundreds 
of passengers on board. Neither had I said, whilst in India, a word about the 
whites in Natal that I had not already said in Nata l itself. And I had ample 
evidence in support of all that I had said. 
Thus the days dragged on their weary length. At the  end of twenty-three days 
the ships were permitted to enter the harbour, and orders permitting the 
passengers to land were passed. 
So the ships were brought into the dock and the pas sengers began to go ashore. 
But Mr. Excombe had sent word to the Captain that, as the whites were highly 
enraged against me and my life was in danger, my fa mily and I should be 
advised to land at dusk, when the Port Superintende nt Mr. Tatum would escort 
us home. The Captain communicated the message to me , and I agreed to act 
accordingly. But scarcely half an hour after this, Mr. Laughton came to the 
Captain. He said: T would, like to take Mr. Gandhi with me, should he have no 
objection. As the legal adviser of the Agent Compan y I tell you that you are not Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  bound to carry out the message you have received fr om Mr. Escombe.' After this 
he came to me and said somewhat to this effect: 'If  you are not afraid, I 
suggest that Mrs. Gandhi and the children should dr ive to Mr. Rustomji's house 
whilst you and I follow them on foot. I do not at a ll like the idea of your 
entering the city like a thief in the night. I do n ot think there is any fear of 
anyone hurting you. Everything is quiet now. The wh ites have all dispersed. But 
in any case I am convinced that you ought not to en ter the city stealthily.' I 
readily agreed. My wife and children drove safely t o Mr. Rustomji's place. With 
the Captain's permission I went ashore with Mr. Lau ghton. Mr. Rustomji's, house 
was about two miles from the dock. 
As Soon as we landed, some youngsters recognized me  and shouted 'Gandhi, 
Gandhi'. About half a dozen men rushed to th<? spot  and joined in the shouting. 
Mr. Laughtor, feared that the crowd might swell and  hailed a rickshaw. I had 
never liked the idea of being in a rickshaw. This w as to be my first experience. 
But the youngsters would not let me get into it. Th ey frightened the rickshaw 
boy out of his life, and he took to his heels. As w e went ahead, the crowd 
continued to swell, until it became impossible to p roceed further. They first 
caught hold of Mr. Laughton and separated us. Then they pelted me with 
stones, brickbats and rotten eggs. Someone snatched  away my turban, whilst 
others began to batter and kick me. I fainted and c aught hold of the front 
railings of a house and stood there to get my breat h. But it, was impossible. 
They came upon me boxing and battering. The wife of  the Police 
Superintendent, who knew me, happened to be passing  by. The brave lady 
came up, opened her parasol though there was no sun  then, and stood between 
the crowd and me. This checked the fury of the mob,  as it was difficult for 
them to deliver blows on me without harming Mrs. Al exander. 
Meanwhile an Indian youth who witnessed the inciden t had run to the police 
station. The Police Superintendent Mr. Alexander se nt a posse of men to ring 
me round and escort me safely to my destination. Th ey arrived in time. The 
police station lay on our way. As we reached there,  the Superintendent asked 
me to take refuge in the station, but I gratefully declined the offer. They are Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  sure to quiet down when they realize their mistake, ' I said. ‘I have trust in their 
sense of fairness.' Escorted by the police, I arriv ed without further harm at Mr. 
Rustomji's place. I had bruises all over, but no ab rasions except in one place. 
Dr. Dadibarjor, the ship's doctor, who was on the s pot, rendered the best 
possible help. 
There was quiet inside, but outside the whites surr ounded the house. Night was 
coming on, and the yelling crowd was shouting. 'We must have Gandhi.' The 
quick-sighted Police Superintendent was already the re trying to keep the 
crowds under control, not by threats, but by humour ing them. But he was not 
entirely free from anxiety. He sent me a message to  this effect: 'If you would 
save your friend's house and property and also your  family, you should escape 
from the house in disguise, as I suggest.' 
As suggested by the Superintendent, I put on an Ind ian constable's uniform and 
wore on my head a Madrasi scarf, wrapped round a pl ate to serve as a helmet. 
Two detectives accompanied me, one of them disguise d as an Indian merchant 
and with his face painted to resemble that of an In dian. I forget the disguise of 
the other. We reached a neighbouring shop by a by-l ane and, making our way 
through the gunny bags piled in the godown, escaped  by the gate of the shop 
and threaded our way through the crowd to a carriag e that had been kept for 
me at the end of the street. In this we drove off t o the same police station 
where Mr. Alexander had offered me refuge a short t ime before, and I thanked 
him and the detective officers. 
Whilst I had been thus effecting my escape, Mr. Ale xander had kept the crowd 
amused by singing the tune: 'Hang old Gandhi! 
On the sour apple tree.' When he was informed of my  safe arrival at the police 
station, he thus broke the news to the crowd: 'Well , your victim has made good 
his escape through a neighbouring shop. You had bet ter go home now.' Some of 
them were angry, others laughed, some refused to be lieve the story. 
'Well then,' said the Superintendent, 'if you do no t believe me, you may appoint 
one or two representatives, whom I am ready to take  inside the house. If they 
succeed in finding out Gandhi, I will gladly delive r him to you. But if they fail, Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  you must disperse. I am sure that you have no inten tion of destroying Mr. 
Rustomji's house or of harming Mr. Gandhi's wife an d children.' 
The crowd sent their representatives to search the house. They soon returned 
with disappointing news, and the crowd broke up at last, most of them 
admiring the Superintendent's tactful handling of t he situation, and a few 
fretting and fuming. 
The late Mr. Chamberlain, who was then Secretary of  State for the Colonies, 
cabled asking the Natal Government to prosecute my assailants. Mr. Escombe 
sent for me, expressed his regret for the injuries I had sustained, and said: 
'Believe me, I cannot feel happy over the least lit tle injury done to your person. 
You had a right to accept Mr. Laughton's advice and  to face the worst, but I am 
sure that, if you had considered my suggestion favo urably, these sad 
occurrences would not have happened. If you can ide ntify the assailants, I am 
prepared to arrest and prosecute them. Mr. Chamberl ain also desires me to do 
so.' 
To which I gave the following reply: 
'I do not want to prosecute anyone. It is possible that I may be able to identify 
one or two of them, but what is the use of getting them punished? Besides, I do 
not hold the assailants to blame. They were given t o understand that I had 
made exaggerated statements in India about the whit es in Natal and 
calumniated them. If they believed these reports, i t is no wonder that they 
were enraged. The leaders and, if you will permit m e to say so, you are to 
blame. You could have guided the people properly, b ut you also believed 
Reuter and assumed that I must have indulged in exa ggerations. I do not want 
to bring any one to book. I am sure that, when the truth becomes known, they 
will be sorry for their conduct.' 
'Would you mind giving me this in writing?' said Mr . Escombe. 'Because I shall 
have to cable to Mr. Chamberlain to that effect. I do not want you to make any 
statement in haste. You may, if you like, consult M r. Laughton and your other 
friends, before you come to a final decision. I may  confess, however, that, if Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  you waive the right of bringing your assailants to book, you will considerably 
help me in restoring quiet, besides enhancing your own reputation.' 
'Thank you,' said I. 'I need not consult anyone. I had made my decision in the 
matter before I came to you. It is my conviction th at I should not prosecute the 
assailants, and I am prepared this moment to reduce  my decision to writing.' 
With this I gave him the necessary statement. 
On the day of landing, a representative of  The Natal Advertiser  had come to 
interview me. He had asked me a number of questions , and in reply I had been 
able to refute every one of the charges that had be en levelled against me. 
Thanks to Sir Pherozeshah Mehta, I had delivered on ly written speeches in 
India, and I had copies of them all, as well as of my other writings. I had given 
the interviewer all this literature and showed him that in India I had said 
nothing which I had not already said in South Afric a in stronger language. I had 
also shown him that I had had no hand in bringing t he passengers of the  
Courland  and  Naderi  to South Africa. Many of them were old residents, and 
most of them, far from wanting to stay in Natal, me ant to go to the Transvaal. 
In those days the Transvaal offered better prospect s than Natal to those coming 
in search of wealth, and most Indians, therefore, p referred to go there. 
This interview and my refusal to prosecute the assa ilants produced such a 
profound impression that the Europeans of Durban we re ashamed of their 
conduct. The press declared me to be innocent and c ondemned the mob. Thus 
the lynching ultimately proved to be a blessing for  me, that is, for the cause. It 
enhanced the prestige of the Indian community in So uth Africa and made my 
work easier. In three or four days I went to my hou se, and it was not long 
before I settled down again. 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103   
30. EDUCATION OF CHILDREN AND NURSING 
When I landed at Durban in January 1897, I had thre e children with me, my 
sister's son ten years old, and my own sons nine an d five years of age. Where 
was I to educate them? 
I could have sent them to the schools for European children, but only as a 
matter of favour and exception. No other Indian chi ldren were allowed to 
attend them. For these there were schools establish ed by Christian missions, 
but I was not prepared to send my children there, a s I did not like the 
education imparted in those schools. For one thing,  the medium of instruction 
would be only English, or perhaps incorrect Tamil o r Hindi; this too could only 
have been arranged with difficulty. I could not pos sibly put up with this and 
other disadvantages. In the meantime I was making m y own attempt to teach 
them. 
I was loath to send them back to India, for I belie ved even then that young 
children should not be separated from their parents . The education that 
children naturally imbibe in a well-ordered househo ld is impossible to obtain in 
hostels. I therefore kept my children with me. 
I could not devote to the children all the time I h ad wanted to give them. My 
inability to give them enough attention and other u navoidable causes prevented 
me from providing them with the literary education I had desired, and, all my 
sons have had complaints to make against me in this  matter. Whenever they 
come across an M.A. or B.A. or even a matriculate, they seem to feel the 
handicap of a want of school education. 
Nevertheless I am of opinion that, if I had insiste d on their being educated 
somehow at public schools, they would have been dep rived of the training that 
can he had only at the school of experience, or fro m constant contact with the 
parents. There are within my knowledge a number of young men today 
contemporaneous with my sons. I do not think that m an to man they are any 
better than my sons, or that my sons have much to l earn from them. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104  But the ultimate result of my experiments is in the  womb of the future. My 
object in discussing this subject here is that a st udent of the history of 
civilization may have some measure of the differenc e between disciplined 
home education and school education. 
Besides, had I been without a sense of self-respect  and satisfied myself with 
having for my children the education that other chi ldren could not get, I should 
have deprived them of the object-lesson in liberty and self-respect that I gave 
them at the cost of the literary training. And wher e a choice has to be made 
between liberty and learning, who will not say that  the former has to be 
preferred a thousand times to the latter? 
The youths whom I called out in 1920 from those cit adels of slavery — their 
schools and colleges — and whom I advised that it w as far better to remain 
unlettered and break stones for the sake of liberty  than to go in for a literary 
education in the chains of slaves will probably be able now to trace my advice 
to its source. 
I longed for some humanitarian work of a permanent nature. Dr. Booth was the 
head of the St. Aidan's Mission. He was a kind-hear ted man and treated his 
patients free. Thanks to Farsi Rustomji's charities , it was possible to open a 
small charitable hospital under Dr. Booth's charge.  I felt strongly inclined to 
serve as a nurse in this hospital. It brought me in  close touch with suffering 
Indians, most of them indentured Tamil, Telugu, or North Indian men. The 
experience stood me in good stead, when during the Boer War I offered my 
services for nursing the sick and wounded soldiers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105   
31. SIMPLE LIFE 
The washerman's bill was heavy, and as he was besid es by no means noted for 
his punctuality, even two to three dozen shirts and  collars proved insufficient 
for me. Collars had to be changed daily and shirts,  if not daily, at least every 
alternate day. This meant a double expense, which a ppeared to me 
unnecessary. So I equipped myself with a washing ou tfit to save it. I bought a 
book on washing, studied the art and taught it also  to my wife. This no doubt 
added to my work, but its novelty made it a pleasur e. 
I shall never forget the first collar that I washed  myself. I had used more starch 
than necessary, the iron had not been made hot enou gh, and for fear of burning 
the collar I had not pressed it sufficiently. The r esult was that, though the 
collar was fairly stiff, the superfluous starch con tinually dropped off it. I went 
to court with the collar on, thus inviting the ridi cule of brother barristers, but 
even in those days I could be impervious to ridicul e. 
'Well,' said I, 'this is my first experience at was hing my own collars and hence 
the loose starch. But it does not trouble me, and t hen there is the advantage of 
providing you with so much fun.' 
'But surely there is no lack of laundries here?' as ked a friend. 
'The laundry bill is very heavy,' said I. 'The char ge for washing a collar is almost 
as much as its price, and even then there is the et ernal dependence on the 
washerman. I prefer by far to wash my things myself .' 
In the same way, as I freed myself from slavery to the washerman, I threw off 
dependence on the barber. All people who go to Engl and learn there at least 
the art of shaving, but none, to my knowledge, lear n to cut their own hair. I 
had to learn that too. I once went to an English ha ir-cutter in Pretoria. He 
contemptuously refused to cut my hair. I certainly felt hurt, but immediately 
purchased a pair of clippers and cut my hair before  the mirror. I succeeded 
more or less in cutting the front hair, but I spoil ed the back. The friends in the 
court shook with laughter. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  'What's wrong with your hair, Gandhi? Rats have bee n at it?' 'No. The white 
barber would not ' condescend to touch my black hai r,' said I, so I preferred to 
cut it myself, no. matter how badly.' 
The reply did not surprise the friends. 
The barber was not at fault in having refused to cu t my hair. There was every 
chance of his losing his custom, if he should serve  black men. We do not allow 
our barbers to serve our 'untouchable' brethren. I got the reward of this in 
South Africa, not once, but many times, and the con viction that it was the 
punishment for our own sins saved me from becoming angry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107   
32. A RECOLLECTION AND A PENANCE 
A variety of incidents in my life have conspired to  bring me in close contact 
with people of many creeds and many communities, an d my experience with all 
of them warrants the statement that I have known no  distinction between 
relatives and strangers, countrymen and foreigners,  white and coloured, Hindus 
and Indians of other faiths, whether Musalmans, Par sis, Christians or Jews. I 
may say that my heart has been incapable of making any such distinctions. I 
cannot claim this as a special virtue, as it is in my very nature. 
When I was practising in Durban, my office clerks o ften stayed with me, and 
there were among them Hindus and Christians, or to describe them by their 
provinces, Gujaratis and Tamilians. I do not recoll ect having ever regarded 
them as anything but my kith and kin. I treated the m as members of my family, 
and had unpleasantness with my wife if ever she sto od in the way of my 
treating them as such. One of the clerks was a Chri stian, born of so-called 
untouchable parents. 
The house was built after the Western model and the  rooms rightly had no 
outlets for dirty water. Each; room had therefore c hamber-pots. Rather than 
have these cleaned by a servant or a sweeper, my wi fe or I attended to them. 
The clerks who made themselves completely at home w ould naturally clean 
their own pots, but the Christian clerk was a newco mer, and it was our duty to 
attend to his bedroom. My wife managed the pots of the others, but to clean 
those used by one who had been an 'untouchable' see med to her to be the limit, 
and we fell out. She could not bear the pots being cleaned by me, neither did 
she like doing it herself. Even today I can recall the picture of her chiding me, 
her eyes red with anger and pearl drops streaming d own her cheeks, as she 
descended the staircase, pot in hand. But I was a c ruelly kind husband. I 
regarded myself as her teacher, and so harassed her  out of my blind love for 
her. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  I was far from being satisfied by her merely carryi ng the pot. I would have her 
do it cheerfully. So I said, raising my voice: 'I w ill not stand this nonsense in my 
house.' 
The words pierced her like an arrow. 
She shouted back: Keep your house to yourself and l et me go.' I forgot myself, 
and the spring of compassion dried up in me. I caug ht her by the hand, dragged 
the helpless woman to the gate, which was just oppo site the staircase, and 
proceeded to open it with the intention of pushing her out. The tears were 
running down her cheeks in torrents, and she cried:  Have you no sense of 
shame? Must you so far forget yourself? Where am I to go? I have no parents or 
relatives here to harbour me. Being your wife, you think I must put up with 
your cuffs and kicks? For Heaven's sake behave your self, and shut the gate. Let 
us not be found making scenes like this!' 
I put on a brave face, but was really ashamed and s hut the gate. If my wife 
could not leave me, neither could I leave her. We h ave had numerous 
bickerings, but the end has always been peace betwe en us. The wife, with her 
matchless powers of endurance, has always been the victor. 
Today I am in a position to narrate the incident wi th some detachment, as it 
belongs to a period out of which I have fortunately  emerged. I am no longer a 
blind infatuated husband, I am no more my wife's te acher. Kasturba can, if she 
will, be as unpleasant to me today, as I used to be  to her before. We are tried 
friends, the one no longer regarding the other as t he object of lust. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109   
33. THE BOER WAR 
I must skip many other experiences of the period be tween 1897 and 1899 and 
come straight to the Boer War. 
When the war was declared, my personal sympathies w ere all with the Boers, 
but I believed then that I had yet no right, in suc h cases, to enforce my 
individual convictions. I have minutely dealt with the inner struggle regarding 
this in my History of Satyagraha in South Africa,  and I must not repeat the 
argument here. I invite the curious to turn to thos e pages. Suffice it to say that 
my loyalty to the British rule drove me to particip ation with the British in that 
war. I felt that, if I demanded rights as a British  citizen, it was also my duty, as 
such, to participate in the defence of the British Empire. I held then that India 
could achieve her complete emancipation only within  and through the British 
Empire. So I collected together as many comrades as  possible, and with very 
great difficulty got their services accepted as an ambulance corps. 
The average Englishman believed that the Indian was  a coward, incapable of 
taking risks or looking beyond his immediate self-i nterest. Many English friends, 
therefore, threw cold water on my plan. But Dr. Boo th supported it whole-
heartedly. He trained us in ambulance work. We secu red medical certificates of 
fitness for service. Mr. Laughton and the late Mr. Escombe enthusiastically 
supported the plan, and we applied at last for serv ice at the front. 
Our corps was 1,100 strong, with nearly 40 leaders.  About three hundred were 
free Indians, and the rest indentured. Dr. Booth wa s also with us. The corps 
acquitted itself well. Though our work was to be ou tside the firing line, and 
though we had the protection of the Red Cross, we w ere asked at a critical 
moment to serve within the firing line. The reserva tion had not been of our 
seeking. The authorities did not want us to be with in the range of fire. The 
situation, however, was changed after the repulse a t Spion Kop, and General 
Buller sent the message that, though we were not bo und to take the risk, 
Government would be thankful if we would do so and fetch the wounded from 
the field. We had no hesitation, and so the action at Spion Kop found us Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  working within the firing line. During these days w e had to march from twenty 
to twenty-five miles a day, bearing the wounded on stretchers. Amongst the 
wounded we had the honour of carrying soldiers like  General Woodgate. The 
corps was disbanded after six weeks' service. 
Our humble work was at the moment much applauded an d the Indians' prestige 
was enhanced. The newspapers published laudatory rh ymes with the refrain, 
'We are sons of the Empire after all.' 
General Buller mentioned with appreciation the work  of the corps in his 
dispatch, and the leaders were awarded the War Meda l. 
The Indian community became better organized. I got  into closer touch with 
the indentured Indians. There came a greater awaken ing amongst them, and 
the feeling that Hindus, Musalmans, Christians, Tam ilians, Gujaratis and Sindhis 
were all Indians and children of the same motherlan d took deep root amongst 
them. Everyone believed that the Indians' grievance s were now sure to be 
redressed. At the moment the white man's attitude s eemed to be distinctly 
changed. The relations formed with the whites durin g the war were of the 
sweetest. We had come in contact with thousands of tommies. They were 
friendly with us and thankful for our being there t o serve them. 
I cannot forbear from recording a sweet reminiscenc e of how human nature 
shows itself at its best in moments of trial. We we re marching towards Chievely 
Camp where Lieutenant Roberts, the son of Lord Robe rts, had received a 
mortal wound. 
Our corps had the honour of carrying the body from the field. It was a sultry 
day — the day of our march. Everyone was thirsting for water. There was a tiny 
brook on the way where we could slake our thirst. B ut who was to drink first? 
We had proposed to come in after the tommies had fi nished. But they would 
not begin first and urged us to do so, and for a wh ile a pleasant competition 
went on for giving precedence to one another. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111   
34. SANITARY REFORM 
I have always been loath to hide or connive at the weak points of the 
community or to press for its rights without having  purged it of its blemishes. 
Therefore, ever since my settlement in Natal, I had  been endeavouring to clear 
the community of a charge that had been levelled ag ainst it, not without a 
certain amount of truth. The charge had often been made that the Indian was 
slovenly in his habits and did not keep his house a nd surroundings clean. The 
principal men of the community had, therefore, alre ady begun to put their 
houses in order, but house-to-house inspection was undertaken only when 
plague was reported to be imminent in Durban. This was done after consulting, 
and gaining the approval of, the city fathers, who had desired our co-operation. 
Our cooperation made work easier for them and at th e same time lessened our 
hardships. 
But I had some bitter experiences. I saw that I cou ld not so easily count on the 
help of the community in getting it to do its own d uty, as I could in claiming for 
its rights. At some places I met with insults, at o thers with polite indifference. 
It was too much for people to bestir themselves to keep their surroundings 
clean. To expect them to find money for the work wa s out of the question. 
These experiences taught me, better than ever befor e, that without infinite 
patience it was impossible to get the people to do any work. It is the reformer 
who is anxious for the reform, and not society, fro m which he should expect 
nothing better than opposition, abhorrence and even  mortal persecution. Why 
may not society regard as retrogression what the re former holds dear as life 
itself? 
Nevertheless the result of this agitation was that the community learnt to 
recognize more or less the necessity for keeping th eir houses and environments 
clean. I gained the esteem of the authorities. They  saw that, though I had 
made it my business to ventilate grievances and pre ss for rights, I was no less 
keen and insistent upon self-purification. 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112   
35. COSTLY GIFTS 
On my relief from war-duty I felt that my work was no longer in South Africa 
but in India. Friends at home were also pressing me  to return, and I felt that I 
should be of more service in India. So I requested my co-workers to relieve me. 
After very great difficulty my request was conditio nally accepted, the condition 
being that I should be ready to go back to South. A frica if, within a year, the 
community should need me. Farewell meetings were ar ranged at every place, 
and costly gifts were presented to me. The gifts of  course included things in 
gold and silver, but there were articles of costly diamond as well. 
What right had I to accept all these gifts? Accepti ng them, how could I persuade 
myself that I was serving the community without rem uneration? All the gifts, 
excepting a few from my clients, were purely for my  service to the community, 
and I could make no difference between my clients a nd co-workers; for the 
clients also helped me in my public work. 
One of the gifts was a gold necklace worth fifty gu ineas, meant for my wife. 
But even that gift was given because of my public w ork, and so it could not be 
separated from the rest. 
The evening I was presented with the bulk of these things I had a sleepless 
night. I walked up and down my room deeply agitated , but could find no 
solution. It was difficult for me to forego gifts w orth hundreds, it was more 
difficult to keep them. 
And even if I could keep them, what about my childr en? What about my wife? 
They were being trained to a life of service and to  an understanding that 
service was its own reward.  
I had no costly ornaments in the house. We had been  fast simplifying our life. 
How then could we afford to have gold watches? How could we afford to wear 
gold chains and diamond rings? Even then I was exho rting people to conquer the 
infatuation for jewellery. What was I now to do wit h the jewellery that had 
come upon me? Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  I decided that I could not keep these things. I dra fted a letter , creating a trust 
of them in favour of the community and appointing P arsi Rustomji and others 
trustees. In the morning I held a consultation with  my wife and children and 
finally got  rid of the heavy incubus. 
I knew that I should have some difficulty in persua ding my wife, and I was sure 
that I should have none so far as the children were  concerned. So I decided to 
constitute them my attorneys. 
The children readily agreed to my proposal. 'We do not need these costly 
presents; we must return them to the community, and  should we ever need 
them, we could easily purchase them,' they said. 
I was delighted. Then you will plead with mother, w on't you?' I asked them. 
'Certainly,' said they. 'That is our business. She does not need to wear the 
ornaments. She would want to keep them for us, and if we don't want them, 
why should she not agree to part with them?' 
But it was easier said than done. 
'You may not need them,' said my wife. 'Your childr en may not need them. 
Cajoled they will dance to your tune. I can underst and your not permitting me 
to wear them. But what about my daughters-in-law? T hey will be sure to need 
them. And who knows what will happen tomorrow? I wo uld be the last person to 
part with gifts so lovingly given.' 
And thus the torrent of argument went on, reinforce d in the end by tears. But 
the children were adamant. And I was unmoved. 
I mildly put in: The children have yet to get marri ed. We do not want to see 
them married young. When they are grown up, they ca n take care of 
themselves. And surely we shall not have, for our s ons, brides who are fond of 
ornaments. And if after all, we need to provide the m with ornaments, I am 
there. You will ask me then.' 
'Ask you? I know you by this time. You deprived me of my ornaments, you would 
not leave me in peace with them. Fancy you offering  to get ornaments for the Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  daughters-in-law! You who are trying to make  sadhus  of my boys from today! 
No, the ornaments will not be returned. And pray wh at right have you to my 
necklace?' 
'But,' I rejoined, 'is the necklace given you for y our service or for my service?' 
I agree. But service rendered by you is as good as rendered by me. I have toiled 
and moiled for you day and night. Is that no servic e? You forced all and sundry 
on me, making me weep bitter tears, and I slaved fo r them!' 
These were pointed thrusts, and some of them went h ome. But I was 
determined to return the ornaments. I somehow succe eded in extorting consent 
from her. The gifts received in 1896 and 1901 were all returned. A trust-deed 
was prepared, and they were deposited with a bank, to be used for the service 
of the community, according to my wishes or to thos e of the trustees. 
Often, when I was in need of funds for public purpo ses, and felt that I must 
draw upon the trust, I have been able to raise the requisite amount, leaving the 
trust money intact. The fund is still there, being operated upon in times of 
need, and it has regularly accumulated. 
I have never since regretted the step, and as the y ears have gone by, my wife 
has also seen its wisdom. It has saved us from in a ny temptations. 
I am definitely of opinion that a public worker sho uld accept no costly gifts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART VII: BACK IN INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116   
36. MY FIRST CONGRESS 
After reaching India I spent some time in going abo ut the country. It was the 
year 1901 when the Congress met at Calcutta under t he presidentship of Mr. 
(later Sir) Dinshaw Wacha. And I of course attended  it. It was my first 
experience of the Congress. 
I asked a volunteer where I was to go. He took me t o the Ripon College, where 
a number of delegates were being put up. The volunt eers were clashing against 
one another. You asked one of them to do something.  He delegated it to 
another, and he in his turn to a third and so on; a nd as for the delegates, they 
were neither here nor there. 
There was no limit to insanitation. Pools of water were everywhere. There 
were only a few latrines, and the recollection of t heir stink still oppresses me. I 
pointed it out to the volunteers. They said pointbl ank: 'That is not our work, it 
is the scavenger's work.' I asked for a broom. The man stared at me in wonder. I 
procured one and cleaned the latrine. But that was for myself. The rush was so 
great, and the latrines were so few, that they need ed frequent cleaning; but 
that was more than I could do. 
There were yet two days for the Congress session to  begin. I had made up my 
mind to offer my services to the Congress office in  order to gain some 
experience. Babu Bhupendranath Basu and Sjt. Ghosal  were the secretaries. I 
went to Bhupenbabu and offered my services. He look ed at me, and said: 'I 
have no work, but possibly Ghosalbabu might have so mething to give you. 
Please go to him.' 
So I went to him. He scanned me and said with a smi le: 
'I can give you only clerical work. Will you do it? ' 
'Certainly,' said I. 'I am here to do anything that  is not beyond my capacity.' 
That is the right spirit, young man,' he said. Addr essing the volunteers who 
surrounded him, he added, 'Do you hear what this yo ung man says?' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  Then turning to me he proceeded: 'Well then, here i s a heap of letters for 
disposal. Take that chair and begin. As you see, hu ndreds of people come to 
see me. What am I to do? Am I to meet them or am I to answer these 
busybodies inundating me with letters? I have no cl erks to whom I can entrust 
this work. Most of these letters have nothing in th em, but you will please look 
them through. Acknowledge those that are worth it, and refer to me those that 
need a considered reply.' 
I was delighted at the confidence reposed in me. 
Shri Ghosal did not know me when he gave me the wor k. Only later did he 
enquire about my credentials. When he learnt someth ing from me about my 
history, he felt rather sorry to have given me cler ical work. But I reassured 
him: 'Please don't worry. What am I before you? You  have grown gray in the 
service of the Congress, and are as an elder to me.  I am but an inexperienced 
youth. You have put me under a debt of obligation b y entrusting me with this 
work. For I want to do Congress work, and you have given me the rare 
opportunity of understanding the details.' And thus  we became good friends. 
Shri Ghosal used to get his shirt buttoned by his b earer. I volunteered to do the 
bearer's duty, and I loved to do it, as my regard f or elders was always great. 
When he came to know this, he did not mind my doing  little acts of personal 
service for him. In fact he was delighted. The bene fit I received from this 
service is incalculable. 
In a few days I came to know the working of the Con gress. I met most of the 
leaders. I observed the movements of stalwarts like  Gokhate and Surendranath. 
I also noticed the huge waste of time there. I obse rved too, with sorrow even 
then, the prominent place that the English language  occupied in our affairs. 
There was little regard for economy of energy. More  than one did the work of 
one, and many an important thing was no one's busin ess at all. 
Critical as my mind was in observing these things, there was enough charity in 
me, and so I always thought that it might, after al l, be impossible to do better 
in the circumstances, and that saved me from underv aluing any work. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  Sir Pherozeshah had agreed to admit my resolution o n South Africa, but I was 
wondering who would put it before the Subjects Comm ittee, and when. For 
there were lengthy speeches to every resolution, al l in English to boot, and 
every resolution had some well-known leader to back  it. Mine was but a feeble 
pipe amongst those veteran drums, and as the night was closing in, my heart 
beat fast. Everyone was hurrying to go. It was 11 o 'clock. I had not the courage 
to speak. I had already met Gokhale, who had looked  at my resolution. So I 
drew near his chair and whispered to him: 'Please d o something for me.' 'So we 
have done?' said Sir Pherozeshah Mehta. 
'No, no, there is still the resolution on South Afr ica. Mr. Gandhi has been 
waiting long,' cried out Gokhale. 
'Have ou seen the resolution?' asked Sir Pherozesha h. 
'Of course.' 
'Do you like it?' 
'It is quite good.' 
'Well then, let us have it, Gandhi.' I read it trem bling. 
Gokhale supported it. 
'Unanimously passed,' cried out everyone. 
'You will have five minutes to speak to it Gandhi.'  said Mr. Wacha. 
The procedure was far from pleasing to me. No one h ad troubled to understand 
the resolution, everyone was in a hurry to go and. because Gokhale had seen 
the resolution, it was not thought necessary for th e rest to see it or understand 
it! 
The morning found me worrying about my speech. What  was I to say in five 
minutes? I had prepared myself fairly well but the words would not come to 
me. I read the resolution somehow. Someone had prin ted and distributed 
amongst the delegates copies of a poem he had writt en in praise of foreign 
emigration. I read the poem and referred to the gri evances of the settlers in 
South Africa. Just at this moment Mr. Wacha rang th e bell. I was sure I had not Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  yet spoken for five minutes. I did not know that th e bell was rung in order to 
warn me to finish in two minutes more. I had heard others speak for half an 
hour or three quarters of an hour, and yet no bell was rung for them. I felt hurt 
and sat down as soon as the bell was rung. 
There was no question about the passing of the reso lution. In those days there 
was hardly any difference between visitors and dele gates. Everyone raised his 
hand and all resolutions passed unanimously. My res olution also fared in this 
wise and so lost all its importance for me. And yet  the very fact that it was 
passed by the Congress was enough to delight my hea rt. The knowledge that 
the  imprimatur  of the Congress meant that of the whole country wa s enough to 
delight anyone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
37. LORD CURZON'S DARBAR 
The Congress was over, but as I had to meet the Cha mber of Commerce and 
various people in connection with work in South Afr ica, I stayed in Calcutta for 
a month. Rather than stay this time in a hotel, I a rranged to get the required 
introduction for a room in the India Club. Among it s members were some 
prominent Indians, and I looked forward to getting into touch with them and 
interesting them in the work in South Africa. 
Lord Curzon held his darbar about this time. Some R ajas and Maharajas who 
had been invited to the durbar were members of the Club. In the Club I always 
found them wearing fine Bengalee  dhotis  and shirts and scarves. On the durbar 
day they put on trousers befitting  khansamas  and shining boots. I was pained 
and inquired of one of them the reason for the chan ge. 
'We alone know our unfortunate condition. We alone know the insults we have 
to put up with, in order that we may possess our we alth and titles,' he replied. 
'But what about these  khansama  turbans and these shining boots?' I asked. 
'Do you see any difference between  khanscimas  and us?' he replied, and added, 
'they are our  khansamas,  we are Lord Curzon's  khansamas.  If I were to absent 
myself from the levee,  I should have to suffer the consequences. If I wer e to 
attend it in my usual dress, it would be an offence . And do you think I am going 
to get any opportunity there of talking to Lord Cur zon? Not a bit of it!' 
I was moved to pity for this plain spoken friend. 
This reminds me of another darbar. 
At the time when Lord Hardinge laid the foundation stone of the Hindu 
University, there was a darbar. There were Rajas an d Maharajas of course, but 
Pandit Malaviyaji specially invited me also to atte nd it, and I did so. 
I was distressed to see the Maharajas bedecked like  women — silk  pyjamas  and 
silk  achkans,  pearl necklaces round their necks, bracelets on th eir wrists, pearl Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  and diamond tassels on their turbans and, besides a ll this, swords with golden 
hilts hanging from their waist-bands. 
I discovered that these were insignia not of their royalty, but of their slavery. I 
had thought that they were wearing these badges of impotence of their own 
free will, but I was told that it was obligatory fo r these Rajas to wear all their 
costly jewels at such functions. I also gathered th at some of them had a 
positive dislike for wearing these jewels. How- hea vy is the toll of sins and 
wrongs that wealth, power and prestige exact from m an! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122   
38. IN BOMBAY 
Gokhale was very anxious that I should settle down in Bombay, practise at the 
bar and help him in public work. Public work in tho se days meant Congress 
work. I liked Gokhale's advice, but I was not over- confident of success as a 
barrister. The unpleasant memories of past failure were yet with me. I, 
therefore, decided to start work first at Rajkot. 
I had been thinking of staying on in Rajkot for som e time longer, when one day 
Kevalram Dave came to me and said: 'Gandhi, we will  not suffer you to 
vegetate here. You must settle in Bombay. You are d estined to do public work, 
and we will not allow you to be buried in Kathiawad . So tell me, then, when 
you will go to Bombay.' 
'I am expecting a remittance from Natal. As soon as  I get it I will go,' I replied. 
The money came in about two weeks, and I went to Bo mbay. 
I prospered in my profession better than I had expe cted. My South African 
clients often entrusted me with some work, and it w as enough to enable me to 
pay my way. 
Just when I seemed to be settling down as I had int ended, I received an 
unexpected cable from South Africa: 'Chamberlain ex pected here. Please return 
immediately.' I remembered my promise and cabled to  say that I should be 
ready to start the moment they put me in funds. The y promptly responded. I 
gave up the chambers and started for South Africa. 
I had an idea that the work there would keep me eng aged for at least a year, so 
I kept the bungalow and left my wife and children t here. 
I believed then that enterprising youths who could not find an opening in the 
country should emigrate to other lands. I therefore  took with me four or five 
such youths, one of whom was Maganlal Gandhi. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART VIII: IN SOUTH AFRICA AGAIN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124   
39. IN SOUTH AFRICA AGAIN 
I reached Durban not a day too soon. There was work  waiting for me. The date 
for the deputation to wait on Mr. Chamberlain had b een fixed. I had to draft 
the memorial to be submitted to him and accompany t he deputation. 
Mr. Chamberlain had come to get a gift of 35 millio n pounds from South Africa, 
and to win the hearts of Englishmen and Boers. So h e gave a cold shoulder to 
the Indian deputation. 
'You know,' he said, 'that the Imperial Government has little control over self-
governing Colonies. Your grievances seem to be genu ine. I shall do what I can, 
but you must try your best to placate the Europeans , if you wish to live in their 
midst.' 
The reply cast a chill over the members of the depu tation. I was also 
disappointed. It was an eye-opener for us all, and I saw that we should start 
with our work  de novo.  I explained the situation to my colleagues. 
From Natal he hastened to the Transvaal. I had to p repare the case for the 
Indians there as well and submit it to him. But how  was I to get to Pretoria? Our 
people there were not in a position to procure the necessary legal facilities for 
my getting to them in time. The War had reduced the  Transvaal to a howling 
wilderness. There were neither provisions nor cloth ing available. Even refugees 
could not be allowed to return until the shops were  ready with provisions. 
Every Transvaaller had therefore to obtain a permit . The European had no 
difficulty in getting one, but the Indian found it very hard. There was a special 
department for the Negroes and another for the Asia tics. The Indians had to 
apply to this department. I was told that no permit  could be had without 
influence and that in some cases one had to pay up to hundred pounds in spite 
of the influence which one might bring to bear. Thu s there seemed to be no 
way open to me. I went to my old friend, the Police  Superintendent of Durban, 
and said to him: 'Please introduce me to the Permit  Officer and help me to 
obtain a permit. You know that I have been a reside nt of the Transvaal.' He Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  immediately put on his hat, came out and secured me  a permit. I thanked 
Superintendent Alexander and started for Pretoria. 
On reaching Pretoria I drafted the memorial. In Dur ban I do not recollect the 
Indians having been asked to submit in advance the names of their 
representatives, but here there was the new departm ent and it asked us to do 
so. 
We did and we had a letter from the Chief of the As iatic Department to the 
effect that, as I had seen Mr. Chamberlain in Durba n, it had been found 
necessary to omit my name from the deputation which  was to wait on him. 
The letter was more than my co-workers could bear. 'It is at your instance that 
the community helped in the war, and you see the re sult now,' were the words 
with which some people taunted me. But the taunt ha d no effect. 'I do not 
regret my advice,' said I. 'I maintain that we did well in taking part in the war. 
In doing so we simply did our duty. We may not look  forward to any reward for 
our labours, but it is my firm conviction that all good action is bound to bear 
fruit in the end. Let us forget the past and think of the task before us.' With 
which the rest agreed. 
I added: 'To tell you the truth, the work for which  you had called me is 
practically finished. But I believe I ought not to leave the Transvaal, so far as it 
is possible, even if you permit me to return home. Instead of carrying on my 
work from Natal, as before, I must now do so from h ere. I must no longer think 
of returning to India within a year, but must get e nrolled in the Transvaal 
Supreme Court. I have confidence enough to deal wit h this new department. If 
we do not do this, the community will be hounded ou t of the country.' 
So I set the ball rolling, discussed things with In dians in Pretoria and 
Johannesburg, and ultimately decided to set up offi ce in Johannesburg. 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126   
40. STUDY OF THE  GITA  
Theosophist friends intended to draw me into their society, but that was with a 
view to getting something from me as a Hindu. Theos ophical literature is 
replete with Hindu influence, and so these friends expected that I should be 
helpful to them. We formed a sort of Seekers' Club where we had regular 
readings. I already had faith in the  Gita,  which had a fascination for me. Now I 
realized the necessity of diving deeper into it. I had one or two translations, by 
means of which I tried to understand the original S anskrit. I decided also to get 
by heart one or two verses every day. For this purp ose I employed the time of 
my morning ablutions. The operation took me thirty- five minutes, fifteen 
minutes for the tooth brush and twenty for the bath . So on the wall opposite I 
stuck slips of paper on which were written the  Gita  verses and referred to them 
now and then to help my memory. This time was found  sufficient for 
memorizing the daily portion and recalling the vers es already learnt. I 
remember having thus committed to memory thirteen c hapters. 
What effect this reading of the  Gita  had on my friends only they can say, but to 
me the  Gita  became an infallible guide of conduct. It became m y dictionary of 
daily reference. Words like  aparigraha  (non-possession) and  samabhava 
(equability) gripped me. How to cultivate and prese rve that equability was the 
question. Was I to give up all I had and follow Him ? Straight came the answer: I 
could not follow Him unless I gave up all I had. My  study of English law came to 
my help. I understood more clearly in the light of the Gita  teaching the 
implication of the word 'trustee'. I understood the  Gita  teaching of non-
possession to mean that those who desired salvation  should act like the trustee 
who though having control over great possessions, r egards not an iota of them 
as his own. It became clear to me as daylight that non-possession and 
equability presupposed a change of heart, a change of attitude. I then wrote, 
to Revashankarbhai to allow the insurance policy to  lapse and get whatever 
could be recovered, or else to regard the premiums already paid as lost, for I 
had become convinced that God, who created my wife and children as well as Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127  myself, would take care of them. To my brother, who  had been as father to 
me, I wrote explaining that I had given him all tha t I had saved up to that 
moment, but that henceforth he should expect nothin g from me, for future 
savings, if any, would be utilized for the benefit of the community. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128   
41.  'INDIAN OPINION'  
About this time Shri Madanjit approached me with a proposal to start  Indian 
Opinion  and sought my advice. He had already been conducti ng a press, and I 
approved of his proposal. The journal was launched in 1904, and Shri 
Mansukhlal Naazar became the first editor. But I ha d to bear the brunt of the 
work, having for most of the time to be practically  in charge of the journal. Not 
that Shri Mansukhlal could not carry it on. He had been doing a fair amount of 
journalism whilst in India, but he would never vent ure to write on intricate 
South African problems so long as I was there. He h ad the greatest confidence 
in my discernment, and therefore threw on me the re sponsibility of attending 
to the editorial columns. The journal has been unti l this day a weekly. 
I had no notion that I should have to invest any mo ney in this journal, but I soon 
discovered that it could not go on without my finan cial help. The Indians and 
the Europeans both knew that, though I was not avow edly the editor of Indian 
Opinion,  I was virtually responsible for its conduct. It wo uld not have mattered 
if the journal had never been started, but to stop it after it had once been 
launched would have been both a loss and a disgrace . So I kept on pouring out 
my money, until ultimately I was practically sinkin g all my savings in it. I 
remember a time when I had to remit £ 75 each month . 
But after all these years I feel that the journal h as served the community well. 
It was never intended to be a commercial concern. S o long as it was under my 
control, the changes in the journal were indicative  of changes in my life. Indian 
Opinion  in those days, like  Young India  and  Navajivan today, was a mirror of 
part of my life. Week after week I poured out my so ul in its columns, and 
expounded the principles and practice of Satyagraha  as I understood it. During 
ten years, that is, until 1914, excepting the inter val of my enforced rest in 
prison, there was hardly an issue of Indian Opinion  without an article from me. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129   
42. THE MAGIC SPELL OF A BOOK 
I used to have my meals at a vegetarian restaurant.  Here I met Mr. Albert West. 
We used to meet in this restaurant every evening an d go out walking after 
dinner. Mr. West was a partner in a small printing concern. He volunteered to 
help me and I requested him to take charge of the  Indian Opinion press at 
Durban. The report from Mr. West of the financial p osition of the paper was 
alarming, and I decided to leave at once for Durban . 
Mr. Polak, another of the friends I made in the veg etarian restaurant, came to 
see me off at the station, and left with me a book to read during the journey, 
which he said I was sure to like. It was Ruskin's  Unto This Last.  
The book was impossible to lay aside, once I had be gun it. It gripped me. 
Johannesburg to Durban was twenty-four hours' journ ey. The train reached 
there in the evening. I could not get any sleep tha t night. I determined to 
change my life in accordance with the ideals of the  book. 
I believe that I discovered some of my deepest conv ictions reflected in this 
great book of Ruskin, and that is why it so capture d me and made me transform 
my life. A poet is one who can call forth the good latent in the human breast. 
Poets do not influence all alike, for everyone is n ot evolved in an equal 
measure. 
The teachings of Unto This Last I understood to be:  
1. That the good of the individual is contained in the  good of all. 
2. That a lawyer's work has the same value as the barb er's, inasmuch as all 
have the same right of earning their livelihood fro m their work. 
3. That a life of labour, i.e., the life of the tiller  of the soil and the 
handicraftsman is the life worth living. 
The first of these I knew. The second I had dimly r ealized. The third had never 
occurred to me.  Unto This Last  made it as clear as daylight for me that the 
second and the third were contained in the first. I  arose with the dawn, ready 
to reduce these principles to practice. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130   
43. THE PHOENIX SETTLEMENT 
I talked over the whole thing with Mr. West, descri bed to him the effect  Unto 
This Last  had produced on my mind, and proposed that  Indian Opinion  should 
be removed to a farm, on which everyone should labo ur, drawing the same 
living wage and attending to the press work in spar e time. Mr. West approved 
of the proposal, and £3 was laid down as the monthl y allowance per head, 
irrespective of colour or nationality. 
I advertised for a piece of land situated near rail way station in the vicinity of 
Durban. An offer came in respect of Phoenix. Within  a week we purchased 
twenty acres of land. It had a nice little spring a nd a few orange and mango 
trees. Adjoining it was a piece of 80 acres which h ad many more fruit trees and 
a dilapidated cottage. We purchased this too, the t otal cost being a thousand 
pounds. 
Some Indian carpenters and masons, who had worked w ith me in the Boer War, 
helped me in erecting a shed for the press. The str ucture, which was 75 feet 
long and 50 feet broad, was ready in less than a mo nth. Mr. West and others, at 
great personal risk, stayed with the carpenters and  masons. The place, 
uninhabited and thickly overgrown with grass, was i nfested with snakes and 
obviously dangerous to live in. At first all lived under canvas. We carted most of 
our things to Phoenix in about a week. It was fourt een miles from Durban and 
two and a half miles from Phoenix station. 
Maganlal Gandhi left his business for good to cast in his lot with me, and by 
ability, sacrifice and devotion stands foremost amo ng my original co-workers in 
my ethical experiments. 
Thus the Phoenix Settlement was started in 1904 and  there in spite of 
numerous odds  Indian Opinion  continues to be published. 
In order to enable every one of us to make a living  by manual labour, we 
parcelled out the land round the press in pieces of  three acres each. One of 
these fell to my lot. On all these plots we, much a gainst our wish, built houses Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131  with corrugated iron. Our desire had been to have m ud huts thatched with 
straw or small brick houses such as would become or dinary peasants, but it 
could not be. They would have been more expensive a nd would have meant 
more time, and everyone was eager to settle down as  soon as possible. 
We had hardly settled down, the buildings were hard ly ready, when I had to 
leave the newly constructed nest and go to Johannes burg. I was not in a 
position to allow the work there to remain without attention for any length of 
time. 
On my return to Johannesburg, I informed Polak of t he important changes I had 
made. His joy knew no bounds when he learnt that th e loan of his book had 
been so fruitful. 'Is it not possible,' he asked, ' for me to take part in the new 
venture?' 'Certainly,' said I. He gave a month's no tice to his chief, and reached 
Phoenix in due course. By his sociability he won th e hearts of all and soon 
became a member of the family. But I could not keep  him there long. It was 
impossible for me to bear the burden of the Johanne sburg office single- 
handed; so I suggested to Polak that he should join  the office and qualify as an 
attorney. 
He wrote to me from Phoenix that though he loved th e life there was perfectly 
happy, and had hopes of developing the Settlement, still he was ready to leave 
and join the office to qualify as an attorney, if I  thought that thereby we should 
more quickly realize our ideals. I heartily welcome d the letter. Polak left 
Phoenix, came to Johannesburg and signed his articl es with me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132   
44. THE HOUSEHOLD 
I had now given up all hope of returning to India i n the near future. I had 
promised my wife that I would return home within a year. The year was gone 
without any prospect of my return, so I decided to send for her and the 
children. 
The tendency towards simplicity began in Durban. Bu t the Johannesburg house 
came in for much severer overhauling in the light o f Ruskin's teaching. I 
introduced as much simplicity as was possible in a barristers house. It was 
impossible to do without a certain amount of furnit ure. The change was more 
internal than external. The liking for doing person ally all the physical labour 
increased. I therefore began to bring my children a lso under that discipline. 
Instead of "buying baker's bread, we began to prepa re unleavened wholemeal 
bread at home according to Kuhne's recipe. Common m ill flour was no good for 
this, and the use of handground flour, it was thoug ht, would ensure more 
simplicity, health and economy. So I purchased a ha nd-mill for £7. The iron 
wheel was too heavy to be tackled by one man, but e asy for two. Polak and I 
and the children usually worked it. My wife also oc casionally lent a hand, 
though the grinding hour was her usual time for com mencing kitchen work. Mrs. 
Polak now joined us on her arrival. The grinding pr oved a very beneficial 
exercise for the children. Neither this nor any oth er work was ever imposed on 
them, but it was a pastime to them to come and lend  a hand, and they were at 
liberty to break off whenever tired. We had engaged  a servant to look after the 
house. He lived with us as a member of the family a nd the children used to 
help him in his work. The municipal sweeper removed  the night-soil, but we 
personally attended to the cleaning of the closet i nstead of asking or expecting 
the servant to do it. This proved a good training f or the children. 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133   
45. THE ZULU 'REBELLION' 
Just when I felt that I should be breathing in peac e, an unexpected event 
happened. The papers brought the news of the outbre ak of the Zulu 'rebellion' 
in Natal. I bore no grudge against the Zulus, they had harmed no Indian. I had 
doubts about the 'rebellion' itself. But I then bel ieved that the British Empire 
existed for the welfare of the world. A genuine sen se of loyalty prevented me 
from even wishing ill to the Empire. The Tightness or otherwise of the 
'rebellion' was therefore not likely to affect my d ecision. Natal had a Volunteer 
Defence Force, and it was open to it to recruit mor e men. I read that this force 
had already been mobilized to quell the 'rebellion' . 
I considered myself a citizen of Natal, being intim ately connected with it. So I 
wrote to the Governor, expressing my readiness, if necessary, to form an Indian 
Ambulance Corps. He replied immediately accepting t he offer. 
I had not expected such prompt acceptance. Fortunat ely I had made all the 
necessary arrangements even before writing the lett er. If my offer was 
accepted, I had decided to break up the Johannesbur g home. Polak was to have 
a smaller house, and my wife was to go and settle a t Phoenix. I had her full 
consent to this decision. 
I went to Durban and appealed for men. In order to give me a status and to 
facilitate work, as also in accordance with the exi sting convention, the Chief 
Medical Officer appointed me to the temporary rank of Sergeant Major and 
three men selected by me to the rank of sergeants a nd one to that of corporal. 
We also received our uniforms from the Government. Our Corps was on active 
service for nearly six weeks. On reaching the scene  of 'rebellion', I saw that 
there was nothing there to justify the name of 'reb ellion'. There was no 
resistance that one could see. The reason why the d isturbance had been 
magnified into a rebellion was that a Zulu chief ha d advised non-payment of a 
new tax imposed on his people, and had assagaied a sergeant who had gone to 
collect the tax. At any rate my heart was with the Zulus, and I was delighted, 
on reaching headquarters, to hear that our main wor k was to be the nursing of Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134  the wounded Zulus. The Medical Officer in charge we lcomed us. He said the 
white people were not willing nurses for the wounde d Zulus, that their wounds 
were festering, and that he was at his wits' end. H e hailed our arrival as a 
godsend for those innocent people, and he equipped us with bandages, 
disinfectants, etc., and took us to the improvised hospital. The Zulus were 
delighted to see us. The white soldiers used to pee p through the railings that 
separated us from them and tried to dissuade us fro m attending to the wounds. 
And as we would not heed them, they became enraged and poured unspeakable 
abuse on the Zulus. Gradually I came into closer to uch with these soldiers, and 
they ceased to interfere. 
The wounded in our charge were not wounded in battl e. A section of them had 
been taken prisoners as suspects. The general had s entenced them to be 
Hogged. The flogging had caused severe sores. These  being unattended to, 
were festering. The others were Zulu friendlies. Al though these had badges 
given them to distinguish them from the 'enemy', th ey had been shot at by the 
soldiers by mistake. 
We were attached to a swift-nioving column. It had orders to march wherever 
danger was reported. It was for the most part mount ed infantry. As soon as our 
camp was moved, we had to follow on foot with our s tretchers on our 
shoulders. Twice or thrice we had to march forty mi les a day. But wherever we 
went, I am thankful that we had God's good work to do, having to carry to the 
camp on our stretchers those Zulu friendlies who ha d been inadvertently 
wounded, and to attend upon them as nurses. 
The Boer War had not brought home to me the horrors  of war with anything like 
the vividness that the 'rebellion' did. This was no  war but a man-hunt, not only 
in my opinion, but also in that of many Englishmen with whom I had occasion to 
talk. To hear every morning reports of the soldiers ' rifles exploding like crackers 
in innocent hamlets, and to live in the midst of th em was a trial. But I 
swallowed the bitter draught especially as the work  of my Corps consisted only 
in nursing the wounded Zulus. I could see that but for us the Zulus would have 
been uncared for. This work, therefore, eased my co nscience. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135   
46.  BRAHMACHARYA  
Marching with or without the wounded, through these  solemn solitudes, I often 
fell into deep thought. I pondered over  brahmacharya  and its implications, and 
my conviction took deep root. I discussed it with m y co-workers. I had not 
realized then how indispensable it was for self-rea lization, but I clearly saw 
that one aspiring to serve humanity with his whole soul could not do without it. 
It was borne in upon me that I should have more and  more occasions for service 
of the kind I was rendering, and that I should find  myself unequal to my task if I 
were engaged in the pleasures of family life and in  the propagation and rearing 
of children. 
In a word, I could not live both after the flesh an d the spirit. On the present 
occasion, for instance, I should not have been able  to throw myself into the 
fray, had my wife been expecting a baby. Without th e observance of 
brahmacharya  service of the family would be inconsistent with s ervice of the 
community. With  brahmacharya  they would be perfectly consistent. 
Whilst I was thus in the midst of strenuous physica l and .mental work, a report 
came to the effect that the work of suppressing the  'rebellion' was nearly over, 
and that we should soon be discharged. A day or two  after this our discharge 
came and in a few days we got back to our homes. Af ter a short while I got a 
letter from the Governor specially thanking the Amb ulance Corps for its 
services. 
On my arrival at Phoenix I took the plunge — the vo w to observe  brahmacharya  
for life. I must confess that I had not then fully realized the magnitude and 
immensity of the task I undertook. The difficulties  are even today staring me in 
the face. The importance of the vow is being more a nd more borne in upon me. 
Life without  brahmacharya  appears to me to be insipid and animal-like. The 
brute by nature knows no self-restraint. Man is man  because he is capable of, 
and only in so far as he exercises, self-restraint.  What formerly appeared to me 
to be extravagant praise of  brahmacharya  in our religious books seems now, Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136  with increasing clearness every day, to be absolute ly proper and founded on 
experience. 
I saw that  brahmacharya,  which is so full of wonderful potency is by no mea ns 
an easy affair, and certainly not a mere matter of the body. It begins with 
bodily restraint, but does not end there. The perfe ction of it precludes, even 
an impure thought. A true  brahmachari  will not even dream of satisfying the 
fleshly appetite, and until he is in that condition , he has a great deal of ground 
to cover. 
Thus  brahmacharya,  which I had been observing willy-nilly since 1900,  was 
sealed with a vow in the middle of 1906. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137   
47. KASTURBA'S COURAGE 
Thrice in her life my wife narrowly escaped death t hrough serious illness. The 
cures were due to household remedies. At the time o f her first attack 
Satyagraha was going on or was about to commence. S he had frequent 
haemorrhage. A medical friend advised a surgical op eration, to which she 
agreed after some hesitation. She was extremely ema ciated, and the doctor 
had to perform the operation without chloroform. It  was successful, but she 
had to suffer much pain. She, however, went through  it with wonderful 
bravery. The doctor and his wife who nursed her wer e all attention. This was in 
Durban. The doctor gave me leave to go to Johannesb urg, and told me not to 
have any anxiety about the patient. 
In a few days, however, I received a letter to the effect that Kasturba was 
worse, too weak to sit up in bed, and had once beco me unconscious. The 
doctor knew that he might not, without my consent, give her wines or meat. So 
he telephoned to me at Johannesburg for permission to give her beef tea. I 
replied saying that I could not grant the permissio n, but that, if she was in a 
condition to express her wish in the matter she mig ht be consulted and she was 
free to do as she liked. 'But,' said the doctor, 'I  refuse to consult the patient's 
wishes in the matter. You must come yourself. If yo u do not leave me free to 
prescribe whatever diet I like, I will not hold mys elf responsible for your wife's 
life.' 
I took the train for Durban the same day, and met t he doctor who quietly broke 
this news to me: 'I had already given Mrs. Gandhi b eef tea when I telephoned to 
you.' 
'Now, doctor, I call this a fraud,' said I. 
'No question of fraud in prescribing medicine or di et for a patient. In fact we 
doctors consider it a virtue to deceive patients or  their relatives, if thereby we 
can save our patients,' said the doctor with determ ination. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138  I was deeply pained, but kept cool. The doctor was a good man and a personal 
friend. He and his wife had laid me under a debt of  gratitude, but I was not 
prepared to put up with his medical morals. 
'Doctor, tell me what you propose to do now. I woul d never allow my wife to be 
given meat or beef, even if the denial meant her de ath, unless of course she 
desired to take it.' 
'You are welcome to your philosophy. I tell you tha t, so long as you keep your 
wife under my treatment, I must have the option to give her anything I wish. If 
you don't like this, I must regretfully ask you to remove her. I can't see her die 
under my roof.' 
'Do you mean to say that I must remove her at once? ' 'Whenever did I ask you to 
remove her? I only want to be entirely free. If you  do so, my wife and I will do 
all that is possible for her, and you may go back w ithout the least anxiety on 
her score. But if you will not understand this simp le thing, you will compel me 
to ask you to remove your wife from my place.' 
I think one of my sons was with me. He entirely agr eed with me, and said his 
mother should not be given beef tea. I next spoke t o Kasturba herself. She was 
really too weak to be consulted in this matter. But  I thought it my painful duty 
to do so. I told her what had passed between the do ctor and myself. She gave a 
resolute reply: 'I will not take beef tea. It is a rare thing in this world to be 
born as a human being, and I would far rather die i n your arms than pollute my 
body with such abominations. 
I pleaded with her. I told her that she was not bou nd to follow me, I cited to 
her the instances of Hindu friends and acquaintance s who had no scruples about 
taking meat or wine as medicine. But she was adaman t. 'No,' Said she, 'pray 
remove me at once.' 
I was delighted. Not without some agitation I decid ed to take her away. I 
informed the doctor of her resolve. He exclaimed in  a rage: 'What a callous man 
you arc! You should have been ashamed to broach the  matter to her in her 
present condition. I tell you your wife is not in a  fit state to be removed. She Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139  cannot stand the least little hustling. I shouldn't  be surprised if she were to die 
on the way. But if you must persist, you are free t o do so. If you will not give 
her beef tea, I will not take the risk of keeping h er under my roof even for a 
single day.' 
So we decided to leave the place at once. It was dr izzling and the station was 
some distance. We had to take the train from Durban  for Phoenix, Whence our 
Settlement was reached by a road of two miles and a  half. I was undoubtedly 
taking a very great risk, but I trusted in God, and  proceeded with my task. I 
sent a messenger to Phoenix in advance, with a mess age to West to receive us 
at the station with a hammock, a bottle of hot milk  and one of hot water, and 
six men to carry Kasturba in the hammock. I got a r ickshaw to enable me to 
take her by the next available train, put her into it in that dangerous condition 
and marched away. 
Kasturba needed no cheering up. On the contrary, sh e comforted me, saying: 
'Nothing will happen to me. Don't worry.' 
She was mere skin and bone, having had no nourishme nt for days. The station 
platform was very large and as the rickshaw could n ot be taken inside, one had 
to walk some distance before one could reach the tr ain. So I carried her in my 
arms and put her into the compartment. From Phoenix  we carried her in the 
hammock, and there she slowly picked up strength un der hydropathic 
treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140   
48. DOMESTIC SATYAGRAHA 
My first experience of jail life was in 1908. I saw  that some of the regulations 
that the prisoners had to observe were such as shou ld be voluntarily observed 
by a  brahmachari,  that is, one desiring to practise self-restraint. Such, for 
instance, was the regulation requiring the last mea l to be finished before 
sunset. Neither the Indian nor the African prisoner s were allowed tea or coffee. 
They could add salt to the cooked, food if they wis hed, but they might not have 
anything for the mere satisfaction of the palate. W hen I asked the jail medical 
officer to give us curry powder, and to let us add salt to the food whilst it was 
cooking, he said 'You are not here for: satisfying your palate. From the point of 
view of health, curry powder is not necessary, and it makes no difference 
whether you add salt during or after cooking.' 
Ultimately these restrictions were modified, though  not without much 
difficulty, but both were wholesome rules of self-r estraint. Inhibitions imposed 
from without rarely succeed, but when they arc self -imposed they have a 
decidedly salutary effect. So, immediately after re lease from jail, I imposed on 
myself the two rules. As far as was then possible, I stopped taking tea, and 
finished my last meal before sunset. Both these now  require no effort in the 
observance. 
There came, however, an occasion which compelled me  to give up salt 
altogether, and this restriction I continued for an  unbroken period of ten years. 
I had read in some books on vegetarianism that salt  was not a necessary article 
of diet for man, that on the contrary saltless diet  was better for health. I had 
deduced that a  brahmachari  benefited by a saltless diet. I had read and 
realized that the weak-bodied should avoid pulses. I was very fond of them. 
Now it happened that Kasturba, who had a brief resp ite after her operation, 
had again begun getting haemorrhage, and the malady  seemed to be obstinate. 
Hydropathic treatment by itself did not answer. She  had not much faith in my 
remedies, though she did not resist them. She certa inly did not ask for outside 
help. So when all my remedies had failed, I entreat ed her to give up salt and Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141  pulses. She would not agree, however much I pleaded  with her, supporting 
myself with authorities. At last she challenged me,  saying that even I could not 
give up these articles if I was advised to do so. I  was pained and equally 
delighted, — delighted in that I got an opportunity  to shower my love on her. I 
said to her: 'You are mistaken. If I was ailing and  the doctor advised me to give 
up these or any other articles, I should unhesitati ngly do so. But there! Without 
any medical advice, I give up salt and pulses for o ne year, whether you do so or 
not.' 
She was rudely shocked and exclaimed in deep sorrow : 'Pray forgive me. 
Knowing you, I should not have provoked you. I prom ise to abstain from these 
things, but for heaven's sake take back your vow. T his is too hard on me.' 
'It is very good for you to forego these articles. I have not the slightest doubt 
that you will be all the better without them.' As f or me, I cannot retract a vow 
seriously taken. And it is sure to benefit me, for all restraint, whatever prompts 
it, is wholesome for men. You will therefore leave me alone. It will be a test 
for me, and a moral support to you in carrying out your resolve.' 
So she gave me up. 'You are too obstinate. You will  listen to none,' she said, 
and sought relief in tears. I would like to count t his incident as an instance of 
Satyagraha, and it is one of the sweetest recollect ions of my life. After this 
Kasturba began to pick up quickly. 
I have tried the experiment of a saltless and pulse less diet on many of my co-
workers; and with good results in South Africa. Med ically there may be two 
opinions as to the value of this diet, but morally I have no doubt that all self-
denial is good for the soul. The diet of a man of s elf-restraint must be different 
from that of a man of pleasure, just as their ways of life must be different. 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142   
49. TOWARDS SELF-RESTRAINT 
At a later stage more changes were introduced for t he sake of supporting  
brahmcharya.  The first of these was the giving up of milk. This  was at Tolstoy 
Farm 1 in the year 1912. But this denial was not enough t o satisfy me. Soon after 
this I decided to live on a pure fruit diet, and th at too composed of the 
cheapest fruit possible. 
Just about the time when I gave up milk and cereals , and, started on the 
experiment of a fruit diet, I commenced fasting as a means of self-restraint. 
All the Farm inmates now began to join us in keepin g partial and complete 
fasts, which, I am sure, was entirely to the good. I cannot definitely say how 
far this self-denial touched their hearts and helpe d them in their striving to 
conquer the flesh. For my part, however, I am convi nced that I greatly 
benefited by it both physically and morally. 
Fasting can help to curb animal passion, only if it  is undertaken with a view to 
self-restraint. Some of my friends have actually fo und their animal passion and 
palate stimulated as an after-effect of fasts. That  is to say, fasting is futile 
unless it is accompanied by an incessant longing fo r self-restraint. The famous 
verse from the second chapter of the  Bhagavad Gita is worth noting in this 
connection: 
"For a man who is fasting his senses Outwardly, the  sense-objects disappear, 
Leaving the yearning behind; but when He has seen t he Highest. Even the 
yearning disappears." 
Fasting and similar discipline is, therefore, one o f the means to the end of self-
restraint, but it is not all, and if physical fasti ng is not accompanied by mental 
fasting, it is bound to end in hypocrisy and disast er. 
Long before I undertook the education of the youngs ters of the Tolstoy Farm I 
had realized that the training of the spirit was a thing by itself. To develop the 
spirit is to build character and to enable one to w ork towards a knowledge of 
God and self-realization. And I held that this was an essential part of the Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143  training of the young, and that all training withou t culture of the spirit was of 
no use and might he even harmful. 
How then was this spiritual training to be given? I  made the children memorize 
and recite hymns, and read to them from books on mo ral training. But that was 
far from satisfying me. As I came into closer conta ct with them I saw that it 
was not through books that one could impart trainin g of the spirit. Just as 
physical training was to be imparted through physic al exercise, and intellectual 
through intellectual exercise, even so the training  of the Spirit was possible 
only through the exercise of the spirit. And the ex ercise of the spirit entirely 
depended on the life and character of the teacher. The teacher had always to 
be mindful of his p's and q's, whether he was in th e midst of his boys or not. 
It is possible for a teacher situated miles away to  affect the spirit of the pupils 
by his way of living. It would be idle for me, if I  were a liar, to teach boys to 
tell the truth. A cowardly teacher would never succ eed in making his boys 
valiant, and a stranger to self-restraint could nev er teach his pupils the value 
of self-restraint. I saw, therefore, that I must be  an eternal object-lesson to 
the boys and girls living with me. They thus became  my teachers, and I learnt I 
must be good and live straight, if only for their s akes, may say that the 
increasing discipline and restraint I imposed on my self at Tolstoy Farm was 
mostly due to those wards of mine. 
 
1 An account of the founding of this Farm follows. See chap. 55. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144   
50. SOME REMINISCENCES OF THE BAR 
As a student I had heard that the lawyer's professi on was a liar's profession. But 
this did not influence me, as I had no intention of  earning either position or 
money by lying. 
I warned every new client at the outset that he sho uld not expect me to take 
up a false case or to coach the witnesses, with the  result that I built up such a 
reputation that no false cases used to come to me. 
On one occasion, whilst I was conducting a case bef ore a magistrate in 
Johannesburg, I discovered that my client had decei ved me. I saw him 
completely break down in the witness box. So withou t any argument I asked the 
magistrate to dismiss the case. The opposing counse l was astonished and the 
magistrate was pleased. I rebuked my client for bri nging a false case to me. He 
knew that I never accepted false cases, and when I brought the thing home to 
him, he admitted his mistake, and I have an impress ion that he was not angry 
with me for having asked the magistrate to decide a gainst him. At any rate my 
conduct in this case did not affect my practice for  the worse, indeed it made 
my work easier. I also saw that my devotion to trut h enhanced my reputation 
amongst the members of the profession, and in spite  of the handicap of colour I 
was able in some cases to win even their affection.  
During my professional work it was also my habit ne ver to conceal my ignorance 
from my clients or my colleagues. Wherever I felt m yself at sea, I would advise 
my client to consult some other counsel, or if he p referred to stick to me, I 
would ask him to let me seek the assistance of seni or counsel. This frankness 
earned me the unbounded affection and trust of my c lients. 
Parsi Rustomji, a client, co-worker and friend of m ine, once got into a very bad 
scrape. Though he kept me informed of most of his a ffairs, he had studiously 
kept back one thing. He was a large importer of goo ds from Bombay and 
Calcutta, and not infrequently he resorted to smugg ling. But as he was on the 
best terms with customs officials, no one was incli ned to suspect him. In Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145  charging duty, they used to take his invoices on tr ust. Some might even have 
connived at the smuggling. 
He came running to me, the tears rolling down his c hecks as he said: 'Bhai, I 
have deceived you. My guilt has been discovered tod ay. I have smuggled and I 
am doomed. I must go to jail and be ruined. You alo ne may be able to save me 
from this predicament.' 
I calmed him and said: 'To save or not to save you is in His hands. As to me you 
know my way, I can but try to save you by means of confession.' 
The good Parsi felt deeply mortified. 
'But is not my confession before you enough?' he as ked. 
'You have wronged not me but the Government. How wi ll the confession made 
before me avail you?' I replied gently. 
Explaining my view further I said to him: 'I don't think this case should be taken 
to court at all. It rests with the Customs Officer to prosecute you or to let you 
go, and he in turn will have to be guided by the At torney General. I am 
prepared to meet both. I propose that you should of fer to pay the penalty they 
fix, and the odds are that they will be agreeable. But if they are not, you must 
be prepared to go to jail. I am of opinion that the  shame lies not so much in 
going to jail as in committing the offence. The dee d of shame has already been 
done. Imprisonment you should regard as a penance. The real penance lies in 
resolving never to smuggle again.' 
I cannot say that Parsi Rustomji took all this quit e well. He was a brave man, 
but his courage failed him for the moment. His name  and fame were at stake, 
and where would he be if the edifice he had reared with such care and labour 
should go to pieces? 
I brought to bear on this case all my powers of per suasion. I met the Customs 
Officer and fearlessly apprised him of the whole af fair. I also promised to place 
all the books at his disposal and told him how peni tent Parsi Rustomji was 
feeling. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146  'I shall be thankful.' said I, 'if you do not insis t on dragging him into court.' 
Having got him to promise this, I entered into corr espondence with the 
Attorney General and also met him. I am glad to say  that he appreciated my 
complete frankness and was convinced that I had kep t back nothing. 
The case against Parsi Rustomji was compromised. He  was to pay a penalty 
equal to twice the amount he had confessed to havin g smuggled. Rustomji 
reduced to writing the facts of the whole case, got  the paper framed and hung 
it up in his office to serve as a perpetual reminde r to his heirs and fellow 
merchants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147   
51. THE ADVENT OF SATYAGRAHA 
On return from duty in connection with the Zulu 're bellion' I met the friends at 
Phoenix and reached Johannesburg. Here I read with deep horror the draft 
Ordinance published in the Transvaal Government Gaz ette Extraordinary of 
August 22, 1906. It meant absolute ruin for Indians  in South Africa. Under it 
every Indian, man, woman or child of eight years or  upwards, entitled to reside 
in the Transvaal, must register his or her name wit h the Registrar of Asiatics 
and take out a certificate of registration. The app licants for registration must 
'surrender their old permits to the Registrar, and state in their applications 
their name, residence, caste, age, etc. The Registr ar was to note down 
important marks of identification upon the applican t's person, and take his 
finger and thumb impressions. Every Indian who fail ed thus to apply for 
registration before a certain date was to forfeit h is right of residence in the 
Transvaal. Failure to apply would be held to be an offence in law for which the 
defaulter could be fined, sent to prison or even de ported within the discretion 
of the court. Even a person walking on public thoro ughfares could be required 
to produce his certificate. Police officers could e nter private houses in order to 
inspect certificates. I have never known legislatio n of this nature being 
directed against free men in any part of the world.  
The next day there was held a small meeting of the leading Indians to whom I 
explained the Ordinance word by word. It shocked th em as it had shocked me. 
All present realized the seriousness of the situati on and resolved to hold a 
public meeting. 
The meeting was duly held on September 11, 1906. Th e most important among 
the resolutions passed by the meeting was the famou s Fourth Resolution, by 
which the Indians solemnly determined not to submit  to the Ordinance in the 
event of its becoming law in the teeth of their opp osition and to suffer all the 
penalties attaching to such non-submission. 
None of us knew what name to give to our movement. Shri Maganlal Gandhi 
suggested the word 'Sadagraha' meaning 'firmness in  a good cause 1. I liked the Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  word, but it did not fully represent the whole idea  I wished it to connote. I 
therefore corrected it to 'Satyagraha'. Truth  (satya)  implies love, and firmness  
(agraha)  engenders and therefore serves as a synonym for fo rce. I thus began to 
call the Indian movement 'Satyagraha', that is to s ay, the Force which is born of 
Truth and Love or non-violence, and gave up the use  of the phrase 'passive 
resistance', in connection with it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149   
52. IMPRISONMENT 
The Asiatic Registration Act was rushed through ail  its stages at a single sitting 
of the Transvaal Parliament on March 21, 1907. The Act was proclaimed to take 
effect from July 1, 1907 and Indians were called up on to apply for registration 
under it before July 31. 
The first of July. 1907 arrived, and saw the openin g of permit-offices. The 
community had decided openly to picket each office,  that is to say, to post 
volunteers on the roads leading thereto, and these volunteers were to warn 
weak-kneed Indians against the trap laid for them t here. 
When the Asiatic Department found, that notwithstan ding all their exertions, 
they could not get more than 500, Indians to regist er, they decided to arrest 
someone. In Germiston there lived many Indians, one  of whom was Pandit Rama 
Sundara. He delivered a number of spirited speeches  in various places. Some 
malevolent Indians in Germiston suggested to the As iatic Department that many 
Indians there would take out permits if Rama Sundar a was arrested, and the 
officers concerned could scarcely resist the tempta tion thus offered. So Rama 
Sundara was put under arrest, and this being the fi rst case of its kind, the 
Government as well as the Indians were much agitate d over it. The day on 
which he was sentenced was celebrated with great ec lat. There was no trace of 
depression, but on the other hand there was exultat ion and rejoicing. Hundreds 
were ready to go to jail. The officers of the Asiat ic Department were 
disappointed in their hope of a bumper crop of regi strants. They did not get a 
single registrant even from Germiston. The only gai ner was the Indian 
community. 
But Rama Sundara turned out to be a false coin. Acc ustomed as he was to 
license, and addicted as he was to bad habits, the loneliness and the restraints 
of jail life were too much for him. In spite of all  the attention showered upon 
him by the jail authorities as well as by the commu nity, jail appeared irksome 
to him and he bid a final good-bye to the Transvaal  and to the movement. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150  I have thus narrated the story of Rama Sundara not in order to expose his 
faults, but to point a moral. The leaders of every clean movement are bound to 
see that they admit only clean fighters to it. 
The officers of the Asiatic Department came to thin k the strength of the 
movement could not by any means be broken so long a s certain leaders were at 
large. Some of the leading men were consequently se rved with a notice in 
Christmas week of 1907 to appear before the Magistr ate. Those who had thus 
been warned appeared before the court on the date s pecified, Saturday, 
December 28, 1907, to show cause why, having failed  to apply for registration 
as required by law, they should not be ordered to l eave the Transvaal within a 
given period. 
The Magistrate conducted each case separately, and ordered all the accused to 
leave the Transvaal within forty-eight hours in som e cases and seven or 
fourteen days in others. The time limit expired on January 10, 1908 and the 
same day we were called upon to attend court for se ntence. None of us was to 
offer any defence. All were to plead guilty to the charge of disobeying the 
order to leave the Transvaal within the stated peri od. 
I asked leave to make a short statement, and on its  being granted, I said I 
thought there should be a distinction made between my case and those that 
were to follow. I had just heard from Pretoria that  my compatriots there had 
been sentenced to three months' imprisonment with h ard labour, and had been 
fined a heavy amount, in lieu of payment of which t hey would receive a further 
period of three months' hard labour. If these men h ad committed an offence, I 
had committed a greater offence and I therefore ask ed the Magistrate to 
impose upon me the heaviest penalty. The Magistrate , however, did not agree 
to my request and sentenced me to two months' simpl e imprisonment. 
From the second or third day Satyagrahi prisoners b egan to arrive in large 
numbers. They had all courted arrest and were most of them hawkers. The 
community had resolved to fill up the jail after ou r arrests. In this the hawkers 
took the lead. It was easy for them to be arrested.  They only had to refuse to 
show their licenses and that was enough to ensure t heir arrest. In this way the Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151  number of Satyagrahi prisoners swelled to more than  a hundred in one week. 
And as a few were sure to arrive every day, we rece ived the daily budget of 
news without a newspaper. When Satyagrahis began to  be arrested in large 
numbers, they were sentenced to imprisonment with h ard labour. 
In Johannesburg jail prisoners not condemned to har d labour got 'mealie pap'1 
in the morning. There was no salt in it, but each p risoner was given some salt 
separately. At noon the prisoners were given four o unces of rice, four ounces of 
bread, one ounce of ghee and a little salt, and in the evening 'mealie pap' and 
some vegetable, chiefly potatoes of which two were given if they were small 
and only one if they were big in size. None of us w ere satisfied with this diet. 
The rice was cooked soft. We asked the prison medic al officer for some 
condiments, and told him that condiments were allow ed in the jails in India. 
This is not India' was the stern answer. There is n o question of taste about 
prison diet and condiments therefore cannot be allo wed.' We asked for pulse on 
the ground that the regulation diet was lacking in muscle-building properties. 
'Prisoners must not indulge in arguments on medical  grounds,' replied the 
doctor. 'You do get muscle- building food, as twice  a week you are served 
boiled beans instead of maize.' The doctor's argume nt was sound if the human 
stomach was capable of extracting the various eleme nts out of various foods 
taken at various times in a week or fortnight. 
We had been in jail for a fortnight, when fresh arr ivals brought the news that 
there were going on some negotiations about a compr omise with the 
Government. The substance of the proposed settlemen t was that Indians should 
register voluntarily and that if the majority of th e Indians underwent voluntary 
registration, Government should repeal the Black Ac t, as the Asiatic 
Registration Act came to be called. 
I was taken to Pretoria to meet General Smuts and a fter discussion with hint of 
an amendment I had suggested, the draft settlement was accepted. The 
prisoners were released and I went about explaining  the terms of the 
settlement to my countrymen. 
 
1 Maize gruel. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152   
53. ASSAULT 
A couple of Pathans were angry with me for consenti ng to the giving of finger-
prints. On the morning of February 10, 1908 some of  us got ready to go and 
take out certificates of registration. The supreme necessity of getting through 
the registration business with all possible expedit ion had been fully impressed 
on the community and it had been agreed that the le aders should be the first 
to take out certificates on the first day, with a v iew to break down shyness, to 
see if the officers concerned discharged their duti es with courtesy and 
generally to have an eye over all the arrangements.  When I reached my office, 
which was also the office of the Satyagraha Associa tion, I found Mir Alam, a 
Pathan, and his companions standing outside the pre mises. Mir Alam was an old 
client of mine, and used to seek my advice in all h is affairs. He was fully six 
feet in height and of a large and powerful build. T oday for the first time I saw 
Mir Alam outside my office instead of inside it, an d although his eyes met mine, 
he for the first time refrained from saluting me. I  saluted him and he saluted 
me in return. As usual I asked him, 'How do you do? ' and my impression is that 
he said he was all right. But he did not today wear  his usual smile. I noticed his 
angry eyes and took a mental note of the fact. I th ought that something was 
going to happen. I entered the office. The Chairman , Mr. Yusuf Mian and other 
friends arrived, and we set out for the Asiatic Off ice. Mir Alam and his 
companions followed us. 
As we were going along Von Brandis Street, outside the premises of Messers 
Arnot and Gibson, not more than three minutes' walk  from the Registration 
Office, Mir Alam accosted me and asked me, 'Where a re you going?' 
'I propose to take out a certificate of registratio n, giving the ten finger-prints,' I 
replied. 'If you will go with me, I will first get you a certificate, with an 
impression only of the two thumbs, and then I will take one for myself, giving 
the fingerprints.' 
I had scarcely finished the last sentence when a he avy cudgel blow descended 
on my head from behind. I at once fainted with the words  He Rama  (0 God) on Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153  my lips, lay prostrate on the ground and had no not ion of what followed. But 
Mir Alam and his companions gave me more blows and kicks, some of which 
were warded off by Yusuf Mian and Thambi Naidoo wit h the result that they too 
became a target for attack in their turn. The noise  attracted some European 
passers-by to the scene. Mir Alam and his companion s fled but were caught by 
the Europeans. The police arrived in the meanwhile and took them in custody. ! 
was picked up and carried into Mr. J. C. Gibson's p rivate office. When I 
regained consciousness, I saw Mr. Doke bending over  me. 'How do you feel?' he 
asked me. 
'I am all right.' I replied, 'but there is pain in the teeth and the ribs. Where is 
Mir Alam?' 
'He has been arrested along with the rest.' 
'They should be released.' 
That is all very well. But here you are in a strang er's office with your lip and 
cheek badly lacerated. The police are ready to take  you to the hospital, but if 
you will go to my place, Mrs. Doke and I will minis ter to your comforts as best 
we can.' 
'Yes, please take me to your place. Thank the polic e for their offer but tell 
them that I prefer to go with you.' 
Mr. Chamney, the Registrar of Asiatics, too now arr ived on the scene. I was 
taken in a carriage to this good clergyman's reside nce in Smit Street and a 
doctor was called in. Meanwhile I said to Mr. Chamn ey: 'I wished to come to 
your office, give ten finger-prints and take out th e first certificate of 
registration, but God willed it otherwise. However I have now to request you to 
bring the papers and allow me to register at once. I hope that you will not let 
anyone else register before me.' 
'Where is the hurry about it?' asked Mr, Chamney. ' The doctor will be here soon. 
You please rest yourself and all will be well. I wi ll issue certificates to others 
but keep your name at the head of the list.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154  'Not so,' I replied. 'I am pledged to take out the first certificate if I am alive and 
if it is acceptable to God. It is therefore that I insist upon the papers being 
brought here and now.' Upon this Mr. Chamney went a way to bring the papers. 
The second thing for me to do was to wire to the At torney- General that I did 
not hold Mir Alam and others guilty for the assault  committed upon me, that, in 
any case I did not wish them to be prosecuted and t hat I hoped they would be 
discharged for mv sake. But the Europeans of Johann esburg addressed a strong 
letter to the Attortiey-General saying that whateve r views Gandhi might hold as 
regards the punishment of criminals, they, could no t be given effect to in South 
Africa. Gandhi himself might not take any steps, bu t the assault was committed 
not in a private place but on the high roads and wa s therefore a public offence. 
Several Englishmen too were in a position to tender  evidence and tile offenders 
must be prosecuted, Upon this the Attorney-General rearrested Mir Alam and 
one of his companions who were sentenced to three m onths' hard labour. Only I 
was not summoned as a witness. 
I addressed a short note as follows to the communit y through the Chairman and 
sent it for publication: 
'I am well in the brotherly and sisterly hands of M r. and Mrs. Doke. I hope to 
take up my duty shortly. 
'Those who have committed the act did not know what  they were doing. They 
thought that I was doing what was wrong. They have had their redress in the 
only manner they know. I therefore request that no steps be taken against 
thein. 
Seeing that the assault was committed by a Musalman  or Musalmans, the Hindus 
might probably feel hurt. If so, they would put the mselves in the wrong before 
the world and their Maker. Rather let the blood spi lt today cement the two 
communities indissolubly - such is my heart-felt pr ayer. May God grant it.' 
Mr. Chamney returned with the papers and I gave my finger-prints but not 
without pain. I then saw that tears stood in Mr. Ch amney's eyes. I had often to Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155  write bitterly against him, but this showed me how man's heart may be 
softened by events. 
The reader will easily imagine that all this did no t take more than a few 
minutes. Mr. Doke and his good wife were anxious th at I should be perfectly at 
rest and peaceful, and were therefore pained to wit ness my mental activity 
after the assault. They were afraid that it might r eact in a manner prejudicial 
to my health. They, therefore, by making signs and similar devices, removed all 
persons from near my bed, and asked me not to write  or do anything. I made a 
request in writing, that in order that I might lie down quietly, their daughter 
Olive, who was then only a little girl should sing for me my favourite English 
hymn, 'Lead, kindly light.' Mr. Doke liked this ver y much and acceded to my 
request with a sweet smile. He called Olive by sign  and asked her to stand at 
the door and sing the hymn in a low tone. The whole  scene passes before my 
eyes as I dictate this, and the melodious voice of little Olive reverberates in my 
ears. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156   
54. RESUMPTION OF SATYAGRAHA 
The Indians had registered voluntarily. The Governm ent were, therefore, on 
their part to repeal the Black Act. But instead of repealing the Black Act, 
General Smuts took a fresh step forward. He maintai ned the Black Act on the 
statute book and introduced into the legislature a measure, validating the 
voluntary registrations effected and the certificat es issued subsequent to the 
date fixed by the Government in terms of that Act, taking the holders of the 
voluntary registration certificates out of its oper ation and 'making further 
provision for the registration of Asiatics'. I was astounded when I read the Bill. 
An 'ultimatum' was sent to the Government by the Sa tyagrahis. It said in effect, 
'If the Asiatic Act is not repealed in terms of the  settlement, and if 
Government’s decision to that effect is not communi cated to the Indians before 
a specific date, the certificates collected by the Indians would be burnt and 
they would humbly but firmly take the consequences. ' 
The ultimatum was to expire on the same day that th e new Asiatic Bill was to 
be carried through the Legislature. A meeting had b een called some two hours 
after the expiry of the time limit to perform the p ublic ceremony of burning 
the certificates. The Satyagraha Committee thought that the meeting would 
not be fruitless even if quite unexpectedly perhaps  a favourable reply was 
received from the Government, as in that case the m eeting could be utilized 
for announcing the Government's favourable decision  to the community. 
As the business of the meeting was about to commenc e, a volunteer arrived on 
a cycle with a telegram from the Government in whic h they regretted the 
determination of the Indian community and announced  their inability to change 
their line of action. The telegram was read to the audience which received it 
with cheers, as if they were glad that the auspicio us opportunity of burning the 
certificates did not after all slip out of their ha nds. 
Mir Alam too was present at this meeting. He announ ced that he had done 
wrong to assault me as he did and to the great joy of the audience, handed his Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157  original certificate to be burnt, as he had not tak en a voluntary certificate. I 
took hold of his hand, pressed it with joy, and ass ured him once more that I had 
never harboured in my mind any resentment against h im. 
The Committee had already received upwards of 2,000  certificates to be burnt. 
These were all thrown into the cauldron, saturated with paraffin and set ablaze 
by Mr. Yusuf Mian. The whole assembly rose to their  feet and made the place 
resound with the echoes of their continuous cheers during the burning process. 
Some of those who had still withheld their certific ates brought them in 
numbers to the platform, and these too were consign ed to the flames. 
The reporters of English newspapers present at the meeting were profoundly 
impressed with the whole scene and gave graphic des criptions of the meeting in 
their papers. 
During the same year in which the Black. Act was pa ssed General Smuts carried 
through the Legislature another bill called the Tra nsvaal Immigrants Restriction 
Bill. This Act indirectly prevented the entry of a single Indian newcomer into 
the Transvaal. 
It was absolutely essential for the Indians to resi st this fresh inroad on their 
rights. Several Satyagrahis therefore deliberately entered the Transvaal and 
were imprisoned. I too was arrested again. At one t ime we were as many as 75 
Indian prisoners in the border town of Volksrust. G overnment was in a 
quandary. How many Indians could be sent to jail af ter all? And then it meant 
additional expenditure. The Government began to cas t about for other means 
of dealing with the situation, and began to deport offenders to India. This 
caused some Indians to weaken, but many remained fi rm and continued the 
struggle. 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158   
55. TOLSTOY FARM 
Till now (1910) the families of jail-going Satyagra his were maintained by a 
system of monthly allowances in cash according to t heir need. But this proved 
to be unsatisfactory and to involve a heavy drain o n our funds. There was only 
one solution for this difficulty, namely, that all the families should be kept at 
one place and should become members of a sort of co -operative 
commonwealth. 
Mr. Kallenbach, a close friend of mine, bought a fa rm of about 1,100 acres and 
gave the use of it to Satyagrahis free of any rent or charge (May 30, 1910). 
Upon the farm there were nearly one thousand fruit- bearing trees and a small 
house at the foot of a hill with accommodation for half-a-dozen persons. Water 
was supplied from two wells as well as from a sprin g. The nearest railway 
station, Lawley, was about a mile from the farm and  Johannesburg was twenty-
one miles distant. We decided to build houses upon this farm and to invite the 
families of Satyagrahis to settle there. 
We insisted that we should not have any servants ei ther for the household work 
or as far as might be even for the farming and buil ding operations. Everything 
therefore from cooking to scavenging was done with our own hands. As regards 
accommodation for families, we resolved from the fi rst that the men and 
women should be housed separately. The houses there fore were to be built in 
two separate blocks, each at some distance from the  other. For the time it was 
considered sufficient to provide accommodation for ten women and sixty men. 
Then again we had to erect a house for Mr. Kallenba ch and by its side a school 
house, as well as a workshop for carpentry, shoe-ma king, etc. 
The settlers hailed from Gujarat. Tamilnad, Andhrad esh and North India, and 
there were Hindus, Musalmans, Parsis and Christians  among them. About forty 
of them were young men, two or three old men, five women and twenty to 
thirty children of whom four or five were girls. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  The weak became strong on Tolstoy Farm and labour p roved to be a tonic for 
all. 
Everyone wanted to go to Johannesburg on some erran d or other. Children liked 
to go there just for the fun of it. I also had to g o there on business. We 
therefore made a rule that we could go there by rai l only on the public business 
of our little commonwealth, and then too travel thi rd class. Anyone who 
wanted to go on a pleasure trip must go on foot, an d carry home-made 
provisions with him. No one might spend anything on  his food in the city. Had it 
not been for these drastic rules, the money saved b y living in a rural locality 
would have been wasted in railway fares and city pi cnics. The provisions 
carried were of the simplest: home-baked bread made  from coarse wheat Hour 
ground at home, from which the bran was not removed , groundnut butter also 
prepared at home, and homemade marmalade. We had pu rchased an iron 
handmill for grinding wheat. Groundnut butter was m ade by roasting and then 
grinding groundnuts, and was four times cheaper tha n ordinary butter. As for 
the oranges, we had plenty of them on the farm. We scarcely used cow's milk 
on the farm and generally managed with condensed mi lk. 
But to return to the trips. Anyone who wished to go  to Johannesburg went 
there on foot once or twice a week and returned the  same day. As I have 
already stated, it was a journey of 21 miles and ba ck. We saved hundreds of 
rupees by this one rule of going on foot, and those  who thus went walking were 
much benefited. Some newly acquired the habit of wa lking. The general 
practice was that the sojourner should rise at two o'clock and start at half past 
two. He would reach Johannesburg in six to seven ho urs. The record for the 
minimum time taken on the journey was 4 hours 18 mi nutes. 
Our idea was to make the farm a busy hive of indust ry, thus to save money and 
in the end to make the families self- supporting. I f we achieved this goal, we 
could battle with the Transvaal Government for an i ndefinite period. We had to 
spend some money on shoes. So we decided to make sa ndals ourselves. We 
learnt the art and began manufacturing and selling sandals. We also introduced Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160  carpentry, as we needed all manner of things large and small from benches to 
boxes, and we made them all ourselves. 
A school was indispensable for the youngsters and t he children. This was the 
most difficult of our tasks and we never achieved c omplete success in this 
matter till the very last. The burden of teaching w ork was largely borne by Mr. 
Kallenbach and myself. The school could be held onl y after noon, when both of 
us were thoroughly exhausted by our morning labour,  and so were our pupils. 
The teachers therefore would often be dozing as wel l as the taught. We would 
sprinkle water on the eyes, and by playing with the  children try to pull them up 
and to pull up ourselves, but sometimes in vain. Th e body peremptorily 
demanded rest and would not take a denial. But this  was only one and the least 
of our many difficulties. For the classes were cond ucted in spite of these 
dozings. What were we to teach pupils who spoke thr ee languages, Gujarati, 
Tamil or Telugu, and how? I was anxious to make the se languages the medium 
of instruction. I knew a little Tamil but no Telugu . What could one teacher do 
in these circumstances? 
But this teaching experiment was not fruitless. The  children were saved from 
the infection of intolerance, and learnt to view on e another's religions and 
customs with a large-hearted charity. They learnt h ow to live together like 
blood-brothers. They imbibed the lessons of mutual service, courtesy and 
industry. And from what little I know about the lat er activities of some of the 
children on Tolstoy Farm, I am certain that the edu cation which they received 
there has not been in vain. Even if imperfect, it w as a thoughtful and religious 
experiment, and among the sweetest reminiscences of  Tolstoy Farm, the 
reminiscences of this teaching experiment are no le ss sweet than the rest. 
I made many experiments in regard to diet and treat ment of disease, on the 
Farm. I had pondered' deeply and read widely over t he question whether as 
vegetarians we had any right to take milk. But when  I was living on the Farm, 
some book or newspaper fell into my hands, in which  I read about the in-human 
treatment accorded to cows in Calcutta in order to extract the last drop of milk Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161  from them, and came across a description of the cru el and terrible process of  
phuka.  The same day I gave up milk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162   
56. WOMEN JOIN THE FIGHT 
Gokhale came to South Africa in October 1912 to med iate between the 
Satyagrahis and the Government. General Botha, acco rding to Gokhale, 
promised him that the Black Act would be repealed i n a year and the £3 tax 
abolished. But this was not done. 
I wrote to Gokhale about the breach of the pledge a nd set about making 
preparations for the ensuing campaign. I assured Go khale that we would fight 
unto death and wring a repeal of the tax out of the  unwilling hands of the 
Transvaal Government. It was realized that we would  be imprisoned for long 
terms. So we decided to close Tolstoy Farm and to t reat Phoenix, which was 
more conveniently situated as the future base of ou r operations. 
While preparations were still being made for resumi ng the struggle a fresh 
grievance came into being, which afforded an opport unity even to women to do 
their bit in the struggle. Till now we had dissuade d women from courting 
imprisonment. But at this time a judgment was passe d by the South African 
Government which nullified all marriages that had n ot been celebrated 
according to Christian rites and registered by the Registrar of Marriages. Thus 
at a stroke of the pen all marriages celebrated acc ording to Hindu, Musalman 
and Zoroastrian rites became illegal, and the wives  concerned were degraded 
to the rank of concubines and their progeny deprive d of the right to inherit 
property. This was an insufferable situation for wo men no less than men. 
Patience was impossible in the face of this insult offered to our womanhood. 
We decided to offer stubborn Satyagraha irrespectiv e of the number of fighters. 
Not only could the women now be not prevented from joining the struggle, but 
we decided even to invite them to come into line al ong with the men. We first 
invited the sisters who had lived on Tolstoy Farm. I found that they were only 
too glad to enter the struggle. I gave them an idea  of the risks incidental to 
such participation. I explained to them that they w ould have to put up with 
restraints in the matter of food, dress and persona l movements. I warned them 
that they might be given hard work in jail, made to  wash clothes and even Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  subjected to insult by the warders. But these siste rs were all brave and feared 
none of these things. One of them was pregnant whil e six of them had young 
babies in arms but one and all were eager to join a nd I simply could not come 
in their way. 
The sisters entered the Transvaal at Vereeniging wi thout permits but they were 
not arrested. They took to hawking without a licens e, but still the police 
ignored them. 
We now decided to send sixteen pioneers of the Phoe nix Settlement to cross 
over into the Transvaal. While the Phoenix group en tered the Transvaal, the 
sisters who had courted arrest in the Transvaal in vain were to enter Natal. As 
it was an offence to enter the Transvaal front Nata l without a permit it was 
equally an offence to enter Natal from the Transvaa l. If the sisters were 
arrested upon entering Natal well and good. But if they were not arrested, it 
was arranged that they should proceed to and post t hemselves at Newcastle, 
the great coalmining centre in Natal, and advise th e indentured Indian 
labourers there to go on strike. If the labourers s truck in response to the sisters' 
appeal, Government was bound to arrest them along w ith the labourers, who 
would thereby probably be fired with still greater enthusiasm. This was the 
strategy I thought out and unfolded before the Tran svaal sisters. 
I went to Phoenix and told the sisters and others i n the colony the seriousness 
of the step they were taking and the sufferings the y might have to undergo in 
jail. But all including my wife were prepared for t he worst and assured me that 
they would not retreat, come what may. 
The Phoenix party crossed the border and entered th e Transvaal without 
permits. Accordingly they were arrested and sentenc ed to three months' 
imprisonment with hard labour. 
The sisters who had been disappointed in the Transv aal now entered Natal but 
were not arrested for entering the country without permits. They therefore 
proceeded to Newcastle and set about their work acc ording to the plans 
previously settled. Their influence spread like wil dfire. The pathetic story of Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164  the wrongs heaped up by the £3 tax touched the labo urers to the quick, and 
they went on strike. 
Government could not now any longer leave the brave  Transvaal sisters free to 
pursue their activities. They too were sentenced to  imprisonment for three 
months. 
The women's bravery was beyond words. They were all  kept in Maritzburg jail, 
where they were considerably harassed. Their food w as of the worst quality and 
they were given laundry work as their task. No food  was permitted to be given 
them from outside nearly till the end of their term . One sister was under a 
religious vow to restrict herself to a particular d iet. After great difficulty the 
jail authorities allowed her that diet, but the foo d supplied was unfit for human 
consumption. The sister badly needed olive oil. She  did not get it at first, and 
when she got it, it was old and rancid. She offered  to get it at her own expense 
but was told that jail was no hotel, and she must t ake what food was given her. 
When she was released she was a mere skeleton and h er life was saved only by 
a great effort. 
Another returned from jail with a fatal fever to wh ich she succumbed within a 
few days of her release (February 22, 1914). How ca n I forget her? Valliamma R. 
Munuswami Mudaliar was a young girl of Johannesburg  only sixteen years of 
age. She was confined to bed when I saw her. As she  was a tail girl, her 
emaciated body was a terrible thing to behold. 
'Valliamma, you do not repent of your having gone t o jail?' I asked. 
'Repent? I am even now ready to go to jail again if  I am arrested.' said 
Valliamma. 
'But what if it results in your death?' I pursued. 
'I do not mind it. Who would not love to die for on e's motherland? 1 was the 
reply. 
Within a few days after this conversation Valliamma  was no more with us in the 
flesh, but she left us the heritage of an immortal name. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165  It was an absolutely pure sacrifice that was offere d by these sisters. Sacrifice is 
fruitful only to the extent that it is pure. God hu ngers after devotion in man. 
He is glad to accept the widow's mite offered with devotion, that is to say, 
without a selfish motive, and rewards it a hundredf old. Satyagrahis may rest 
assured, that even if there is only one among them who is pure as crystal, his 
sacrifice suffices to achieve the end in view. The world rests upon the bedrock 
of  satya  or truth. Asatya  meaning untruth also means non-existent, and  satya  or 
truth also means that which  is.  If untruth does not so much as exist, its victory 
is out of the question. And truth being that which  is  can never be destroyed. 
This is the doctrine of Satyagraha in a nutshell. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166   
57. A STREAM OF LABOURERS 
The women's imprisonment worked like a charm upon t he labourers on the 
mines near Newcastle who downed their tools and ent ered the city in 
succeeding batches. As soon as I received the news,  I left Phoenix for 
Newcastle. 
These labourers have no houses of their own. The mi ne-owners erect houses for 
them, set up lights upon their roads, and supply th em with water, with the 
result that the labourers are reduced to a state of  utter dependence. 
The strikers brought quite a host of complaints to me. Some said the mine-
owners had stopped their lights or their water, whi le others stated that they 
had thrown away the strikers' household chattels fr om their quarers. I 
suggested that the only possible course was for the  labourers to leave their 
masters' quarters, to fare forth in fact like pilgr ims. 
The labourers were not to be counted by tens but by  hundreds. And their 
number might easily swell into thousands. How was I  to house and feed this 
ever growing multitude? There was a huge concourse of men, which was 
continuously receiving accessions. It was a dangero us if not an impossible task 
to keep them in one place and look after them while  they had no employment. 
I thought out a solution of my problem. I must take  this 'army' to the Transvaal 
and see them safely deposited in jail like the Phoe nix party. The strength of 
the 'army' was about five thousand. I had not the m oney to pay the railway fare 
for such a large number of persons, and therefore t hey could not all be taken 
by rail. And if they were taken by rail, I would be  without the means of putting 
their morale to the test. The Transvaal border is 3 6 miles from Newcastle. The 
border villages of Natal and the Transvaal are Char lestown and Volksrust 
respectively. I finally decided to march on foot. I  consulted the labourers who 
had their wives and children with them and some of whom therefore hesitated 
to agree to my proposal. I had no alternative excep t to harden my heart, and 
declared that those who wished were free to return to the mines. But none of 
them would avail themselves of this liberty. We dec ided that those who were Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167  disabled in their limbs should he sent by rail, and  all able-bodied persons 
announced their readiness to go to Charlestown on f oot. The march was to be 
accomplished in two days. 
The labourers were informed one evening that they w ere to commence the 
march early next morning (October 28, 1913), and th e rules to be observed on 
the march were read to them. It was no joke to cont rol a multitude of five or 
six thousand men. I had no idea of the exact number  nor did I know their names 
or places of residence. I was merely content with a s many of them as chose to 
remain. I could not afford to give anything on the road beyond a daily ration of 
one pound and a half of bread and an ounce of sugar  to each 'soldier'. I planned 
to gel something more from the Indian traders on th e way. But if I failed they 
must rest content with bread and sugar. My experien ce of the Boer War and the 
Zulu 'rebellion' stood me in good stead on the pres ent occasion. None of the 
'invaders' was to keep with him any more clothes th an necessary. None was to 
touch any one's property on the way. They were to b ear it patiently if any 
official or non-official European met them and abus ed or even flogged them. 
They were to allow themselves to be arrested if the  police offered to arrest 
them. The march must continue even if I was arreste d. All these points were 
explained to the men and I also announced the names  of those who should 
successively lead the 'army' in my place. 
The men understood the instructions issued, to them , and our caravan safely 
reached Charlestown where the traders rendered us g reat help. They gave us 
the use of their houses and permitted us to make ou r cooking arrangements on 
the grounds of the mosques. The ration supplied on the march would be 
exhausted when camp was reached and therefore we we re in need of cooking 
pots, which were cheerfully supplied by the traders . We had with us a plentiful 
store of rice, etc., to which also the traders cont ributed their share. 
Charlestown was a small village with a population o f hardly 1,000 souls, and 
could never accommodate the several thousands of pi lgrims. Only women and 
children were lodged in houses. All the rest camped  in the open. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168  My co-workers and I never hesitated to do sweeping,  scavenging and similar 
work, with the result that others also took it up e nthusiastically. In the absence 
of such sensible procedure it is no good issuing or ders to others. All would 
assume leadership, and dictate to others and there would be nothing done in 
the end. Bui where the leader himself becomes a ser vant, there are no rival 
claimants for leadership. 
I was the leader among the cooks. Sometimes there w as too much water in the 
dal, at other times it was insufficiently cooked. T he vegetable and even the 
rice was sometimes ill cooked. I have not seen many  people in the world who 
would cheerfully gulp down such food. 
Serving the food was if possible even more difficul t than cooking it, and was in 
my sole charge. It rested with me to satisfy all pr esent by cutting down the 
individual ration when there was too little food an d more than the expected 
number of diners. I can never forget the angry look  which the sisters gave me 
for a moment when I gave them too little food and w hich was at once 
transformed into a smile as they understood the tha nklessness of my self-
chosen task. 'I am helpless,' I would say. 'The qua ntity cooked is small, and as I 
have to feed many, I must divide it equally between  them.' Upon this they 
would grasp the situation and go away smiling, sayi ng that they were content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169   
58. THE GREAT MARCH 
I wrote to the Government, that we did not propose to enter the Transvaal with 
a view to domicile, but as an effective protest aga inst the Minister's breach of 
pledge and as a pure demonstration of our distress at the loss of our self- 
respect. Government would be relieving us of all an xiety if they were good 
enough to arrest us where we then were, that is in Charlestown. But if they did 
not arrest us, and if any of us surreptitiously ent ered the Transvaal, the 
responsibility would not be ours. There was no secr ecy about our movement. 
None of us had a personal axe to grind. We would no t like it if any of us 
secretly entered the Transvaal. But we could not ho ld ourselves responsible for 
the acts of any, as we had to deal with thousands o f unknown men and as we 
could not command any other sanction but that of lo ve. Finally I assured the 
Government that if they repealed the £3 tax, the st rike would be called off and 
the indentured labourers would return to work, as w e would not ask them to 
join the general struggle directed against the rest  of our grievances. 
At a crisis like this we could not await the reply of the Government for a 
number of days. We therefore decided to leave Charl estown and enter the 
Transvaal at once if the Government did not put us under arrest. If we were not 
arrested on the way, the 'army of peace' was to mar ch twenty to twenty-four 
miles a day for eight days together, with a view to  reach Tolstoy Farm, and to 
stop there till the struggle was over and in the me anwhile to maintain 
themselves by working the Farm. 
We also made other preparations for the march. The good Dr. Briscoe 
improvised a small medical chest for us and gave us  some instruments which 
even a layman like myself could handle. 
Bread and sugar constituted our sole ration, but ho w was a supply of bread to 
be ensured on the eight days' march? The bread must  be distributed to the 
pugrims every day and we could not hold any of it i n stock. The only solution of 
this problem was that someone should supply us with  bread at each stage. But 
who would be our provider? Volksrust was about doub le the size of Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170  Chariestown, and a large European bakery there will ingly contracted to supply 
bread at each place by rail, and the railway offici als, also Europeans not only 
honestly delivered it to us, but they took good car e of it in transit and gave us 
some special facilities. They knew that we harboure d no enmity in our hearts. 
When all the preparations for the march were comple ted, I made one more 
effort to achieve a settlement. I had already sent letters and telegrams. I now 
decided to phone even at the risk of my overtures b eing answered by an insult. 
I received this reply within half a minute: 'Genera l Smuts will have nothing to 
do with you. You may do just as you please.' With t his the message closed. I 
had fully expected this result, though I was not pr epared for the curtness of the 
reply. 
The next day (November 6, 1913) at the appointed st roke of the hour (6.30) we 
offered prayers and commenced the march in the name  of God. The pilgrim 
band was composed of 2,037 men, 127 women and 57 ch ildren. 
There is a small spring one mile from Charlestown, and as soon as one crosses 
it. One has entered Volksrust or the Transvaal. A s mall patrol of mounted 
policemen was on duty at the border gate. I went up  to them leaving 
instructions with the 'army' to cross over when I s ignaled to them. But while I 
was still talking with the police, the pilgrims mad e a sudden rush and crossed 
the border. The police surrounded them, but the sur ging multitude was not 
easy of control. The police had no intention of arr esting us. I pacified the 
pilgrims and got them to arrange themselves in regu lar rows. Everything was in 
order in a few minutes and the march into the Trans vaal began. 
Two days before this the Europeans of Volksrust hel d a meeting where they 
offered all manner of threats to the Indians. Some said that they would shoot 
the Indians, if they entered the Transvaal. Mr. Kal lenbach attended this 
meeting to reason with the Europeans who were howev er not prepared to listen 
to him. 
Our procession passed through Volksrust in peace. I  do not remember that any 
European attempted even a jest. All were out to wit ness this novel sight, while 
there was even a friendly twinkle in the eyes of so me of them. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171  On the first day we were to stop for the night at P almford about eight miles 
from Volksrust, and we reached the place at about f ive p. m. The pilgrims took 
their ration of bread and sugar, and spread themsel ves in the open air. Some 
were talking while others were singing  bhajans.  Some of the women were 
thoroughly exhausted by the march. They had dared t o carry their children in 
their arms, but it was impossible for them to proce ed further. I. therefore, 
according to my previous warning, kept them lodgers  with a good Indian 
shopkeeper who promised to send them to Tolstoy Far m if we were permitted 
to go there, and to their homes if we were arrested . 
As the night advanced, all noises ceased and I too was preparing to retire when 
I heard a tread. I saw a European coming lantern in  hand. I understood what it 
meant, but had no preparations to make. The police officer said. 
'I have a warrant of arrest for you. I want to arre st you.' 
'When?' I asked. 
'Immediately.' 
'Where will you take me?' 
To the adjoining railway station now, and to Volksr ust when we get a train for 
it.' 
'I will go with you without informing any one, but I will leave some instructions 
with one of my co-workers.' 
'You may do so.' 
I roused P. K. Naidoo who was sleeping near me. I i nformed him about my 
arrest and asked him not to awake the pilgrims befo re morning. At daybreak 
they must regularly resume the march. The march wou ld commence before 
sunrise, and when it was time for them to halt and get their rations, he must 
break to them the news of my arrest. He might infor m anyone who inquired 
about me in the interval. 
If the pilgrims were arrested, they must allow them selves to be arrested. 
Otherwise they must continue the march according to  the programme. Naidoo Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172  had no fears at all. I also told him what was to be  done in case he was arrested. 
Mr. Kallenbach too was in Volksrust at the time. 
I went with the police officer, and we took the tra in for Volksrust the next 
morning. I appeared before the court in Volksrust, but the Public Prosecutor 
himself asked for a remand until the 14th as he was  not ready with the 
evidence. The case was postponed accordingly. I app lied for bail as I had over 
2,000 men. 122 women and 50 children in my charge w hom I should like to take 
on to their destination within the period of postpo nement. The Public 
Prosecutor opposed my application. But the Magistra te was helpless in the 
matter, as every prisoner not charged with a capita l offence is in law entitled 
to be allowed to give bail for his appearance, and I could not be deprived of 
that right. He therefore released me on bail of £50 . Mr. Kallenbach had a car 
ready for me, and he took me at once to rejoin the 'invaders'. The special 
reporter of  The Transvaal Leader wanted to go with us. We took him in the car, 
and he published at the time a vivid description of  the case, the journey, and 
the meeting with the pilgrims, who received me with  enthusiasm and were 
transported with joy. Mr. Kallenbach at once return ed to Volksrust, as he had 
to look after the Indians stopping at Charlestown a s well as fresh arrivals there. 
We continued the march, but it did not suit the Gov ernment to leave me in a 
state of freedom. I was therefore re-arrested at St anderton on the 8th. 
Standerton is comparatively a bigger place. There w as something rather strange 
about the manner of my arrest here. I was distribut ing bread to the pilgrims. 
The Indian storekeepers at Standerton presented us with some tins of 
marmalade, and the distribution therefore took more  time than usual. 
Meanwhile the Magistrate came and stood by my side.  He waited till the 
distribution of rations was over, and then called m e aside. I knew the 
gentleman, who, I thought, perhaps wanted to talk w ith me. He laughed and 
said, 
'You are my prisoner.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173  'It would seem I have received promotion in rank,' I said, 'as Magistrates take 
the trouble to arrest me instead of mere police off icials. But you will try me 
just now.' 
'Go with me,' replied the Magistrate, 'the Courts a re still in session.' 
I asked the pilgrims to continue their march, and t hen left with the Magistrate. 
As soon as I reached the Court room, I found that s ome of my co-workers had 
also been arrested. There were five of them there. 
I was at once brought before the court, and applied  for remand and bail on the 
same grounds as in Volksrust. Here too the applicat ion was strongly opposed by 
the Public Prosecutor and here too I was released o n my own recognizance of 
£50 and the case was remanded till the 21st. The In dian traders had kept a 
carriage ready for me and I rejoined the pilgrims a gain when they had hardly 
proceeded three miles further. The pilgrims thought , and I thought too, that we 
might now perhaps reach Tolstoy Farm. But that was not to be. It was no small 
thing however that the invaders got accustomed to m y being arrested. The five 
co-workers remained in jail. 
We were now near Johannesburg. The whole pilgrimage  had been divided into 
eight stages. Thus far we had accomplished our marc hes exactly according to 
programme and we now had four days' march in front of us. But if our spirits 
rose from day to day, Government too got more and m ore anxious as to how 
they should deal with the Indian invasion. They wou ld be charged with 
weakness and want of tact if they arrested us after  we had reached our 
destination. 
If we were to be arrested, we must be arrested befo re we reached the 
promised land. 
Gokhale desired by cable that Polak should go to In dia and help him in placing 
the facts of the situation before the Indian and Im perial Governments. We were 
therefore preparing to send him to India. I wrote t o him that he could go. But 
he would not leave without meeting me in person and  taking full instructions 
from me. He therefore offered to come and see me du ring our march. I wired Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174  to him saying that he might come if he wished thoug h he would be in so doing 
running the risk of arrest. 
In spite of this Polak joined us on the 9th at Teak worth between Standerton 
and Greylingstad. We were in the midst of our consu ltation and had nearly done 
with it. It was about 3 o'clock in the afternoon. P olak and I were walking at the 
head of the whole body of pilgrims. Some of the co- workers were listening to 
our conversation. Polak was to take the evening tra in for Durban. But God does 
not always permit man to carry out his plans. While  we were thus engaged in 
talking, a Cape cart came and stopped before us and  from it alighted Mr. 
Chamney, the Principal Immigration Officer of the T ransvaal and a police 
officer. They took me somewhat aside and one of the m said. 'I arrest you.' 
I was thus arrested thrice in four days. 
'What about the marchers?' I asked. 
'We shall see to that,' was the answer. 
I said nothing further. I asked Polak to assume cha rge of and go with the 
pilgrims. The police officer permitted me only to i nform the marchers of my 
arrest. As I proceeded to ask them to keep the peac e, etc., the officer 
interrupted me and said, 
'You are now a prisoner and cannot make any speeche s.' I was taken to 
Greylingstad, and from Greylingstad via Balfour to Heidelberg where I passed 
the night. The pilgrims with Polak as leader resume d their march and halted for 
the night at Greylingstad. At about 9 o'clock in th e morning on the 10th the 
pilgrims reached Balfour where three special trains  were drawn up at the 
station to take them and deport them to Natal. The pilgrims were there rather 
obstinate. They asked for me to be called and promi sed to be arrested and to 
board the trains if I advised them to that effect. But after Polak and Kachhalia 
Sheth had reasoned with them, the pilgrims were bro ught round and all 
entrained peacefully. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175   
59. THE TRIUMPH OF SATYAGRAHA 
I, on my part, was again hauled up before the Magis trate. This time I was 
arrested on a warrant from Dundee where I was to be  prosecuted on the 
principal charge of inducing indentured labourers t o leave the province of 
Natal. I was therefore taken to Dundee by rail the same day. 
Polak was not only not arrested at Balfour but he w as even thanked for the 
assistance he had rendered to the authorities. But he was arrested in 
Chariestown whilst waiting for the corridor train. Kallenbach was also arrested 
and both these friends were confined in Volksrust j ail. 
I was tried in Dundee on the 11th and sentenced to nine months' imprisonment 
with hard labour. I had still to take my second tri al at Volksrust on the charge 
of aiding and abetting prohibited persons to enter the Transvaal. From Dundee I 
was therefore taken on the 13th to Volksrust where I was glad to meet 
Kallenbach and Polak in the jail. We spent a few ha ppy days together, only to 
be soon separated by the Government and confined in  different jails. 
To return to the pilgrims. The special trains took them back to Natal. The 
Government had surrounded the coal mines with wire netting, declaring them 
out-stations of Dundee and Newcastle jails, appoint ed the mine-owners' 
European staff as warders, and put the pilgrims bac k to work in them. The 
labourers were thus reduced to slavery pure and sim ple. But they flatly 
declined to work on the mines, were brutally whippe d, kicked and abused. 
Cablegrams regarding these outrages were sent to In dia. All India was deeply 
stirred, and the South African question became the burning topic of the day. 
It was then (December 1913) that Lord Hardinge in M adras made his famous 
speech which created a stir in South Africa as well  as in England. The Viceroy 
may not publicly criticize other members of the Emp ire, but Lord Hardinge not 
only passed severe criticism upon the Union Governm ent, but he also 
wholeheartedly defended the action of the Satyagrah is. Lord Hardinge's 
firmness created a good impression all round. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176  The Union Government had not the power to keep thou sands of innocent men 
in jail. The Viceroy would not tolerate it, and all  the world was waiting to see 
what General Smuts would do. The Union Government n ow did what all 
governments similarly situated generally do. States  amenable to public opinion 
get out of such awkward positions by appointing a c ommission which conducts 
only a nominal inquiry, as its recommendations are a foregone conclusion. It is 
a general practice that the recommendations of such  a commission should be 
accepted by the State, and therefore under the guis e of carrying out the 
recommendations, governments give the justice which  they have first refused. 
General Smuts appointed a commission of three membe rs. The commission 
recommended 'with a view to enabling the enquiry to  be made as thorough as 
possible' that Kallenbach, Polak and I should be re leased unconditionally. The 
Government accepted this recommendation and release d all three of us 
simultaneously (December 18, 1913) after an impriso nment of hardly six weeks. 
We felt that the Indians should be certainly allowe d to nominate at least one 
representative on the commission. I addressed a let ter to General Smuts 
accordingly. Fie, however, declined to appoint any more members on the 
commission. We therefore prepared to go to jail and  announced that a party of 
Indians courting jail would commence their march fr om Durban on January 1, 
1914. 
Just at this time there was a great strike of the E uropean employees of the 
Union railways, which made the position of the Gove rnment extremely 
delicate. I was called upon to commence the Indian march at such a fortunate 
juncture. But I declared that the Indians could not  thus assist the railway 
strikers, as they were not out to harass the Govern ment, their struggle being 
entirely different and differently conceived. Even if we undertook the march, 
we would begin it at some other time when the railw ay trouble had ended. This 
decision of ours created a deep impression, and was  cabled to England by 
Renter. Lord Ampthill cabled his congratulations fr om England. English friends 
in South Africa too appreciated our decision. One o f the secretaries of General 
Smuts jocularly said: I do not like your people, an d do not care to assist them Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177  at all. But what am I to do? You help us in our day s of need. How can we lay 
hands upon you? I often wish you took to violence l ike the English strikers, and 
then we would know at once how to dispose of you. B ut you will not injure even 
the enemy. You desire victory by self-suffering alo ne and never transgress your 
self-imposed limits of courtesy and chivalry. And t hat is what reduces us to 
sheer helplessness.' General Smuts also gave expres sion to similar sentiments. 
Numerous cases of such chivalry left their invisibl e yet potent impress 
everywhere, enhanced the prestige of the Indians, a nd prepared a suitable 
atmosphere for a settlement. 
I entered into correspondence with General Smuts ov er the work of the 
commission and came to agreement. The commission in  its report 
recommended compliance with the demands of the Indi an community; and 
within a short time after the issue of the report, the Government published in 
the official Gazette of the Union the Indians' Reli ef Bill which abolished the £3 
tax, made legal all marriages deemed legal in India , and made a domicile 
certificate bearing the holder's thumbprint suffici ent evidence of the right to 
enter the Union. 
Thus the great Satyagraha struggle closed after eig ht years, and it appeared 
that the Indians in South Africa were now at peace.  On July 18, 1914, I sailed 
for England to meet Gokhale, on my way back to Indi a, with mixed feelings of 
pleasure and regret, — pleasure because I was retur ning home after many years 
and eagerly looked forward to serving the country u nder Gokhale's guidance, 
regret because it was a great wrench for me to leav e South Africa, where I had 
passed twenty-one years of my life sharing to the f ull in the sweets and bitters 
of human experience, and where I had realized my vo cation in life. 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART IX : TO ENGLAND AND THE WAR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179   
60. MY PART IN THE WAR 
War was declared on the 4th of August, 1914. We rea ched London on the 6th. 
I felt that Indians residing in England ought to do  their bit in the war. English 
students had volunteered to serve in the army, and Indians might do no less. A 
number of objections were taken to this line of arg ument. 
The opposing friends felt that that was the hour fo r making a bold declaration 
of Indian demands and for improving the status of I ndians. 
I thought that England's need should not be turned into our opportunity, and 
that it was more becoming and far-sighted not to pr ess our demands while the 
war lasted. I therefore adhered to my advice and in vited those who would to 
enlist as volunteers. There was a good response, pr actically all the provinces 
and all the religions being represented among the v olunteers. 
I wrote a letter to Lord Crewe, acquainting him wit h these facts, and 
expressing our readiness to be trained for ambulanc e work, if that should be 
considered a condition precedent to the acceptance of our offer. 
Lord Crewe accepted the offer after some hesitation , and thanked us for having 
tendered our services to the Empire at that critica l hour. 
It was quite clear to me that participation in war could never be consistent 
with  ahimsa.  But it is not always given to one to be equally cl ear about one's 
duty. 
I had hoped to improve my status and that of my peo ple through the British 
Empire. Whilst in England I was enjoying the protec tion of the British Fleet, and 
taking shelter as I did under its armed might, I wa s directly participating in its 
potential violence. Therefore if I desired to retai n my connection with the 
Empire and to live under its banner, one of three c ourses was open to me : I 
could declare open resistance to the war and, in ac cordance with the law of 
Satyagraha, boycott the Empire until it changed its  military policy; or I could 
seek imprisonment by civil disobedience of such of its laws as were fit to be Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180  disobeyed: or I could participate in the war on the  side of the Empire and 
thereby acquire the capacity and Fitness for resist ing the violence of war. I 
lacked this capacity and fitness, so I thought ther e was nothing for it but to 
servo in the war. I make no distinction, from the p oint of view of  ahimsa,  
between combatants and non-combatants. He who volun teers to serve a band 
of dacoits, by working as their carrier, or their w atchman while they are about 
their business, or their nurse when they are wounde d, is as much guilty of 
dacoity as the dacoits themselves. In the same way those who confine 
themselves to attending to the wounded in battle ca nnot be absolved from the 
guilt of war. 
I had argued the whole thing out to myself in this manner, before I received 
Polak's cable questioning the consistency of my act ion with my profession of  
ahimsa,  and soon after its receipt, I discussed these view s with several friends 
and concluded that it was my duty to offer to serve  in the war. Even today I see 
no flaw in that line of argument, nor am I sorry fo r my action, holding, as I then 
did, views favourable to the British connection. 
I got pleurisy however and was advised to return to  India before winter. This I 
did. It was a joy to get back to the homeland after  many years of exile. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART X : IN INDIA AND FOUNDING OF THE SABARMATI ASH RAM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182   
61. IN POONA 
Before I reached home, the party which had started from Phoenix had already 
arrived. When I landed in Bombay I learnt that the Phoenix party was at 
Shantiniketan. 1 I was impatient to meet them as soon as I could af ter my 
meeting with Gokhale. 
Gokhale and the members of the Servants of India So ciety 2 overwhelmed me 
with affection. So far as I recollect, Gokhale had summoned all of them to 
meet me. I had a frank talk with them all on every sort of subject. 
Gokhale was very keen that I should join the Societ y and so was I. But the 
members felt that, as there was a great difference between my ideals and 
methods of work and theirs, it might not be proper for me to join the Society. 
I informed Gokhale of my intentions. Whether I was admitted as a member or 
not, I wanted to have an Ashram where I could settl e down with my Phoenix 
family, preferably somewhere in Gujarat, as, being a Gujarati, I thought I was 
best fitted to serve the country through serving Gu jarat. Gokhale liked the 
idea. He said: 'You should certainly do so. Whateve r may be the result of your 
talks with the members, you must look to me for the  expenses of the Ashram, 
which I will regard as my own.' 
My heart overflowed with joy. It was a pleasure to feel free from the 
responsibility of raising funds, and to realize tha t I should not be obliged to set 
about the work all on my own, but that I should be able to count on a sure 
guide whenever I was in difficulty. This took a gre at load off my mind.  
Gokhale took from me a promise that I should travel  in India for gaining 
experience, and express no opinion on public questi ons until I had finished the 
period of probation. 
 
1 Shantiniketan, literally, 'abode of peace', found ed by the Poet Rabindranath Tagorc in 
Bolpur, Bengal, for imparting a new type of educati on to the young. — Ed. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183   
2 Founded by Gokhale and consisting of men pledged to devote all their lives to the 
service of the country on such allowances as the so ciety may be able to give. Its work 
covers many fields - political, social, economic an d educational; moderate in politics, it is 
a non-communal organization which does not recogniz e caste distinctions. It conducts 
several institutions throughout the country. — Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184   
62. WOES OF THIRD CLASS PASSENGERS 
During the Satyagraha in South Africa I had altered  my style of dress so as to 
make it more in keeping with that of the indentured  labourers, and in England 
also I had adhered to the same style for indoor use . For landing in Bombay I had 
a Kathiawadi suit of clothes consisting of a shirt,  a dhoti, a cloak and a white 
scarf, all made of Indian mill cloth. But as I was to travel third from Bombay, I 
regarded the scarf and the cloak as too much of an encumbrance, so I shed 
them, and invested in an eightrto-ten-annas Kashmir i cap. One dressed in that 
fashion was sure to pass muster as a poor man. 
On my return from Shantiniketan at Burdwan we came face to face with the 
hardships that a third class passenger has to go th rough even in securing his 
ticket. 'Third class tickets are not booked so earl y,' we were told. I went to the 
Station- master, though that too was a difficult bu siness. Someone kindly 
directed me to where he was, and I represented to h im our difficulty. He also 
made the same reply. As soon as the booking window opened, I went to 
purchase the tickets. But it was no easy thing to g et -them. Might was right, 
and passengers, who were forward and indifferent to  others, coming one after 
another, continued to push me out. I was therefore about the last of the first 
crowd to get a ticket. 
The train arrived, and getting into it was another trial. There was a free 
exchange of abuse and pushes between passengers alr eady in the train and 
those trying to get in. We ran up and down the plat form, but were everywhere 
met with the same reply : 'No room here.' I went to  the guard. He said, 'You 
must try to get in where you can or take the next t rain.' 
'But I have urgent business,' I respectfully replie d. He had no time to listen to 
me. I was disconcerted. I told Maganlal to get in w herever possible, and I got 
into an inter-class compartment with my wife. The g uard saw us getting in. At 
Asansol station he came to charge us excess fares. I said to him : Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185  It was your duty to find us room. We could not get any, and so we are sitting 
here. If you can accommodate us in a third class co mpartment, we shall be only 
too glad to go there.' 
'You may not argue with me,' said the guard. 'I can not accommodate you. You 
must pay the excess fare, or get out. I wanted to r each Poona somehow. I was 
not therefore prepared to fight the guard, so I pai d the excess fare he 
demanded, i.e., up to Poona. But I resented the inj ustice. 
In the morning we reacfied Mogalsarai. Maganlal had  managed to get a seat in 
the third class, to which I now shifted. I acquaint ed the ticket examiner with 
all the facts, and asked him to give me a certifica te to the effect that I had 
shifted to a third class compartment at Mogalsarai.  This he declined to do. I 
applied to the railway authorities for redress, and  got a reply to this effect: 'It 
is not our practice to refund excess fares without the production of a 
certificate, but we make an exception in your case.  It is not possible, however, 
to refund the excess fare from Burdwan to Mogalsara i.' 
The woes of third class passengers are undoubtedly due to the high-handedness 
of railway authorities. But the rudeness, dirty hab its, selfishness and ignorance 
of the passengers themselves are no less to blame. The pity is that they often 
do not realize that they are behaving ill, dirtily or selfishly. They believe that 
everything they do is in the natural way. All this may be traced to the 
indifference towards them of us 'educated' people. 
My bitterest experience was from Lahore to Delhi. I  was going to Calcutta from 
Karachi via Lahore where I had to change trains. It  was impossible to find a 
place in the train. It was full, and those who coul d get in did so by sheer force, 
often sneaking through windows if the doors were lo cked. I had to reach 
Calcutta on the date fixed for the meeting, and if I missed this train. I could 
not arrive in time. I had almost given up hope of g etting in. No one was willing 
to accept me, when a porter discovering my plight c ame to me and said, 'Give 
me twelve annas and I will get you a seat.' 'Yes', said I, 'you shall have twelve 
annas if you do procure me a seat.' The young man w ent from carriage to 
carriage entreating passengers but no one heeded hi m. As the train was about Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186  to start, some passengers said, 'There is no room h ere, but you can shove him in 
if you like. He will have to stand.' 'Well?' asked the young porter. I readily 
agreed, and he shoved me in bodily through the wind ow. Thus I got in and the 
porter earned his twelve annas. 
The night was a trial. The other passengers were si tting somehow. I stood two 
hours, holding the chain of the upper bunk. Meanwhi le some of the passengers 
kept worrying me incessantly. 'Why will you not sit  down?' They asked. I tried to 
reason with them saying there was no room, but they  could not tolerate my 
standing, though they were lying full length on the  upper bunks. They did not 
tire of worrying me, neither did I tire of gently r eplying to them. This at last 
mollified them. Some of them asked me my name, and when I gave it they felt 
ashamed. They apologized and made room for me. Pati ence was thus rewarded. 
I was dead tired, and my bead was reeling. God sent  help just when it was most 
needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187   
63. FOUNDING OF THE ASHRAM 
The Satyagraha Ashram was founded on the 25th of Ma y, 1915 at Sabarmati in 
Ahmedabad. 
I had a predilection for Ahmedabad. Being a Gujarat i I thought i should be able 
to render the greatest service to the country throu gh the Gujarati language. 
And then, as Ahmedabad was an ancient centre of han dloom weaving, it was 
likely to be the most favourable field for the revi val of the cottage industry of 
hand-spinning. There was also the hope that, the ci ty being the capital of 
Gujarat, monetary help from its wealthy citizens wo uld be more available here 
than elsewhere. 
So far as accommodation was concerned, Shri Jivanla l Desai, a barrister in 
Ahmedabad, was the principal man to help me. He off ered to let, and we 
decided to hire, his Kochrab bungalow. The first th ing we had to settle was the 
name of the Ashram. Our creed was devotion to truth , and our business was the 
search for and insistence on truth. I wanted to acq uaint India with the method I 
had tried in South Africa, and I desired to test in  India the extent to which its 
application might be possible. So my companions and  I selected the name 
'Satyagraha Ashram', as conveying both our goal and  our method of service. For 
the conduct of the Ashram a code of rules and obser vances was necessary. A 
draft was therefore prepared and friends were invit ed to express their opinions 
on it. We were in all about twenty-five men and wom en. This is how the 
Ashram was started. All had their meals in a common  kitchen and strove to live 
as one family. 
The Ashram had been in existence only a few months when we were put to a 
test such as I had scarcely expected. I received a letter from Amritlal Thakkar 
to this effect: 'A humble and honest untouchable fa mily is desirous of joining 
your Ashram. Will you accept them?' 
I wrote to Amritlal Thakkar expressing our willingn ess to accept the family, 
provided all the members were ready to abide by the  rules of the Ashram. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188  The family consisted of Dudabhai, his wife Danibehn  and their daughter 
Lakshmi, then a mere toddling babe. Dudabhai had be en a teacher in Bombay. 
They all agreed to abide by the rules and were acce pted. 
But their admission created a flutter amongst the f riends who had been helping 
the Ashram. The very first difficulty was found wit h regard to the use of the 
well, which was partly controlled by the owner of t he bungalow. The man in 
charge of the water-lift objected that drops of wat er from our bucket would 
pollute him. So he took to swearing at us and moles ting Dudabhai. I told 
everyone to put up with the abuse and continue draw ing water at any cost. 
When he saw that we did not return his abuse, the m an became ashamed and 
ceased to bother us. 
All monetary help, however, was stopped. With the s topping of monetary help 
came rumours of proposed social boycott. We were pr epared for all this. I had 
told my companions that, if we were boycotted and d enied the usual facilities, 
we would not leave Ahmedabad. We would rather go an d stay in the quarter 
and live on whatever we could get by manual labour.  
Matters came to such a pass that Maganlal Gandhi on e day gave me this notice : 
'We are out of funds' and there is nothing for the next month.' 
I quietly replied: 'Then we shall go to the "untouc hables" quarter.' 
This was not the first time I had been faced with s uch a trial. On all such 
occasions God has sent help at the last moment. One  morning, shortly after 
Maganlal had given me warning of our monetary pligh t, one of the children 
came and said that a Sheth who was waiting in a car  outside wanted to see me. 
I went out to him. 'I want to give the Ashram some help. Will you accept it?' he 
asked. 
'Most certainly,' said I. 'And I confess I am at th e present moment at the end of 
my resources.' 
I shall come tomorrow at this time,' he said. 'Will  you be here?' 
'Yes,' said I, and he left. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189  Next day, exactly at the appointed hour, the car dr ew up near our quarters, 
and the horn was blown. The children came with the news. The Sheth did not 
come in. I went out to see him. He placed in my han ds currency notes of the 
value of Rs. 13,000 and drove away. 
I had never expected this help, and what a novel wa y of rendering it! The 
gentleman had never before visited the Ashram. So f ar as I can remember, I 
had met him only once. No visit, no enquiries, simp ly rendering help and going 
away! This was a unique experience for me. The help  deferred the exodus to 
the "untouchables' " quarter. We now felt quite saf e for a year. 
Just as there was a storm outside, so was there a s torm in the Ashram itself. 
Though in South Africa "untouchable" friends used t o come to my place and live 
and feed with me, my wife and other women did not s eem quite to relish the 
admission into the Ashram of the "untouchable" frie nds. My eyes and ears easily 
detected their indifference, if not their dislike, towards Danibehn. The 
monetary difficulty had caused me no anxiety, but t his internal storm was more 
than I could bear. Danibehn was an ordinary woman. Dudabhai was a man with 
slight education but of good understanding. I liked  his patience. Sometimes he 
did flare up, but on the whole I was well impressed  with his forbearance. I 
pleaded with him to swallow minor insults. He not o nly agreed, but prevailed 
upon his wife to do likewise. 
The admission of this family proved a valuable less on to the Ashram. In the very 
beginning we proclaimed to the world that the Ashra m would not countenance 
untouchability. Those who wanted to help the Ashram  were thus put on their 
guard, and the work of the Ashram in this direction  was considerably simplified. 
The fact that it is mostly the real orthodox Hindus  who have met the daily 
growing expenses of the Ashram is perhaps a clear i ndication that 
untouchability is shaken to its foundation. There a re indeed many other proofs 
of this, but the fact that good Hindus do not scrup le to help an Ashram where 
we go the length of dining with the "untouchables" is no small proof. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XI: CHAMPARAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191   
64. THE STAIN OF INDIGO 
Champaran is the land of King Janaka. Just as it ab ounds in mango groves, so 
used it to be full of indigo plantations until the year 1917. The Champaran 
tenant was bound by law to plant three out of every  twenty parts of his land 
with indigo for his landlord. This system was known  as the tinkathia  system, as 
three  kathas  out of twenty (which make one acre) had to be plan ted with 
indigo. 
Rajkumar Shukta was one of the agriculturists who h ad been under this harrow, 
and he was filled with a passion to wash away the s tain of indigo for the 
thousands who were suffering as he had suffered. He  wanted me personally to 
visit Champaran, and witness the miseries of the ry ots there. I told him that I 
would include Champaran in the tour which I had con templated and give it a 
day or two. 'One day will be enough,' said he, and you will see things with your 
own eyes.' 
So early in 1917, we left Calcutta for Champaran lo oking just like fellow 
rustics. I did not even know the train. He took me to it, and we travelled 
together, reaching Patna in the morning. 
Rajkumar Shukla took me to Rajendra Babu's place in  Patna. Rajendra Babu had 
gone to Puri or some other place, I now forget whic h. There were one or two 
servants at the bungalow who paid us no attention. I had with me something to 
cat. I wanted dates which my companion procured for  me from the bazaar. 
There was strict untouchability in Bihar. I might n ot draw water at the well 
whilst the servants were using it, lest drops of wa ter from my bucket might 
pollute them, the servants not knowing to what cast e I belonged. Rajkumar 
directed me to the indoor latrine, the servant prom ptly directed me to the 
outdoor one. All this was far from surprising or ir ritating to me, for I was inured 
to such things. The servants were doing the duty, w hich they thought Rajendra 
Babu would wish them to do. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192  It was suggested that I should first go to Muzaffar pur. Principal Kripalani used 
to be a professor in the Government College, Muzaff arpur, and had just 
resigned the post when I went there. I had sent a t elegram informing him of my 
arrival, and he met me at the station with a crowd of students, though the 
train reached there at midnight. 
Professor Kripalani spoke to me about the desperate  condition of Bihar, 
particularly of the Tirhut division and gave me an idea of the difficulty of my 
task. He had established very close contact with th e Biharis, and had already 
spoken to them about the mission that took me to Bi har. 
In the morning, a small group of vakils called on m e. Brajkishore Babu now 
arrived from Darbhanga and Rajendra Babu from Puri.  Soon I felt myself 
becoming bound to this circle of friends in life-lo ng friendship. Brajkishore 
Babu acquainted me with the facts of the case. He u sed to be in the habit of 
taking up the cases of the poor tenants. There were  two such cases pending 
when I went there. 
Having studied these cases, said I, 'I have come to  the conclusion that we 
should stop going to law courts. Taking such cases to the courts does little 
good. Where the ryots are so crushed and fear-stric ken, law courts are useless. 
The real relief for them is to be free from fear. W e cannot sit still until we 
have driven  tinkathia  out of Bihar. I had thought that I should be able to leave 
here in two days, but I now realize that the work m ight take even two years. I 
am prepared to give that time, if necessary. I am n ow feeling my ground, but I 
want your help.' I found Brajkishore Babu exception ally cool-headed. 'We shall 
render all the help we can,' he said quietly, 'but pray tells us what kind of help 
you will need.' 
And thus we sat talking until midnight. 
'I shall have little use for your legal knowledge,'  I said to them. 'I want clerical 
assistance and help in interpretation. It may be ne cessary to face 
imprisonment, but, much as I would love you to run that risk, you would go only 
so far as you feel yourselves capable of going. Eve n turning yourselves into 
clerks and giving up your profession for an indefin ite period is no small thing. I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193  find it difficult to understand the local dialect o f Hindi, and I shall not be able 
to read papers written in Kaithi, or Urdu. I shall want you to translate them for 
me. We cannot afford to pay for this work. It shoul d all be done for love and 
out of a spirit of service.' 
Brajkishore Babu understood this immediately, and h e now cross-examined me 
and his companions by turns. 
Ultimately they gave me this assurance. 'Such and s uch a number of us will do 
whatever you may ask. Some of us will be with you f or as much time as you may 
require. The idea of accommodating oneself to impri sonment is a novel thing 
for us. We will try to assimilate it.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 194   
65. FACE TO FACE WITH  AHIMSA  
My object was to inquire into the condition of the Champaran agriculturists and 
understand their grievances against the indigo plan ters. For this purpose it was 
necessary that I should meet thousands of the ryots . But I deemed it essential, 
before starting on my inquiry, to know the planters ' side of the case and see 
the Commissioner of the Division. I sought and was granted appointments with 
both. 
The Secretary of the Planters' Association told me plainly that I was an outsider 
and that I had no business to come between the plan ters and their tenants, but 
if I had any representation to make I might submit it in writing. I politely told 
him that I did not regard myself as an outsider, an d that I had every right to 
inquire into the condition of the tenants if they d esired me to do so. 
The Commissioner, on whom I called, proceeded to bu lly me, and advised me 
forthwith to leave Tirhut. 
I acquainted my co-workers with all this, and told them that there was a 
likelihood of Government stopping me from proceedin g further, and that I 
might have to go to jail earlier than I had expecte d, and that, if I was to be 
arrested, it would be best that the arrest should t ake place in Motihari or if 
possible in Bettiah. It was advisable, therefore, t hat I should go to those places 
as early as possible. 
Champaran is a district of the Tirhut division and Motihari is its headquarters. 
Rajkumar Shukla's place was in the vicinity of Bett iah, and the tenants 
belonging to the  kothis  in its neighbourhood were the poorest in the distr ict. 
Rajkumar Shukla wanted me to see them and I was equ ally anxious to do so. 
So I started with my co-workers for Motihari the sa me day. Babu Gorakh Prasad 
harboured us in his home, which became a caravanser ai. It could hardly contain 
us all. The very same day we heard that about five miles from Motihari a tenant 
had been ill-treated. It was decided that, in compa ny with Babu Dharanidhar 
Prasad, I should go and see him the next morning, a nd we accordingly set off Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 195  for the place on elephant's back. We had scarcely g one half way when a 
messenger from the Police Superintendent overtook u s and said that the latter 
had sent his compliments. I saw what he meant. Havi ng left Dharailidhar Babu 
to proceed to the original destination, I got into the hired carriage which the 
messenger had brought. He then served on me a notic e to leave Champaran, 
and drove me to my place. On his asking me to ackno wledge the service of the 
notice, I wrote to the effect that I did not propos e to comply with it and leave 
Champaran till my inquiry was finished. Thereupon I  received a summons to 
take my trial the next day for disobeying the order  to leave Champarn. 
I kept awake that whole night writing letters and g iving necessary instructions 
to Babu Brajkishore Prasad. 
The news of the notice and the summons spread like wildfire, and I was told 
that Motihari that day witnessed unprecedented scen es. Gorakhbabu's house 
and the court house overflowed with men. Fortunatel y I had finished ail my 
work during the night and so was able to cope with the crowds. My companions 
proved the greatest help. They occupied themselves with regulating the 
crowds, for the latter followed me wherever I went.  
A sort of friendliness sprang up between the offici als — Collector, Magistrate, 
Police Superintendent — and myself. I might have le gally resisted the notices 
served on me. Instead I accepted them all, and my c onduct towards the 
officials was correct. They thus saw that I did not  want to offend them 
personally, but that I wanted to offer civil resist ance to their orders. In this 
way they were put at ease, and instead of harassing  me they gladly availed 
themselves of my and my co-workers' co-operation in  regulating the crowds. 
But it was an ocular demonstration to them of the f act that their authority was 
shaken. The people had for the moment lost all fear  of punishment and yielded 
obedience to the power of love which their new frie nd exercised. 
It should be remembered that no one knew me in Cham paran. The peasants 
were all ignorant. Champaran, being far up north of  the Ganges, and right at 
the foot of the Himalayas in close proximity to Nep al, was cut off from the rest 
of India. The Congress was practically unknown in t hose parts.' Even those who Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 196  had heard the name of the Congress shrank from join ing it or even mentioning 
it. 
No emissaries had therefore been sent there, openly  or secretly, on behalf of 
the Congress to prepare the ground for our arrival.  Rajkumar-Shukla was 
incapable of reaching the thousands of peasants. No  political work had yet been 
done amongst them. The world outside Champaran was not known to them. And 
yet they received me as though we had been age-long  friends. It is no 
exaggeration, but the literal truth, to say that in  this meeting with ihe peasants 
I was face to face with God,  Ahimsa,  and Truth. 
When I come to examine my title to this realization , I find nothing but my love 
for the people. And this in turn is nothing but an expression of my unshakable 
faith in  Ahimsa.  
That day in Champaran was an unforgettable event in  my life and a red-letter 
day for the peasants and for me. 
According to the law, I was to be on my trial, but truly speaking Government 
was to be on its trial. The Commissioner only succe eded in trapping 
Government in the net which he had spread for me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 197   
66. CASE WITHDRAWN 
The trial began. The Government pleader, the Magist rate and other officials 
were on tenterhooks. They were at a loss to know wh at to do. The Government 
pleader was pressing the Magistrate to postpone the  case. But I interfered and 
requested the Magistrate not to postpone the case, as I wanted to plead guilty 
to having disobeyed the order to leave Champaran. 
There was now no occasion to postpone the hearing, but as both the Magistrate 
and the Government pleader had been taken by surpri se, the Magistrate 
postponed judgment. Before I could appear before th e Court to receive the 
sentence, the Magistrate sent a written message tha t the Lieutenant Governor 
had ordered the case against me to be withdrawn, an d the Collector wrote to 
me saying that I was at liberty to conduct the prop osed inquiry, and that I 
might count on whatever help I needed from the offi cials. None of us was 
prepared for this prompt and happy issue. 
I called on the Collector Mr. Heycock. He seemed to  be a good man, anxious to 
do justice. He told me that I might ask for whateve r papers I desired to see, 
and that I was at liberty to see him whenever I lik ed. 
The country thus had its first object-lesson in Civ il Disobedience. The affair was 
freely discussed both locally and in the press, and  my inquiry got unexpected 
publicity. 
It was not possible to carry on the work without mo ney. It had not been the 
practice hitherto to appeal to the public for money  for work of this kind. 
Brajkishorebabu and his friends were mainly vakils who either contributed 
funds themselves, or found it from friends whenever  there was an occasion. 
How could they ask the people to pay when they and their kind could well 
afford to do so? That seemed to be the argument. I had made up my mind not 
to accept anything from the Champaran ryots. It wou ld be bound to be 
misinterpreted. I was equally determined not to app eal to the country at large 
for funds to conduct this inquiry. For that was lik ely to give it an all-India and Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 198  political aspect. We were not likely to require lar ge funds, as we were bent on 
exercising the greatest economy in consonance with the poverty of Champaran. 
Indeed it was found in the end that we did not need  any large amount. I have 
an impression that we expended in all not more than  three thousand rupees, 
and, as far as I remember, we saved a few hundred r upees from what we had 
collected. 
Crowds of peasants came to make their statements, a nd they were followed by 
an armv of companions who filled the compound and g arden to overflowing. 
Those who took down the statements had to observe c ertain rules. Each 
peasant had to be closely cross-examined, and whoev er failed to satisfy the 
test was rejected. This entailed a lot of extra tim e but most of the statements 
were thus rendered incontrovertible. 
An officer from the C.I.D. 1 would always be present when these statements 
were recorded. We might have prevented' him, but we  had decided from the 
very beginning not only not to mind the presence of  C.I.D. officers, but to treat 
them with courtesy and to give them all the informa tion that it was possible to 
give them. 
As I did not want to irritate the planters, but to win them over by gentleness, I 
made a point of writing to and meeting such of them  against whom allegations 
of a serious nature were made. I met the Planters' Association as well, placed 
the ryots' grievances before them and acquainted my self with their point of 
view. Some of the planters hated me, some were indi fferent, and a few treated 
me with courtesy. 
 
1 Criminal Investigation 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 199   
67. IN THE VILLAGES 
As I gained more experience of Bihar. I became conv inced that work of a 
permanent nature was impossible without proper vill age education. The ryots' 
ignorance was pathetic. They either allowed their c hildren to roam about, or 
made them toil on indigo plantations from morning t o night for a couple of 
coppers a day. In those days a male labourer's wage  did not exceed ten pice, a 
female's did not exceed six, and a child's three. H e who succeeded in earning 
four annas a day was considered most fortunate. 
In consultation with my companions I decided to ope n primary schools in six 
villages. One of our conditions with the villagers was that they should provide 
the teachers with board and lodging while we would see to other expenses. The 
village folk had hardly any cash in their hands, bu t they could well afford to 
provide foodstuffs. Indeed they had already express ed their readiness to 
contribute grain and other raw materials. 
As far as possible we placed each school in charge of one man and one woman. 
These volunteers had to look after medical relief a nd sanitation. The 
womenfolk had to be approached through women. 
Medical relief was a very simple affair. Castor oil , quinine and sulphur ointment 
were the only drugs provided to the volunteers. If the patient showed a furred 
tongue or complained ol constipation, castor oil wa s administered, in case of 
fever quinine was given after an opening dose of ca stor oil, and sulphur 
ointment was applied in case of boils and itch afte r thoroughly washing the 
affected parts. No patient was permitted to take ho me any medicine. Wherever 
there was some complication Dr. Dev was consulted. Dr. Dev used to visit each 
centre on certain fixed days in the week. 
Quite a number of people availed themselves of this  simple relief. This plan of 
work will not seem strange when it is remembered th at the prevailing ailments 
were few and amenable to simple treatment, by no me ans requiring expert 
help. As for the people the arrangements answered e xcellently. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 200  Sanitation was a difficult affair. The people were not prepared to do anything 
themselves. Even the field labourers were not ready  to do their own 
scavenging. But Dr. Dev was not a man easily to los e heart. He and the 
volunteers concentrated their energies on making a village ideally clean. They 
swept the roads and the courtyards, cleaned out the  wells, filled up the pools 
nearby, and lovingly persuaded the villagers to rai se volunteers from amongst 
themselves. In some villages they shamed people int o taking up the work, and 
in others the people were so enthusiastic that they  even prepared roads to 
enable my car to go from place to place. These swee t experiences were not 
unmixed with bitter ones of people's apathy. I reme mber some villagers frankly 
expressing their dislike for this work. 
It may not be out of place here to narrate an exper ience that I have described 
before now at many meetings. Bhitiharva was a small  village in which was one 
of our schools. I happened to visit a smaller villa ge in its vicinity and found 
some of the women dressed very dirtily. So I told m y wife to ask them why they 
did not wash their clothes. She spoke to them. One of the women took her into 
her hut and said, 'Look now, there is no box or cup board here containing other 
clothes. The  sari  I am wearing is the only one I have. How am I to w ash it? Tell 
Mahatniaji to get me another  sari,  and I shall then promise to bathe and put on 
clean clothes every day.' 
This cottage was not an exception, but a type to be  found in many Indian 
villages. In countless cottages in India people liv e without any furniture, and 
without a change of clothes, merely with a rag to c over their shame. 
One more experience I will note. In Champaran there  is no lack of bamboo and 
grass. The school hut they had put up at Bhitiharva  was made of these 
materials. Someone — possibly some of the neighbour ing planters' men — set 
fire to it one night. It was not thought advisable to build another hut of bamboo 
and grass. The school was in charge of Shri Soman a nd Kasturba. Shri Soman 
decided to build a pukka house, and thanks to his i nfectious labour, many 
cooperated with him and a brick house was soon made  ready. There was no 
fear now of this building being burnt down. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 201  Thus the volunteers with their schools, sanitation work and medical relief 
gained the confidence and respect of the village fo lk , and were able to bring 
good influence to bear upon them. 
But I must confess with regret that my hope of putt ing this constructive work 
on a permanent footing was not fulfilled. The volun teers had come for 
temporary periods, I could not secure any more from  outside, and permanent 
honorary workers from Bihar were not available. As soon as my work in 
Champaran was finished, work outside, which had bee n preparing in the 
meantime, drew me away. The few months' work in Cha mparan, however, took 
such deep root that its influence in one form or an other is to be observed there 
even today. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 202   
68. THE STAIN REMOVED 
The ever growing number of ryots coming to make the ir statements increased 
the planters' wrath, and they moved heaven and eart h to counteract my 
inquiry. 
One day I received a letter from the Bihar Governme nt to the following effect: 
'Your inquiry has been sufficiently prolonged; shou ld you not now bring it to an 
end and leave Bihar?' The letter was couched in pol ite language, but its 
meaning was obvious. 
I wrote in reply that the inquiry was bound to be p rolonged, and unless and 
until it resulted in bringing relief to the people,  I had no intention of leaving 
Bihar. I pointed out that it was open to Government  to terminate my inquiry by 
accepting the ryots' grievances as genuine and redr essing them, or by 
recognizing that the ryots had made out a  prima facie  case for an official 
inquiry which should be immediately instituted. 
Sir Edward Gait, the Lieutenant Governor, asked me to see him, expressed his 
willingness to appoint an inquiry and invited me to  be a member of the 
Committee. I ascertained the names of the other mem bers, and after 
consultation with my co-workers agreed to serve on the Committee, on 
condition that I should he free to confer with my c o-workers during the 
progress of the inquiry, that Government should rec ognize that, by being a 
member of the Committee. I did not cease to be the ryots' advocate, and that 
in case the result of the inquiry failed to give sa tisfaction, I should be free to 
guide and advise the ryots as to what line of actio n they should take. 
Sir Edward Gait accepted the condition as just and proper and announced the 
inquiry. The late Sir Frank Sly was appointed Chair man of the Committee. 
The Committee found in favour of the ryots, and rec ommended that the 
planters should refund a portion of the exactions m ade by them which the 
Committee had found to be unlawful, and that the  tinkathia  system should be 
abolished by law. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 203  Sir Edward Gait had a large share in getting the Co mmittee to make a 
unanimous report and in getting the agrarian bill p assed in accordance with the 
Committee's recommendations. Had he not adopted a f irm attitude, and had he 
not brought all his tact to bear on the subject, th e report would not have been 
unanimous, and the Agrarian Act would not have been  passed. The planters 
wielded extraordinary power. They offered strenuous  opposition to the bill in 
spite of the report, but Sir Edward Gait remained f irm up to the last and fully 
carried out the recommendations of the Committee. 
The  tinkaithia  system which had been in existence for about a cen tury was thus 
abolished, and with it the planters' raj  came to an end. The ryots, who had all 
along remained crushed, now somewhat came to their own, and the 
superstition that the stain of indigo could never b e washed out was exploded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 204   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XII: AHMEDABAD LABOUR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 205   
69. IN TOUCH WITH LABOUR 
At this time there came a letter from Shrimati Anas uyabehn about the 
condition of labour in Ahmedabad. Wages were low, t he labourers had long 
been agitating for an increment, and I had a desire  to guide them if I could. But 
I had not the confidence to direct even this compar atively small affair from 
that long distance. So I seized the first opportuni ty to go to Ahmedabad. 
I was in a most delicate situation. The mill-hands'  case was strong. Shrimati 
Anasuyabehn had to battle against her own brother. Shri Ambalal Sarabhai, who 
led the fray on behalf of the mill-owners. My relat ions with them were friendly, 
and that made fighting with them the more difficult . I held consultations with 
them, and requested them to refer the dispute to ar bitration, but they refused 
to recognize the principle of arbitration. 
I had therefore to advise the labourers to go on st rike. Before I did so, I came in 
very close contact with them and their leaders, and  explained to them the 
conditions of a successful strike: 
1. never to resort to violence, 
2. never to molest blacklegs, 
3. never to depend upon aims, and 
4. to remain firm, no matter how long the strike conti nued, and to earn 
bread, during the strike by any other honest labour . 
The leaders of the strike understood and accepted t he conditions, and the 
labourers pledged themselves at a general meeting n ot to resume work until 
either their terms were accepted or the mill-owners  agreed to refer the dispute 
to arbitration. 
The strike went on for twenty-one days. During the continuance of the strike I 
consulted the mill-owners from time to time and ent reated them to do justice 
to the labourers. 'We have our pledge too,' they us ed to say. 'Our relations with Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 206  the labourers are those of parents and children....  How can we brook the 
interference of a third party? Where is the room fo r arbitration?' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 207   
70. THE FAST 
For the first two weeks the mill-hands exhibited gr eat courage and self-
restraint and daily held monster meetings. On these  occasions I used to remind 
them of their pledge, and they would shout back to me the assurance that they 
would rather die than break their word. 
But at last they began to show signs of flagging. J ust as physical weakness in 
men manifests itself in irascibility, their attitud e towards the blacklegs became 
more and more menacing as the strike seemed to weak en, and I began to fear 
an outbreak of rowdyism on their part. The attendan ce at their daily meetings 
also began to dwindle by degrees, and despondency a nd despair were writ large 
on the faces of those who did attend. Finally the i nformation was brought to 
me that the strikers had begun to totter. I felt de eply troubled and set to 
thinking furiously as to what my duty was in the ci rcumstances. 
One morning — it was at a mill-hands' meeting - whi le I was still groping and 
unable to see my way clearly, the light came to me.  Unbidden and all by 
themselves the words came to my lips: 'Unless the s trikers rally,' I declared to 
the meeting, 'and continue the strike till a settle ment is reached, or till they 
leave the mill altogether, I will not touch any foo d.' 
The labourers were thunderstruck. Tears began to co urse down Anasuyabehn's 
cheeks. The labourers broke out, 'Not you but we sh all fast. It would be 
monstrous if you were to fast. Please forgive us fo r our lapse, we will now 
remain faithful to our pledge to the end.' 
'There is no need for you to fast,' I replied. 'It would be enough.if you could 
remain true to your pledge. As you know we are with out funds, and we do not 
want to continue our strike by living on public cha rity. You should therefore try 
to eke out a bare existence by some kind of labour,  so that you may be able to 
remain unconcerned, no matter how long the strike m ay continue. As for my 
fast, it will be broken only after the strike is se ttled.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 208  In the meantime Vallabhbhai was trying to find some  employment for the 
strikers under the Municipality, but there was not much hope of success there. 
Maganlal Gandhi suggested that, as we needed sand f or filling the foundation of 
our weaving school in the Ashram, a number of them might he employed for 
that purpose. The labourers welcomed the proposal. Anasuyabehn led the way 
with a basket on her head, and soon an endless stre am of labourers carrying 
baskets of sand on their heads could be seen issuin g out of the hollow of the 
river-bed. It was a sight worth seeing. The laboure rs felt themselves infused 
with a new strength, and it became difficult to cop e with the task of paying out 
wages to them. 
My fast was not free from a grave defect. For as I have already mentioned in a 
previous chapter, I enjoyed very close and cordial relations with the mill-
owners, and my fast could not but affect their deci sion. As a Satyagrahi I knew 
that I might not fast against them, but ought to le ave them free to be 
influenced by the mill-hands' strike alone. My fast  was undertaken not on 
account of lapse of the mill-owners, but on account  of that of the labourers in 
which, as their representative, I felt I had a shar e. With the mill-owners, I 
could only plead; to fast against them would amount  to coercion. Yet in spite 
of my knowledge that my fast was bound to put press ure upon them, as in fact 
it did, I felt I could not help it. The duty to und ertake it seemed to me to be 
clear. 
I tried to set the mill-owners at ease. There is no t the slightest necessity for 
you to withdraw from your position,' I said to them . But they received my words 
coldly and even flung keen, delicate bits of sarcas m at me, as indeed they had 
a perfect right to do. 
The principal man at the back of the mill-owners' u nbending attitude towards 
the strike was Sheth Ambalal. His resolute will and  transparent sincerity were 
wonderful and captured my heart. It was a pleasure to be pitched against him. 
The strain produced by my fast upon the opposition,  of which he was the head, 
cut me, therefore, to the quick. And then, Sarladev i, his wife, was attached to Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 209  me with the affection of a blood-sister, and I coul d not bear to see her anguish 
on account of my action. 
Anasuyabehn and a number of other friends and labou rers shared the fast with 
me on the first day. But after some difficulty I wa s able to dissuade them from 
continuing it further. 
The net result of it was that an atmosphere of good will was created all round. 
The hearts of the mill-owners were touched, and the y set about discovering 
some means for a settlement. Anasuyabehn's house be came the venue of their 
discussions. Shri Anandshankar Dhruva intervened an d was in the end appointed 
arbitrator, and the strike was called off after I h ad tasted only for three days. 
The mill-owners commemorated the event by distribut ing sweets among the 
labourers, and thus a settlement was reached after 21 days' strike. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 210   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XIII: THE KHEDA SATYAGRAHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 211   
71. THE KHEDA SATYAGRAHA 
No breathing time was, however, in store for me. Ha rdly was the Ahmedabad 
mill-hands' strike over, when I had to plunge into the Kheda Satyagraha 
struggle. 
A condition approaching famine had arisen in the Kh eda district owing to a 
widespread failure of crops, and the Patidars of Kh eda were considering the 
question of getting the revenue assessment for the year suspended. 
The cultivators' demand was as clear as daylight, a nd so moderate as to make 
out a strong case for its acceptance. Under the Lan d Revenue Rules, if the crop 
was four annas 1 or under, the cultivators could claim full suspens ion of the 
revenue assessment for the year. According to the o fficial figures the crop was 
said to be over four annas. The contention of the c ultivators, on the other 
hand, was that it was less than four annas. But the  Government was in no mood 
to listen, and regarded the popular demand for arbi tration as  lese majeste.  At 
last all petitioning and prayer having failed, afte r taking counsel with co-
workers, I advised the Patidars to resort to Satyag raha. 
Besides the volunteers of Kheda, my principal comra des in this struggle were 
Shris Vallabhbhai Patel, Shankarlal Banker, Shrimat i Anasuyabehn. Shris Indulal 
Yajnik, Mahadev Desai and others. Shri Vallabhbhai,  in joining the struggle, had 
to suspend a splendid and growing practice at the b ar, which for all practical 
purposes he was never able to resume. 
We fixed up our headquarters at the Nadiad Anathash ram, no other place being 
available which could have been large enough to acc ommodate all of us. 
The following pledge was signed by the Satyagrahis:  
'Knowing that the crops of our villages are less th an four annas, we requested 
the Government to suspend the collection of revenue  assessment till the 
ensuing year, but the Government has not acceded to  our prayer. Therefore, 
we, the undersigned, hereby solemnly declare that w e shall not, of our own 
accord, pay to the Government the full or the remai ning revenue for the year. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 212  We shall let the Government take whatever legal ste ps it may think fit and 
gladly suffer the consequences of our non-payment. We shall rather let our 
lands be forfeited than that by voluntary payment w e should allow our case to 
be considered false or should compromise our self-r espect. Should the 
Government, however, agree to suspend collection of  the second installments 
of the assessment throughout the district, such amo ngst us as are in a position 
to pay will pay up the whole or the balance of the revenue that may be due. 
The reason why those who are able to pay still with hold payment is that, if they 
pay up, the poorer ryots may in a panic sell their chattels or incur debts to pay 
their dues, and thereby bring suffering upon themse lves. In these 
circumstances we feel that, for the sake of the poo r, it is the duty even of 
those who can afford to pay to withhold payment of their assessment.' 
I cannot devote many chapters to this struggle. So a number of sweet 
recollections in this connection will have to be cr owded out. Those who want to 
make a fuller and deeper study of this important fi ght would do well to read 
the full and authentic history of the Kheda Satyagr aha by Shri Shankarlal Parikh 
of Kathlal, Kheda. 
 
* i.e. four annas in the rupee (16 annas), or one-f ourth the normal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 213   
72. “THE ONION THIEF”  
The Gujaratis were deeply interested in the fight, which was to them a novel 
experiment. They were ready to put forth their rich es for the success of the 
cause. It was not easy for them to see that Satyagr aha could not be conducted 
simply by means of money. Money is the thing that i t least needs. In spite of my 
remonstrance, the Bombay merchants sent us more mon ey than necessary, so 
that we had some balance left at the end of the cam paign. 
The main thing was to rid the agriculturists of the ir fear by making them realize 
that the officials were not the masters but the ser vants of the people, 
inasmuch as they received their salaries from the t ax-payer. And then it 
seemed well nigh impossible to make them realize th e duty of combining 
civility with fearlessness. Once they had shed the fear of the officials, how 
could they be stopped from returning their insults?  And yet if they resorted to 
incivility it would spoil their Satyagraha, like a drop of arsenic in milk. I 
realized later that they had less fully learnt the lesson of civility than I had 
expected. Experience has taught me that civility is  the most difficult part of 
Satyagraha. Civility does not here mean the mere ou tward gentleness of speech 
cultivated for the occasion, but an inborn gentlene ss and desire to do the 
opponent good. These should show themselves in ever y act of a Satyagrahi. 
In the initial stages, though the people exhibited much courage, the 
Government did not seem inclined to take strong act ion. But as the people's 
firmness showed no signs of wavering, the Governmen t began coercion. The 
attachment officers sold people's cattle and seized  whatever movables they 
could lay hands on. Penalty notices were served, an d in some cases standing 
crops were attached. This unnerved the peasants, so me of whom paid up their 
dues, while others desired to place safe movables i n the way of the officials so 
that they might attach them to realize the dues. On  the other hand some were 
prepared to fight to the bitter end. 
While these things were going on, one of Shri Shank arlal Parikh's tenants paid 
up the assessment in respect of his land. This crea ted a sensation. Shri Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 214  Shankarlal Parikh immediately made amends for his t enant's mistake by giving 
away for charitable purposes the land for which the  assessment had been paid. 
He thus saved his honour and set a good example to others. 
With a view to steeling the hearts of those who wer e frightened, I advised the 
people, under the leadership of Shri Mohanlal Pandy a, to remove the crop of 
onion from a field which had been, in my opinion, w rongly attached. I did not 
regard this as civil disobedience, but even if it w as, I suggested that this 
attachment of standing crops, though it might be in  accordance with law, was 
morally wrong, and was nothing short of looting, an d that therefore it was the 
people's duty to remove the onion in spite of the o rder of attachment. This was 
a good opportunity for the people to learn a lesson  in courting fines or 
imprisonment, which was the necessary consequence o f such disobedience. For 
Shri Mohanlal Pandya it was a thing after his heart . He did not like the 
campaign to end without someone undergoing sufferin g in the shape of 
imprisonment for something done consistently with t he principles of 
Satyagraha. So he volunteered to remove the onion c rop from the field, and in 
this seven or eight friends joined him. 
It was impossible for the Government to leave them free. The arrest of Shri 
Mohanlal and his companions added to the people's e nthusiasm. When the fear 
of jail disappears, repression puts heart into the people. Crowds of them 
besieged the court-house on the day of the hearing.  Pandya and his companions 
were convicted and sentenced to a brief term of imp risonment. I was of opinion 
that the conviction was wrong, because the act of r emoving the onion crop 
could not come under the definition of 'theft' in t he Penal Code. But no appeal 
was filed as the policy was to avoid the law courts . 
A procession escorted the 'convicts' to jail, and o n that day Shri Mohanla! 
Pandya earned from the people the honoured title of  'dungli chor'  (onion thief) 
which he enjoys to this day. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 215   
73. END OF KHEDA SATYAGRAHA 
It was clear that the people were exhausted, and I hesitated to let the 
unbending be driven to utter ruin. I was casting ab out for some graceful way of 
terminating the struggle which would be acceptable to a Satyagrahi. Such a one 
appeared quite unexpectedly. The Mamlatdar of the N adiad Taluka sent me 
word that, if well-to-do Patidars paid up, the poor er ones would be granted 
suspension. I asked for a written undertaking to th at effect, which was given. 
But as a Mamlatdar could be responsible only for hi s Taluka, I inquired of the 
Collector, who alone could give an undertaking in r espect of the whole district, 
whether the Mamlatdar's undertaking was true for th e whole district. He 
replied that orders declaring suspension in terms o f the Mamlatdar's letter had 
been already issued. I was not aware of it, but if it was a fact, the people's 
pledge had been fulfilled. The pledge, it will be r emembered, had the same 
thing for its object, and so we expressed ourselves  satisfied with the orders. 
However, the end was far from making me feel happy,  inasmuch as it lacked 
the grace with which the termination of every Satya graha campaign ought to be 
accompanied. The Collector carried on as though he had done nothing by way 
of a settlement. The poor were to be granted suspen sion, but hardly any got 
the benefit of it. It was the people's right to det ermine who was poor, but they 
could not exercise it. I was sad that they had not the strength to exercise the 
right. Although, therefore, the termination was cel ebrated as a triumph of 
Satyagraha, I could not enthuse over it, as it lack ed the essentials of a 
complete triumph. 
The campaign was not, however, without its indirect  results which we can see 
today and the benefit of which we are reaping. The Kheda Satyagraha marks 
the beginning of an awakening among the peasants of  Gujarat, the beginning of 
their true political education. The Patidar peasant  came to an unforgettable 
consciousness of his strength. The lesson was indel ibly imprinted on the public 
mind that the salvation of the people depends upon themselves, upon their 
capacity for suffering and sacrifice. Through the K heda campaign Satyagraha 
took firm root in the soil of Gujarat. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 216   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XIV: RECRUITING CAMPAIGN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 217   
74. RECRUITING CAMPAIGN 
The Kheda campaign was launched while the deadly wa r in Europe was still 
going on. Now a crisis had arrived, and the Viceroy  had invited various leaders 
to a war conference in Delhi. I had also been urged  to attend the conference. 
In response to the invitation I went to Delhi. I ha d, however, objections to 
taking part in the conference, the principal one be ing the exclusion from it of 
leaders like the Ali Brothers. 1 
I had realized early enough in South Africa that th ere was no genuine friendship 
between the Hindus and the Musalmans. I never misse d a single opportunity to 
remove obstacles in the way of unity. It was not in  my nature to placate anyone 
by adulation, or at the cost of self-respect. But m y South African experience 
had convinced me that it would be on the question o f Hindu-Muslim unity that 
my  ahimsa would be put to its severest test. 
Having such strong convictions on the question when  I returned from South 
Africa, I prized the contact with the Brothers. But  before closer touch could be 
established they were isolated. Maulana Mahomed Ali  used to write long letters 
to me from Betul and Chhindwada whenever his jailer s allowed him to do so. I 
applied for permission to visit the Brothers, but t o no purpose. 
Friends and critics have criticized my attitude reg arding the  Khilafat question 2 
In spite of the criticism I feel that I have no rea son to revise it or to regret my 
co-operation with the Muslims. I should adopt the s ame attitude, should a 
similar occasion arise. 
When, therefore, I went to Delhi, I had fully inten ded to submit the Muslim 
case to the Viceroy. The Khilafat question had not then assumed the shape it 
did subsequently. 
But on my reaching Delhi another difficulty in the way of my attending the 
conference arose. Dinabandhu 3 Andrews raised a question about the morality of 
my participation in the war conference. He told me of the controversy in the 
British press regarding secret treaties between Eng land and Italy. How could I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 218  participate in the conference, if England had enter ed into secret treaties with 
another European power? asked Mr. Andrews. I knew n othing of the treaties. 
Dinabandhu Andrews' I word was enough for me. I the refore addressed a letter 
to Lord Chelmsford explaining my hesitation to take  part in the conference. He 
invited me to discuss the question with him. I had a prolonged discussion with 
him and his Private Secretary Mr. Maffey. As a resu lt I agreed to take part in 
the conference. This was in effect the Viceroy's ar gument: 'Surely you do not 
believe that the Viceroy knows everything done by t he British Cabinet. I do not 
claim, no one claims, that the British Government i s infallible. But if you agree 
that the Empire has been, on the whole, a power for  good, if you believe that 
India has, on the whole, benefited by the British c onnection, would you not 
admit that it is the duty of every Indian citizen t o help the Empire in the hour 
of its need? I too have read what the British paper s say about the secret 
treaties. I can assure you that I know nothing beyo nd what the papers say, and 
you know the canards that these papers frequently s tart. Can you, acting on a 
mere newspaper report, refuse help to the Empire at  such a critical juncture? 
You may raise whatever moral issues you like and ch allenge us as much as you 
please after the conclusion of the war, not today.'  
The argument was not new. It appealed to me as new because of the manner in 
which, and the hour at which, it was presented, and  I agreed to attend the 
conference. As regards the Muslim demands I was to address a letter to the 
Viceroy. 
So I attended the conference. The Viceroy was very keen on my supporting the 
resolution about recruiting. I asked for permission  to speak in Hindi-Hindustani. 
The Viceroy acceded to my request, but suggested th at I should speak also in 
English. I had no speech to make. I spoke but one s entence to this effect: 'With 
a full sense of my responsibility I beg to support the resolution.' 
In raising recruits, where could I make a beginning  except in Kheda? And whom 
could I invite to be the first recruits except my o wn co-workers? So as soon as I 
reached Nadiad, I had a conference with Vallabhbhai  and other friends. Some 
of them could not easily take to the proposal. Thos e who liked the proposal had Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 219  misgivings about its success. There was no love los t between the Government 
and the classes to which I wanted to make my appeal . The bitter experience 
they had had of the Government officials was still fresh in their memory. 
And yet they were in favour of starting work. As so on as I set about my task, my 
eyes were opened. My optimism received a rude shock . Whereas during the 
revenue campaign the people readily offered their c arts free of charge, and 
two volunteers came forth when one was needed, it w as difficult now to get a 
cart even on hire, to say nothing of volunteers. Bu t we would not be dismayed. 
We decided to dispense with the use of carts and to  do our journeys on foot. At 
this rate we had to trudge about 20 miles a day. If  carts were not forthcoming, 
it was idle to expect people to feed us. It was har dly proper to ask for food. So 
it was decided that every volunteer must carry his food in his satchel. No 
bedding or sheet was necessary as it was summer. 
We had meetings wherever we went. People did attend , but hardly one or two 
would offer themselves as recruits. 'You are a vota ry of  ahimsa,  how can you 
ask us to take up arms?' 'What good has Government done for India to deserve 
our cooperation?' These and similar questions used to be put to us. 
However, our steady work began to tell. Quite a num ber of names were 
registered, and we hoped that we should be able to have a regular supply as 
soon as the first batch was sent. I had already beg un to confer with the 
Commissioner as to where the recruits were to be ac commodated. 
The Commissioners in every division were holding co nferences on the Delhi 
model. One such was held in Gujarat. My co-workers and I were invited to it. 
We attended, but I fell there was even less place f or me here than at Delhi. In 
this atmosphere of servile submission I felt ill at  ease. I spoke somewhat at 
length. I could say nothing to please the officials , and had certainly one or two 
hard things to say. 
I used to issue leaflets asking people to enlist as  recruits. One of the arguments 
I had used was distasteful to the Commissioner: 'Am ong the many misdeeds of 
the British rule in India, history will look upon t he Act depriving a whole nation 
of arms as the blackest. If we want the Arms Act to  be repealed, if we want to Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 220  learn the use of arms, here is a golden opportunity . If the middle classes render 
voluntary help to Government in the hour of its tri al, distrust will disappear and 
the ban on possessing arms will be withdrawn.' The Commissioner referred to 
this and said that he appreciated my presence in th e conference in spite of the 
differences between us. And I had to justify my sta ndpoint as courteously as I 
could. 
 
1 Mahomed Ali and Shaukat Ali, staunch fighters for  the Khilafat and the Muslim cause in 
general.—Ed. 
2 During the First World War, when Britain was at w ar with Turkey. Indian Muslims were 
greatly agitated that the Khilafat or the suzeraint y of the Caliph (the Sultan of Turkey who 
was regarded as the spiritual and temporal head of Muslims) was in danger. Gandhiji 
sought to win the co-operation and sympathy of Hind us and other non-Muslim Indians for 
the Muslims in this Muslim agitation and brought ab out much unity between Hindus and 
Muslims. - Ed. 
3 Lit. Lover of the poor - a title of affection giv en to Rev. C. E Andrews. an Englishman 
who was a close associate of Gandhiji. —Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 221   
75. NEAR DEATH'S DOOR 
I very nearly ruined my constitution during the rec ruiting campaign. In those 
days my food principally consisted of groundnut but ter and lemons. I knew that 
it was possible to eat too much butter and injure o ne's health, and yet I 
allowed myself to do so. This gave me a slight atta ck of dysentery. I did not 
take serious notice of this, and went that evening to the Ashram, as was my 
wont every now and then. I scarcely took any medici ne in those days. I thought 
I should get well if I skipped a meal, and indeed I  felt fairly free from trouble 
as I omitted the morning meal next day. I knew, how ever, that to be entirely 
free I must prolong my fast and, if I ate anything at all, I should have nothing 
but fruit juices. 
There was some festival that day, and although I ha d told Kasturba that I should 
have nothing for my midday meal, she tempted me and  I succumbed. As I was 
under a vow of taking no milk or milk products, she  had specially prepared for 
me a sweet wheat porridge with oil added to it inst ead of  ghi. She had reserved 
too a bowlful of  mung  for me. I was fond of these things, and I readily took 
them, hoping that without coming to grief I should eat just enough to please 
Kasturba and to satisfy my palate. But the devil ha d been only waiting for an 
opportunity. Instead of eating very little I had my  fill of the meal. This was 
sufficient invitation to the angel of death. Within  an hour the dysentery 
appeared in acute form. 
All the friends surrounded me deeply concerned. The y were all love and 
attention, but they could not relieve my pain. And my obstinacy added to their 
helplessness. I refused all medical aid. I would ta ke no medicine, but preferred 
to suffer the penalty for my folly. So they looked on in helpless dismay. I must 
have had thirty to forty motions in twenty-four hou rs. I fasted, not taking even 
fruit juices in the beginning. The appetite had all  gone. I had thought all along 
that I had an iron frame, but I found that my body had now become a lump of 
clay. It had lost all power of resistance. Dr. Kanu ga came and pleaded with me 
to take medicine. I declined. He offered to give me  an injection. I declined that Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 222  too. My ignorance about injections was in those day s quite ridiculous. I believed 
that an injection must be some kind of serum. Later  I discovered that the 
injection that the doctor suggested was a vegetable  substance, but the 
discovery was too late to be of use. The motions st ill continued, leaving me 
completely exhausted. The exhaustion brought on a d elirious fever. The friends 
got more nervous, and called in more doctors. But w hat could they do with a 
patient who would not listen to them? 
The many medical advisers overwhelmed me with advic e, but I could not 
persuade myself to take anything. Two or three sugg ested meat broth as a way 
out of the milk vow, and cited authorities from Ayu rveda in support of their 
advice. One of them strongly recommended eggs. But for all of them I had but 
one answer — no. 
For me the question of diet was not one to be deter mined on the authority of 
the Shastras. It was one interwoven with my course of life which is guided by 
principles no longer depending upon outside authori ty. I had desire to live at 
the cost of them. How could I relinquish a principl e in respect of myself, when I 
had enforced it relentlessly in respect of my wife,  children and friends? 
This protracted and first long illness in my life t hus afforded me a unique 
opportunity to examine my principles and to test th em. One night I gave myself 
up to despair, I felt that I was at death's door. 
Whilst I lay thus ever expectant of death. Dr. Talv alkar came one day with a 
strange creature. He hailed from Maharashtra. He wa s not known to fame, but 
the moment I saw him I found that he was a crank li ke myself. He had come to 
try his treatment on me. The treatment consisted in  the application of ice all 
over the body. Whilst I am unable to endorse his cl aim about the effect his 
treatment had on me, it certainly infused in me a n ew hope and a new energy, 
and the mind naturally reacted on the body. I began  to have an appetite. The 
improvement was enough to give me interest in publi c activities. 
Shankarlal Banker now constituted himself the guard ian of my health, and 
pressed me to consult Dr. Dalai. Dr. Dalal was call ed accordingly. His capacity 
for taking instantaneous decisions captured me. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 223  He said: 'I cannot rebuild your body unless you tak e milk. If in addition you 
would take iron and arsenic injections, I would gua rantee fully to renovate your 
constitution.' 
'You can give me the injections,' I replied, 'but m ilk is a different question; I 
have a vow against it.' 
'What exactly is the nature of your cow?' the docto r inquired. 
I told him the whole history and the reasons behind  my vow, how, since I had 
come to know that the cow and the buffalo were subj ected to the process of  
phuka.  I had conceived a strong disgust for milk. Moreove r, I had always held 
that milk is not the natural diet of man. I had the refore abjured its use 
altogether. Kasturba was standing near my bed liste ning all the time to this 
conversation. 
But surely, you cannot have any objection to goat's  milk then,' she interposed. 
The doctor too took up the strain. 'If you will tak e goat's milk, it will be enough 
for me,' he said. 
I succumbed. My intense eagerness to take up the Sa tyagraha fight had created 
in me a strong desire to live, and so I contented m yself with adhering to the 
letter of my vow only, and sacrificed its spirit. F or although I had only the milk 
of the cow and the she-buffalo in mind when I took the vow, by natural 
implication it covered the milk of all animals. Nor  could it be right for me to 
use milk at all, so long as I held that milk is not  the natural diet of man. Yet 
knowing all this I agreed to take goat's milk. The will to live proved stronger 
than the devotion to truth, and for once the votary  of truth compromised his 
sacred ideal by his eagerness to take up the Satyag raha fight. The memory of 
this action even now rankles in my breast and fills  me with remorse, and I am 
constantly thinking how to give up goat's milk. But  I cannot yet free myself 
from that subtlest of temptations, the desire to se rve, which still holds me. 
Soon after I began taking goat 's  milk, Dr. Dalai performed on me a successful 
operation for fissures. As I recuperated, my desire  to live revived, especially 
because God had kept work in store for me. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 224   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XV: THE ROWLATT ACT AND ENTRANCE INTO POLITICS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 225   
76. THE ROWLATT ACT 1 
I had hardly begun to feel my way towards recovery,  when I happened casually 
to read in the papers the Rowlatt Committee's repor t which had just been 
published. Its recommendations startled me. Shakarl al Banker and Umar Sobani 
approached me with the suggestion that I should tak e some prompt action in 
the matter. In about a month I went to Ahmedabad. I  mentioned my 
apprehensions to Vallabhbhai who used to come to se e me almost daily. 
'Something must be done.' said I to him. 'But what can we do in the 
circumstances?' he asked in reply. I answered, 'If even a handful of men can he 
found to sign the pledge of resistance, an the prop osed measure is passed into 
law in defiance of it, we ought to offer Satyagraha  at once. If I was not laid up 
like this, I should give battle against it all alon e, and expect others to follow, 
suit. But in my present helpless condition I feel m yself to be altogether unequal 
to the task.' 
As a result of this talk, it was decided to call a small meeting of such persons as 
were in touch with me. 
As all hope of any of the existing institutions ado pting a novel weapon like 
Satyagraba seemed to me to be vain, a separate body  called the Satyagraha 
Sabha was established at my instance. 
But from the very beginning it seemed clear to me t hat the Sabha was not likely 
to live long. I could see that already my emphasis on truth and  ahimsa  had 
begun to be disliked by some of its members. Nevert heless in its early stages 
our new activity went on at full blast, and the mov ement gathered head 
rapidly. 
The Bill had not yet been gazetted as an Act. I was  in a very weak condition, 
but when I received an invitation from Madras I dec ided to take the risk of the 
long journey. Rajagopalachari had then only recentl y left Salem to settle down 
for legal practice in Madras. We daily discussed to gether plans of the fight, but 
beyond the holding of public meetings I could not t hen think of any other 
programme. I felt myself at a loss to discover how to offer civil disobedience Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 226  against the Rowlatt Bill if it was finally passed i nto law. One could disobey it 
only if the Government gave one the opportunity for  it. Failing that, could we 
civilly disobey other laws? And if so, where was th e line to be drawn? These and 
a host of similar questions formed the theme of the se discussions of ours. 
While these cogitations were still going on news wa s received that the Rowlatt 
Bill had been published as an Act. That night I fel l asleep while thinking over 
the question. Towards the small hours of the mornin g I woke up somewhat 
earlier than usual. I was still in that twilight co ndition between sleep and 
consciousness when suddenly the idea broke upon me — it was as if in a dream. 
Early in the morning I related the whole story to R ajagopalachari. 
'The idea came to me last night in a dream that we should call upon the country 
to observe a general  hartal.  Satyagraha is a process of self-purification, and 
ours is a sacred fight, and it seems to me to be in  the fitness of things that it 
should be commenced with an act of self-purificatio n. Let all the people of 
India, therefore, suspend their business on that da y and observe the day as one 
of fasting and prayer. The Musalmans may not fast f or more than one day; so 
the duration of the fast should be 24 hours. It is very difficult to say whether all 
the provinces would respond to this appeal of ours or not, but I feel fairly sure 
of Bombay, Madras, Bihar and Sindh. I think we shou ld have every reason to 
feel satisfied even if all these places observe the  hartal  fittingly.' 
Rajagopalachari was at once taken up with my sugges tion. Other friends too 
welcomed it when it was communicated to them later.  I drafted a brief appeal. 
The date of the  hartal was first fixed on the 30th March 1919, but was 
subsequently changed to 6th April. The people thus had only a short notice of 
the  hartal.  As the work had to be started at once, it was hard ly possible to give 
longer notice. 
But who knows how it all came about? The whole of I ndia from one end to the 
other, towns as well as villages, observed a comple te  hartal  on that day. It was 
a most wonderful spectacle. 
1 This Act was passed in 1919 to provide special po wers to the Government to suppress 
movements aimed against the State. It authorised ar rest and detention, without trial of 
persons suspected of anti-government activities. —E d. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 227   
77. THAT MEMORABLE WEEK 
After a short tour in South India I reached Bombay.  Needless to say the  hartal  
in Bombay was a complete success. Full preparation had been made for starting 
civil disobedience. Two or three things had been di scussed in this connection. It 
was decided that civil disobedience might be offere d in respect of such laws 
only as easily lent themselves to being disobeyed b y the masses. The salt tax 1 
was extremely unpopular and a powerful movement had  been for sometime 
past going on to secure its repeal. I therefore sug gested that the people might 
prepare salt from sea-water in their own houses in disregard of the salt laws. 
My other suggestion was about the sale of proscribe d literature. Two of my 
books, viz.,  Hind Swaraj  and  Sarvodaya  (Gujarati adaptation of Ruskin's  Unto 
This Last),  which had been already proscribed, came handy for this purpose. To 
print and sell them openly seemed to be the easiest  way of offering civil 
disobedience. A sufficient number of copies of the books was therefore printed, 
and it was arranged to sell them at the end of the monster meeting that was to 
be held that evening after the breaking of the fast . 
On the evening of the 6th an army of volunteers iss ued forth accordingly with 
this prohibited literature to sell among the people . The proceeds of the sale 
were to be utilized for furthering the civil disobe dience campaign. Both these 
books were priced at four annas per copy, but I har dly remember anybody 
having purchased them from me at their face value m erely. Quite a large 
number of people simply poured out all the cash tha t was in their pockets to 
purchase their copy. Five and ten rupee notes just flew out to cover the price 
of a single copy, while in one case I remember havi ng sold a copy for fifty 
rupees! It was duly explained to the people that th ey were liable to be arrested 
and imprisoned for purchasing the proscribed litera ture. But for the moment 
they had shed all fear of jail-going. The reprint w as held by the Government to 
be a new edition of the books that had been proscri bed, and to sell them did 
not constitute an offence under the law. This news caused general 
disappointment. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 228  On the night of the 7th I started for Delhi and Amr itsar. On reaching Mathura on 
the 8th I first heard rumours about my probable arr est. At the next stoppage 
after Mathura, Acharya Gidvani came to meet me, and  gave me definite news 
that I was to be arrested, and offered his services  to me if I should need them. 
Before the train had reached Palwal railway station , I was served with a written 
order to the effect that I was prohibited from ente ring the boundary of the 
Punjab, as my presence there was likely to result i n a disturbance of the peace. 
I was asked by the police to get down from the trai n. I refused to do so saying, 
'I want to go to the Punjab in response to a pressi ng invitation, not to foment 
unrest, but to allay it. I am therefore sorry that it is not possible for me to 
comply with this order.' 
At Palwal railway station I was taken out of the tr ain and put under police 
custody. A train from Delhi came in a short time. I  was made to enter a third 
class carriage, the police party accompanying. On r eaching Mathura, I was 
taken to the police barracks, but no police officia l could tell me as to what 
they proposed to do with me or where I was to be ta ken next. Early at 4 o'clock 
the next morning, I was waked up and put in a goods  train that was going 
towards Bombay. 
We reached Surat. Here I was made over to the charg e of another police 
officer. 'You are now free,' the officer told me wh en we had reached Bombay. 
'It would however be better,' he added, 'if you get  down near the Marine Lines* 
where I shall get the train stopped for you. At Col aba* there is likely to be a big 
crowd.' I told him that I would be glad to follow h is wish. He was pleased and 
thanked me for it. Accordingly I alighted at the Ma rine Lines. The carriage of a 
friend just happened to be passing by. It took me a nd left me at Revashankar 
Jhaveri's place. The friend told me that the news o f my arrest had incensed the 
people and roused them to a pitch of mad frenzy. 'A n outbreak is apprehended 
every minute near Pydhuni, 2 the Magistrate and the police have already arrived  
there,' he added. 
Scarcely had I reached my destination, when Umar So bani and Anasuyabehn 
arrived and asked me to motor to Pydhuni at once. T he people have become Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 229  impatient, and are very much excited,' they said, ' we cannot pacify them. Your 
presence alone can do it.' 
I got into the car. Near Pydhuni I saw that a huge crowd had gathered. On 
seeing me the people went mad with joy. A processio n was immediately 
formed, and the sky was rent with the shouts of  Vande mataram  and  Allciho 
akbar.  At Pydhuni we sighted a body of mounted police. Br ickbats were raining 
down from above. I besought the crowd to be calm, b ut it seemed as if we 
should not be able to escape the shower of brickbat s. As the procession issued 
out of Abdur Rahman Street and was about to proceed  towards the Crawford 
Market, it suddenly found itself confronted by a bo dy of the mounted police, 
who had arrived there to prevent it from proceeding  further in the direction of 
the Fort. The crowd was densely packed. It had almo st broken through the 
police cordon. There was hardly any chance of my vo ice being heard in that 
vast concourse. Just then the officer in charge of the mounted police gave the 
order to disperse the crowd, and at once the mounte d party charged upon the 
crowd brandishing their lances as they went. For a moment I felt that I would 
be hurt. But my apprehension was groundless, the la nces just grazed the car as 
the lancers swiftly passed by. The ranks of the peo ple were soon broken, and 
they were thrown into utter confusion, which was so on converted into a rout. 
Some got trampled under foot, others were badly mau led and crushed. In that 
seething "mass of humanity there was hardly any ' o om for the horses to pass, 
nor was there any exit by which the people could di sperse. So the lancers 
blindly cut their way through the crowd. I hardly i magine they could see what 
they were doing. The whole thing presented a most d readful spectacle. The 
horsemen and the people were mixed together in mad confusion. 
Thus the crowd was dispersed and its progress check ed, our motor was allowed 
to proceed. I had it stopped before the Commissione r's office, and got down to 
complain to him about the conduct of the police. 
We argued on and on. It was impossible for us to ag ree. I told him that I 
intended to address a meeting on Chowpati3 and to ask the people to keep the 
peace, and took leave of him. The meeting was held on the Chowpati sands. I Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 230  spoke at length on the duty of non-violence and on the limitations of 
Satyagraha, and said: 'Satyagraha is essentially a weapon of the truthful. A 
Satyagrahi is pledged to non-violence, and, unless people observe it in thought, 
word and deed, I cannot offer mass Satyagraha.' 
Anasuyabehn, too, had received news of disturbances  in Ahmedabad. Someone 
had spread a rumour that she also had been arrested . The mill-hands had gone 
mad over her rumoured arrest, struck work and commi tted acts of violence, 
and a sergeant had been done to death. 
I proceeded to Ahmedabad. I learnt that an attempt had been made to pull up 
the rails near the Nadiad railway station, that a G overnment officer had been 
murdered in Viramgam, and that Ahmedabad was under martial law. The 
people were terror-stricken. They had indulged in a cts of violence and were 
being made to pay for them with interest. 
A police officer was waiting at the station to esco rt me to Mr. Pratt, the 
Commissioner. I found him in a state of rage. I spo ke to him gently, and 
expressed my regret for the disturbances. I suggest ed that martial law was 
unnecessary, and declared my readiness to co-operat e in all efforts to restore 
peace. I asked for permission to hold a public meet ing on the grounds of the 
Sabarmati Ashram. The proposal appealed to him, and  the meeting was held, I 
think, on Sunday, the 13th of April, and martial la w was withdrawn the same 
day or the day after. Addressing the meeting, I tri ed to bring home to the 
people the sense of their wrong, declared a peniten tial fast of three days for 
myself, appealed to the people to go on a similar f ast for a day, and suggested 
to those who had been guilty of acts of violence to  confess their guilt. 
I saw my duty as clear as daylight. It was unbearab le for me to find that the 
labourers, amongst whom I had spent a good deal of my time, whom I had 
served, and from whom I had expected better things,  had taken part in the 
riots, and I felt I was a sharer in their guilt. 
.Just as I suggested to the people to confess their  guilt, I suggested to the 
Government to condone the crimes. Neither accepted my suggestion. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 231  The late Sir Ramanbhai and other citizens of Ahmeda bad came to me with an 
appeal to suspend Satyagraha. The appeal was needle ss, for I had already made 
up my mind to suspend Satyagraha so long as people had not learnt the lesson 
of peace. The friends went away happy. 
There were, however, others who were unhappy over t he decision. They felt 
that, if I expected peace everywhere and regarded i t as a condition precedent 
to launching Satyagraha, mass Satyagraha would be a n impossibility. I was sorry 
to disagree with them. If those amongst whom I work ed, and whom I expected 
to be prepared for non-violence and self- suffering , could not be non-violent, 
Satyagraha was certainly impossible. I was firmly o f opinion that those who 
wanted to lead the people to Satyagraha ought to be  able to keep the people 
within the limited non-violence expected of them. I  hold the same opinion even 
today. 
 
1 Gandhiji carried on a campaign against taxing sal t, as it was a tax on the only article 
with which the poor could afford to make their rice  gruel or bread palatable. Later in 1930 
when he started Civil Disobedience against British rule he chose the salt laws for violation 
on a nation-wide scale.—Ed. 
2 Parts of Bombay city. 
3 A part of Bonibay city, popular as a beach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 232   
78. 'A HIMALAYAN MISCALCULATION' 
Almost immediately after the Ahmedabad meeting I we nt to Nadiad. Even at 
Ahmedabad I had begun to have a dim perception of m y mistake. But when I 
reached Nadiad and saw the actual state of things t here and heard reports 
about a large number of people from Kheda district having been arrested, it 
suddenly dawned upon me that I had committed a grav e error in calling upon 
the people in the Kheda district and elsewhere to l aunch upon civil 
disobedience prematurely, as it now seemed to me. I  was addressing a public 
meeting. My confession brought down upon me no smal l amount of ridicule. But 
I have never regretted having made that confession.  For I have always held that 
it is only when one sees one's own mistakes with a convex lens, and does just 
the reverse in the case of others, that one is able  to arrive at a just relative 
estimate of the two. I further believe that a scrup ulous and conscientious 
observance of this rule is necessary for one who wa nts to be a Satyagrahi. 
Let us now see what that Himalayan miscalculation w as. Before one can be fit 
for the practice of civil disobedience one must hav e rendered a willing and 
respectful obedience to the State laws. 
It is only when a person has thus obeyed the laws o f society scrupulously that 
he is in a position to judge as to which particular  rules are good and just, and 
which unjust and iniquitous. Only then does the rig ht accrue to him of the civil 
disobedience of certain laws in well-defined circum stances. My error lay in my 
failure to observe this necessary limitation. I had  called on the people to 
launch upon civil disobedience before they had thus  qualified themselves for it, 
and this mistake seemed to me of Himalayan magnitud e. As soon as I entered 
the Kheda district, all the old recollections of th e Kheda Satyagraha struggle 
came back to me, and I wondered how I could have fa iled to perceive what was 
so obvious. I realized that before a people could b e fit for offering civil 
disobedience, they should thoroughly understand its  deeper implications. That 
being so, before restarting civil disobedience on a  mass scale, it would be 
necessary to create a band of well-tried, pure-hear ted volunteers who Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 233  thoroughly understood the strict conditions of Saty agraha. They could explain 
these to the people, and by sleepless vigilance kee p them on the right path. 
With these thoughts filling my mind I reached Bomba y, raised a corps of 
Satyagrahi volunteers through the Satyagraha Sabha there, and with their help 
commenced the work of educating the people, with re gard to the meaning and 
inner significance of Satyagraha. This was principa lly done by issuing leaflets of 
an educative character bearing on the subject. 
But whilst this work was going on, I could see that  it was a difficult task to 
interest the people in the peaceful side of Satyagr aha. The volunteers too 
failed to enlist themselves in large numbers. Nor d id all those who actually 
enlisted take anything like a regular systematic tr aining, and as the days passed 
by, the number of fresh recruits began gradually to  dwindle instead of to grow. 
I realized that the progress of the training in civ il disobedience was not going to 
be as rapid as I had at first expected. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 234   
79.  'NAVAJIVAN'  AND 'YOUNG INDIA'  
Through these journals I now commenced to the best of my ability the work of 
educating the reading public in Satyagraha. Both of  them had reached a very 
wide circulation, which at one time rose to the nei ghbourhood of forty 
thousand each. But while the circulation of  Navajivan  went up at a bound, that 
of  Young India  increased only by slow degrees. After my incarcera tion the 
circulation of both these journals fell to a low eb b and today stands below 
eight thousand. 
From the very start I set my face against taking ad vertisements in these 
journals. I do not think that they have lost anythi ng thereby. On the contrary, 
it is my belief that it has in no small measure hel ped them to maintain their 
independence. 
Incidentally these journals helped me also to some extent to remain at peace 
with myself for, whilst immediate resort to civil d isobedience was out of the 
question, they enabled me freely to ventilate my vi ews and to put heart into 
the people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 235   
80. THE AMRITSAR CONGRESS 
The King's announcement on the new reforms 1 had just been issued. It was not 
wholly satisfactory even to me, and was unsatisfact ory to everyone else. But I 
felt at that time that the reforms, though defectiv e, could still be accepted. 
Deshabandhu Chittaranjan Das, 2 on the other hand, held firmly to the view that 
the reforms ought to be rejected as wholly inadequa te and unsatisfactory. The 
late Lokamanya was more or less neutral, but had de cided to throw in his 
weight on the side of any resolution that the Desha bandhu might approve. 
The idea of having to differ from such seasoned, we ll-tried and universally 
revered leaders was unbearable to me. But on the ot her hand the voice of 
conscience was clear. I tried to run away from the Congress and suggested to 
Pandit Malaviyaji3 and Motilalji4 that it would be in the general interest if I 
absented myself from the Congress for the rest of t he session. It would save me 
from having to make an exhibition of my difference with such esteemed 
leaders. But my suggestion found no favour with the se two seniors. 
So I framed my resolution, and in heart trembling u ndertook to move it. Pandit 
Malaviyaji and Mr. Jinnah 5 were to support it. I could notice that, although our 
difference of opinion was free from any trace of bi tterness, and although our 
speeches too contained nothing but cold reasoning, the people could not stand 
the very fact of a difference; it pained them. They  wanted unanimity. 
Even while speeches were being delivered, efforts t o settle the difference were 
being made on the platform, and notes were being fr eely exchanged among the 
leaders for that purpose. Malaviyaji was leaving no  stone unturned to bridge 
the gulf. Just then Jairamdas handed over his amend ment to me and pleaded in 
his own sweet manner to save the delegates from the  dilemma of a division. His 
amendment appealed to me. Malaviyaji's eye was alre ady scanning every 
quarter for a ray of hope. I told him that Jairamda s's amendment seemed to me 
to be likely to be acceptable to both the parties. The Lokamanya, to whom it 
was next shown, said, 'If C. R. Das approves, I wil l have no objection.' Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 236  Deshabandhu at last thawed, and cast a look towards  Shri Bepin Chandra Pal for 
endorsement. Malaviyaji was filled with hope. He sn atched away the slip of 
paper containing the amendment, and before Deshaban dhu had even 
pronounced a definite 'yes', shouted out, 'Brother delegates, you will be glad to 
learn that a compromise has been reached.' What fol lowed beggars description. 
The pandal was rent with the clapping of hands, and  the erstwhile gloomy faces 
of the audience lit up with joy. 
I must regard my participation in Congress proceedi ngs at Amritsar as my real 
entrance into Congress politics. 
My experience of Amritsar had shown that there were  one or two things for 
which perhaps I had some aptitude and which could b e useful to the Congress. 
There were, for the coming year, two things which i nterested me, as I had 
some aptitude for them. One of these was the memori al of the Jalianwala Bagh 
Massacre. 6 The Congress had passed a resolution for it amid g reat enthusiasm. A 
fund of about five lakhs had to be collected for it . I was appointed one of the 
trustees. Pandit Malaviyaji enjoyed the reputation of being the prince among 
beggars for the public cause. But I knew that I was  not far behind him in that 
respect. It was whilst I was in South Africa that I  discovered my capacity in this 
direction. 
My other aptitude which the Congress could utilize was as a draftsman. The 
Congress leaders had found that I had a faculty for  condensed expression, 
which I had acquired by long practice. The then exi sting constitution of the 
Congress was Gokhale's legacy. He had framed a few rules which served as a 
basis for running the Congress machinery. The inter esting history of the framing 
of these rules I had learnt from Gokhale's own lips . But everybody had now 
come to feel that these rules were no longer adequa te for the ever increasing 
business of the Congress. The question had been com ing up year after year. 
I undertook the responsibility of framing a constit ution on one condition. I saw 
that there were two leaders, viz., the Lokamanya an d the Deshabandhu who 
had the greatest hold on the public. I requested th at they, as the 
representatives of the people, should be associated  with me on the Committee Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 237  for framing the constitution. But since it was obvi ous that they would not have 
the time personally to participate in the constitut ion-making work, I suggested 
that two persons enjoying their confidence should b e appointed along with me 
on the Constitution Committee, and that the number of its personnel should be 
limited to three. This suggestion was accepted by t he late Lokamanya and the 
late Deshabandhu, who suggested the names of Shri K elkar and I. B. Sen 
respectively as their proxies. The Constitution Com mittee could not even once 
come together, but we were able to consult each oth er by correspondence, and 
in the end presented a unanimous report. I regard t his constitution with a 
certain measure of pride. I hold that, if we could fully work out the 
constitution, the mere fact of working it out would  bring us Swaraj. With the 
assumption of this responsibility I may be said to have made my real entrance 
into Congress politics. 
 
1 Otherwise called, the Montford Refornis of 1919, establishing Dyarchy in the provinces 
with certain portfolios transferred to Indian Minis ters and others reserved in British hands, 
the Central Government however not coming under thi s scheme of partial self-
government. - Ed. 
2  A great Congressman of Bengal. – Ed. 
3 A veteran Hindu leader, founder of Benaras Hindu University. - Ed. 
4 Pandit Motilal Nehru, father of the late Prime Mi nister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru; an 
eminent lawyer who guided and shaped Congress polic ies. - Ed. 
5 Founder of Pakistan: at this time a member of the  Indian National Congress. - Ed. 
6 On April 13. 1919 about 20.000 people had gathere d for a public meeting in a small 
square surrounded by houses, in the midst of Amrits ar city, with only a narrow passage as 
entrance to the square. General Dyer entered the sq uare with some troops and ordered 
the people to disperse, but before they could do so  within two or three minutes of his 
order he ordered his men to fire. As a result about  400 died and one to two thousand were 
wounded, '('his provoked intense feeling throughout  the land. - Ed. 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 238   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART XVI : THE BIRTH OF KHADI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 239   
81. THE BIRTH OF KHADI 
I do not remember to have seen a handloom or a spin ning wheel when in 1908 I 
described it in  Hind Swaraj 1 as the panacea for the growing pauperism of India.  
In that book I took it as understood that anything that helped India to get rid of 
the grinding poverty of her masses would in the sam e process also establish 
Swaraj. Even in 1915, when I returned to India from  South Africa, I had not 
actually seen a spinning wheel. When the Satyagraha  Ashram was founded at 
Sabarmati, we introduced a few handlooms there. But  no sooner had we done 
this than we found ourselves up against a difficult y. All of us belonged either to 
the liberal professions or to business; not one of us was an artisan. We needed 
a weaving expert to teach us to weave before we cou ld work the looms. One 
was at last procured from Palanpur, but he did not communicate to us the 
whole of his art. But Maganlal Gandhi was not to be  easily baffled. Possessed of 
a natural talent for mechanics, he was able fully t o master the art before long, 
and one after another several new weavers were trai ned in the Ashram. 
The object that we set before ourselves was to be a ble to clothe ourselves 
entirely in cloth manufactured by our own hands. We  therefore forthwith 
discarded the use of mill- woven cloth, and all the  members of the Ashram 
resolved to wear hand-woven cloth made from Indian yarn only. The adoption 
of this practice brought us a world of experience. It enabled us to know, from 
direct contact, the conditions of life among the we avers, the extent of their 
production, the handicaps in the way of their obtai ning their yarn supply, the 
way in which they were being made victims of fraud,  and. lastly, their ever 
growing indebtedness. We were not in a position imm ediately to manufacture 
all the cloth for our needs. The alternative theref ore was to get our cloth 
supply from handloom weavers. But ready-made cloth from Indian mill-yarn was 
not easily obtainable either from the cloth- dealer s or from the weavers 
themselves. All the fine cloth woven by the weavers  was from foreign yarn, 
since Indian mills did not spin fine counts. Even t oday the outturn of higher 
counts by Indian mills is very limited, whilst high est counts they cannot spin at Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 240  all. It was after the greatest effort that we were at last able to find some 
weavers who condescended to weave Swadeshi yarn for  us, and only on 
condition that the Ashram would take up all the clo th that they might produce. 
By thus adopting cloth woven from mill- yarn as our  wear, and propagating it 
among our friends, we made ourselves voluntary agen ts of the Indian spinning 
mills. This in its turn brought us into contact wit h the mills, and enabled us to 
know something about thier management and their han dicaps. We saw that the 
aim of the mills was more and more to weave the yar n spun by them; their co-
operation with the handloom weaver was not willing,  but unavoidable and 
temporary. We became impatient to be able to spin o ur own yarn. It was clear 
that, until we could do this ourselves, dependence on the mills would remain. 
We did not feel that we could render any service to  the country by continuing 
as agents of Indian spinning mills. 
No end of difficulties again faced us. We could get  neither a spinning wheel nor 
a spinner to teach us how to spin. We were employin g some wheels for filling 
pins and bobbins for weaving in the Ashram. But we had no idea that these 
could be used as spinning wheels. Once Kalidas Jhav eri discovered a woman 
who, he said, would demonstrate to us how spinning was done. We sent to her 
a member of the Ashram who was known for his great versatility in learning 
new things. But even he returned without wresting t he secret of the art. 
So the time passed on, and my impatience grew with the time. I plied every 
chance visitor to the Ashram who was likely to poss ess some information about 
hand-spinning with questions about the art. But the  art being confined to 
women and having been all but exterminated, if ther e was some stray spinner 
still surviving in some obscure corner, only a memb er of that sex was likely to 
find of her whereabouts. 
In the year 1917 I was taken by my Gujarati friends  to preside at the Broach 
Educational Conference. It was here that I discover ed that remarkable lady 
Gangabchn Majmudar. She was a widow, but her enterp rising spirit knew no 
bounds. Her education, in the accepted sense of the  term, was not much. But 
in courage and common sense she easily surpassed th e general run of our Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 241  educated women. She had already got rid of the curs e of untouchability, and 
fearlessly moved among and served the suppressed cl asses. She had means of 
her own and her needs were few. She had a well seas oned constitution, and 
went about everywhere without an escort. She felt q uite at home on 
horseback. I came to know her more intimately at th e Godhra Conference. To 
her 1 poured out my grief about the  charkha  and she lightened my burden by a 
promise to prosecute an earnest and incessant searc h for the spinning wheel. 
At last, after no end of wandering in Gujarat, Gang abehn found the spinning 
wheel in Vijapur in the Baroda State. Quite a numbe r of people there had 
spinning wheels in their homes, but had long since consigned them to the lofts 
as useless lumber. They expressed to Gangabehn thei r readiness to resume 
spinning, if someone promised to provide them with a regular supply of slivers, 
and to buy the yarn spun by them. Gangabehn communi cated the joyful news 
to me. The providing of slivers was found to be a d ifficult task. On my 
mentioning the thing to the late Umar Sobani, he so lved the difficulty by 
immediately undertaking to send a sufficient supply  of slivers from his mill. I 
sent to Gangabehn the slivers received from Umar So bani, and soon yarn began 
to pour in at such a rate that it became quite a pr oblem how to cope with it. 
Umar Sobani's generosity was great, but still one c ould not go on taking 
advantage of it forever. I felt ill at ease, contin uously receiving slivers from 
him. Moreover, it seemed to me to be fundamentally wrong to use mill-slivers. 
If one could use mill-slivers, why not use mill-yar n as well? Surely no mills 
supplied slivers to the ancients? How did they make  their slivers then? With 
these thoughts in my mind I suggested to Gangabehn to find carders who could 
supply slivers. She confidently undertook the task.  She engaged a carder who 
was prepared to card cotton. He demanded thirty- fi ve rupees, if not much 
more, per month. I considered no price too high at the time. She trained a few 
youngsters to make slivers out of the carded cotton . I begged for cotton in 
Bombay. Shri Yashwantprasad Desai at once responded . Gangabehn's enterprise 
thus prospered beyond expectations. She found out w eavers to weave the yarn 
that was spun in Vijapur, and soon Vijapur  Khadi  gained a name for itself. Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 242  While these developments were taking place in Vijap ur, the spinning wheel 
gained a rapid footing in the Ashram. Maganlal Gand hi, by bringing to bear all 
his splendid mechanical talent on the wheel, made m any improvements in it, 
and wheels and their accessories began to be manufa ctured at the Ashram. The 
first piece of  khadi  manufactured in the Ashram cost 17 annas per yard.  I did 
not hesitate to commend this very coarse  khadi  at that rate to friends who 
willingly paid the price. 
I was laid up in bed at Bombay. But I was fit enoug h to make searches for the 
wheel there. At last I chanced upon two spinners. T hey charged one rupee for a 
seer of yarn, i.e. 28  tolas  or nearly three quarters of a pound. I was then 
ignorant of the economics of  khadi.  I considered no price too high for securing 
handspun yarn. On comparing the rates paid by me wi th those paid in Vijapur I 
found that I was being cheated. The spinners refuse d to agree to any reduction 
in their rates. So I had to dispense with their ser vice. But they served their 
purpose. They taught spinning to Shrimatis Avantika bai, Ramibai Kamdar, the 
widowed mother of Shri Shankarlal Banker and Shrima ti Vasumatibehn. The 
wheel began merrily to hum in my room, and I may sa y without exaggeration 
that its hum had no small share in restoring me to health. I am prepared to 
admit that its effect was more psychological than p hysical. But then it only 
shows how powerfully the physical in man reacts to the psychological. I too set 
my hand to the wheel, but did not do much with it a t the time. 
In Bombay, again, the same old problem of obtaining  a supply of hand-made 
slivers presented itself. A carder twanging his bow  used to pass daily by Shri 
Revashankar's residence. I sent for him and learnt that he carded cotton for 
stuffing mattresses. He agreed to card cotton for s livers, but demanded a stiff 
price for it, which, however, I paid. The yarn thus  prepared I disposed of to 
some Vaishnava friends for making from it the garla nds for the  pavitra 
ekadashi.  Shri Shivji started a spinning class in Bombay. Al l these experiments 
involved considerable expenditure. But it was willi ngly defrayed by patriotic 
friends, lovers of the motherland, who had faith in  khadi.  The money thus Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 243  spent, in my humble opinion, was not wasted. It bro ught us a rich store of 
experience, and revealed to us the possibilities of  the spinning wheel. 
I now grew impatient for the exclusive adoption of  khadi for my dress. My  dhoti  
was still of Indian mill cloth. The coarse  khadi  manufactured in the Ashram and 
at Vijapur was only 30 inches in width. I gave noti ce to Gangabehn that, unless 
she provided me with a  khadi dhoti  of 45 inches width within a month, I would 
do with coarse, short  khadi dhoti. The ultimatum came upon her as a shock. 
But she proved equal to the demand made upon her. W ell within the month she 
sent me a pair of  khadi dhotis  of 45 inches width, and thus relieved me from 
what would then have been a difficult situation for  me. 
At about the same time Shri Lakshmidas brought Shri  Ramji, the weaver, with 
his wife Gangabchn from Lathi to the Ashram and got  khadi dhotis,  woven at 
the Ashram. The part played by this couple in the s pread of  khadi  was by no 
means insignificant. They initiated a host of perso ns in Gujarat and also outside 
into the art of weaving handspun yarn. 
 
1 Written by Gandhiji on his return voyage from Lon don to South Africa and containing in 
germ his letter teachings, it is a severe condemnat ion of modern civilization and a 
powerful plea for a non-violent, political, social and economic order. - Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 244   
82. FAREWELL 
The time has now come to bring these chapters to a close. 
My life from this point onward has been so public t hat there is hardly anything 
about it that people do not know. 
In fact my pen instinctively refuses to proceed fur ther. 
It is not without a wrench that I have to take leav e of the reader. I set a high 
value on my experiments. I do not know whether I ha ve been able to do justice 
to them. I can only say that I have spared no pains  to give a faithful narrative. 
To describe truth, as it has appeared to me, has be en my ceaseless effort. The 
exercise has given me ineffable mental peace, becau se it has been my fond 
hope that it might bring faith in Truth and  Ahimsa  to waverers. 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there i s no other God than Truth. 
And if every page of these chapters does not procla im to the reader that the 
only means for the realization of Truth is  Ahimsa  I shall deem all my labour in 
writing these chapters to have been in vain. And. e ven though my efforts in this 
behalf may prove fruitless, let the readers know th at the vehicle, not the great 
principle, is at fault. After all. however sincere my striving, after  Ahimsa  may 
have been, they have still been imperfect and inade quate. The little fleeting 
glimpses, therefore, that I have been able to have of Truth can hardly convey 
an idea of the indescribable lustre of Truth, a mil lion times more intense than 
that of the sun we daily see with our eyes. In fact  what I have caught is only 
the faintest glimmer of that mighty effulgence. But  this much I can say with 
assurance, as a result of all my experiments, that a perfect vision of Truth can 
only follow complete realization of  Ahimsa.  
To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of Tr uth face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. An d a man who aspires after 
that cannot afford to keep out of any field of life . That is why my devotion to 
Truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 245  hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who  say that religion has nothing 
to do with politics do not know what religion means . 
Identification with everything that lives is imposs ible without self-purification; 
without self-purification the observance of the law  of  Ahimsa  must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who i s not pure of heart. Self-
purification therefore must mean purification in al l the walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to 
the purification of one's surroundings. 
But the path of self-purification is hard and steep . To attain to perfect purity 
one has to become absolutely passion- free in thoug ht, speech and action; to 
rise above the opposing currents of love and hatred , attachment and repulsion. 
I know that I have not in me as yet that triple pur ity, in spite of constant 
ceaseless striving for it. That is why the world's praise fails to move me indeed 
it very often stings me. To conquer the subtle pass ions seems to me to be 
harder far than the physical conquest of the world by the force of arms. Ever 
since my return to India I have had experience of t he dormant passions lying 
hidden within me. The knowledge of them has made me  feel humiliated though 
not defeated. The experiences and experiments have sustained me and given 
me great joy. But I know that I have still before m e a difficult path to traverse. 
I must reduce myself to zero. So long as a man does  not of his own free will put 
himself last among his fellow creatures, there is n o salvation for him.  Ahimsa  is 
the farthest limit of humility. 
In bidding farewell to the reader, for the time bei ng at any rate, I ask him to 
join with me in prayer to the God of Truth that He may grant me the boon of  
Ahimsa  in mind, word and deed. 
 
 
 
 
 Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 246   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH THEIR MEANINGS 
Achkan  - a long closed coat 
Ahimsa  - non-violence; love  
Allaho Akbar  - God is great (a Muslim cry)  
Anna  - equivalent to one English penny or two American cents 
Ashram  - a place for spiritual retirement; colony of work ers run on spiritual 
basis  
Ayurveda  - a sacred book of the Hindus dealing with medicin e  
Bhai - brother 
Bhajan  - prayer in the form of song  
Brahmacharya -  celibacy; continence 
Chandrayana  - a religious observance or penance in which the d aily quantity of 
food is increased or diminished according as the mo on waxes or wanes Charkha  
- spinning wheel 
Chaturmas -  literally a period of 4 months. A vow of fasting a nd semi-fasting 
during the 4 months of the rains   
Coolie  - porter; wage-earner: used contemptibly in South Africa for all Indians  
Dal  - pulse 
Darshan  - view of a god or some great person  
De novo  - afresh  
Debut  - first appearance 
Dhoti - a loose cloth wound round the waist by men 
Diwan  - prime minister of an Indian State  
Durbar  - a royal reception, a State levee  
En route  - on the way Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 247  Gadi  - literally a throne; therefore high office 
Ghee (Ghi)  - clariried butter  
Hartal - cessation of work  
Haveli  - Vaishnava temple 
Imprimatur  - mark of approval 
Impromptu  - without preparation  
Khadi  - hand-spun, hand-woven cloth  
Khansama  - waiter or cook Koran  - sacred book of the Muslims  
Kothi - a palatial residence 
Lingua fratica  - universal language or language understood by all  
Mamlatdar  - a taluka-officer 
Mandir - temple 
Meman  - a sect of Muslims 
Menu  - a list of articles of food available for a meal  
Moksha  - freedom from birth and death; salvation  
Mung  - a kind of pulse  
Nawab  - title of a Muslim Ruler 
Pandal - temporary roof of leaves or mat over an open-air m eeting place  
Par excellence  - of the highest quality  
Patidar  - a peasant caste of Gujarat; a member of that cas te  
Pavitra ekadashi  - literally holy eleventh day – meaning eleventh d ay of the 
waxing or waning moon  
Pice  - one-fourth of an anna; equivalent to an English farthing 
Phuka - a process of extracting more milk from the cow tha n it normally yields 
by blowing or inserting air or any other substance into the organ of generation 
of the animal  Abridged Autobiography 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 248  Pugree - turban 
Pukka  - proper, in the sense of permanent  
Pyjama - loose trousers Raison d'etre -  reason for existence  
Raj  - rule 
Ramanama  - the name of Rama or God  
Ramayana  - a great Indian epic, describing the life of Rama   
Rickshaw  - a two-wheeled passenger-vehicle drawn by men  
Ryot  - peasant 
Sabha - an association or a committee; meeting  
Sadhu  - aseetic 
Saheb (Sahib)  - gentleman, used often for a European  
Sami  - corruption of the Sanskrit  Swami,  a suffix occurring after many Tamil 
names, and used in South Africa for Indians as a te rm of contempt  
Sari  - a loose cloth worn as garment by Indian women  
Satyagraha  - clinging to truth or spiritual force as against physical force; non-
violent resistance  
Shastras  - ancient books of wisdom; the scriptures  
Shirastedar  - a head-clerk in a court of justice  
Sowar  - horseman 
Swadeshi  - literally belonging to one's own country; of loc al origin 
Swaraj  - self-rule, home-rule 
Taluka  - an administrative unit consisting of a group of villages 
Tulasi  - a holy shrub venerated by the Hiudus  
Vaishnava  - a Hindu sect Vakil  - a lawyer 
Vande mataram  - Hail Motherland; former Indian National Anthem 
Vedas  - sacred books of the Hindus 