 
BAHUROOPEE GANDHI  
 
 
Written By 
Anu Bandopadhyaya  
 
Forwarded By 
Jawaharlal Nehru Forward  
This book is for children. But I am sure that many grown-ups will read it with pleasure and 
profit.  
Already Gandhiji has become a legend. Those who hav e not seen him, especially the 
children of today, must think of him as a very unus ual person, a superman who performed 
great deeds. It is desirable, therefore, for the co mmon aspects of his life to be placed 
before them, as is done by this book.  
It is extraordinary how in many things he took inte rest and when he took interest, he did so 
thoroughly. It was not superficial interest. It was  perhaps his thoroughness in dealing with 
what are considered to be the small things of life which emphasized his humanism. That 
was the basis of his character.  
I am glad that this book has been written telling u s of how Gandhiji functioned in a variety 
of ways, quite a part from politics and the public scene . It will perhaps give us a greater 
insight into him.  
Jawaharlal Nehru  
New Delhi, 10th March, 1964.  Introduction  
 
The manuscript of this book has been lying with me since1949. I read D. G. Tendulkar's 
manuscript of the Mahatma in 1948, just after I had  left the work in Kasturba training camp 
of Bengal. I worked in a village. The villagers aro und me and the girl trainees, I noticed, 
knew very little about Gandhiji. They observed Gand hi Jayanti, daily spun and prayed. 
Some had taken part in national movements and court ed jail, but they did not know what 
Gandhiji's real contribution was. May be I was wron g, but that is what I felt.  
I still feel the same about many persons I come in contact with every day, some of whom 
are educated, all of whom abhor manual labour. I my self do not believe in the dignity of 
labour, but I know the drudgery of body labour. And  that's why I every day try to share 
some manual labour with servants, lest I develop th e feeling that just by paying a few chips 
I can win a right to make others work for me.  
I wanted to present Gandhiji as a willing shared in  many such labours which others do to 
earn their livelihood, not for the love of the work . Some incidents are repeated purposely. I 
definitely do not want to add more persons to the b and of blind worshippers of Gandhiji. 
But I would very much like the young  of today to k now that Gandhiji was not merely the 
Father of Nation or the Architect of Freedom, and t hen, criticise him.  
The idea of the book was mine. I wrote it for the t eenagers. Almost all the material have 
been culled from D. G Tendulkar's Mahatma. I cannot  express how much indebted I am to 
him for this small publication.. My diffidence dela yed the publication of this small book. Mr. 
N.G. Jog and Prof. P. R. Sen were kind enough to go  through the manuscript  Mr. M. 
Chalapathi Rau gave me the chance of getting twenty  of these sketches published in a 
series in the national Herald.  
I am indebted to Mr. R. K. Laxman for the illustrat ions he has done for my book  
I  am extremely grateful to Jawaharlalji for writin g a foreword to this book.  
I shall be happy if one young reader out of a thous and practices and of the works done by 
Gandhiji.  Toiler  
 
A busy barrister advised his clients not to ruin th emselves by wasting time and money on 
litigation and to settle their disputes out of the court through arbitration. In his leisure 
hours, he read books on the religions of the Hindus , Muslims, Christians, Parsis and 
Buddhists. He also read books written by wise men. This study of books and a search within 
convinced him that each day every person should do some manual labour. It was not 
enough to do only brain work. The literate and the illiterate, the doctor and lawyer, barber 
and scavenger should be paid equal wages for their work. He slowly changed his way of life 
in an ashram with his friends and family. some of h is European friends wanted to share that 
ashram life, They all lived like hard working self- reliant farmers, ploughing the land and 
tending the orchard. No paid servants were employed . On that farm, Hindus and Muslims, 
Christians and Paris, brahmins and shudras, laboure rs and baristers, whites and " blackies", 
all lived as members of one big family. In a common  dining room, they ate meals prepared 
in a common kitchen. their food was simple, their d ress coarse. Each member got Rs. 40 
for his monthly expenses. The barrister lived on th e same allowance, though he was then 
earning Rs. 4,000 per month. He followed a routine of hard work with clock-like precision 
and took rest for six hours a day. When a hut was b eing built on the farm, he was the first 
man to climb to the top of the structure. He was we aring coarse blue overalls with several 
pockets, and nails. A hammer peeped out from one of  the pockets. A small saw and a borer 
hung on his belt. day after day he worked in the sc orching sun with his hammer and saw.  
One day, after his meal, he sat to make a book-shel f. He worked for seven long hours and 
finished the shelf reaching right up to the ceiling . A path leading to the ashram needed 
metal ling but he had not enough money to meet the cost. He began to collect small stones 
on his way back to the ashram from his regular dail y walks. His companions followed his 
example and, in a short time, a pile of stones for paving the path rose in the yard. Thus he 
made others work. Even the ashram children took par t in gardening, cooking, sweeping, 
carpentry, leather work and type-setting.  
Early in the morning , the barrister ground wheat i n a hand-mill, then dressed up and 
walked five miles to reach his office. he would cli p his own hair and wash or iron his 
clothes. He would keep awake a whole night nursing plague-stricken miners. He would 
wash the wounds of a leper and would not feel asham ed to clean latrines. he knew to 
laziness, fear or hatred.  
He wrote articles for his journal, typed them out h imself, composed them in his own 
printing-press and, if necessary, lent a hand in wo rking a hand-driven printing machine. He 
was good at binding books. The creative hand that w rote inspiring editorials and letters, 
spun thread on a charkha, wove on a loom, cooked ne w dishes, used a needle skillfully and 
tended fruit trees and vegetables, was equally adep t in tilling land, drawing water from a 
well, hewing wood and unloading heavy goods from a cart.  When in jail, he had to dig hard, dry ground with a  pickaxe or sew torn pieces of blankets 
for nine hours a day. When he felt very tired, he p rayed to God for strength. The very idea 
of failure to do any allotted task was intolerable to him.  
In the prime of his life, he more than once walked 40 miles a day to buy things from a store 
in the nearest town. Once he walked 55 miles in one  day. As a voluntary stretcher-bearer, 
he carried mounded soldiers from 30 to40 miles at a  stretch. Even at 78, for weeks, he 
worked 18 hours a day. Sometimes his working hours extended to 21 hours. At that age , 
he could not do any physical labour barring spinnin g, but was fit enough to walk barefoot 
three to five miles every wintry morning on a dew s oaked village path. For his amazing 
devotion to and capacity for work, he won the title  of Karmavir from his South African 
colleagues.  
Karmavir Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born on Oct ober 2, 1869.  Barrister  
 
Gandhi matriculated at the age of 18. Soon after he  went to London to study law. He was 
the first Modh bania to go abroad. After joining th e Inner Temple, Gandhi found that 
passing law examinations very easy. Reading notes o n the texts only for a could of months, 
many passed the examinations. That easy course of r eading notes did not appeal to 
Gandhi. He loathed deception. He chose to read the text-books in original and spent much 
money on them. He had to study hard for nine months  to read the fat volumes on Common 
Law. He learnt Latin and read the Roman Law books i n the original. The Barrister then 
when to known as " dinner barristers" because they had to keep 12 terms in about three 
years. That meant they had to attend at least 72 di nners. The students had to meet the 
expense of these costly dinners.  
Gandhi was not used to such social gatherings and c ould not understand how eating dinners 
and drinking wine helped one to become a good barri ster. Anyway he had to attend 
dinners. He was a good vegetarian and a teetotaller . As he could not share all the dishes 
and did not drink, many law students were keen on h aving him as a partner.  
These dinners and readings did not help Gandhi to o vercome his shyness and nervousness. 
He wondered how to use the book learning in arguing  a case. An English lawyer encouraged 
him and told him honestly and industry were enough to become a lawyer and to earn a 
modest living. Facts were 3\4 of the law, if he too k care of the facts of a case, the law 
would take care of itself. He advised Gandhi to rea d books on history and general 
knowledge. Gandhi followed his advice.  
For a short time, Gandhi made an effort to become a  smart English gentleman. He tried to 
learn proper pronunciation and speech making to dan ce, to play the violin and to dress in 
the right fashion. He bought an expensive suit from  the most fashionable shop and sported 
a  double watch chain of gold. He wore top hats and  ties. He also made friends with young 
ladies. Slowly he was drifting to a life of ease an d luxury. Some months later, he realized 
how foolish he was, expensive habits. He had to com e to England for study, not to ape the 
ways of an Englishman. Immediately he decided to ch ange his style of living. He hired a 
cheap room and a stove and began to cook his breakf ast and dinner himself. He lunched at 
cheap vegetarian restaurants and stopped spending m oney on conveyance. He walked eight 
to ten miles every day.  
In due time, after 32 months stay in England, Gandh i was enrolled as a barrister. Two days 
later he sailed for India.  
On reaching India, he rented a house in Bombay and hired a cook, He attended the High 
Court regularly, saw how cases were conducted and s pent many hours in the Bar library. 
He read books on Indian Law.  His first case was a simple one. He was offered a f ee of Rs. 30 for it. When the young 
inexperienced barrister of 22 stood up to argue, he  lost his nerve. His head reeled and 
tongue got parched up. He left the court in shame. Thenceforth he did not take up any case 
in that court.  
His expenses mounted up, his income was almost nil.  He proved good at drafting memorials 
but that neither was a barrister's job, nor did it fetch enough money. After six months' trial, 
Gandhi joined his brother and his family at Rajkot.  His brother had high hopes in the 
success of his England-returned barrister brother .  He was sorely disappointed. Gandhi felt 
miserable.  
At Rajkot another problem arose. As a rule, he had to play commission to the vakils who 
brought him cases. Gandhi declined to do so, it app eared immoral to him to give 
commission. His brother pleaded and Gandhi made a c ompromise. Gandhi was then earning 
about Rs. 300 per month. He was not happy in doing that work, nor with the practices of 
falsehood all around.  
Luckily he got an offer from a rich Muslim merchant  of South Africa. He was to get Rs. 
1,575 all found and a first-class passage with retu rn fare. He accepted the offer and sailed 
for the far-away continent. He had no idea about th e conditions of living in South Africa. 
When the ship anchored at Zanzibar, he went to see how the court worked there. Questions 
relating to book-keeping he could not follow. the c ase for which he was going to south 
Africa was mainly about accounts. Gandhi bought a b ook on accounting and read it 
carefully.  
On the third day of his arrival at Durban, Gandhi w ent to the court. The magistrate ordered 
him to take off his turban. Gandhi refused to obey him and left the court. From the time of 
his landing on the South African soil, he noticed h ow the Indians were ill-treated by the 
whites. He was labeled an unwelcome visitor and a " coolie barrister". He smarted under 
under this insults.  
From his client Dada Abdulla le learnt details abou t the litigation and made a thorough 
study of the case. He thought both the parties woul d be ruined if they continued to spend 
on the lawyers for long. He did not like to gain mo ney or position by exploiting his client. 
He believed that the true function as algal counsel  was to unite both the parties. He insisted 
on meeting the other party for setting the case out  of court. When dada Abdulla hesitated, 
Gandhi said: "Not a soul shall know anything that i s confidential between us. I would only 
suggest to him to come to an understanding."  
In spite of Gandhi's meditation , the case dragged on for one year. Gandhi had a good 
chance of studying how a complicated case was condu cted by the best attorneys and 
counsels. He prepared the evidence. The case was se ttled to the satisfaction of both the 
parties, but Gandhi got disgusted with his professi on that could raise points of law in 
support of each party and make we the cost go up.  Soon after Gandhi began to practice in Durban Court , Balasundaram, an indentured 
labourer in tattered clothes and with two front tee th broken came to his office. He was 
beaten by his white master. Gandhi calmed him, got him treated by a white doctor and 
secured a medical certificate relating the seriousn ess of the injury. He fought for 
Balasundaram, won the case and found him a better m aster. This incident made Gandhi 
very popular with the poor Indian labourers. His fa me as the protector of the helpless 
reached India. Thenceforth, he was looked upon as t he friend of the friendless.  
One year's experience helped Gandhi to gain confide nce. After some exchange of 
arguments, this coolie barrister was permitted to e nrol himself in the Natal Supreme Court. 
the white attorneys did not give him cases. He hims elf added more handicaps to his 
practice of law. He was determined to prove that a lawyer's profession was not a liar's 
profession. He never told untruth or tutored a witn ess for winning a case. Whether his client 
won or lost, he accepted nothing more or less his c lients for unpaid fees and did not 
prosecute anyone for personal grievances. He was fo ur times assaulted in South Africa, but 
every time he declined to drag the offender to the court or to get him punished. During his 
20 years of practice as a lawyer, he helped to sett le hundreds of cases out of court.  
Once while conducting a case, he found the client w as dishonest. Without pleading for him 
further he asked the magistrate to dismiss the case  and himself rebuked the client for 
bringing a false case. Gandhi once said; : " I bega n my legal career as a second-rate 
lawyer. My clients were not at all impressed with m y legal talents but when they saw that I 
would not under any circumstances swerve from truth , they clung to me." His clients from 
jail-going. The old client smuggled goods without p aying the customs duty. When his 
honour was at stake, he told the truth to Gandhi. G andhi advised him to confess his crime 
and accept the penalty Gandhi met the Attorney-Gene ral and Customs Officer and reported 
the matter truthfully. His version of the report wa s not questioned and offender was only 
fined. In gratitude the client had the whole incide nt printed and hung that sheet in his office 
room.  
On another occasion, there was a wrong  entry of ac counts in his client's papers. Gandhi 
pointed out the error to the opponent and argued ab ly. The judge who at first accused 
Gandhi of sharp practice, gave verdict in favour of  Gandhi's client. The judge told the other 
party: "Supposing Mr. Gandhi had not admitted of th e slip, what would you have done?" 
Gandhi was an expert cross-examiner. He was respect ed by the judges and members of the 
bar. He had many white clients. Both in India and S outh Africa, he found in 99 cases out of 
100, justice was denied to Indians against European s and that made him say: "has a single 
Englishman suffered the extreme penalty of the law for brutal murders in India? Look at the 
trial of an English officer and the farcical punish ment he received for having deliberately 
tortured inoffensive Negroes."  
In spite of observing rigid and making adverse rema rks about law, Gandhi prospered in his 
profession. In India he practice extended to 20 yea rs. At the beginning he rented a house in a good locality and set up an establishment befitti ng a rising barrister. He furnished it in 
European style. On Sundays and holidays, he had a f east at his house. He kept an open 
house and invited his close friends and subordinate s to live with him. His office was six 
miles from his house. for some months he rode a bic ycle. Afterwards he walked to the 
office. As Indians were not allowed to occupy any f ront have got special permission to do 
so. He slowly tried to identify himself with the po or Indian labourers and took to a simple 
life. At the age of forty when he was earning on an  average Rs. 4,000 a month, he gave up 
his practice and dedicated himself to public work. He gave up all his possessions for the 
community, worked with his hands and lived on farms .  
Years later Gandhi condemned the high fees charges by lawyers and barristers in India 
where the law courts are run most extravagantly. Th ey bear no relation to the poverty of 
the people. A lawyer can earn fifty thousand rupees  to one lakh per month. Gandhi said: " 
A legal practice is not a speculative business. If we were not under the spell of the lawyers 
and law courts, we would be leading a much happier life. The lawyer's profession teaches 
immorality . perjured witnesses are ranges on eithe r side, they sell their souls for money". 
he realized that a radical change in the legal mach inery was needed to make justice pure 
and inexpensive. He himself took up the cases of th e poor without charging fees and 
whenever the case was connected with any public wor k, he charges nothing beyond actual 
pocket expenses. When poor Indians settlers were be ing ousted from the coolie locations by 
the municipality, Gandhi sided with the tenants. He  worked hard for each case but charged 
only Rs.150 per case. out of 70 cases, one  was los t . half of that income he donated to 
build a charitable institution.  
In order to gain human rights for his countrymen, h e preached resistance against the 
government. He was put under arrest and was tried b oth in South African and Indian 
Courts. He was sentenced to jail many times. In Sou th Africa, he had to stand handcuffed 
in the witness box of the sane court where he pract iced for ten years. After his first 
conviction in India, his name was removed from the roll of barristers.  
Gandhi declared non-co-operation with the courts of  the British Raj an advocated revival of 
panchayat. At the call of this law-breaker, many em inent lawyers gave up their practice and 
joined the freedom movement.  
In reply to an address presented by a Bar associati on, Gandhi said that he had been 
disbarred by his own inn and had long forgotten his  law. He had been engaged more in 
breaking the laws than in interpreting them.  Tailor  
 
In South Africa, Gandhi was twice penalized with ha rd labour. For some weeks, he had to 
sew pieces of torn blankets and cut shirt pockets f rom thick cloth for nine hours a day. He 
finished tagging the pieces given to him before tim e and asked for more strips.  
IN The Indian jail too, for some more days, he work ed on a Singer Sewing Machine. It was 
all jail work done by him voluntarily. Gandhi wante d to grow efficient in the use of a sewing 
machine. He disapproved of the use of big machines that replace the working hands and 
make man a slave of the machines owned by capitalis ts. He believed that a machines must 
not be allowed to displace necessary human labour. The problem in India was not how to 
find leisure for the millions but how to utilized t heir idle hours. He made an exception of the 
sewing machine because " It is one of the few usefu l things ever invented. Singer saw his 
wife laboring over the tedious process of sewing an d seaming with her hands and simply 
out of his love for her, devised the sewing machine  in order to save he labour. The machine 
had love at its back"  
Gandhi once wrote to a female ashramite: " don't yo u worry over the tailoring of your dress 
salwar and kameez. Whatever has to be prepared can be prepared by me. We can easily 
borrow a Singer sewing Machine. A few hours work sh ould a make the necessary dress." He 
had every reason to be proud of his needle work. He  could cut and stitch his wife's blouses. 
He spun yarn on a charkha, wove it on a handloom an d sewed his own kurta. Expert tailors 
and shoe-makers gave free lessons to the ashram tra inees.  
when Gandhi was guiding the Champaran ryots in resi sting the indigo planters' tyranny a 
British journalist maligned him. He said that in or der to win the ryots. Gandhi temporarily 
and specially adopted the national dress. Gandhi wr ote in reply: " having taken the vow of 
Swadeshi, my clothing is now entirely hand woven an d hand -sewn by me or my fellow 
workers."  
Gandhi later gave up the use of kurta and wore a lo in-cloth and a wrap. Even then, at 
times, he hemmed the borders of his handkerchief, n apkin or loin-cloth. When he was kept 
busy in sewing, he dictated letters to his secretar y. During his detention in the Aga Khan 
Palace, he gave khadi handkerchiefs as birthday pre sent to the jail superintendent. Each 
handkerchief bore the initials of the superintenden t neatly embroidered by Gandhi who was 
then 74.  
Under his direction, a lady once had to do patch-wo rk with suitable pieces of khadi on 
favorite shawl of Gandhi. As a representative of hi s poor countrymen, he sat at the Round 
Table Conference beside the British Prime Minister and attended a tea party at the Bucking 
ham palace with that shawl on. He never cared for s how, but detested a shabby, torn 
dress. Once in a meeting, he notices a hole in the wrap of co-worker. Immediately he sent 
this note to him: " To wear torn clothes is sign of  laziness and, therefore, shame. but to wear patched clothes proclaims poverty or renunciat ion or industry. I could not appreciate 
the rent in your chaddar. it is not a sign of pover ty or simplicity . It is a sign of no wife, bad 
wife or laziness."  Washerman  
 
Barrister Gandhi used to go to the court in a neat European dress. Everyday he needed a 
fresh clean collar to match his shirt. He changed h is shirt every alternate day and his 
washing bill was heavy. The washer man was often la te in delivering clothes. Gandhi had to 
spend a lot for a good stock of clothes. Even three  dozens of shirts with collars were not 
enough to cope with the sweet will of the dhobi.  
Gandhi wanted to cut down his expenses. One day he came home with a complete set of 
washing outfit. He bought a book on washing, he beg an to practise he got directions for 
good washing, he began to practise it. Poor Kasturb a was not allowed to remain a spectator 
of the show. Gandhi taught her the art of washing. This new was an additional burden on 
Gandhi's defeat. He was determined to get rid of th e washerman's tyranny and become 
self-reliant. One day he washed a collar and starch ed it. Not being used to the work, he 
ironed it with a not-enough-hot iron, putting littl e pressure. He was afraid to burning it. He 
went to the Court with that collar on. It was over starched and stood stiff. His friends 
chuckled at this sight. Gandhi was least disturbed and sail; " well, this is my first attempt in 
washing hence this overdose of starch. But it does not matter. At least it provided you with 
so much fun."  
"But is there any lack of laundries here?" asked on e. " No, the laundry bill is very heavy. 
The charge for washing a single collar is almost as  much as its price and even then there is 
the eternal dependence on the washer man. I prefer by far to wash my things myself." 
Later he proved tone an expert dhobi.  
Gokhale once came to stay with Gandhi who revered h im as his guru. Gokhale was to 
attend a big party. His scarf got crumpled but ther e was no time to get it washed by a   
dhobi. Gandhi asked ; " shall I nicely iron it?" Go khale replied ; " I can trust your capacity 
as a lawyer but not as a waherman . What if you spo il it?" Gandhi insisted and ironed it. 
Gokhale was pleased with the work. Gandhi was then so happy that he said that he did not 
care at all if the whole world denie4d him a certif icate.  
In his ashrams in south Africa, there was scarcity of water and women had to got  distant 
spring for washing. Gandhi helped them. In the earl y stage of khadi production, very thick 
and heavy saris were woven on handlooms. The ashram  women agreed to wear them but 
they grumbled when they had to wash them . Gandhi o ffered his services as a dhobi. He 
was not ashamed of washing other's clothes. Once he  was the guest of a rich man. After 
entering the bathroom , he saw a clean dhoti lying on the floor. He finished his bath and 
washed that dhoti along with his own . He took them  out to spread on the sun. He was 
particular about drying white clothes in the sun, a s that made them look bright and killed 
germs. the host said in protest; " Bapuji what ate you doing?" Gandhi said; " why what's 
wrong in it? The clean dhoti would have got dirty ,  so I washed it. I am not a shamed of 
doing a bit for keeping things clean." Gandhi was n ot put to shame but his host was.  In jail, in his old age, Gandhi sometimes washed hi s loin-cloth, napkin and handkerchief 
and relieved his co-workers from doing extra work. During Kasturba's last illness in the 
Agakhan Palace Gandhi picked up handkerchiefs used by her and washed them.  
He was particular about his dress all through his l ife. As a small boy, he competed with 
other boys in washing his fine mill dhoti white. He  drew water from a well and washed it. 
Gandhi asmired simple habits but hated shabby and r umpled clothes. He kept his loin-cloth, 
wrap and napkin spotlessly clean and increased. He was a picture of cleanness.  Barber  
 
After a week of his arrival in south Africa, Gandhi  had to spend on night in a big city in 
connection with his legal work. He hired a cab and asked the coachman to take him to the 
leading hotel. Gandhi saw a manager of the hotel an d asked for a room. The white manager 
eyed him from top to toe and said; " Sorry , we are  full the shop of an Indian friend. When 
he related the incident, the friend asked; " How di d you ever expect to get admission in a 
hotel?" " Why not? " Gandhi asked in surprise. " We ll you will come to know everything I 
time," the friend said. And Gandhi did come to know  a lot about the insults borne by the 
Indians in South Africa. He was slapped, boxed and kicked , was pushed out from a train 
and footpath, because he was a colored Indian. Stil l he failed to understand why the whites 
hated and ill-treated the " blackies". After all, a ll men were sons of the same God and 
Christianity was a religion of love.  
One day he went to hair- cut. The white barber aske d: " What do you want?" " I want a hair 
-cut, " said Gandhi.  
" Sorry, I can't cut your hair. If I attend a colou red man, I shall lose my customers."  
This insult sank deep in Gandhi's mind. He felt it would not do to smart in pain or to make 
written appeals in newspapers.  he must be self-rel iant, be able to manage his own affairs. 
Immediately he bought a pair of clippers and went h ome. He started clipping his hair before 
a mirror. He could shave himself but to cut one's o wn hair was an odd job. And it surely 
was not a barrister's job! He somehow managed it bu t spoiled went to the court the next 
day. His clownish hair-cut made his friends shake w ith laughter. One asked in jest; "Gandhi 
, what's wrong with your hair? Rats have nibbled at  it last night? " Gandhi replied in 
earnest; " No. The white barber refused to touch th e black hair of black man, so I decided 
to cut it myself, no matter how badly."  
This was Gandhi's first attempt in hair-cutting at the age of 28. Afterwards he often used 
the scissors and the clippers. In his ashrams, a hi red barber's service was taboo. The 
ashramites cut the hair of one another by turn. Gan dhi waned the students of ashram to 
lead a simple Spartan life. No fashion , no fine dr ess or tasty dishes were allowed there. 
One Sunday morning , the boys were going for a bath . Gandhi called them one by one and 
cropped their hair. They were very unhappy to get t heir hair trimmed to the scalp. Gandhi 
once cut the long hair of two ashrams girls.  
No combs were given in South African prisons and ev ery prisoner convicted for two months 
or more had his hair cropped close and his moustach es shaved. Gandhi and his party were 
exempted from this practice. But Gandhi wanted to g o through all the jai experiences. 
When he said in writing that he wanted to get his h air cropped, the chief warder gave him 
clippers and a pair of scissors. Gandhi and one or two co-prisoners each day spent two 
hours in doing the barber's job.  when he was imprisoned in the Aga Khan Palace, with  him was a lady ashramite. Dandruff 
was troubling her. IN an unguarded moment , she ask ed; ' Bapu , shall I cut my hair and 
put some medicine to kill the dandruff? " Quick cam e Gandhi's reply; " Yes, do it right now. 
Bring the scissors." Scissors were brought and off fell the locks of the lady . Mahatma 
barber was then 75.  
During the Swadeshi movement, Gandhi discarded fore ign razors and took to country-made 
ones. slowly he learnt its proper use and could sha ve without mirror, soap or brush. He 
must have thought it was a marked improvement in th e art of shaving and gave this 
certificate to a barber; " Munnilal has given me a fine shave with devotion. His razor is 
country-made and he shaves without soap." Some of h is followers were infected with this 
fan fond it made shaving less disagreeable. Gandhi knew how the village barbers acted as 
surgeons and were expert in opening a boil or takin g out a thorn but found it trying to put 
with their dirty clothes and unclean instruments.  
Once a Harijan attendant at Sevagram said; " I want  to go to Wardha." When asked why, 
he said; " For shaving."  
"You can't get it done in this village?"  
" Savarna barbers will not shave me and there is no  Harijan barber here" he replied.  
"Then how can I get myself ever shaved by that barb er," said Gandhi. He stopped taking 
service from that barber. When he traveled from vil lage to village every day, he could not 
find time for a shave and and at times needed a bar ber's help.  
During the khadi tour, he wanted to be shaved by a khadi-clad barber. Volunteers ran 
hither and thither to find one. Gandhi told them; "  We shall have to make the washermen 
and barbers co-sharers of our swadeshi vow. Barbers  are good at gossiping. they can 
spread there message of Swadeshi." On another occas ion, Gandhi was waiting for a barber 
in Orissa. He saw a woman come with shaving tackle all complete. She wore heavy ear-
rings, nose-ring, necklace, anklets and laquer bang les. Gandhi asked; " So you are going to 
shave me?' She nodded with a smile and went on shar pening the razor. Gandhi again 
asked; " Why are you wearing these heavy ornaments?  they don't make you beautiful. 
They are ugly and full of dirt." With tearful eyes she said; " Do you know I have borrowed 
them today for this special occasion? How could I c ome to a great man like you without 
good ornaments on? After shaving Gandhi's head and chin, she left her wages at his feet, 
bowed to him and went away.  Scavenger  
 
In his father's house at Rajkot, a mehtar called Uk a did the scavenging. If Gandhi ever 
touched Uka, Putlibai asked him to take a bath. Gan dhi, otherwise a docile, obedient son, 
did not like it. The 12 years old son would argue w ith his mother; "Uka serves us by 
cleaning dirt and filth, how can his touch pollute me? I shall not disobey you, but the 
ramayana says that Rama embraced Guhaka a chandal. The Ramayana cannot mislead us." 
Putlibai could find no answer for this arguments.  
Gandhi learnt scavenging in South Africa. His frien ds there lovingly called him the great 
scavenger. After three year's stay there, he came t o India to take his wife and sons to 
South Africa. At that time plague had broken out in  the Bombay Presidency. There was a 
chance of its spreading to Rajkot. Gandhi immediate ly offered his service for improving the 
sanitation of Rajkot. He inspected every home and s tressed the need of keeping the latrines 
clean. The dark, filthy, stinking pits infested wit h vermin horrified him. In some houses 
belonging to the upper class, gutters were used as a privy and stench was unbearable. The 
residents were apathetic. Poor untouchables lived i n cleaner homes and responded to 
Gandhi's pleadings. Gandhi suggested the use of two  separate buckets for urine and night-
soil and that improved the sanitation.  
The Gandhi family was well known in Rajkot. His fat her and grandfather served long as 
dewans in Rajkot and other neighboring states. Abou t 70 years ago, the Prime Minister's 
barrister so needed guts to go round the home town and make a house to house inspection 
of the drains. a Gandhi seldom filed to show moral courage in the hour of need. He 
criticized many western customs but repeatedly admi tted that he learnt sanitation from the 
west. He wanted to introduce that type of cleanline ss in India  
On his second trip to India from South Africa, Gand hi attended the Congress session in 
Calcutta. He came to plead because of the ill-treat ed Indians in South Africa The sanitary 
condition of the Congress camp was horrible. Some d elegates used the verandah in front of 
their room as latrines, others did not object to it . Gandhi reacted immediately. When he 
spoke to the volunteers, they said; " This is not o ur job, this is a sweeper's job." Gandhi 
asked the broom and cleaned the filth. He was then dressed in western style. the 
volunteers were astonished but none came forward to  assist him. Years later, when Gandhi 
became the guiding star of the Indian National Cong ress, volunteers formed a bhangi squad 
in the Congress camps. Once the brahmins only worke d as bhangis. Two thousand teachers 
and students were specially trained for doing scave nging at the Haripura Congress. Gandhi 
could not think of having a set of people labeled a s untouchables for cleaning filth and dirt. 
He wanted to abolish untouchability from India.  
In South Africa the whites despised the Indians for  their slovenly habits. Gandhi inspected 
their quarters and asked them to keep their homes a nd surroundings clean. He spoke about 
it in public meetings and wrote in newspapers. Gand hi's house in Durban was built in western fashion. The bathroom had no outlet for wat er. Commodes and chamber-pot used 
by his clerks residing with him. He compelled his w ife Kasturba to do the same. He also 
taught his young sons this work. Kasturba once made  a wry face while carrying the 
chamber-pot used by allow caste clerk. Gandhi rebuk ed her and told her to leave the house 
if she wanted to observe caste bias. He was once so cially boycotted by his own 
sympathizers for admitting an untouchable couple in  the Sabarmati Ashram.  
In a South African jail, Gandhi once volunteered to  clean water closets. Next time, 
sweeper's work was allocated to him by the jail aut horities.  
After twenty years stay in that alien land, Gandhi at 46 finally returned to India with his 
party. During his visit to Kumbh Mela at Hardwar th at year, he with his Phoenix boys 
served as bhangis in the mela. The same year Gandhi  visited the Servants of India 
Society's quarters at Poona. The members of the sma ll colony one morning saw him 
cleaning the latrines. They did not like it. But Ga ndhi believed that work of this kind 
qualified one for Swaraj. More than once he toured all over India. whenever he went, he 
found insanitation in some form or other. The filth  and stench of public urinal and latrines in 
railway stations and in dharmashalas were awful. Th e roads use d by the poor villagers and 
their bullocks were always ill-kept. He saw people taking a dip in a sacred pond without 
caring to know how dirty that bathing place or the water was. They them selves dirtied the 
river-banks. He was hurt to see the marbel floor of  Kashi Viswanath Temple set with stary 
silver coins that collected dirt and wondered why m ost entrances to abodes of God were 
through narrow slippery lanes. Gandhi deplored the passengers' habit of dirtying lanes. 
Gandhi deplored the passengers' habit of dirtying t he railway compartments and said that 
though few could afford to sue shoes, it was unthin kable to walk barefoot in India. How 
even in a city like Bombay, people walked about the  streets under the fear of being spat 
upon by the occupants of houses around.  
In reply to municipal addressed, Gandhi often said;  " I congratulate you on your spacious 
roads, your splendid lighting and your beautiful pa rks. But a municipality does not deserve 
to exist which does not possess model closets and w here streets and lanes are not kept 
clean all the hours of the day and night . The grea test problem many municipalities have to 
tackle is insanitation . Have you ever thought of t he conditions in which the sweepers live?"  
To the people he said: " So long as you do not take  the broom and the bucket in your 
hands, you cannot make your towns and cities lean."  When he inspected a model school, he 
told the teachers: " You will make your institution  ideal, if besides giving the students 
literary education, you have made finished cooks an d sweepers of them." To the students 
his advice was: " If you become your own scavengers , you will make your surroundings 
clean. It needs no les courage to become an expert scavenger than to win a Victoria Cross."  
The villagers near his ashram refused to cover excr eta with earth. They said: " Surely this 
is bhangi's work. It is sinful to look at faces, mo re so to throw earth on them"  Gandhi 
personally supervised the scavenging work in villag es. To set an example to them, he for some months, himself used to go to the villages wit h bucket and broom. Friends and guests 
went with him. They brought bucketfuls of dirt and stool and buried them in pits.  
All scavenging work in his ashram was done by the i nmates. Gandhi guided them. People of 
different races, religions and colors lived there.  
No dirt could be found anywhere on the ashram groun d. All rubbish was buried in pits 
Peelings of vegetables and leaving s of food were d umped in a separate manure pit. The 
night soil too was buried and later used as good ri ch manure. Waste water was used for 
gardening. The farm was free from flies and stink t hough there was no pucka drainage 
system. Gandhi and his co-workers managed sweeper's  work by turn. He introduced 
bucket-latrines and bicameral trench latrines. To a ll visitors Gandhi showed this new 
innovation with pride. Rich and poor, leaders and w orkers, Indians and foreigners all had to 
use these latrines. This experiment slowly removed aversion for scavenging from the minds 
of orthodox co-workers and women inmates of the ash ram.  
Whenever Gandhi got an opportunity of doing a littl e bit of cleaning work, he felt happy. To 
him the test of a people's knowledge of cleanliness  was the condition of their latrines. at 
76, with pride he said: " They privy I use is spotl essly clean without a trace of smell . I 
clean it myself." On many occasions , he described himself as a bhangi and said he would 
be content if he could die as a sweeper. He even as ked orthodox Hindus to make him suffer 
social boycott along with the untouchables.  
He visited bhangi quarters and the bhangis always n arrated their tale of woe to him. He 
assured them that there was no disgrace in doing th eir job and advised them to give up 
drinking liquors and eating flesh of dead animals. He never supported a sweepers' strike 
and believed a bhangi should not give up his work e ven for a day.  
In Harijan he defined what an ideal bhangis: " He s hould know how the right kind of latrine 
is constructed and the correct way of cleaning it. He should know how to overcome and 
destroy the odour of excreta and the various disinf ectants to render them innocuous. He 
should likewise know the process of converting nigh t soil and urine into manure." Instead of 
allowing scavenging to continue as a forced hired l abour, Gandhi wanted to lift it to the 
level of indispensable social work.  
During his khadi tour, the sweepers once were not p ermitted to attend a public meeting 
where Gandhi was to speak. When Gandhi came to know  of it, he told the organisers: " You 
may keep back your purse and your addresses. I am g oing to have a meeting with the 
untouchables only. Let all others who want , come t here."  
Two years before his death, Gandhi stayed some days  in the sweepers' colony in Bombay 
and Delhi. He wished to share the same lodging and partake of their food but then he was 
too old for the experiment. Moreover some special p rivileges were forced on the Mahatma.  
Gandhi once went to Simla to have an important meet ing with the Viceroy. He sent one 
leading co-worker to see the bhangi quarters there.  When he was told that they have reduced the bhangis to the level of beasts. They ea rn a few coppers but only at the expense 
of their human dignity. Look at a bhangi as he eats  his surrounded by filth. It is enough to 
break one's heart."  
The sight of a bhangi carrying the night-soil baske t on his head made him sick. He 
explained how with the use of proper instruments, c leaning could be done neatly. 
Scavenging was a fine art and he did it without bec oming filthy himself.  
Once a foreigner asked Gandhi: "If you are made the  Viceroy of India for a day, what will 
you do?"  
Gandhi said: "I shall clean the Augean stables of t he scavengers near the viceroy's house."  
" Supposing your term is extended a day more, then? '  
" The very same work shall I do the next day."  Cobbler  
 
At the age of 63, Gandhi was imprisoned in the Yera vda jail with Vallabhbhai Patel. 
Vallabhbhai needed a pair of sandals but there was no good show-maker in the jail. Gandhi 
said : " If I can get some good leather, I can make  pair for you. Let me see if I remember 
that art which I had learnt long ago. I was a very good cobbler. A sample of my 
workmanship can be seen in the khadi Pratisthan Mus eum at Sodepur. I sent that pair of 
sandals for'-' . He said he could not use them as f oot-wear but only as an ornament for no 
use them as foot-wear but only as an ornament for h is head. I made a number of them on 
Tolstoy Farm."  
He learn this craft in South Africa from his devote d German friend Kallenbach. Gandhi 
taught others to make shoes and they excelled their  teacher in shoe making. Shoes made 
by them were sold outside the farm. At that time, G andhi set a fashion in wearing sandal-
shoes with trousers. In tropical countries, they we re more comfortable than covered shoes 
and  could as well be worn with socks in winter.  
Sardar Patel, Jawaharlal and others once went to Se vagram for Gandhi's advice. They found 
him busy in stitching a batch of trainees: " The st rips should be here, the stitches should be 
there on the sole where the pressure is the heavies t." They were getting the defects correct 
by Gandhi. One of the leaders complained: " But the y are robbing us of our time." Gandhi 
said: " Don't grudge there lesson they are having. If you feel like, you can also watch how a 
good sandal is made."  
another day, Gandhi and some co-workers were seen w itnessing  the full process of flaying 
a dead bull by the dead animal with a village knife  without damaging the hide impressed 
Gandhi. He was told that none, not even surgeons, c ould do that work better than a village 
tanner. To Gandhi every medical student who dissect ed job is respected where as a 
sweeper's or a tanner's occupation is despised. The y are untouchables to the Hindus.  
Gandhi did not stop at learning show-making. He wan ted to be a tanning expert. What else 
could he do? So many persons all over the world wea r leather shoes and that leather is 
mostly procured by killing healthy animals cows, bu lls, sheep and goats. Gandhi was a 
believer in non-violence. A man who did not give be ef tea or eggs to a dying wife or a sick 
son, was the last person to agree to slaughter anim als for wearing shiny shoes. But he 
needed leather.  
He decided to use the hide of only those animals th at die a natural death. Shoes and 
sandals made from such leather became known as ahim sak chappals. It was easier to treat 
hides of slaughtered animals than the hides of carc asses and tanneries did not supply 
ahimsak leather: and Gandhi had to learn the art of  tanning.  
He found out that raw hide worth nine crores of rup ees was exported from India every 
year. After being treated scientifically, finished leather articles costing crores of rupees were imported in India from abroad. This did not on ly mean a loss of money but loss of an 
opportunity of using our intelligence for tanning r aw hides and of making good leather 
articles. Like spinners and wavers hundred of tanne rs and cobblers were deprived of their 
livelihood. Gandhi wondered since when tanning had become a degrading calling. It could 
not have been so in ancient times. But today, a mil lion tanners do this work and are 
counted as untouchables from generation to generati on. The higher classes despise them 
and they lead a life deprived of art, education, cl eanliness and dignity. tanners, sweepers 
and shoe makers serve society and do useful work ye t observance of caste forced a part of 
the nation to live a miserable life. In other count ries, a man does not become a poor 
illiterate untouchable, if he chooses the professio n of a tanner or a show-maker.  
For reviving this village industry, Gandhi made pub lic appeals. He sought help from tanning 
chemists for revitalising the art of village tannin g which was fast dying out. Reformed 
tanning which was fast dying out. Reformed tanning,  Gandhi thought, would stop carrion 
eating. When a dead cow is brought to a tanner's ho use, the whole family gets jubilant. It 
means a day of feast on the flesh on the flesh of t he dead animal. Children dance round it 
and as the animal is flayed, they take hold of bone s and pieces of flesh and throw them at 
one another. This scene was repulsive Gandhi.  
He told the Harijan tanner: " Will you not give up eating carrion? If you do not give up, I 
may touch you but the orthodox people will shun you r company . It is a filthy habit." They 
said: " If we are to dispose of dead cattle, flay t heir skin, then you cannot expect us to stop 
eating carrion." I can say fro my experience that s cavenging and tanning can be done in a 
perfectly healthy and clean manner."  
a tannery section was opened by Gandhi at the ashra ms in Sabarmati and Wardha. It 
started on asmall scale but later had a pucka build ing for storing hides. Gandhi collected Rs. 
50,000 for the building where the asram boys did ta nning work helped by expert chamars. 
Leather goods made there were sold in the open mark et. The entire work was done with 
dead cattle hides.  
Gandhi visited the National Tannery in Calcutta and  with keen interest saw the process of 
manufacturing chrome leather. He marked how salted cow hides were limed to take off 
hair, how dyeing was done . He also kept in touch w ith the research work that was being 
done in Tagore's Santiniketan for improving village  tanning. Gandhi did not want to scrap 
the ancient method of village tanning, nor did he l ike to remove tanning and such other 
industries to cities from villages as that would ha ve meant sure ruin for villagers. They 
would lose the little opportunity they had of makin g skilled use of their hands and heads. 
He wanted to find a decent way of removing a dead a nimal from one part of the village to 
another. The village tanner lifts it, drags it and thus injures the skin and reduced the value 
of the hide. He does not know how to utilise the bo nes. He throws them to dogs and incurs 
a loss. Handles and buttons made from bones come to  India from foreign lands. Powered 
bones also serve as a good manure.  Gandhi went to chamar's huts, mixed with them, talk ed with them. they too put great trust 
on him and looked up to  him as a friend determined  to improve their lot. when he visited 
their colony, they complained of the lack of drinki ng water. They told him how they were 
not allowed to use the public well or to enter a te mple, how people avoid their company 
and hoe they are compelled to live in the outskirts  of a village or city. Gandhi felt hurt and 
ashamed. He did not believe in doing charity to the m. he wanted them  to stand on their 
own legs. With Tagore, he prophesied that an evil d ay dawned upon India when body 
labour began to be looked own upon and a day would come when those who denied human 
rights to their brethren would have to answer for t heir unjust and unkind acts.  
Gandhi felt the need of a band of dedicated workers  who would see that the tanners get 
proper wages, real education and medical aid. they would conduct night schools, take the 
Harijan children to picnic and sight-seeing. he him self opened night schools quarters and 
concentrated on doing Harijan work.  
the chamars in return tried to respond to his appea l. some of them promised to deal only 
with dead cattle hide, some to give up drink and ca rrion eating Gandhi once went to a 
cobblers' meeting in a tattered pair of sandals. He  was on tour and had no extra pair of 
sandals with him. The chamars noticed it and two of  them made a pair of ashimsak 
chappals and presented them to Gandhi.  
Gandhi himself once presented a pair of hand-made s andals to General Smuts who had 
jailed Gandhi in south Africa. On Gandhi's 70th bir thday, General Smuts wrote: " In jail he 
prepared for me a pair of sandals. I have worn them  for many a summer, though I feel that 
I am not worthy to stand in the shoes of so great a  man."  Servant  
 
In the ashram life Gandhi performed different kinds  of work generally done by the menials. 
Before that when he was earning thousands of rupees  as an attorney, he regularly ground 
wheat every morning. Kasturba and his children join ed him in grinding. That supplied them 
with fine of coarse fresh flour for preparing unlea ven whole meal bread at home. Gandhi 
continued this practice in Sabarmati Ashram. He spe nt hours in repairing a grind stone. 
Once a workers complained about shortage of flour i n the Ashram, Gandhi immediately got 
up to lend a hand in grinding wheat. He was particu lar about gleaning the grinding. Visitors 
often found this great man in loin cloth busy with gleaning. He felt no shame in doing any 
manual labour in presence of outsiders. Once a coll egian , proud of his English, came to 
meet Gandhi. After the interview he said: " Bapu, i f I can be of any service to you, please 
let me know." He expected that he would be given so me literary work. Gandhi sensed it 
and said: "Well, if you can spare time now, please glean this plate of wheat." The man was 
in a fix. After an hour he got tired of gleaning an d bade good-bye in a weary tone.  
For some years Gandhi served as an assistant store- keeper in the ashram. After morning 
prayers, he used to go to the kitchen to peel veget ables. If he notices dirt or cobwebs in 
any corner of the kitchen or storeroom, he took his  co-workers to task. He was well aware 
of the food values of vegetables, fruits and grains . Once an ashramite cut potatoes without 
washing them. Gandhi explained to him why lemons an d potatoes should always be washed 
before cutting. An other inmate once felt insulted when he was given bananas with black 
mark on the skin. Gandhi said that he gave them to him because they were particularly 
suitable for his digestive system, Gandhi often dis tributed food to the ashramites who thus 
had little chance of complaining against the insipi d boiled dishes served to them. In South 
African prison , he served served to them. In South  African prison , he served food twice a 
day to thousands of fellow prisoners.  
One of the ashram rules was that everyone should cl ean his own utensils. The kitchen pots 
were cleaned by different groups in turn. One day G andhi chose to clean the big heavy 
cooking pans covered with soot. Smearing his hands with ash , Gandhi thought it wise to 
yield and left the work to be finished by her. Gand hi was not satisfied till the metal pots 
shone brightly. Once being displeased with the work  of a helping hand in jail, he citied how 
he could make iron-pots shine like silver.  
When the ashram was being constructed, some guests had to sleep in tents. A newcomer 
not knowing where to keep his bedding, rolled it up  and went to inquire. On his way back 
he saw Gandhi carrying the bed on his shoulders.  
Drawing water from a well outside the ashram precin cts was another item of daily work. 
One day Gandhi was unwell and had already taken par t in grinding. A co-worker wanted to 
save Gandhi from doing more body labour and wit the  help of ashramites filed up all big 
and small pots. Gandhi did not like the idea, felt hurt and picked up a child's bath-tub. He filled it with water and carried it on his head. Th e workers repented his folly. So long as it 
was not physically impossible to cope with any work , Gandhi never liked to miss any routine 
work just because he was a Mahatma or an aged man. He had tremendous energy and will-
power for doing any type of work. He knew no fatigu e. For many days he covered 25 miles 
a day as a stretcher bearer during the Boer War. He  was a great walker. On  Tolstoy Farm, 
he often tramped 42 miles in one day, if he had any  personal business in the nearest city. 
He started at 2 a.m. with home made snacks, finishe d shopping and came back in the 
evening. Other colleagues followed his example chee rfully.  
A tank was once being filled by some co-workers of Gandhi. On morning, after work, they 
came back with shovel, pickaxe and baskets and foun d their breakfast of fruits kept ready 
by Gandhi in several plates. One of them asked: " W hy did you take so much trouble for 
us? Do we deserve this service from you? Gandhi rep lied with a smile: " Of Course, I knew 
you will come back exhausted. I had leisure to prep are your breakfast".  
As a well known leader of the Indians in South Afri ca, Gandhi once went to London to plead 
the Indian settlers' cause. He was invited to a veg etarian dinner by  the Indian students 
who decided to cook the meal themselves. At 2 p.m. a thin wiry man joined them in the 
underground cellar and helped them in washing dishe s, cleaning vegetables and doing other 
odd jobs. Later the students leader came there and found that he was none other than their 
honored guest of the evening.  
Gandhi was exacting but he disliked to make others work for him. At the end of apolitical 
conference, he was found dusting the floor of his r ushed to help Gandhi fore retiring to bed. 
A follower rushed to help Gandhi who submitted with  a smile. When on tour in villages if 
the oil in lantern got exhausted , he preferred to write letters in the moonlight rather than 
to wake up his tired in the companions. During his Naokhali march, Gandhi allowed only 
two companions to stay in his camp. They did not kn ow how to prepare khakra. Gandhi 
entered the kitchen, sat in an expert's pose and de monstrated the process. He was then 
78.  
He was very fond of children. Two months after chil d's birth, he did not keep any of his 
sons under the care of a nurse or a maid. Love and attention from parents he considered 
essential for the development a child  He could ten d, feed and humour a baby like a 
mother. After release from South African jail, he o nce came home and found his friend's 
wife, Mrs Polak, thin and weary. She was trying to wean her baby from mother's milk. The 
baby gave her no rest and kept her awake by crying.  That very night Gandhi took charge of 
the baby. After working hard for the whole day, del ivering speeches in public meetings and 
trudging four miles, Gandhi sometimes reached home at one in the night , picked up the 
child from his mother's side and laid him on his ow n bed. He kept a jug of water ready near 
him to pacify the thirst of the child but it was ne edless. The child never cried and slept 
quietly. After a fortnight, the weaning effort prov ed success.  Gandhi's regard for the elders was great. When Gokh ale stayed with Gandhi , he ironed 
Gokhales' scarf, made his bed, served him food and was ready to massage his feet. He paid 
no heed to Gokhale's objections. Before he became a  Mahatma, he one came to India from 
South Africa and attended to Congress session. He c leaned the dirty latrines there and then 
asked a Congress leader: " What can I do for you?" He said: Heaps of letters are lying 
unanswered. I have no clerks to entrust this work t o. Are you willing to do that?" Gandhi 
said: " Certainly. I am ready to do anything that i s not beyond my capacity." He finished 
the work in a short time and volunteered to do a va let's job by buttoning the leader's shirt 
and attending to his other needs. Whenever the serv ice of and experienced helping-hand 
was needed in the ashram. Gandhi insisted on employ ing Harijan servants in order to break 
the barriers of untouchability. His advice was: " W e should not treat servants as paid 
labourers but as our brothers. There may be some tr ouble, some thefts , mote expense, 
still the effort will not be lost".  
He never knew how to keep anyone as his servant but  in Indian Jail, he once enjoyed the 
service of many co-prisoners. One cleaned fruits fo r him and another milched the goats. A 
third on served as a personal attendant. A fourth c leaned his closes. a Brahmin washed his 
dishes and two Europeans every day brought out his cot.  
Gandhi was very happy to notice a living family tie  between the noblemen of England and 
their domestic servants. At the end of visit to a h ost he was glad to be introduced to at the 
servants not as inferior beings but as members of t he family.  
Once bidding farewell to the servants of an Indian host, after a long stay, Gandhi said: " I 
cannot tell you how grateful I am to you. I have ne ver in my life regarded any one as my 
servant but as a brother of a sister and you have b een nothing less. It is not in my power 
to requite your services, but God will do so in amp le measure."  Cook  
 
Mahadev Desai once asked Gandhi: " Bapuji, did you have a cook before you joined the 
Phoenix Settlement?' Gandhi replied: " No, I got ri d of hi earlier. We had a fine cook but he 
said that he said that he won't be able to cook wit hout spices and condiments. Immediately 
I granted him leave and did not appoint a cook any more." This incident took place when 
Gandhi was nearly 35 years old.  
He first tried his hand at cooking at the age of 18 , when he was in England. He was a strict 
vegetarian. Vegetarianism was then comparatively a new cult in England. He was generally 
served with bread, butter and jam and boiled vegeta bles without dressing. every thing 
tasted insipid to Gandhi who was used to tasty spic y Indian dishes prepared by his mother.  
After taking meals in vegetarian restaurants for so me months, he decided to live thriftily. 
He hired a room and stove and himself cooked his br eakfast and dinner. It took scarcely 
more than 20 minutes to cook his food and cost abou t 2 annas a day. When Gandhi read 
Salt's Plea for Vegetarianism and came and came in touch with the London Vegetarian 
Society, he made many changes in his diet.  
After his return to India as an enrolled barrister,  he hired a small flat in Bombay and 
engaged a brahmin cook. Gandhi did half the cooking  and taught the cook some English 
vegetarian dishes. He was rather fastidious about o rderliness and cleanliness, especially in 
the kitchen, and taught the cook cleanliness, to wa sh cleanliness, to wash his clothes and 
to bathe regularly.  
Hired cooks were never employed in his ashrams in S outh Africa or India. Gandhi realised 
that it was sheer waste of time and energy to cook various dishes for one meal. he was not 
prepares to eater to the differing tastes of differ ent members of the ashram . He prescribed 
a simple menu for all. The meals were cooked in a c ommon kitchen.  
He simplified the highly complicated and difficult art of cooking. In his ashram, rice with 
gruel, bread, raw salad, boiled vegetables without spices, fruits and milk or curd were 
served. Sweets and milk preparations were substitut ed by fresh gut and honey.  
Just's return to Nature convinced him that one shou ld not eat to please the palate but just 
to keep the body fit. Gandhi began to make experime nts with diet which was a life time 
hobby with him. Some of the experiments needed no c ooking and some landed him in 
trouble. He was a fruitarian for five years. for fo ur months he lived on germinated seeds 
and uncooked food and developed dysentery.  
In the Phoenix Settlement he acted as the headmaste r of the school and the chief cook. In 
a banquet given to the Europeans by the South Afric an Indians, Gandhi took part in cooking 
serving.  
When the first batch of satyagrahis from the Phoeni x Settlement were to leave the ashram, 
Gandhi served them a hearty meal. He made a heap of  chapatis, tomato chutney, rice, curry, a sweet dish of dates. While busy with his h ands, he gave detailed advice about the 
practice of satyagraha and the way of life in jail.  When there number of satyagrahis swelled 
to2500, Gandhi led turned up waterish, the other da y the rice remained half-cooked. They 
adored their Gandhibhai so much that they gulped th e food without a murmur. In South 
African jail, he helped his colleagues in cooking.   
Gandhi considered cooking as an essential part of e ducation and proudly started that 
almost all the youngsters on Tolstoy Farm knew cook ing. soon after his return India from 
South Africa, he infected the Santiniketan students  with this fad. They welcomed the idea of 
running a community kitchen and cooking the food th emselves by turn. Tagore doubted the 
workability of the scheme but blessed the venture.  
Gandhi was once shocked to see a student's hostel i n Madras where he found kitchens not 
only to serve different castes but to eater for the  delicate taste of different groups needing 
different types of condiments He was equally distur bed in a Bengali host's house where he 
was served with numerous preparations Thenceforth, he took a vow to take only five food 
ingredients a day. He also broke the age -long bias  to wards untouchability in Bihar and 
made all the vakils who were helping him in the Cha mparan inquiry eat in one common 
kitchen. He laid more stress on health-giving and h ygienic cooking than on seasoning of 
food for satisfaction of palate.  
Some odd samples of Gandhi's menu were fresh neem l eaf chutney bitter as quinine, 
mixture of fresh nutritive oil-cake from an oil-pre ss adjoining the ashram and curd, sweet 
sherbat made of tamaind and gur, boiled and mashed soya beans served without 
seasoning, salad made out of any fresh edible green  leaves a sort of pudding made from 
finely powdered baked chapattis, porridge of coarse ly ground wheat and wheaten coffee 
from baked whet powder.  
He could prepare cake, rice, dal, vegetable soup, s alads, marmalade both of oranges and 
orange skins, bread without using yeast or baking p owder, good chapatis and fine khakras. 
He introduced loaf-making and biscuit making in the  ashram kitchen. A special type of oven 
was used in Sevagram for cooking rice for hundreds of persons, for making bread and 
boiling vegetables at a low cost.   
One of his associates remarked:" Lately it was repo rted that grass had plenty of vitamins. 
Fortunately the discovery was not made when Gandhi was in the ashram , for then he 
would have decieded to wind up the kitchen and ask us to graze on the lawn."  
Once Gandhi asked us to graze residential school. H e did not like the kitchen arrangements 
and told teh teachers: " You will make your institu tion ideal if besides giving them a literary 
education, you make finished cooks and sweepers of them." Doctor  
 
Gandhi matriculated from the Alferd High School at Rajkot. Soon after when his guardians 
decided to send him to England for a study of Law, Gandhi asked: " Could I not be sent to 
qualify for the medical profession?" His eldest bro ther objected because a Vaishnava could 
have nothing to do with dissection. Gandhi's deceas ed father Karamchand had never liked 
it.  
At the age of 39 Gandhi again went to England from South Africa and thought of taking up 
the medical course. Again vivisection stood as a ba rrier. Vivisection of live animals, 
experiments on living creatures for preparing serum  and injections he could not tolerate. To 
him allopath were the devil's deplored the Ayurvedi c practitioner's apathy to new 
experiments. Homoeopathy had no charm for him. His great interest in healing the sick 
allowed him no peace till he became a naturopath.  
He read Kuhne and was influenced by the use of wate r in curing diseases. Slowly, after 
making experiments on himself, his sons and his wif e, he stuck to a treatment based on the 
right use of the elements around us of water and ea rth, of fresh air and sun's rays. Gandhi 
never poisoned the body with pills and powders and laid stress on fasting, change of diet 
and use of herbs.  
His uncommon power of observing the sick and making  a full study of a case helped him to 
treat patients successfully. In South Africa, he wa s the first coolie barrister and the first 
coolie quack. Many came the family physician of som e of his clients. His method of 
treatment at that time was against the current rule s of medical science and was later partly 
advocated by doctors.  
When his son was down with typhoid, doctors prescri bed eggs and chicken broth. Gandhi 
did not agree to give any non-vegetarian diet. He t ook up the case and kept the boy on 
water and orange juice. He put him in wet sheet pac ks. When the boy grew delirious, 
Gandhi got a little nervous but stuck to his nature  cure methods and cured him. He 
succeeded in handling more cases of typhoid without  injections.  
He defied a doctor's ruling more than once. Kasturb a was once laid down with a bad type of 
anaemia. The doctor asked her to take beef-tea. Bot h Gandhi and Kasturba refused to do 
so. Gandhi kept her on lime juice for days together  and cured her. He advised her not to 
take dal and salt. For a moment Kasturba forgot her  husband's rigid nature and murmured; 
" it is all very well for you to prescribe it. Can you give them up? " Quick came the reply: " 
Surely if the doctor advised me. But there, without  any medical advice, I give up salt and 
pulses for one year." Kasturba's tears and pleading s could not induce him to recall his vow. 
Both the patient and the physician stopped taking s alt and pulses.  
On another occasion for a fortnight Kasturba had to  fast and take neem juice regularly. 
Gandhi laid particular stress on keeping the bowels  clean. To destroy pent-up poison he advised fasts, semi-fasts and the use of enema. He believed that headaches, indigestion, 
diarrhoea and constipation resulted exercise. Long brisk walks were to him an unfailing 
means of keeping fit. In jails he maintained this h abit by walking in the allotted space every 
morning and evening. He also advocated breathing ex ercises. He knew physical fitness was 
often disturbed by mental disorder. Ramanam meant t o him complete faith in God's will 
giving up all worries. It was a remedy for all ills .  
When Gandhi was assaulted by the Pathans in South A frica, he applied clean earth poultice 
on his bruised mouth, forehead and ribs. The swelli ng soon subsided.  
He applied earth treatment in cases of plague, ente ric fever, malaria, dypepsia, jaundice, 
blood-presure, severe burns, small-pox and fracture s. His son broke his arm during a 
voyage, Gandhi tried earth bandage and the wound he aled. He was successful in treating 
and the wound healed. He was successful in treating  a number of cases, yet he warned not 
to take his experiments as gospel truths. He knew t here was great risk in making such 
unorthodox experiments. He admitted his Guide to He alth contained bold views on keeping 
fit. He was not keen on opening a few maternity hom es, hospitals and dispensaries but on 
touching people cleanliness and healthy ways of liv ing. He was more for preventive 
measures than for curative ones.  
Allopathic drugs were not taboo. During a cholera e pidemic in Sevagram he allowed the 
villagers and the ashramites to get vaccinated. He himself was operated in jail for 
appendicitis and was flooded with unkind letters fr om the public. He admitted his lapse.  
Gandhi knew the limitations of naturopathy still he  patronised it for many reasons. It was 
within the reah of their poor masses of India. It w as cent percent swadeshi. At seventy 
seven he took it up with redoubled zeal and establi shed a nature cure centre in a village 
called Uruli Kanchan. It had no costly and mechanic al appliances. He thought an ideal 
doctor should have a good knowledge of medicine and  should share the knowledge with the 
public free of charge. He wanted to fix a yearly al lowance for doctors who need not expect 
anything from their patients whether rich or poor. For some days he examined the patients 
and wrote prescriptions. One read: For Raju- " Sun bath , hip-bath, friction bath . Fruit juice 
and whey . No milk. If whey cannot be digested, fru it juice and boiled water should be 
used." Another was for Parvati " Only mousambi juic e. Hip-bath, friction-bath mud-pack on 
abdomen. Regular sun-bath . If this much is observe d, she will get well. explain to her the 
glory of Ramanam."  
In his ashram the common joke was: " If you want Ba pu near you, fall ill." Gandhi knew the 
smallest details of all sick person and visited eve ry patient on his way back from the daily 
walks. He gave detailed instructions as to how the diet was to be prepared, how  a patient 
was to be sponged and massaged and how many grains of salt or sods were to be used in 
an enema. When he decide to devote on hour each mor ning to patients in Sevagram, 
patients streamed in from the neighboring villages.  His advice was; "Bhaji khao, chach pio, 
mitti lagao" ( Eat vegetables , drink buttermilk an d apply mud poultices). He sometimes examined the stool of a patient. If the patient was  not too weak, he was kept and open air. 
He suggested a cure for an ailment after making a t horough study of the case. One Co-
worker was suffering from high blood pressure due t o nervous strain. To detect the cause of 
it, Gandhi got his pressure checked before and afte r a serious discussion. The next day, it 
was checked before and after he sawed a plank of wo od exactly on a line drawn on it. The 
third day the same was done before and after he ran  a furlong on the ashram ground. On 
the last day there was a fall in his blood-pressure , in two previous occasions it rose higher. 
Gandhi's prescription to him was: " Whenever you fe el  a higher pressure, walk it off." 
Gandhi 's most important work or talk could be inte rrupted by anyone seeking his advise on 
food , bath and treatment of patients,. Many well-k nown leaders were kept under strict 
vigilance, lest they disobey his orders. in jail to o, he obtained permission to attend on his 
co-workers.  
A co-worker suffering from asthma sought his help. Gandhi asked him to stop smoking and 
he agreed. Three days passed without any improvemen t. The smoker could not help 
smoking secretly one or two cigarettes a day. One n ight as he stuck a match for lighting a 
cigarette, atorch flashed on his face. He pardon an d gave up smoking. Asthma soon left 
him for good. Gaffar Khan had some scalp trouble an d Gandhi suggested a home remedy. 
That pained the tall pathan leader more than the di sease . A thorn once entered 
Vallabhbhai's foot. Gandhi put burnt bibba, a marki ng nut, as substitute for iodine. 
Vallabhabhai said: " I prefer the pain of the thorn  to this biting cure."  Nurse  
 
Some Congress leaders once went to Sewagram for Gan dhi's advice. They found him busy 
giving wet sheet-packs and hip-baths to two ashrami tes suffering from fever. One of them 
asked; " Must you do all the we things yourself?" G andhi replied: " who else is to do it? If 
you go to the village, you will find that out of 60 0 there 300 are ill."  
From boyhood Gandhi had a passion for nursing. Afte r school hours he ran back home to 
nurse his ailing father. He gave his father medicin e, dressed his wound and prepared drugs 
prescribed by the vadyas. As he grew older his crav ing for serving the sick grew stronger. 
He decided to devote two hours daily for nursing in  charitable hospital in South Africa. 
There he learnt to dispense over many legal cases t o a Muslim friend as he could not attend 
to all the legal work brought to him.  
When Gandhi came to India in 1896, for a short time , he kept very busy in informing the 
Indian leaders about the plight of the Indians sett led in South Africa. His time was taken up 
in writing and distributing the Green Pamphlet. Yet  the moment he learnt that his brother -
in-law was seriously ill and his sister could not a fford to employ in nurse, he brought the 
patient to his house, put him in his own room and n ursed him day and night.  
For about a month Gandhi dressed the wound of his e ight year old son who fractured his 
arm. Gandhi undid the doctor's bandage, washed the wound, applied a clean earth poultice 
and tied up the arm till it healed. Another ten yea r old son had an attack of typhoid. For 40 
days Gandhi nursed him. He wrapped up the child's b ody in wet cloth enclosed in dry 
blankets in spite of his piteous cries. He took gre at care of and showed tender love for his 
patients but did not allow any lapse in treatment. While nursing another typhoid case, 
Gandhi for a fortnight applied earth treatment and hip-bath to a child. Every hour and a 
half he placed on its abdomen a new pack of mud one  inch deep. after remission of fever, 
the held was allowed to have a diet of ripe bananas . Gandhi himself mashed the bananas 
for 15 minutes and coaxed the child to eat it. He d id not entrust that work to its mother lest 
the patient was overfed. While treating the sick, G andhi tried to keep patient's mind at 
peace. He was against boy was ill and craved for a cup of coffee, he himself prepared it and 
gave it to him.  
In spite of heavy pressure of work Gandhi never fai led to inquire about the sick inmates of 
his ashram every day. He sponged the patients, gave  enema and baths and applied mud-
poultices. He was more than a nurse to his patients . He had no fear of any infections. A 
leper beggar once came to him. Gandhi offered him s helter, dressed his wounds for some 
days and later sent him to a hospital. One fellow p risoner developed symptoms of leprosy. 
Gandhi got permission to visit him regularly. He wa s later sheltered in Sevagram for years. 
Gandhi daily dressed his wounds.  On two historic occasions Gandhi found a greater sc ope for offering his service as a nurse. 
One was the Boer War and the other the Zulu rebelli on. On both the occasions he raised an 
Zulu Ambulance Corps that tended the sick and carri ed the wounded. He proved an able 
leader of the nursing squad and marched miles beari ng the wounded on stretcher. He was a 
happy to nurse the Zulu who were flogged and left u nattended, as even the white sisters of 
mercy refused to nurse them. Their wounds were fest ering. Gandhi also dispensed 
prescriptions for the white soldiers. For his servi ce he was awarded the Zulu War Medal and 
theKaisar -I Hind gold medal.  
When plague broke out in the gold mines of south Af rica, many Indians labourers fell sick. 
The moment Gandhi heard of it, with four assistants  he went there. No hospital was nearby. 
A vacant godown was broken open, some beds were ins talled in it and 23 patients were 
removed there. The municipality thanked Gandhi for this prompt action and supplied him 
with disinfectants and sent nurse. She had a good s tock of brandy as preventive. Gandhi 
had little faith in it. He gave medical aid and cle aned the patient's beds, sat by their beside 
at night and cheered them up. With the permission o f the attending doctor he applied earth 
treatment to three patients. Two of them survived. All others, including the nurse, died . To 
keep fit for rendering service he considered to be as much a duty of a nurse as to look after 
the needs of a patient. He always took precaution a nd never ate to his fill when 
overworked. Gandhi was an expert in giving enema, h ip-baths, sitz-baths, oil-massage and 
in applying mudpacks and wet-sheet-packs. Fro bring ing down his blood-pressure he often 
applied mud poultice on his head and interviewed im portant persons with that earth 
bandage on. To the Japanese poet Yone Noguchi he sa id: " I sprang fro Indian earth and so 
it is Indian earth that crowns me."  
He seldom got disturbed at the critical turn of a p atient's condition and with cool nerve 
nursed his wife and sons. Kasturba twice fell serio usly ill in South Africa. Doctors gave little 
hope of her recovery. Gandhi, with patience, courag e and alertness nursed her, gave her 
enema, cleaned her bed-pan and once tried to comb h er hair. Early in the morning he 
carried he rout from the bedroom and laid her whole  day in the open air, under the shade 
of a tree. As the sun changed its course, he shifte d the bed.  
To get a trained Indian nurse in South Africa was d ifficult and there was every chance of a 
white mid-wife's refusal to attend a coloured woman . When Kasturba was bearing a child, 
Gandhi made a study of midwifery and helped the saf e delivery of his last child.  
In the Aga Khan Palace, during kasturba's last illn ess, Gandhi tried give her relief by giving 
hipbaths. He then was 75.  
This nurse -cum-compounded was highly praised by th e nurses who attended him when he 
underwent an operation for appendicitis in Yeravda jail. A nurse said: " Nursing is not 
always a joy but it has been a pure joy and a privi lege to nurse Mr. Gandhi. The doctor told 
me, 'You did not use to print your reports like thi s before.' I told him, 'Nor had I such a 
patient before."  Teacher  
 
Gandhi was married at the age of 13 to Kasturba who  was of the same age. She was 
illiterate. The teenager husband tried to teach her  the three R's but failed miserably. 
Kasturba, at73, was in jail with him in the edited a few chapters of the Ramayana and 
Bhagwat in geography, Gujarati literature and gramm ar. His pupil bent with age and sorrow 
failed to respond. As a prisoner, Gujarati to an Ir ish jailor and history, geography and 
geometry to his grandniece. With ease he could, at 74, draw accurate diagrams of 
geometrical figures.  
Gandhi was quite confident of his capacity as a tea cher. But his views on education and his 
method of teaching were very different from the acc epted standards. Three busy workers in 
South Africa a barber, a clerk and a shop-keeper wa nted to learn English but they had no 
money to employ a teacher and no time taught them e nough English to keep accounts and 
write business letters.  
For some time Gandhi gave oral lessons to his sons.  As he was very short of time, his sons 
used to walk with him to his office and he, on the way , spoke to them in Gujarati about 
literature, poetry and other subjects. For a short time Gandhi employed an English tutors to 
teach them English. They also picked up English fro m his English friends who stayed with 
them.  
In phoenix Settlement, Gandhi founded a primary sch ool for the children of the inmates. He 
was the head teacher, other co-workers helped him. The students  belonged to various 
religions, teachers were from different countries E ngland ,Germany and India. The teachers 
kept so busy  with  manual labour that they sometim es came to the class straight from the 
fields with their ankles covered with mud. Gandhi a t times gave lessons while nestling a 
baby in his arms. He did not ask the students to do  anything which he did not ask the 
students to do anything which he did not practice h imself. A timid teacher, he believed, 
could never  make his students brave. A teacher sho uld be an object lesson to his pupils. 
Gandhi read widely and was keen on learning somethi ng new. At the age of 65, he began to 
study the stars.  
The school at the Phoenix Settlement was run on exp erimental lines and had many rigid 
rules. Life was simple and hard. Tea, coffee and co coa were taboo, as they were produced 
by slave labour. Most of the students were resident ial. Gandhi seldom taught with the help 
of books. He did not want to paralyses the pupil's intellect by loading it with book learning. 
He remembered how in his boyhood stress on cramming  killed the joy of reading. Nor did 
he attach much importance to the knowledge of the t hree R's. Culture of heart and building 
of character were the aim of his teaching. The chil dren were taught to respect all religions. 
Hindu boys kept fasting with the Muslim boys during  the month of Ramzan. Some Muslim 
boys were for some months kept in Hindu families. T hey shared food with the host. All were 
vegetarians. They attended a common prayer and all had to lend a hand in gardening, scavenging, shoe-making, carpentry work and cooking . The students' ears were trained to 
appreciate music. Every evening, bhajans and psalms  were sung to the accompaniment of a 
piano. Instead of playing tennis or cricket, he wan ted the students to share the daily chore 
of manual labour and thus grow sturdy. Both on the Tolstoy farm and in the Sabarmati 
Ashram, Gandhi taught show-making. He gave elementa ry lessons in Urdu and Tamil on 
Tolstoy Farm. Literary training was imparted throug h the  mother tongue. Gandhi knew 
Gujarati Marathi, Hindi, Urdu, Tamil, English Frenc h and Latin.  
In the Sabarmati Ashram too, no fees were charged. Parents were expected to contribute 
voluntarily to the ashram fund. Children above the age of four were admitted as residential 
students. History, geography, mathematics and econo mics were taught through the 
vernacular. Sanskrit, Hindi and  one Dravidian lang uage were compulsory; English was a 
secondary language. Urdu, Tamil, Telugu and Bengale se alphabets were also taught. Food 
was served thrice a day; it was very simple, no con diments expect salt were used. A simple 
uniform style of clothing was used and stress was l aid on swadeshi. Gandhi advocated co-
education. " We shall have to rid ourselves of this  sex, mentality. I should allow  the 
children to run the risk. Cotton-wool protection is  no good." Whenever there was any 
incident of misbehavior among the boys and girls, G andhi resorted to a purificatory fast.  
Along with spinning, carding and ginning were taugh t. Thus the youngsters were trained to 
learn some occupational work and covered a fraction  of the expenses of their education. 
They did not enjoy a vacation or holiday. For two d ays in a week, they had some leisure to 
do their own work. three months in a year they coul d travel on foot, if they were fit for it. 
In Gujarat Vidyapith, Gandhi orally taught stories from the New Testament and took classes 
on choice selection of the English literature.  
Gandhi felt the need of a complete overhauling of t he system of higher education for 
meeting the needs of millions, instead of the few m iddle-class people. He marked how 
much time and energy of the budding minds were wast ed in mastering English a language 
completely foreign to the students and thus how gra dually the get alienated from their own 
heritage, from their literature and language. Highe r education too did not create any 
confidence in them who often wondered what they wou ld do after finishing their course in 
schools and colleges. Higher education he wanted to  be an ideal synthesis of different 
cultures of India, based on the traditions of the p ast and enriched by experiences of 
modern times. Students should be developed into hea lthy, honest and intelligent villagers, 
and day able to earn their livelihood. He insisted that a child should be taught to read 
before he learnt to write. Good hand writing he con sidered a part of education and was 
ashamed of his own handwriting. He advised the teac hers first to teach a child t draw 
flowers and leaves, as that would help it to draw a nd not to scrawl alphabets. To him the 
current primary education was a farce because it ne glected the needs of the India of the 
villages.    Gandhi wanted to draw out the best from the childre n, to make them upright men instead 
of mere literates. After giving thought to educatio n for 30 years, he introduced a system of 
education imparted through crafts. At the age 63, h e first laid down his theory of education 
in jail, later it developed into Basic education or  the Wardha Education Scheme.      
Gandhi was against the use of any corporal punishme nt. Only once in his life, he hit a 
naughty boy with a ruler and himself trembled  all over for his loss of self-control. the boy 
cried begging pardon of Gandhi not because the beat ing was painful but because he 
disturbed Gandhi's mental poise.  
Gandhi encouraged students to compete in games but never urged them on to outdo on 
another in learning. His method of giving marks was  unusual. He did not compare the work 
of one pupil with the work of the best in the class , but gave him higher marks if he 
improved upon his own class work or home work. He p laced full trust in the students and 
kept no guard on them when they sat for a test. Lib erty of the child was the guiding 
principle of ashram education. His advice was: "The  youngest child should feel that it is 
something."  
Gandhi wanted to have basis schools in every villag es and he knew that it would not be 
possible till the schools or at least the teacher b ecame self-supporting. The students of the 
basic schools had to learn some handicraft the most  common being spinning. Gandhi 
believed that one should begin with the children to  enkindle a true sense of equality and to 
attain real enkindle a true sense of equality and t o attain real peace in the world. If the 
knowledge of the three R's prompted students to for get use of their hands or made them 
ashamed of doing any manual labour, then it was far  better for them to remain unlettered 
and break stones. He himself explained to his small  grandson how cotton grew how the disc 
of a takli was made, how cloth was woven from yarn and how to count rounds of yarn. thus 
was the child taught geography, nature study, arith metic, geometry and the growth of 
civilization.  
t he questions Gandhi set for testing the grown-up pupil's knowledge of spinning and its 
allied processes were rather stiff and demanded a t horough mastery of the theoretical and 
practical problems of hand-spinning. Gandhi showed how basic education could make the 
pupils partly earning how basic education could mak e moment they reached years of 
understanding. Yet ten aim of Nayee Talim was not t o teach`  an occupation only, but 
through it to develop the whole man in a child. He wanted the students not to feel puffed 
up, if they were made to sit on a chair, nor to fee l ashamed, if asked to use a broom. He 
emphasized that literary training itself added not an inch to one's moral height or character 
building.  
In the frequent speeches delivered in student's mee tings and in his convocation address at 
the Kashi Vidyapith, he pointed out how the student s were not being educated with the idea 
of their being able to get good jobs and employment , but to strengthen the national life, to 
remain brave soldiers and upright men. It was also their duty to study the life of the peasants and to think how their lot could be improv ed.  Adult mass education was 
necessary to remove the sense of helplessness of th e millions and to eradicate superstition.  
Gandhi was influenced by Ruskin's Tolstoy's and Tag ore's views on education. As an 
educationist he can be ranked among the great exper imentalists of the world. He opened 
some schools in Bihar, a national college in Bengal  and founded the National University at 
Ahmedabad. This teacher with many original ideas wa s, in his younger days, refused a 
teacher's job fetching Rs. 75 per month, because he  was not agraduate He then was a 
London matriculate and a barrister.  Weaver  
 
After his arrest, the magistrate once asked Gandhi what his occupation was. Gandhi said: " 
I am a spinner, weaver and farmer. " He was then 64 . Twenty -five years earlier he had 
written Hind Swaraj. In it had stressed the need of  using swadeshi things and of making 
India free from exploitation from within and  witho ut. till then, he had not seen a handloom, 
nor known the difference between a charkha and a ha ndloom. But he knew how the import 
of cloth from England had ruined Indian weavers. Th e Indians helped a foreign government 
to establish itself firmly on the soil by showing t heir preference for  foreign fineries. He read 
in books how to increase the export of their mill-m ade cloth, the east India company 
terrorized the Indian weavers and compelled them to  cut off their thumbs that wove the 
finest muslin.  
two hundred years ago, India used to export 30 lakh  rupees' worth of hand woven cloth a 
year. After the conquest of India by the British, i n 40 years' time, all export eased and 100 
years later, India used every year one-fourth of Br itain's textile export amounting to 60 
crores of rupees. Thus Indian handloom production, which was the envy of the world, got 
ruined . the weavers lost their occupation, fell ba ck on agriculture and were starved to 
death. One Viceroy stated that " the bones of the c otton weavers ate bleaching the plains of 
India. The misery hardly finds a parallel in the hi story of commerce."  
Gandhi learnt how the Muslim weavers of Bengal, who  wove shabnams of world-wide fame 
had became idle: the proud weavers of the Punjab le ft their looms and joined the army and 
helped to keep India in chains. What once was an ho norable and artistic  calling was held 
them to be disreputable. The weavers of Gujarat lef t their homes in search of work and  
became scavengers in big cities like Bombay. They r uined their health and took to drink, 
gambling and other vices. Many homes were broken . These skilled crafts men turned into 
unskilled labourers. Spinning mills made the rich r icher.  
Gandhi was determined to rid his country of this de pendence, to stop the import of foreign 
cloth. To him, the practice of swadeshism the use o f things produced locally was the 
foundation of swaraj. To make his countrymen self-r eliant and self-sufficient was his life's 
mission. For attaining that he laid certain conditi ons. He did not want to add more mills for 
producing swadeshi cloth. A mill is owned by a capi talist, parts of its complicated machinery 
are imported from outside, it robs the use of hands  of many bread earners and exploits the 
mill hands the labourers are uprooted from their na tive place and work mechanically like 
robots. Gandhi observed : " If our tastes were not debased, we would prefer Khaddar to 
sticky calico. There is an art that kills and an ar t that gives life. Production by machine in 
mass scale blunts the creative urge and deftness of  fingers of an artisan." He was charmed 
to see the " maidens of lovely Assam weave poems on  their looms".  
Gandhi wanted to revive hand-weaving . He came in d irect contact with the weavers and 
collected firsthand information about handlooms. He  chose Ahmedabad for settling up his first ashram in India, because it was the centre of  the handloom m industry. He installed 
handlooms in the Sabarmati Ashram. All the inmates of the ashram observed the vow of 
swadeshi. They used cloth made only on their own ha ndlooms. The motto was" weave what 
you require or do without it". A weaving class unde r a skilled weaver was started and some 
ashram members began to ply the loom for eight hour s a day. Gandhi, at 45, worked on 
the loom for four to five hours every day. each wea ver daily earned 12 anna worth wage. In 
the beginning, 30-inch wide cloth was woven and tha t was not broad enough for a woman's 
wear. The women members of the ashram had to use sa rees made from sewn pieces. One 
day a lady complained of the short width of her sar ee and wanted to use mill made cloth. 
Her husband sought Gandhi's advice. Gandhi asked hi m to learn to weave on a broader 
loom.  
soon after sarees and dhotis of broader width were being woven in the ashram. Other 
professional weavers took to wearing handspun yarn but they often charged a higher rate. 
They preferred to weave mill yarn as it was easier to handle. After independence, one khadi 
worker suggested that the Government should give a subsidy to the spinners. Another said 
that unless the weavers wove a certain quota of han d-spun yarn, they should not get their 
quota of mill yarn. Gandhi did not support the we i deas because any kind of compulsion 
would create a dislike for khadi and the weaver mig ht well refuse to be compelled. He 
advised them to improve the yarn so that weavers wo uld have less difficult in weaving 
hand-spun yarn. He also warned the weavers how thei r dependence on mill yarn would kill 
their avocation in the end. Mill-owners were no phi lanthropists. They would draw the noose 
tight round the neck of the handloom weavers the mo ment they would see that the 
handloom cloth was coming near competition with mil l-cloth. He admitted: " If we adopted 
universal weaving, all these difficulties about wea ving of hand-spun yarn could not have 
risen. It was wrong of me not to insist on every-bo dy learning weaving, as i did in the case 
of spinning."  Spinner  
 
Gandhi learnt to weave cloth on a handloom from the  yarn supplied by mills. This did not 
satisfy him as it was not self sufficiency. He want ed to master the complete process of 
cloth-making starting right from cotton growing, gi nning an discarding. He made search of 
for the discarded charkha which once hummed in ever y village home. One woman worker 
first spotted a charkha working in a village and in formed Gandhi of it. Gandhi employed an 
expert spinner to teach the use of a charkha to the  ashramites. the music of a humming 
wheel soothed Gandhi when he was convalescing from an illness. He learnt to ply a charkha 
soon after. He took a vow of not taking his food, t ill he spun for half an hour every day. to 
him spinning was a sacrament. He struck to this vow  to the end of his life for 30 years. 
While traveling, he span on a moving train or a roc king ship. If he kept busy the whole day 
in meeting people, discussing important issues or s peaking at public gatherings, Gandhi 
once had pain in his right arm but continued spinni ng with his left hand.  
He also span in public meetings seated on a dais. T agore once had a long talk with Gandhi 
and said he must have wasted his time. Gandhi repli ed : " No. I have been spinning away 
without a break in the conversation. For every minu te I spin, i feel that  I am adding to the 
nation's wealth. If one crore spin for an hour ever y day, we would add Rs. 50,000 each day 
to the national wealth. the spinning wheel is not m eant to oust a single man or woman 
from his or her occupation."  
Gandhi wanted the poor to become self-sufficient by  using khadi made from their own yarn 
and the rich to spin as ritual and to donate their yarn for the poor. He did not leave out any 
Indian from doing the Karmayajna of this age and ex pected men Raman and Tagore to do 
the symbolic spinning. Gandhi believed that just as  both the prince and the peasant must 
eat and clothe themselves, so they must labour. He remarked; ' It is my conviction that 
with every thread I draw, I am spinning the destiny  of India. Without the spinning wheel 
there is no salvation for this country of ours." to  the students he said: " Every yard of khadi 
that you wear will mean some coppers going into the  pockets of the poor. Coarse hand-
spun signifies simplicity of life. Khadi has a soul  about it."  
During his lifetime, he did not encourage any basin g of the quality of khadi, nor pandering 
of the baser tastes of their customers. He disliked  bleaching of khadi and asked the khadi 
bhandars not to pamper the popular fancy but to cul tivate a new taste in people. He wanted 
the villagers, who kept idle for four to six months  a year, to ply the charkha. Critics laughed 
at Gandhi's attempt to revive this ancient art in t his machine age. Gandhi argued: " Needle 
has not yet given place to sewing-machine, nor has the hand lost its cunning in spite of the 
typewriter. spinning mills and spinning wheels may co-exist. Spinning wheel could be made 
universal and could reach interior villagers, a mil l cannot reach a fraction of the 
population."  Just before launching the non--co-operation movemen t and boycott of foreign cloth in 
1921, when visitors came to him, he sat down and wo rked on his charkha to show how he 
and  his wife span their own cloth. Day in and out he and wife span their own cloth. Day in 
and day out he talked about it and wrote about it a nd inspired the whole country. Motilal 
Nehru burnt his foreign cloths, took t wearing khad i and once hawked khadi on the streets 
of Allahabad. thousands followed suit.  
In 1925 the Charkha Sangh was formed and 50,000 cha rkhas began working. About 50,000 
spinners in 15,00 villages, besides weavers, printe rs, dyers and tailors found work. 
Manufacture of taklis and charkhas provided work to  village carpenters and black-smiths. 
The charkha again became the giver of life to the m asses, protector of women's chastify 
and filler of hungry mouths.  
In the next five years' time, production and sale o f khadi increased and more than 100,000 
spinners were employed. Training in all the process es of khadi-making was given to the 
trainees. Gandhi claimed; " I see nothing in the wo rld which can compete with this mill in 
miniature. Show me another industry or corporation that has in the course of 18 years put 
four crores of rupees in the pocket of lakhs of the  neediest men and women with the same 
capital expenditure that the Charkha Sangh has done ." there were families which started 
spinning by investing one pice for cotton. this was  doubled the next day by the sale of the 
yarn spun and thus slowly the spinners were able to  have their own cloth.  
A prize of one lakh of rupees was announced for a c harkha that would yield good yarn at a 
low cost. A box-model charkha was given the proper shape by Gandhi in Yeravda Chakra. 
Another cheap and very simple spinning mechanism dh anush takli was later popularized by 
Gandhi. he found he could spin equally fine and str ong yarn on it with the same speed as 
on a charkha. He also span on a takli. His yarn was  not very fine but well twisted and even 
. He presented Kasturba saris made from yarn. Kastu rba too was a regular spinner.  
Somebody pointed out that spinning adds only an ann a or two a day to a spinner's income. 
Gandhi said; " The average income is hardly three p ice per head per day in India. If I can 
supplement that income by even three pice with the help of charkha, am I not right in 
calling the charkha my cow of plenty?"  
Gandhi insisted on a living wage being paid to the village women and other spinners who 
sometimes walked ten miles a day to earn the scanty  wage of two pice per hour. The 
minimum was fixed at three annas a day.  
Gandhi did not measure the charkha's worth, in term s of money only, but in terms of the 
strength it could generate among the masses. Charkh a increases power of organisation and 
makes people feel akin to one another. it recognise s dignity of labour and is a symbol of 
non-violence and humility, independence and service . It is made of cheap simple material, 
is capable of being easily mended and develops deft ness of hand which agriculture, as a basic craft, cannot make it, nor highly specialized  teachers to teach this beautiful creative 
art., It can be worked in the cottages by the weak,  the aged and by a boy or girl of five.  
One critic asked why Indians, who span such fine co unts that no machine could produce 
and who met not only their own immediate needs but also those of far-away lands, became 
poor and enslaved. Gandhi replied;" In ancient time s, charkha had nothing to do with 
independence. It had a background pf slavery. Poor women span to get a piece of dry bread 
or cowrie shells thrown at them by the government o f those days. We have to spin 
intelligently and must spinning. Turning of the cha rkha in a lifeless way is like the turning of 
the beads of a rosary. This mechanical use of it de serves to be destroyed."  
Stressing the educative value of spinning he said t o the teachers of basic education that 
charkha was an instrument of service, not one of th e professions they teach like carpentry, 
clay-modelling and painting. He likened the charkha  to the sun round which all the other 
handicrafts revolved. Gandhi told them how by count ing the rounds of yarn a pupil could 
learn arithmetic. Again, geography, history and nat ure study could be taught by explaining 
how and when cotton was first grown , in what kind of soil it grew and the stages of 
development of cotton trade between different count ries. Takli-spinning could teach a 
student why takli was now made out of steel spindle  and brass disc of a particular diameter 
and so on and would go into the mathematics of the thing.  
Gandhi allowed his birthday celebration to be obser ved on a nation-wide scale only when it 
got connected with the Charkha Jayanti. He did not miss a single opportunity of 
popularizing khadi and  self-spinning. When it beca me the Congress President, he 
introduced khadi franchise in place of the four-ann a subscription for Congress membership. 
Every member was asked to spin regularly for half a n hour a day and to send a fixed quota 
of hand-spun yarn to the khadi Board every month. I n the late years of his life, he advised 
the Charkhas Sangh to make every buyer of Khaddar s ubmit a nominal quota of hand-spun 
yarn When people grumbled that they could not produ ce the yarn, Gandhi asked where 
from was khadi to come if people did not spin?  
He brushed aside any reference to cloth famine in I ndia. He believed India produced more 
cotton than she required and there was large man-po wer . Cloth shortage could be 
remedied planting a miniature mill in every home in  the form of a spinning wheel or a takli. 
Spinning became more and more an inner need with hi m. He felt he was thus coming 
nearer to the poorest of the poor and in them to Go d. He affirmed: "it will take me many 
incarnations to become disillusioned with the slown ess of the charkha. I would not forsake 
the charkha, if you were to forsake me or kill me."  Bania  
 
Gandhi once said: " I am a bania and there is no li mit to my greed." He was a bania by 
caste. He was groomed to succeed to his father's ga di of dewanship but he never became a 
dewan and chose to lead the life of a mendicant. Bu t the bania instinct was ingrained in 
him.  
He was economical and had a good eye for things tha t were durable, cheap yet artistic. He 
gave up the use of all luxuries and costly things a nd took to wearing self made khadi cloth, 
coarse chaddar and strong hand-made chappals. He ma de his wife and sons wear simple 
coarse khadi dress. Gandhi did not eat multi course  meal. One or two pieces of dry bread, 
rice, boiled vegetables, raw green leaves, goat's m ilk' gur, honey and fruits formed his diet. 
He did not eat more than five varieties of food in one day. when a rich zamindar served him 
food in gold plates, he was deeply pained.  
Gandhi believed that in a country like India, where  a poor man earned about one anna 
every day, it was a crime to allow hoards of money to lie idle in the shape of ornaments 
and decorative pieces. His wife possessed no orname nts.  
He did not send his four sons to a school or colleg e for expensive education that was 
beyond the reach of the poor millions of India. He became their teacher. they had to help in 
household work and scavenging. Gandhi did not emplo y paid servants and himself did all 
sorts of manual labour. He preferred to live in mud  huts. He traveled all over India again 
and again but that too as a third -class passenger.  In train his extra pair of clothes or paper 
bundles were used as a pillow. Once he tried to do without a mosquito net. He wrapped 
himself in a sheet and smeared his face with kerose ne oil, when he retired at night. He 
heard poor peasants follow this method to curtail e xpense on mosquito-nets.  
When he went to England for the fourth time to veri fy whether the British rulers were truly 
willing to grant independence to India, he travelle d as a deck passenger on the ship. He 
stopped his companions and secretaries from carryin g trunk-loads of dress and asked them 
to wear in England the Indian style of dress a dhot i, kurta and a pair of sandals . During the 
voyage, a friend presented Gandhi with a fine fine shawl worth Rs. 700. He sold it on the 
ship for Rs. 7, 000 saying: "That is all that a sol e reprehensive of the poor can do." From 
the number of shawls presented to him by his friend s he could have run a shop, he said. He 
used all such money for Harijan uplift work.  
When Gandhi landed in France, the French people wer e shocked to see him in loin-cloth. He 
told them with a smile: " You in your country wear plus-fours, but I prefer minus-fours." 
Some still kept wondering whether he was going to m eet the King of England or to move 
about in a cold country and among well dressed peop le in his scanty dress. Gandhi assured 
them with a twinkle in his eyes; " The King Confere nce, went to the Oxford and Cambridge 
Universities and to the Buckingham Palace in his lo in-cloth, patched up shawl and chappals. In anger Churchill called him " the half naked faki r of India" and Gandhi took pride in it. His 
daily food expenses in London did not exceed twelve  annas.  
Wastage in any form annoyed Gandhi. Twenty -Four ho urs of the day were used by him for 
various activities. He was very punctual, never lat e in doing any work, yet never did 
anything in hate. He believed in economy of words. He made many speeches and wrote 
many articles but avoided the use of superfluous wo rds. He saved every used letter papers 
and envelopes which had one side blank. According t o their size, he had the bundles ready 
at hand and used them as letter pads. Some of his i mportant statements, drafts and replies 
to Viceroys, princes and British Prime Ministers we re written on such chits. When a small 
pencil, a gift from a small boy, and a pumice stone  used as soap for years got lost, he knew 
no rest till he found them out after a long search.  After independence, he rebuked teh 
ministers and councillors for using teh most expens ive embossed letter-heads and office  
when Gandhi landed in France, the French people wer e shocked to see him in loin-cloth. He 
told them with a smile; " You in your country wear plus-fours, but I prefer minus-fours." 
Some still kept wondering whether he was going to m eet the King of England or to move 
about in a cold country and among well dressed peop le in his scanty dress. Gandhi assured 
them with a twinkle in his eyes: " the King has eno ugh for both of us." He sat at Round 
table Conference, went to the oxford and Cambridge Universities and to the Buckingham 
Palace in his loin-cloth, patched up shawl and chap pals. In anger Churchill called him " the 
half-naked fakir of India" and Gandhi took pride in  it. His daily food expenses in London did 
not exceed twelve annas.  
Wastage in any form annoyed Gandhi. Twenty-four hou rs of the day were used by him for 
various activities. He was very punctual, never lat e in doing any work, yet never did 
anything in haste. He believed in economy of words.  He made many speeches and wrote 
many articles but avoided the use of superfluous wo rds. He saved every used letter papers 
and envelopes which had one side blank. According t o their size, he had the bundles ready 
at hand and used them as letter pads. Some of his i mportant statements, drafts and replied 
to viceroys, princes and British Prime Ministers we re written on such chits. when a small 
pencil,  a gift from a small boy, and pumice stone used as soap for ten years got lost, he 
knew no rest till he found them out after a long se arch. After independence, he rebuked the 
ministers and councilors for using the most expensi ve embossed letter-heads and office 
stationery for private correspondence. He warned th at the copying of the style and habits of 
the Englishmen would ruin. The Englishmen wanted to  create awe in their subject nation. 
All these expensive habits should be gven up. Hand- made paper with ordinary printed 
letters-heads in devanagari and Urdu should be used . They should not also receive costly 
addresses and floral tributes.  
Gandhi was keen on saving every pie of his collecti on for the poor. He tried to save 
commission fee on money orders, drafts and cheque h e received for public funds. 
Volunteers and organisers were chastised when they were careless with public funds. In 1896, when Gandhi visited India, he was given on th ousands rupees by the Indian 
community. he submitted a detailed account of all h is expenses. Some such interesting 
entries were made: Tram 1 annas, water 6 pies, tric kman 6pies, magician 8 annas, theatre 
4 rupees.  
He often said: " Extravagance has no room in our ca mpaigns. What else can be the result if 
the local workers fetch for me the choices oranges or grapes, or if they bring120, when 
they want 12? We must become real trustees of the d ump millions." His advice was : Do 
not ride if you can walk." He himself practised  th is in his younger days. In South Africa, he 
walked 42 miles from the ashram in one day for maki ng purchases from the nearest store 
and that too for saving a few rupees. He used to wa lk to and  from his office and court 
every day.  
Once admission to his lectures: " Is race hatred es sential for nationalism" was arranged by 
tickets. Proceeds of the collection were donated to  Deshbnadhu memorial Fund. Gandhi for 
the first time recorded a talk " God is Truth" by g iving audition to a gramophone company. 
In half an hour, he made Rs. 65,000 and donated it to Harijan Fund. Gandhi was no less 
good at making money than at saving it. When the Go vernment banned his booked, he 
openly hawked them and sold some copies of Hind Swa raj at rupees annas. During the 
Dandi March, the half tola of natural salt picked u p by him was brought by an admirer for 
Rs. 525. The price of half a tola of gold at that t ime was Rs. 40. Nowhere in the world had 
any bania sold salt at such a fantastic price.  
He knew people were eager to collect his autograph.  He demanded five rupees for his 
autograph. Donors giving thousands were not exempte d from paying this fee when they 
took his autograph. To push up the sale of khadi, G andhi once acted as a salesman. With 
yard-stick on the right and khadi heap on the left , he went on signing vouchers and made 
a very brisk sale. In 50 minutes he told 500 rupees ' worth of khadi. On another occasion, 
during a journey, he sold khadi ay wayside railway station. At a khadi exhibition opened by 
him 4,000 rupees ' worth of khadi was sold in a wee k. Ordinarily the yearly sale of khadi 
was sold in a week. Ordinarily the yearly sale of k hadi there did not exceed Rs. 6,000. Due 
to his appeal, a khadi bhandar could raise its sale  to Rs. 65,312 from Rs. 48 per year. He 
asked all the visitors to the handicrafts exhibitio n at the Congress session to become 
voluntary advertising agents of the hand-made goods  exhibited.  
His preaching of boycott of foreign goods caused 50 % decrease in the annual sale of 
foreign cloth in Bengal. Other provinces followed s uit and almost paralysed the foreign 
trade. He felt that with India's growing wants, she  must also grow he imports and the 
hurtful to India. Gandhi knew it was not enough to wear khadi and surround oneself with 
videshi articles. Big merchants and industrialists,  in partnership with the British, allowed 
their country to be robbed. He wanted to make the w hole of India khadi-clad and to revive 
the dying cottage industries.  He got no subsidy or grant from the hostile Governm ent, the apathy of the people was 
disheartening yet he was determined to teach people  self-help, to rely upon their own 
labour and skill for the production of articles of food, clothing and other basic needs. All 
India Village Industries Association and All India spinning Association were established and 
several branches of them were open4eed all over Ind ia. Magan Museum at Wardha was 
turned into a hive of such activities as spinning, weaving, paper-making, bee-keeping, 
carpentry and smithy. Gandhi emphasized that no clo th could be cheaper than that spun 
and woven in one's home, as no bread could be cheap er than the home-baked one made 
from grain grown in one's home. to him life was mor e than ,money and people's lethargy 
induced by continuous unemployment was most depress ing. Judging from this point of view 
of national well-being, Gandhi tried to revise our notion of economics. He pleaded : " Do 
you know that in spite of plenty of foodstuffs we p roduce we import wheat from outside? 
We will eat rice polished of its substance and eat less nutrition's sugar. We will pay for less 
nutritious mill-ground things and purchase ill-heal th in bargain. We have suffered the 
village oil-man to be driven to extinction. The vil lager today is not half so intelligent or 
resourceful as the villager of 50 years ago. He con stantly gives and gets little in return. 
Under my scheme, nothing will be allowed to be prod uced by the villagers." He asked the 
people to husk their own rice, to grind their own w heat , to use fresh gur instead of sugar 
and to spin and wave. He used to sample out rich br own gur to foreign visitors.  
Gandhi told his countrymen to forget that khadi has  to compete with mill-cloth: " The mill 
owner will always concentrate on cheapening it, but  we must concentrate on justice and a 
fair wage, a living wage. Otherwise it is an uncons cious exploitation." A paper manufacturer 
was paying the labourers at six pice per day and ho ped to make hand made paper still 
cheaper. Gandhi told him he would not buy it at a c heaper rate.  
He wanted to eliminate the middleman who sponged up on the farmers and village artisans. 
He knew the tiller of the soil did not get the full  value of their produce. Only a fraction of 
the price paid by the consumers reached them. The t rouble with them was not the low 
prices but the middlemen. Gandhi was against contro l of food and cloth and condemned 
black-marketing and excessive profit-making by the banias. He accused the traders for 
amassing wealth by deception and for  deceiving the mselves in thinking that their sins 
would be washed by spending their ill-gotten gains the banias saying: " Big merchants and 
capitalists its will and profit through it through the profit may amount to 5% against the 
Government's 95% . I understand the swadeshi moveme nt  had collapsed largely because 
Indian merchants had palmed of foreign goods as swa deshi articles. I am sure India was 
lost through the merchants and I am equally sure th at we shall recover it through them".  Kisan  
 
Gandhi read a poem describing the farmer as the fat her of the world. It said God was the 
provider and cultivator was his hand. He asserted t hat in peasants' freedom from poverty 
and ignorance lay the freedom of India: " Over 75% of the population are agriculturists. 
The Kisan is the salt of the earth which should bel ong to him and not to the absentee 
landlord sabhi bhumi gopalki. There cannot be much self-government about us, if we take 
away from the peasants almost the whole of the resu lts of their labour. Our salvation can 
only come through the farmer. Neither the lawyers n or the doctors, nor the rich landlords 
are going to secure it."  
Twenty-five percent of the state revenue was collec ted from the peasantry. The pressure of 
land tax was heavy. Whenever Gandhi heard of or saw  a new palatial building being 
constructed in any city in India, he sadly remarked  : " Oh it is the money that comes from 
agriculturists." Any such symbol of urban prosperit y reminded him of the peasantry 
burdened with taxation, illegal exactions, debts wh ich could never be fully paid, illiteracy, 
superstition and diseases.  
Gandhi was not a born Kisan but he made every effor t to become one. From boyhood he 
loved to grow fruits. Every  afternoon, coming back  from school, he carried buckets of 
water up on the terrace to water plants. At the age  of 36, he began to live a peasant's life 
on a farm. An acre of ground with some fruit trees attracted him when he was searching a 
plot of land with his family and friends. slowly he  took to farming and gave up the 
gentlemanly occupation of an attorney. the cottages  were built by the inmates of the farm. 
Gandhi tilled the soil, drew water, grew vegetables  and fruits and hewed wood. He soon 
converted the land into an orchard.  
Ten years of farm life in south Africa armed him wi th good knowledge of and experience in 
farming. He popularised the non-violent and more sc ientific method of bee -keeping that 
did not displace the honey comb, nor destroyed the bees. He explained how bee-keeping 
near a harvesting land or a garden of fruits and ve getables increased the yield from plants. 
The bees while drinking honey from the flowers carr y pollens with their feet and improve 
the quality and quantity of crops.  
Gandhi brushed aside any complaint about the barren ness of land, dearth of implements or 
meagre water supply. The major asset of a cultivato r, he affirmed, was an intelligent use of 
his labour. He should be energetic, resourceful and  self-reliant. When an organiser of the 
Nayee Talim complained that the land at their dispo sal was not fit for agriculture, Gandhi 
said: " You do not know what kind of land we had to  begin with in South Africa. If I were in 
your place, I would not use the plough to begin wit h. I would arm the children with hoe and 
teach them to use it. It is an art. the bullock pow er can come later. A thin top layer of loam 
or compost manure can enable us to grow many a usef ul vegetable and pot-herb. 
Conversion of night-soil into manure by shallow tre nching system does not need more than a fortnight . Our children should be taught to rega rd the work of agriculture as honorable. It 
is not degrading but a noble occupation." Gandhi th ought agriculture could play an 
important part in basic education scheme.  
Just before the partition of India, the Hindus of N oakhali asked him:" How can we continue 
to stay here, what are we to feed on? the Muslim pe asants are non-co-operating with us 
and are not supplying us with bullocks or ploughs."  Gandhi retorted: " Get hold of some 
pickaxes and start digging. Crop yield won't be poo r from earth dug with pickaxes."  
In 1943, when Gandhi was in jail, lakhs of people d ied of starvation in Bengal. The memory 
of that tragic event was fresh in the minds of the people and the government officials. 
When there was fear of another famine in 1947, the Viceroy promptly sent his private 
secretary to Sevagram in a plane to seek Gandhi's a dvice. Gandhi remained unshaken and 
asked people to shed all fear of the approaching ca lamity; " There is plenty of fertile land, 
enough water and no dearth of man-power. Why should  there be food shortage under such 
circumstances? People should be educated to become self-reliant. He who eats two grains 
must produce four. Everyone should grow some edible  for personal use. The easiest way to 
do so is to collect clean earth, mix it with organi c manure even a little bit of dried cow-dung 
is good organic manure and put it in any earthen po t or tin pot and throw some seeds of 
vegetables and daily water the pots. All exports of  seeds should stopped. Starch can be 
derived from such roots as carrots, parsnips, potat oes, yam and bananas. The idea being to 
exclude from the present diet grains and pulses whi ch can be kept and stored." His call for 
self-help needed determined practice of discipline and austerity, adaptability to anew type 
of food habit and no begging from abroad.  
During the control of food and cloth, Gandhi needed  no rations from the Government stock. 
He could manage without rice, bread and pulses and did not use sugar. He made his own 
cloth.  
In Harijan, he gave detailed instructions as how to  make compost manure using the things 
that were near at hand, the things that cost nothin g -cow dung, night soil, urine, peelings 
of vegetables and deadly water hyacinths. With labo ur and application, compost manure 
could be made without any capital . In his ashrams,  night-soil and urine were conserved in 
pits. In a short time, they were turned in to rich manure. This bhangi cum kisan's work did 
not appeal to the conservative peasants. Gandhi pre ferred organic manure to chemical 
fertiliser. Use of the latter for soil fertility or  for quick return of crop was in his opinion 
dangerous. It might results in depletion of the soi l in spite of its promise of dramatic 
results.  
He also did not favour the use of a tractor in plac e of cattle plough. At the Sabarmati 
Ashram he tried almost all improved ploughs but the  primitive cattle plough proved must 
suitable. It conserved soil because it ploughed dee p enough for the crop but never too deep 
to do any damage. Moreover, he disliked the displac ement of human labour of hundreds of 
men by a tractor. He wanted to employ them in fruit ful productive work. He had a fear that a mechanical device would blunt the creative facult y of the peasants. The age long system 
of ploughing small holdings separately was not appr oved by him because " it is better for 
100 families to cultivate together and divide the i ncome there from than to divide the land 
any how into 100 portions. Everyone in a village ha ving a bullock and a bullock-cart seems 
wasteful'. He advocated co-operative cattle farming . Collective cattle farming can ensure 
proper veterinary treatment to animals and maintain  a common grazing ground and a 
select stud bull for many cows. No ordinary farmer can provide for these arrangements. 
Cattle Fodder often costs more than what the cattle  yield. As the number of cattle increases 
, under pressure or turns them out to starve to dea th. He ill treats the cattle and cruelly 
extracts work from them.  
Gandhi laid special stress on protection of the cow  the most valuable animal in farm 
economy. During his tours all over India, he was di stressed to see lusterless eyes of the 
peasants and the pitiable condition of the cows; " In no country on earth were the cow and 
its progeny so ill-treated as in India where the co w is held in veneration. The veneration 
now consists of deadly feuds with the Muslims over cow-killing and in sanctifying ourselves 
with her sacred touch. Many pinjrapoles and goshala s are dens of torture." He expected the 
pinjarapoles to take care of dry and disabled anima ls and to give expert advice on cattle 
breeding. He preferred cow's milk and butter to tho se of a buffalo for their superior quality. 
Moreover after death, the skin, bone, entrails and flashings of the cow are useful.  
In his ashram goshala he kept good stud bulls and m aintained a model yet inexpensive 
cow-shed. He attended to every detail of the goshal a. All new born calved were greeted 
with a loving pat by him. A heifer was once sufferi ng from an incurable disease. No 
medicals relief was of any avail. Gandhi decide to end its life and himself held a paw of the 
ailing calf when the doctor put it to sleep. There was aloud protest against this act of 
violence committed by the great apostle of non-viol ence. One Jain threatened to wipe out 
this sin with Gandhi's blood. Gandhi faced the stor m calmly.  
Once more he shocked the rigid observers of ahimsa with his proposal of killing the 
monkeys that destroyed crops, fruits and vegetable grown in the ashram, He said: " having 
become a peasant myself, I must find out some means  by which crops can be safeguarded 
against them with the minimum use of himsa. The mon key nuisance has become very 
acute. The monkeys refuse to be frightened even by gun-shots and only gibber and howl 
when shots are fired. I am seriously considering th e question of killing them, in case it 
should become unavoidable. " No monkey was ever kil led or hurt by arrows or otherwise in 
the ashram.  
How to increase the income of the poor peasants was  Gandhi's constant concern. They were 
without work for four to six months a year. They co uld not maintain themselves only on 
agriculture. He tried to utilize this enforced idle ness of 30 crores of peasants by restoring to 
women their spinning wheel and to men their handloo ms . He wanted to raise the income of 
these illiterate, ill-clad, ill-fed peasants to a l evel that would ensure a balanced diet, livable dwelling houses cloth enough for health requirement s and good education. they should also 
develop a will to resist He stood for Kisan-Mazdoor -Praja-Raj and warned: " When the 
peasant is fully awakened to a sense of his plight and knows that is fully awakened to a 
sense of his plight and knows that is to not his ki smet that has brought hi m to this helpless 
state, he will abolish all distinctions between con stitutional and unconstitutional means . 
When the Indian peasantry will under stand what swa raj is, then nobody dare hold it back 
from him."  
Under Gandhi's lead, the peasants joined the civil disobedience movement, made salt 
despite the official prohibition and took the Indep endence Pledge in public meetings. During 
the no-tax campaign, their land and property were c onfiscated. they lost economically but 
grew in moral stature.  Auctioneer  
 
Gandhi was willing to subscribe to a bill to make i t criminal for anybody to call him a 
Mahatma or to touch his feet. But he could not avoi d a hero's reception in cities or villages. 
For helping one good cause or other, he moved about  from place to place and kept in touch 
with the masses. everywhere he was greeted with ove rwhelming love and devotion . He 
was presented with bouquets and garlands, civic add resses in costly frames or caskets, 
purses and ornaments. Gandhi appreciated this expre ssion of love but did not like wastage 
of money on garlands, buntings and addresses in a c ountry where the average income of 
an individual was three pice a day.  
In a vain did he entreat people to stop this wastag e. He wanted to turn this waste into 
wealth. An idea struck him. When people were willin g to give money, why not give them a 
better chance of doing it publicly? He decided to a uction all the presents, especially the 
things that were ephemeral. In public meetings, sea ted on a dais, he could say: " My 
beloved sweethearts (small girls) are not here and I know not how to dispose of these 
garlands. Would anyone buy this garland?" " Do rupi ye ek bar, teen rupiye, panch rupiye" 
two rupees, three ruppes, five rupees he drawled on  in a jovial mood. the bid went up for 
possessing such a trivial articles as a lime fruit or a flower garland. Sometimes a garland 
fetched Rs. 30, at other times Rs. 300. Villagers d id not fall behind in paying handsome 
prices for auctioned goods. Once Gandhi picked up a  casket and said: " Its price is Rs. 250. 
No, I made a mistake, its price is Rs. 75." When of fered Rs. 300, he said: "Rs. 300,Rs. 300. 
Come along, I want more. I got Rs. 1000 for a caske t before." The citizens of Calcutta, on 
three occasions, presented him with addresses in be autiful costly caskets and he auctioned 
them all. He said: "don't you think that in auction ing things I am belittling the love with 
which they are being given. I cannot afford to carr y these caskets with me. For I carry no 
trunk with me, nor I any provision in the ashram to  keep them... I have  seen nothing 
wrong about these auctions. they set up a healthy r ivalry and are innocent methods of 
evoking the generous impulse in man or women for a noble cause. And  let it be 
remembered that the people who bid at my auctions d o not pay a fancy price just for 
pleasing me."  
There were rare occasions when he failed to persuad e the audience to donate generously. 
he sold a lime-fruit for Rs. 10, a yarn garland fro  Rs. 201, a golden takli for Rs. 5, 000 and 
a casket for Rs. 1,000. After laying the foundation  stone of an institution, he sold the pan 
and trowel to a bidder for Rs. 1,000. Once during a n auction , Gandhi stretched out his 
arms to a small boy wearing a gold locket. the moth er lifted the child. Gandhi patted him, 
removed the locket and auctioned it.  
Gandhi once announced: " I have an inexhaustible st ock of rings. I propose to sell them." A 
thrice auctioned ring was finally sold for Rs. 445.  The normal price of that ring then was Rs. 
30. Among the collection of notes , silver and copp er coins, a cowrie was once found . It was a greatly appreciated by Gandhi: " The poor man  perhaps had nothing else to give and 
he seems to have paid his all. Looking at it as a s ymbol of sacrifice, it is more precious than 
a gold cowrie of that size. A bidder paid Rs. 111 f or it.  
Stress and strain of tours with packed programmes o r the burden of knotty problems did 
not dry up the fountain of buoyancy or the bania in stinct in him. At the age of 78, weighed 
down by Hindu-Muslim tension and communal riots, Ga ndhi visited Bihar, collected funds 
for the stricken Muslims and auctioned the gift of ornaments.  
He had no money or possession of his own. Himself a  poor ashramite, he once donated one 
copper pice to a public fund. The souvenir was boug ht for Rs. 500 by an admirer.  Begger  
 
Gandhi got more and more involved in public work an d could not devote much time or 
attention to his family or legal work. He realised that he if he wanted to serve the people, 
he must lead a life of voluntary poverty spurning l uxury and comfort, discarding all wealth , 
all possession. A time came when possession seemed to him to be a crime and it became a 
matter of positive joy to him to give it up. One af ter another things slipped away from him. 
He laid no claim to his paternal property, allowed his insurance policy to lapse. He gave up 
his legal work fetching Rs. 4,000 per month. He mad e to him by his South African 
colleagues and also of the Phoenix Settlement value d at Rs. 65,000 for public causes. He 
himself denied a life of security and was equally h ard on his wife, sons and relatives.    
The last 40 years of his life he lived on voluntary  donations from his friends and admirers. 
The expense incurred by Gandhi and his family at th e Tolstoy Farm were borne by his 
German friend Kallenbach. The ashrams in India were  run the help of sympathisers.  
Pandit Malviya was called the prince of beggars, Ga ndhi was the king of beggars. In the 
history of begging for public cause, Gandhi created  a world record. He discovered this 
capacity in him in south Africa, when he was in cha rge of collection on subscriptions from 
the members of the Natal Indian Congress. Late in t he evening, he went to a wealthy donor 
and expected him to pay Rs. 80. All persuasion fail ed and he was offered Rs. 40. Gandhi 
was hungry, tired yet tenacious. He sat up the whol e night and at daybreak received Rs. 
80.  
During the epic struggle of the Indian settlers in South Africa, he was mainly responsible for 
raising funds for the support and relief of 5, 000 resisters and their families. The daily 
expense was Rs. 3,200. india generously responded t o Gandhi's appeal made through a 
cable. Princes and rich merchants sent money. An ap peal for helping his campaign was 
made in a Congress session and the audience showere d notes and gold and silver.  
Gandhi sent a receipt of the gifts and submitted a detailed account of all expenditure. He 
respected the sentiment of the donors and id not us e a pie to meet other needs from the 
money donated for relief work. He was very particul ar about the spending of public money. 
When challenged, he invited the critics to examine the audited accounts of the Tilak Swaraj 
Fund. For the Tilak Swaraj Fund he set up target of  one crore of rupees to be collected in 
three months. A friend pleaded that if he agreed to  attend a professional dramatic 
performance for ten minutes only, the actors could subscribe Rs. 50,oooo on that night. 
Gandhi denied, still the total collection amounted to Rs.1,15,00,000. He often said that " 
through the thousands of the rich are welcome, it i s the coppers and single rupees of the 
poor people that bless a cause. Every pice knowingl y given will be a token of determination 
of the giver to establish Swaraj." He could never f orget there sight of poor old people with 
their trembling fingers untying the knots which fir mly held their pies. He appreciated their 
willing surrender of their savings to him. Besides the Tilak Swaraj Fund, Gandhi raised memorial funds for the girl martyrValiamma, for Gok hale, Lajpat Rai, Deshbandhu Das, 
Andrewa and the Jallianwalla Bagh victims. He told the people that if the necessary fund for 
raising a memorial in Jallianwalla Bagh was not fou nd collected within the time limit set by 
him, he could sell his ashram and give all he could  . In two months , ten lakhs of rupees 
were collected for the the Deshbandhu Memorial Fund . When Gandhi came to know that 
Tagore was touring India to collect money for Santi niketan by staging public performances 
of his dramas, he Entreated staging public performa nces of his dramas, he entreated the 
aged poet to discontinue the venture and handed to him a donation of Rs. 50, 000 as a first 
installment.  
when floods, famines or earthquakes ravaged the lan d, the Mahatma went out a begging. 
For the spread of khadi work and for wiping out the  sin of untouchability, he made 
whirlwind tours all over India. For the Harijan Fun d, he collected more than two crores of 
rupees. If money was given to feed the needy, he re fused to accept it. He believed the real 
hunger of a man was not for a morsel of food, but f or decent living as a self-respecting 
human being: " I must refuse to insult the naked by  giving them clothes they do not need 
instead of giving them work which they sorely need.  I would give them neither crumbs , nor 
cast-off clothing."  
A Jail doctor once asked Gandhi : " Gandhiji, don't  you think able-bodied men should be 
prevented from begging? Would you make a law to tha t effect?" Gandhi replied :" Certainly 
, but men like me would be free to beg." He defied the proverbial saying" Beggars should 
not be choosers". Gandhi's slogans, his approach to  donors and his dictation of terms fro 
acceptance of charity were uncommon. Standing on a beggar's bowl to the audience. 
Usually there was a scramble for giving alms to him . Hundreds of rustics, aged and infirm, 
men and women, walked miles to offer their mite to him. Some brought bringals, pumpkins 
and others vegetables from their gardens. The stude nts of a model residential school 
presented him with a heap of hand-spun yarn, apiece  of khadi woven by them and a small 
sum of money that they saved by denying themselves of ghee, milk and wheat for some 
days. Once a widow borrowed a two-anna bit and gave  it to Gandhi. When asked," I did not 
give it to help the cause but to fulfill my life's dream of giving alms to the Mahatma who 
has renounced all."  
Top collect a few lakhs of rupees was a child's pla y to Gandhi who sent his appeal through 
microphones, cables and newspaper columns. He once whisked the hat of a journalist and 
used it as a begging bowl. The bewildered journalis t was the first victim of Gandhi's begging 
bowl.  
When Gandhi went to Burma on a begging mission, his  cry was:" It is after 14 years that I 
am visiting in Burma. You do not mind even a famine  coming once in 14 years and to face 
it as bravely as you can. I hope that you will sati sfy the hunger of this representative of 
Daridranarayan, who may never come again in the mid st of you." He twitted at the miserly 
donation from rich merchants: " scrap this list of subscription and start afresh. I will certainly dig my hands deeper into the Gujarati's p ocket than of others. I am a Gujarati 
chetty." This rebuke doubled the subscription on th e spot. To the ceylonese he said: " When 
Mahendra came to Ceylon, the children of the mother land were not starving, our star was 
in the ascendant and you partook of the glory. If y ou do not disown the kinship with them, 
but take pride in it, then you must give not only m oney, but your jewellery." He rejected 
the plea of the Cutchees to spend their contributio n only for the Cutchees: " If you trust me 
with money , you must do so in the fullest consciou sness that I know how to use it and 
when to use it."  
In a moment of anguish he remarked: " I have none o f the power of Hanuman to tear open 
my heart. I assure you, you will find nothing there  but love for Rama whom I see face to 
face in the starving millions of India." He often a ttended more than twelve meetings a day 
and pleaded : " Give me a quarter-anna, half an ann a, anything you can it may be even a 
pie." In a civic reception, he would accept an addr ess and ask: " where is the purse?" If he 
ever got no money, he thus persuade the people to c ontribute. Sometimes the surging 
crowd kept waiting till midnight to make a gift of houses, ornaments, cheques, notes, gold, 
silver and copper coins, heaps of yarn and khaddar.  On his 78th birthday he was presented 
with 78 lakhs of hanks of yarn.  
a cowrie was once found in the collection. To Gandh i it was a symbol of the greatest 
sacrifice, more precious than gold. A murderer's la st instruction, while going to the gallows, 
was to give all his money Rs. 100 to Gandhi for nat ional work.  
As a rule, Gandhi needed the help of three to four workers to count the money or to carry 
the load from a meetings. At the end of the collect ion, mostly of copper coins, a volunteer 
once came to Gandhi and showed his palms marked wit h green stain by handling of copper 
coins which the poor folk kept buried under ground for years. Gandhi said: " This gift is 
blessed one. For us it is a dedication, for them it  is a gleam of hope in a world darkened by 
despair. It is a symbol for them of better things t o come.'  
To discourage professional begging was one of the p aradoxical gestures of Gandhi. A 
beggar's desperate struggle for bread decrying all feelings of decency and self-respect was 
revolting to him and he disapproved the custom of g iving alms instead of work to the poor. 
Gandhi deplored the growing number of mendicants in  India exceeding 56 lakhs. He did not 
want a single individual, barring the physically un fit, to live on charity without doing some 
useful work for society. He thought it was wrong bo th to accept and to offer alms. For the 
able-bodied to beg was to become thieves.  
He asked the victims of Bihar earthquake and the re fugees in camps to work for the food, 
shelter and clothing they got there, otherwise they  might develop a mentality of willing 
dependence on public charity. It was wrong for anyo ne to live on public doles. To them his 
advice was: " Do honest good work. I want no beggar s. Ask for work to do and do it 
faithfully. Work, work, do not beg."  Looter  
 
If Gandhi was a king of beggars, he was also a prin ce of looters. He saw in India the rich 
were growing richer and the poor were getting poore r day by day . He wanted to introduce 
his own idea of equality. His aim was to recognize village life, bringing relief to village 
people.  
He robbed the rich to help the needy. Instead of bl azing torches and flashing swords, he 
used loving persuasion and moral coercion as his we apons. He asked the rich to part with 
their coveted hoard, the learned pundits to extend their knowledge to the masses, the 
capitalists to share their knowledge to the masses,  the capitalists to share their profits 
equitably with the labourers, the rulers to grant h uman rights to the ruled and the timid 
lazy countrymen to shed their lethargy. He encourag ed his countrymen to wrest the reins of 
Government from the hands of the alien rulers indif ferent to people's welfare. The magic 
spell of the earnest appeal of this dedicated soul captured the imagination of the young and 
the aged, simple rural folks and shrewd businessmen . Like a tornado he traveled from one 
end of India to the other and encouraged people to dedicate their riches, their children , 
their all at the altar of the nation. He  shook up the dazed minds. To him parents gave 
away their children for national service, the purda nashin women their jewellery, the poor 
their coppers.  
Once there was a failure of crops in the country. P easants were in the distress. But the 
government demanded full payment of taxes. Helpless  ryots, terrorised oxen to pay the 
dues. Gandhi asked them to rob the Government of th e taxes. The ryots launched a no-tax 
campaign. Under Gandhi's lead, a batch of satyagrah i declare that we shall not of our own 
accord pay to the Government the full or the remain ing revenue for the year. We shall 
rather led our lands be forfeited." The Government confiscated the peasants' lands with 
standing crops. Gandhi convinced the peasants that they had a right to enjoy the fruit of 
their labour and directed them to loot a confiscate d onion field. Accordingly a batch of 
volunteers removed the crop. Mohanlal Pandya, the l eader of the looting squad, was 
arrested . After his release, he was given a royal reception and won the title "Onion-thief" 
Gandhi presided over the meeting and put a mark of victory on his forehead.  
On another occasion, under famine conditions, Gandh i gave similar advice to the ryots. The 
Government officials, enraged at being deprived of the land revenue, confiscated their 
property and forced them to quit their huts. The pe asants collected a few belongings and 
migrated from their ancestral homes. The officials tried to auction the forfeited holdings but 
found no buyer. After a prolonged inquiry, the peas ants' demands were partly accepted and 
they were exempted from taxation that year.  
In Champaran, the white planters used special power s and compelled the ryots to cultivate 
indigo and compelled the ryots to cultivate indigo and did not pay them regular wages. 
They earned big profits levying forced labour on th e ryots. A harassed cultivator from Champaran approached Gandhi for redress. Gandhi wen t to the spot, made a detailed 
imagination followed. Ultimately the evil system wa s discontinued and the indigo planters 
were deprived of huge profits. A century -old strai n of indigo was wiped off from 
Champaran.  
The salt tax in India was so high in proportion to the miserable per capita income of one 
anna a day. The starving millions living on a fare of salt and cereals had to pay a heavy poll 
tax. In some parts of the country natural salt was procurable from salt creaks and salt 
rocks, but salt-making was forbidden by law. As a p rotest, Gandhi launched his salt 
campaign. He was determined to end this exploitatio n: " Either I shall return with what I 
want or my dead body will float in the ocean.. We s hall go to heaven if killed , to jail if 
arrested and shall return home if victorious." From  his ashram , he walked 241 miles on 
foot in 25 days and broke the salt law on Dandi bea ch by picking up a lump of natural salt. 
Sarojini Naidu hailed the law breaker with a garlan d and tilak. Gandhi said: " To take a 
handful of salt earth is a child's play. I am going  to take possession of all the salt. "  People 
all over India began to collect contraband salt.  T he police started a mad search of illicit 
salt. Palanquins carrying purdanashin ladies were s earched. While passing by a car Gandhi 
once called out to the police guard saying: " I hav e some contraband salt. Do you want to 
stop me ? "  
Gandhi decided to raid the salt depot at Dharasana.  His early arrest upset the plan. His 
non-violent army of looters marched to the salt dep ot. A grim fight broke out. Police hit the 
volunteers with steel-shod lathis. Bones were broke n skulls fractured and blood flowed from 
the gashes. Many salt depots were looted in other p arts of India. In a year , the salt law 
was relaxed. To collect or make salt for domestic u se or for salt within a village having 
adjoining salt deposits became legal.  
The British Government met with a tough adversary i n Gandhi who proved that looting was 
one better than chicanery. Britishers came to India  as traders. They captured the Indian 
market and by unfair means they destroyed India's h and-spinning and hand-weaving 
industry which once was the envy of the world. The spindles and looms lay idle. Some 
artisans took to cultivation, others turned into un skilled labourers. Pauperism stalked in the 
land of plenty. Cloth imported form Lancashire and Manchester drained crores of rupees 
from India. The merchants measuring rod was turned into a royal sceptre.  
Gandhi hit upon the idea of boycotting foreign clot h, liquor and British goods. He tirelessly 
pleaded with his countrymen to spin, weaver and use  home-made khaddar. People 
responded splendidly. Gandhi revived hand-spinning and hand weaving and formed a 
women's volunteer corps for picketing foreign cloth  shops and liquor booths. He addressed 
meetings in cities and villages and made a bonfire of foreign fineries. There was a sharp fall 
in import trade. Many British owned cloth mills wer e closed down. Gandhi's bullets in the 
shape of cones of hand-spun yarn hit the British te xtiles workers. Thousands were 
unemployed. Years later, when Gandhi visited Lancah ire, he said to gathering of mill hands: " I am pained at the unemployment here. You have th ree million unemployed, but we have 
three hundred million unemployed for half the year.  The average income is seven shillings 
and six pence a month. Do you wish to prosper by st ealing a morsel of bread from the 
mouth of the Indian spinners and weavers and their hungry children? Is India morally 
bound to purchase Lancashire cloth, whilst she can produce her own? Do you think of 
prospering on the tombs of the poor millions of Ind ia?" This frank endeared him to the 
British workers who greeted him with cheers.  
Gandhi spared no effort in levelling the disparity of income and social amenities between 
the rich and por. Once in a sweeper's meeting, a la dy took two gold bangles off her wrist, 
presented them to Gandhi and said:" Now days husban ds leave very little for their wives, I 
can therefore, only make this humble offering, the last remnant of my ornaments, for the 
service of the Harijans." Gandhi replied : " I admi t I have been instrumental in making 
paupers of doctors, lawyers and merchants. i do not  repent. In a poor country like India, 
where people walk for miles to get a dole of one pi ce per day, it does not be have any body 
to wear any costly ornaments." In some cases, where  the bangles would not come off the 
wrists of young women, Gandhi had them cut. Critics  deplored Gandhi's practice of 
persuading women to donate their ornaments for a pu blic cause. Gandhi was adamant: " I 
would like thousands pf sisters, who attend my meet ings, to give me most , if not all, of 
their jewellery they wear." His appeal inspired mor e women to make a gift of their 
ornaments. A young widow invited him to her house a nd give all her ornaments. another 
married young woman, whose husband was earning only  Rs. 40 a month, started a fast in 
order to make Gandhi to come to her house and accep t her gift of ornaments.  
In a public meeting, a teenager girl, Kaumudi, walk ed up to the dais, took off her gold 
necklace, bangles and ear-rings and gave them to Ga ndhi. He made the donors promise not 
to replace the ornaments they gave away because "th e real ornament of women is her 
character and purity". Even tender aged children we re not shared. When a small girl came 
to present flowers to him, his eyes fell on the tin y ring on her finger. He coaxed her to 
donate it. He relieved a boy of his gold studs sayi ng: " Now you must do the right and 
proper pranam and go, as you know I am carrying blo od pressure of 195." He never 
accepted any ornaments from children without their guardian's consent.  
Gandhi gained notoriety as an expert looter and yet  was ever welcome and trusted by those 
who were robbed. An admirer agreed to pay him Rs.11 6 per minute of his stay in his house, 
but Gandhi was too busy to spare more than two minu tes.  
At the news of his sudden illness, a doctor friend rushed to him. Gandhi twitted him saying: 
" What fee will you give me, if I allow you to exam ine me?" In stead of getting any fees the 
doctor had to empty his pocket by offering him what ever he had previously received from 
another patient.  Motilal Nehru and Deshbandhu Das renounced their pr incely practice at Gandhi's call and 
made a gift of their palatial houses to the nation.  Gandhi turned thousands of amirs 
(millionaire) into fakirs (paupers).  Jail-bird  
 
Gandhi preached rebellion, launched mass civil diso bedience and was repeatedly jailed. 
When arrested, he pleaded guilty and asked for the severest punishment. In South Africa, 
the charge against him and his co-workers was prove d by witnesses furnished by him. The 
horror, shame and hardship of jail life, originally  a punishment allotted to criminals, scared 
the Indians. Gandhi removed this fear from their he arts.  
He was jailed eleven times. Once he was arrested th rice within four days. If he had to 
complete all his jail terms, he would have spent 11  years and 19 days in jail. Occasionally 
his punishment was reduced and and he altogether sp ent 6 years and 10 months in prison. 
At the age of 39, he first entered a jail. He came out of the prison gates for the last time 
when he was 75.  
he first entered the jail in South Africa with five  satyagrahis. He had heard terrible stories 
about jail life and was a bit nervous and wondered whether he was to be specially treated 
as a political prisoner or was to be separated from  his his co-worker. a slight feeling of 
awkwardness crept in his mind, when he stood in the  very court where he often appeared 
as a counsel. He got two months' simple imprisonmen t. He was stealthily driven to prison 
from the court in a cab to evade the big crowd wait ing outside the court.  On reaching the 
jail , he had to give digit impressions. He was wei ghted, totally undressed and made to 
wear very dirty jail clothing. every second or thir d day, more comrades joined him and, in a 
fortnight, the number rose to 150. they were huddle d in a room meant for 50. Tents were 
pitched to accommodate some prisoners at night only .  
The jail inspector, Governor and chief warder visit ed the prison four or five times a day. 
Gandhi and others had to fall in a row, cap in hand . He volunteered to do manual labour but 
that was a not allowed.  
The jail diet was trying for the Indians. In the mo rning and evening, they were given mealie 
pap (a sort of maize porridge) without sugar, milk or ghee and this they could not eat. 
Some evenings only boiled beans were served. No sug ar and no spices except salt was a 
allowed. European prisoners got meat., bread and ve getables. Peelings of those vegetables, 
cooked with vegetables were served to the coloured convicts. Gandhi sent a complaint 
bearing the signatures of 100 Indian prisoners to t he jail authority. He was told: " this is 
not India. This is a prison, no palatable dish can be allowed here." within a fortnight , 
Gandhi succeeded in a getting a ration of rice, bre ad, vegetables and ghee sanctioned for 
Indians. They were also permitted to cook their foo d. Gandhi helped in cooking and twice a 
day distributed the food. Without clamoring for bet ter or more rations, the half-cooked 
porridge without sugar was eaten by Gandhibhai's fo llowers. During his third jail term, food 
was no problems. He then lived on fruits and got en ough bananas, tomatoes and nuts. He 
liked some disciplinary rules of the jail an dafter  release, he stopped taking tea and 
continued to take the dinner before sunset.  Gandhi suffered many hardships in his next two conv ictions is South Africa. He was 
awarded hard labour and was led in handcuffs from t he same court where he had practised 
for ten years. He was clad in the dress of a" nativ e convict with a small military cap, loose 
coarse jacket bearing a convict ticket number and b oard arrow marks, short trousers 
similarly marked, thick grey woollen socks and leat her sandals". He had to march six 
furlongs carrying his bed on his head in pelting ra in. He was lodged with the worst type of 
Negro and Chinese prisoners. Some Zulu prisoners ab used him and beat him. There was no 
privacy in sanitary arrangements. their indecent ma nners scared him. He could not 
understand their languages. Soon he was removed to a dark isolation cell 4ft. by 6ft. There 
was a small window near the roof for ventilation. H e had to take his meals standing behind 
locked doors. Every day he was taken out twice for exercise. In protest, he did not take rice 
for 15 days because no ghee was given with it. He l ived on on one meal of mealie pap a 
day. Ghee and bread were thereafter given to him. H e was given a coir mat, a small 
wooden pillow, two rugs  and some books . He was da ily supplied with one bucket of water. 
Another bucket placed on a large tray served for ch amber-pot. For keeping a watch on the 
prisoner an electric light was kept burning after d ark, but that was too dim for reading a 
book. If, as a change, Gandhi walked up and down th e cell. the warder shouted : " don't 
walk about like that . It spoils my floor." and the  precious floor was made of tar.  
If Gandhi asked permission for a bath, the warder o rdered him to go undressed. Gandhi 
could not walk 125 feet naked . His request for han ging his clothes on the curtain of the 
water closet was granted. Before he could clean his  body, came the order: " Sam come 
out." If Sam was not prompt in vacating the place, a Negro would knock him down.  
He had to cut shirt-pockets, sew pieces of torn bla nkets or polish varnished iron doors for 
nine hours a day. After rubbing the doors and floor s for three hours, he found them same 
as before. He also was asked to clean the lavatorie s. Gandhi bore these hard-ships with a 
smile, but when he joined colleagues, their plight moved him. The fatigue made some of 
them weep, some to faint. He was responsible for dr agging them weep, some to faint. He 
was responsible for dragging them from their homes to this life of suffering and shame. He 
believed that self-sacrifice and suffering was the only remedy for ending their slavery and 
that helped him to regain his peace of mind.  
By six in the morning, ablution and toilet had to b e finished. work started from seven and 
they all had to labour for nine hours. With them , Gandhi walked a mile and then began 
digging dry hard ground. He lost weight. His back a ched, water oozed from the blisters 
covering his palms and with difficulty he could lif t the spade. He he rested a while, the 
guard shouted: " Go on go on." Gandhi warned the gu ard that if he did not mend his 
manners, he would stop working. This mellowed the g uard. Gandhi prayed to god to defend 
his honour by giving him strength to finish the tas k allotted to him.  
When Gandhi stayed in " His Majesty's Hotel" in Ind ia, his expenses were borne by the 
Government, yet he disliked to incur any extra expe nditure for his maintenance. Once he asked the jail superintendent to remove all furnitu re and extra pots and pans. He used one 
iron cot and a few utensils. He could never forget that the whole the dumb millions of India. 
Referring to his last detention in the Aga Khan Pal ace, he said: " The huge palace in which I 
am being detained with big guards around me, I hold  to be waste of public fund. When the 
people are dying of starvation , it is almost a cri me against humanity."  
The first trial scene of Gandhi in India was a memo rable incident. The English sessions 
Judge nodded a respectful salutation to this native  standing in the dock, before he took his 
seat. He awarded six year's of simple imprisonment for Gandhi's rebellious you in politics 
look upon you as a man of high ideals and of noble and even saintly life." Gandhi said: " I  
know that some of the most loved of India's patriot s have been convicted under it. I 
consider it a privilege to be charged under that se ction. I know I was playing with fire, I 
would still do the same" The entire court rose to p ay homage, when Gandhi entered and 
left the court. In telegrams the police secret code  referred to him as " Bombay Political No. 
50." his name was struck off from the roll of barri sters. In jail, his height and special 
identification marks were noted down. He was confin ed in a solitary cell. He had nothing but 
a loin-cloth on, still his groins were touched and blankets searched. Gandhi made no 
protest, till his water-pitcher was touched with bo ots. Out of disgust, he sometimes stopped 
having visitors or writing letters.  
Gandhi never became bitter or fretful under duress.  Every time he came out of jail, his 
mind grew richer and more poised. Jail to him was a  rest-cure where one learns to be more 
regular in one's habits and companions. He felt as happy as a bird in jail. He was fond of 
reading, but outside the prison he kept so busy wit h numerous activities that he could get 
little time for study. In jail he followed a strict  routine for study. He learned Urdu and read 
books in Sanskrit, Tamil Hindi, Gujarati and Englis h. In two years, he once read 150 books 
by noted authors on religion, literature and social  science. He read the Gita , Koran, Bible 
and books on Buddhism, Sikhism and Zorostrianism. H e also read the Ramayana, 
Mahabharata, Upanishads, Manusmriti and Patanjali Y oga Darshan. He took his first lessons 
in astronomy at 65 from a co-prisoner. He managed t o get a telescope from the jail 
authorities and studied the stars.  
Gandhi regularly prayed, spun for four to six hours  a day and took brisk walks in jail. In the 
Aga Khan Palace, at 75, he gave lessons to Kasturba  and to his grand-niece on geography, 
geometry, history, Gujarati grammar and literature.  Previously he taught English to a 
Chinese co-prisoner and Gujarati to an Irish jailor . He also wrote a text-book for Children 
and to an Irish jailor. He also wrote a text-book f or children and the history of the 
satyagraha struggle in south Africa. He translated hymns from the Upanishada and poems 
by Indian saint poets into English and that collect ion was published as Songs from the 
prison. He wrote hundreds of letters form jail to t he ashramites, co-workers, jail 
authorities, Governors, Viceroys and the British Pr ime Ministers. Every week he sent such 
charming notes to the ashram children will as" If y ou learn to fly without wings, all your troubles will vanish. I have no wings yet I come fl ying to you every day in thought. Here is 
little Vimla and there is Hari".  
Gandhi noted down the advantages of the disciplined  life in jail and described how a model 
prisoner should behave. He wanted the prisoners to do what ever work was given to them 
and to obey jail regulations so long as it was not immoral to do so. Also they were not to 
start a hunger-strike until they were humiliated or  were given unclean food. He and his 
followers never sat in a crouching position or shou ted "Sarkar salam."  
Gandhi admitted that we shall have to maintain jail s even under swaraj. He wanted to 
convert them into reformatories and workshops a sch ool for education of those who in fact 
were temporarily deranged and misguided. While in p rison , he once suggested how the 
prisoners could do productive work and make the jai l self-supporting. the jail authorities 
could not accept and such scheme from the prisoner.  
This ideal prisoner at times proved very exacting a nd put the jail authorities in a fix. When 
he was permitted to eat bread, he demanded a knife to cut it, as he could not eat 
untoasted bread. he asked  for more space for his w alks. He treated his comrades as wards 
kept under his special care. He wanted to bear the responsibility of treating somebody who 
suffered from asthma of someone else who needed nat ure cure or Ayurvedic treatment and 
asked for special facilities. He indirectly coerced  the jailors to meet his demands by 
resorting t long fasts. When his condition grew wor se, the jail authority set him free. They 
did not want to take risks with the life of renowne d citizen of the world like the Mahatma. 
They showed great concern and promptly got him oper ated when he developed 
appendicitis. He twice fell ill in jail.  
Gandhi invariably entered the jail with a retinue o f friends and relatives. Kasturba and his 
secretary Mahadev Desai were kept with him in the A ga Khan Palace. They both died there 
and were cremated inside the jail compound. Gandhi said:" they lived up to the 'Do or Die' 
mantra and laid down their lives at the altar of th e Goddess of Freedom. They have become 
immortal."  General  
 
South Africa made a man of Gandhi.  
He reached Durban at the age of 23. Till then, he w as ashy, nervous young man. The 
moment he landed on South African soil, he noticed how the Indians, the coloured people, 
were looked down upon by the whites. The Indians we re called "coolies " by them.  
On the third day of his arrival , he visited the Du rban court and was ordered to take off his 
turban to show respect to the magistrate. Gandhi fe lt insulted, refused to do so and left the 
court.  
after a week, he had to go to another town by train . He bought a first-class ticket and sat in 
a first-class compartment. At the next station, he was ordered to occupy a third-class 
compartment by a ticket checker. When Gandhi tried to prove that he had a right to travel 
first, he was forcibly dragged down from the train.  Gandhi was shaken by this insult. 
Seated alone in a dark waiting room, he was lost in  thought. What should he do? Should he 
leave this country where Indians were ill-treated o r should he fight for his rigts?The honour 
of his country was at stake. He resolved to stay on . That fateful night decided the future 
course of his action. The next lap of the journey G andhi had to cover by a stage-coach. He 
was not allowed to sit inside the coach. He sat bes ide the coachman. Soon after, he was 
ordered to vacate that seat and to sit on a sack cl oth spread on the footboard. Gandhi 
refused to leave his seat and was mercilessly beate n. On reaching the town, he asked for a 
room in a hotel and that was refused. He spent the night in the shop of an Indian friend 
who sympathized with Gandhi, but found nothing un u sual in this ill-treatment. Some such 
incident took place every day in that country. The Indians were used to it. They came to 
South Africa to earn money and they did that at the  cost of their self-respect. Gandhi was 
shocked at their slave mentality. He sent complaint s to the newspapers, to the railway and 
coach-service authorities.  
In a short time,  Gandhi learnt that the Indians we re not permitted to walk over the 
footpaths, to move about after 9p.m. or to occupy t he front seats in a tram-car. There were 
particular "coolie" locations to house them. Gandhi  himself  was once kicked off from the 
footpath by a sentry and was labeled "coolie barris ter". Some of his white friends wanted to 
secure for him permission to enjoy special privileg es but Gandhi politely refused to avail 
himself of that offer. He was ken on gaining a few personal advantages , but to root out the 
colour bar. He did not fret in shame , nor did he t ry to get the offenders punished.  
He collected all information about the disadvantage s suffered by the Indian settlers and by 
every Indian living in that town. Within a week, he  called a public meeting and told the 
Indians to change their way of life and to be hones t, to form clean habits and to forget 
differences of caste, creed and provincialism. Not a word blaming the whites was uttered by 
him. He wanted his countrymen to understand that if  their behavior was correct, they could then demand human rights. He kept in touch with the m and patiently listened to their tales 
of woe.  
A year later, a bill was moved to deprive the India ns the little right of vote they had. 
Gandhi advised them to oppose it. He enrolled volun teers, made Christian youths, Muslim 
and Parsi merchants and Hindu clerks work for their  common welfare. Under his lead, some 
copied the note of protest drafted by him, some cop ied the note of protest drafted by him, 
some donated money and others reached this message of awakening to hundreds living far 
away from the town. In a month's time, funds were r aised and 10, 000 signatures of 
protest were secured. Printed copies of the protest  were sent to the Governor and Premier 
of Natal, to the Viceroy of India, to Queen Victori a and to the newspapers of Natal, India 
and England. The wrong done to the Indians in South  Africa was given wide publicity. The 
bill was passed, the Indians gained no rights, but they learnt to shed their apathy and 
timidity, to challenge the authority of the Governm ent in passing an unjust law. Gandhi 
soon founded the Natal Indian Congress for the Indi ans, laid rules for its working and 
himself collected donations from the members.  
During his 20 years' stay in South Africa, Gandhi l ed his people in opposing many such 
Black Acts. One exacted an annual tax of Rs. 40 fro m every adult Indian, another refused 
to accept marriages performed in India as legally v alid, a third demanded every Indian to 
carry a certificate contaminating ten finger prints . Finger prints are generally taken from 
criminals. In protest, Gandhi wrote and sent hundre ds of letters, appeals and petitions to 
scores of men whose authority counted. He also met important Government officials . When 
all agitation through the press and the platform fa iled, Gandhi forged the new weapon of 
satyagraha non-violent resistance to evil.  
Gandhi now asked the Indians to boycott registratio n of finger prints. He told them to get 
ready for a long non-violent fight to march to jail , if need be, to die, but not to submit to 
that law. His slogan was; "I want you to shed the f ear of death. Voluntary suffering is the 
quickest and best remedy for removal of injustices. " He warned them that they would not 
be able to reach their goal by dependending on him but by understanding and following the 
programme suggested by him. His instructions were e xplained to the people in Hindi, 
Gujarati, Tamil and Telugu. His army took a vow to fight the battle with perfect non-
violence. Uneducated men in the street , artisans, hawkers, miners, merchants and women 
joined the army. Gandhi led on foot an unarmed, pea ceful, disciplined army of 5000. He 
walked with his caravan, slept with it under the sk y, shared the waterish dal or half-cooked 
rice with all. He tended the sick, cheered up the s tragglers, cooked and served food to them 
all. His physical strength matched with his mental fortitude. About 2,500 persons were 
penalized with hard labour, 1,000 were absolutely r uined, fed died. With their leader 
Gandhi, merchants, used to a life of luxury, broke stones or did sweeper's work in jail. 
Kasturba too joined the satyagraha and was jailed.  In England, sympathy was shown for Gandhi's campaig n. In India, at the Congress 
sessions, South African problem was discussed. Sir Wedderburn, an Englishman who 
became the President of the Congress, said:" A good  example of what may be achieved by 
Hindu and Muslims standing shoulder to shoulder in service of India is supplied by the latest 
news from south Africa. Thanks to the determined st and taken by the Indians under the 
splendid generalship of Mr. Gandhi. " Gandhi needed  money for meeting a daily expense of 
Rs. 3, 200, when he led the march. An appeal for fu nds was made in India. Women tore 
gold bangles and rings from their persons, princes and businessmen gave thousands of 
rupees. Tagore sent donation collected by him. The long-drawn-out battle ended in a 
compromise favorable to the Indians. Gandhi was eve r ready to make a compromise, when 
self respect was not at stake.  
There were many leaders in India, yet after his ret urn to India, harassed people peasants 
and labourers in distress sought Gandhi's help. Thr ough his efforts, the century old 
enforced plantation of indigo in Champaran was annu lled, the indenture system was 
abolished. Gandhi encouraged the people to remedy a  specific local grievance themselves. 
All such agitations gained publicity and drew atten tion of the whole of India.  
Gandhi used the same tactics, whenever he launched a mass movement in India. Apart 
from guiding the peasants of Champaran, Kheda and B ardoli, he led generalship in India. 
He toured all over India and studied all details of  a problem in hand.  
He interviews thousands of persons and worked 18to 20 hours a day for collecting 
information from the people involved in a fight wit h Government. He spoke in thousands of 
public meetings and laid rules for discipline. Gand hi justified his choice of non-violence 
saying: " There is another remedy before the countr y drawing of the sword. If that was 
possible, India would not have listened to the gosp el of non-violence. You can not get 
swaraj by speeches and processions, the will to do should not be lacking. We want to 
become brave soldiers who do not run away. You shou ld be ready to sacrifice your own 
lives. To attain this, manly power is necessary. In stead of killing, if necessary, be killed. 
Why should it be easy to risk death in the act of k illing and almost superhuman to do so in 
the act of sparing life? The killing of others is n ot bravery. Die for your honour and 
freedom."  
Women, children and aged persons could form his non -violent army. The children's squad 
was known as Vanar Sena. When there was any outbrea k of violence, Gandhi suspended 
satyagraha. He loathed secrecy. He always openly an nounced his future moves. He wanted 
the people to banish anger, hatred and vengeance fr om their breast.  
This hard task-master never raised false hopes in h is men and told his soldiers how they 
would have to face lathi-charges and bullets, court  jail and mount gallows without raising 
their hands in protest. Their property could be for feited. His mantra of "Do or Die" meant 
suffering and that suffering, he knew , would melt the heart of the opponent.  Along with his call for bonfire of foreign cloth, n on-payment of land-tax, salt-making and 
boycott of Government schools, colleges an law cour ts, he asked the people to do 
constructive work. He wanted them to spin and weave , to revive village panchayats and to 
establish national schools and colleges. His bid to  were set free. The awakening of the 
masses was a great gain. His march to Dandi had a m agic spell. Hundreds of women came 
out of purdah to collect natural salt and showed th ey could serve the country on equal 
terms with men. They also took part in picketing fo reign cloth shops and liquor shops. For 
the first time in the political history of India, G andhi used non-violent non-co-operation on 
amass scale.  
Gandhi often used war terminology to describe his n on-violent fights: " I am out for a 
battle. Just as an Afridi cannot do without his rif le, even so, everyone of you non-violent 
soldiers, should not be able to do without your spi nning. Yarn balls ate your lead, the 
spinning wheel is your gun. Independence will prote cted not by guns, but by the bullets in 
the shape of cones of handspun yarn... You attack t he Dharasana Salt works and it will be 
known as the Battle of Dharasana." The destructive weapons of violent war were discarded 
but all the soldierly virtues bravery, chivalry, pa triotism, endurance and self-sacrifice were 
there.  
He preferred violence to cowardice, but attached gr eater importance to soul-force than to 
brute force. When asked, " Has not the atom bomb sh aken your faith in non-violence", 
Gandhi replied : " Nor only it has done so, but it has clearly shown to me that in the world. 
Before it the atom bomb is of no effect." He assert ed that the freedom of India won non-
violently would demonstrate to all the exploited ra ces of the earth that their freedom was 
very near.  Author  
 
A number of books bear the authorship of M. K. Gand hi. Majority of them were not written 
in a book form. They were collections of his articl es and speeches on truth and ahimsa, 
Swadeshi and charkha or of his addresses to women ,  students and princes.  
Gandhi was accepted as a very good writer. He never  aimed at a style nor used flowery 
words merely to please the ears. He had a forceful style of  his own which mirrored his 
hopes and faith, his sorrows and disappointments. H is style of writing was simple, precise, 
clear and as devoid of artificialities as the life of its author. Some English Viceroys admitted 
that Gandhi was direct and expressed himself in exc ellent English with a fine appreciation of 
the value of words he used. Gandhi claimed that a t houghtless word never escaped his lips 
or pen. A professor at the Oxford University, who a ssisted in drafting some of Gandhi's 
statements made at the Round Table Conference, said : "I have never met an Indian who 
had mastered the prepositions as Gandhi had... I to ok a deal of trouble over this drafting. 
Mr. Gandhi would glance over my work and would make  just one suitable prepositional 
change. It did its work. It changed my meaning into  Mr. Gandhi's meaning."  
Perhaps Gandhi's love for and careful reading of ch oice English writers and the Bible trained 
his ears for making proper use of words. He read wi dely and digested what he read.  
His first attempt in his teens as a writer was a bo oklet London Guide written for Indian 
students. It contained helpful details about London . Next came two pamphlets An Appeal to 
Every Briton and The Indian Franchise. The first de scribes the general condition of Natal 
Indians and the other is a history of Indian franch ise  in Natal. The language of the Green 
Pamphlet which followed was factual. In a month's t ime, a second revised edition of it was 
published. A summary of the Green Pamphlet in South  African newspapers angered the 
Europeans and when he next landed in South Africa, he was mobbed and lynched. To his 
bitter experience Gandhi found that his writing cou ld not be properly in a condensed form. 
He himself had a knack for writing in condensed for m. He drafted the Congress constitution 
and many resolutions.  
Gandhi's experiments in diet were recorded in A gui de to Health. It is an English translation 
of his articles printed in the Gujarati Indian Opin ion and was widely read in India and 
abroad and translated into English, European and In dian languages.  
When any idea gripped his mind, he put it in writin g with conviction without any fear of 
being ridiculed. His urge to write made him scribbl e on running trains and rocking ships. He 
prepared the whole of the Green Pamphlet while on v oyage home in 1896. Hind Swaraj, a 
severe criticism of modern civilisation , was writt en at a stretch during his voyage from 
England to South Africa in 1909. He used the steame r stationery. When he got tired of 
writing with his right hand, he used the left and f inished the book in ten days. Tolstoy read 
it and said that the question of passive resistance  was " of very great importance not only for India but for the whole world" . Constructive P rogramme, a booklet on nation building 
work, was written on a train. His manuscripts had f ew marks of correction and seldom 
needed any change. And that, he said, was due to " the spiritual discipline of a votary of 
truth".  
His knack for picking up apt words for translating an idea into another language was 
remarkable. He did dance he called Patanga Nritya R uskin's Unto this Last echoing Gandhi's 
deepest belief appealed to him and he adapted it in to Gujarati. It was called Sarvodaya. 
Some portions from Carlyle and from the life of Kem al Pasha were also translated into 
Gujarati by him. His " Story of a Satyagrahi" is a paraphrase of the "Defense and Death of 
socrates" by Plato. Gandhi translated into English Ashram Bhajanavali and some poems of 
the saint poets of India when he was in jail. the l atter was entitled songs from the Prison.  
He wrote his autobiography in Gujarati. He introduc ed a simple, forceful style that turned 
the Gujarati language into a people's language. The  English rendering of The Story of my 
Experiments with Truth has been judged a good piece  of literature by many eminent 
persons. Apart from unfolding the live human person ality of a world figure, the pen pictures 
of his parents, wife and friends, of dramatic event s and his exercise of suspense and 
interweaving of stray dialogues sustain the interes t of the readers. It was translated into 
almost all the Indian languages and also into Engli sh, French , Russian German, Chinese 
and Japanese.  
all his writing cherish truth and high moral values . at the same time they are not records of 
dry codes of behavior. For children he wrote a prim er Balpothi and a book on ethics 
Nitidharma. He did not went to preach anything to c hildren which they could not put into 
practice. His letters to ashram children from jail were both amusing and instructive. He was 
a voluminous letter writer and could in one day wri te 50 letters in long hand. Collection of 
his letters, numbering about 100,000, forms a vital  part of his writing.  
Gandhi was against "art for art's sake". For him al l art had to be based on truth and 
literature had value only so far as it helped man t o rise upward. For the half-starved 
masses he felt the need of simple good stories and such couples that a peasant goading a 
bullock could sing lustily and forget filthy abuses . In a literary conference he asked the 
writers: " Did you have any thought of these dumb m illions' appetites and aspirations? For 
whose sake are we going to have our literature? wha t am I to read to them?" As a model 
he referred to Dean Farrar's life of Christ written  in a language which the masses of 
England could understand. He wrote short sketches o f many outstanding men and women 
in the Gujarati Indian Opinion. When he was asked t o write a biography of his favourite 
poet philosopher Raichandbhai, he said: " If I want  to write his life story, I shall have to 
study carefully his home, his playground, mix with his friends, schoolmates, relatives and 
followers." In this sphere too, truth and not imagi nation was his guiding star.  
Gandhi often referred to incidents, examples and mo ral found in the Indian epics, in the 
lives of Rama, Krishna and Mohomed. This made his i deas lucid to the masses and gave him that amazing power of touching their hearts. Bo ldness of his expressions decrying such 
evil customs as lynching, white hooliganism, untouc hability, degeneration of self-seeking 
Congress men into white robed goondas etc. were tre nchant and prophetic. In protest to 
Lord Curzon's statement " the ideal of truth is to a large extent a western conception", 
Gandhi quoted a host of evidence supporting thru wo rship of truth in India from the 
Ramayana, Mahabharata, Vedas etc. He challenged tha t as an English gentlemen a Lord 
Curzon should with draw his baseless and offensive imputations. Gandhi once asked:" 
where is Mahomed and his message of peace? If Mahom ed came to India today, he would 
disown many of his so-called followers and own me a s true Muslim, as Jesus own me as a 
true Christian. there is no Christianity in the Wes t, or there should have been no war."  
Gandhi used to say that " the poet in a magic world  of his own creation " but he himself 
was a slave of the spinning wheel which was somebod y else's creation. But many passages 
from his writings testify how with a few strokes of  his pen, he could create vivid, living 
pictures:- 
" in Mysore , I saw in the ancient temple a bracket  in stone made of a little statuette which 
spoke out to me. It was just a woman , half-naked ,  struggling with the folds of her clothes 
to extricate herself from shafts of Cupid, who is a fter all lying defeated at her feet in the 
shape of a scorpion. I could see the agony of the f orm, the agony of the sting of the 
scorpion,"  
" Do you know Orissa and its skeletons? well, from that hunger-stricken impoverished land 
of skeletons have come men who have wrought miracle s in bone, horn, and silver. Go and 
see how a soul of a man even in an impoverished bod y can breathe life into lifeless horns 
and metals. A poor potter has worked miracles out o f clay."  
" The spot lay on a river bank. The river ran betwe en a row of homely hills shaded with 
trees and shrubs. The bed of the river was sandy, n ot muddy. The platform was erected in 
the waters of the river. On either side of the road  that lay in front of the platform, huge 
masses of men and women over twelve thousands sat i n perfect silence."  
' Early in the morning I entered Malabar. as I was passing by the familiar places, the face of 
a Nayadi whom I had seen during the previous visit,  rose before my eyes. In the midst of a 
discussion about untouchability, a shrill voice was  heard. those who were talking to me 
said, ' we can show you a live Nayadi." The public road was not for him. Unshod he was 
walking across the fields with a noiseless tread. I  asked him to come and talk to me. 
Tremblingly he talked to me. I told him the public road was as much for walk on the public 
road.' You will be finding me smiling with you and cracking jokes with you, but you also 
may know that, behind all these jokes and smiles an d laughs, the face of the Nayadi and 
that scene will keep haunting me throughout my tour  in Malabar.'  
The beauty of his thoughts and language made deep i mpression on some of the great men 
of our age.  Journalist  
 
Gandhi became a regular reader of newspapers after reaching England at the age of 19. As 
a school student in India, he did not read them. He  was very shy and could not speak in a 
gathering. At 21, he first wrote nine articles for The Vegetarian, an English weekly, on 
vegetarianism, Indian food habits, customs and reli gious festivals. His earliest writings 
show his capacity for expressing any idea in simple  direct language.  
After a gap of two years, Gandhi again took to jour nalism. From that time onwards his pen 
knew no rest till the end of his life. He never wro te anything only for creating an impression 
and carefully avoided exaggeration. His aim was to serve truth, to educate people and to be 
useful to his country.  
On the third day of his arrival in south Africa he was insulted in a court of law. He published 
an account of this incident in a local paper and ga ined publicity overnight.  
At the age of 35, he took charge of Indian Opinion and through it he guided and unified the 
Indians in South Africa. A Gujarati edition of this  weekly was simultaneously printed at 
Phoenix. A series of articles on dietetics appeared  in the Gujarati Indian Opinion, also the 
life sketches of great men and women. Every issue o f these weeklies contained articles by 
Gandhi. There was an editor, but Gandhi bore the wh ole burden. He wanted to educate the 
public opinion, to remove causes of misunderstandin g between the whites and the Indians 
and to point out the drawbacks of his countrymen. H e poured out his soul in the columns of 
Indian Opinion and published detailed account of th e Satyagraha struggle carried on in 
South Africa. Among the distinguished readers were Gokhale in India, Dadabhai Naoroji in 
England and Tolstoy in Russia. For ten years Gandhi  worked hard for this weekly. He got 
two hundred journals per week in exchange of Indian  Opinion, read each one of them 
carefully and reproduced such news as might benefit  there readers of Indian Opinion.  
Gandhi knew newspapers could become powerful medium  for spreading ideas. He was a 
successful journalist but never intended to make a living from journalism. In his opinion 
there aim of journalism was service: " Journalism s hould never be prostituted for selfish 
ends or for the sake of carrying a livelihood . And  whatever happens to the editors or the 
journal, it should express views of the country irr espective of consequences. they will have 
to strike a different line of policy if they wanted  to penetrate into the hearts of the masses."  
When he took charge of Indian Opinion, it was a los ing concern and had a circulation of four 
hundred. For  some months gandhi had to contribute Rs. 1,200 per month to keep it going. 
Altogether he incurred a personal loss of Rs. 26,00 0. In spite of this heavy loss, he later 
decided to leave out all advertisements in order to  devote more space for his ideas. He 
knew that the would not be able serve truth and rem ain independent if he accepted 
advertisements. he never cared to increase the sale  of his journals through improper 
means, nor to compete with other newspapers.  In India too, he struck to this tradition and for30  years published his journals without any 
advertisement. He suggested that for each province,  there should be only on advertising 
medium printing decent descriptions of things usefu l to the people. After accepting the 
editorship of Young India, he was keen on conductin g a Gujarati paper because a 
vernacular paper was a felt want. Editing a newspap er in English was no joy to him. he 
brought out Navajivan, the Hindi and Gujarati versi on of Young India, and contributed 
many articles regularly. He was proud to say that m any readers of Navajivan were the 
farmers and workers who really made India.  
Under heavy pressure of work he had to write a lot and had to work late at night or in the 
early hours of the morning. He often wrote on a run ning train. Some of his famous 
statements or editorials bore the mark " on the tra in". When his right hand got tired, he 
wrote with the left. His left-hand writing was more  legible. Even while convalescing he 
wrote three to four articles every week.  
In India he did not run any paper on loss. Both his  English and Indian language papers 
reached a circulation of 40,000. When he was jailed , the circulation dropped down to 3,000. 
After his release from the first imprisonment in In dia, a new feature of the weeklies was the 
publication of his autobiography in a serial form. It continued for three years and created 
world-wide interest. He allowed almost all the Indi an papers to reproduce his life-story. 
While in jail , he started another weekly Harijan. Like Young India this too was priced one 
anna. It was mainly devoted to serve the untouchabl es. For years it did not contain any 
article on politics. It was first brought out in Hi ndi. Gandhi was permitted to write thrice a 
week from jail. Regarding the proposal for an Engli sh edition, he wrote to a friend: " I 
would warn you against issuing the English edition unless it is properly got up, contains 
readable material and translations are accurate. It  would be much better to be satisfied 
with the Hindi edition only than to have an indiffe rently edited English weekly. I shall not 
handle the paper except to make it self-supporting. " He proposed to bring out 10,ooo 
copies in the beginning and give it a trial of thre e months. In two months' time, it became 
self supporting. Later it became a very popular vie ws-paper. People read it not for 
amusement but for instructions. It was published in  English, Hindi, Urdu, Tamil, Telugu, 
Ooriya, Marathi, Gujarati, kannada and Bengali. Gan dhi wrote articles in Hindi, Urdu, 
Gujarati and English.  
Gandhi journals never had any sensational topics. h e untiringly wrote on constructive work, 
satyagraha, non-violence, diet, nature-cure, Hindu Muslim unity, untouchability, spinning, 
khadi, swadeshi, village industries and prohibition . He stressed the need of reorientation of 
education and food habits and was a severe critic o f national defects.  
He was a hard task-master. His secretary, Mahadev D esai, had to seek shelter in the 
lavatory from the crowded railway compartment and c omplete his work in time. Gandhi's 
assistants had to know all corresponding railway ti mings and postal clearance hours for a 
timely dispatch of written matter for publication. Once the train carrying Gandhi and his articles written on it was running late and there w as no time for sending them by post. The 
English articles were sent by a messenger and were printed in Bombay instead of his own 
press at Ahmedabad. The issue was brought out in ti me.  
Gandhi was first jailed in India for his bold artic les printed in Young India. He never 
submitted to any gagging order issued by the Govern ment. When he was not allowed to 
express his deepest thoughts, he stopped writing. H e was confident that he could any day 
persuade his readers to copy his editorials for him  and circulate the news. he knew his 
paper could be suppressed but not its message, so l ong as he lived . By not caring for the 
aid of printing-room and compositor's stick, the ha nd written paper, he assured, could be a 
heroic remedy for heroic times.  
Gandhi published an unregistered weekly Satyagraha in 1919, defying the Government 
orders. This one-sheet weekly was sold for one  pic e.  
Himself being a journalist of many years standing, he spoke with authority on the traditions 
of good journalism; "  The newspapers man has becom e a walking plague. Newspapers are 
fast becoming the people's Bible, Koran and Gita ro lled in one. A newspaper predicts that 
riots are coming and all the sticks and knives in D elhi have been sold out. A journalist's 
duty is to teach people to be brave, not to instil fear into them."  Printer-Publisher  
 
Gandhi edited Indian opinion, Young India, Navajiva n and Harijan. He printed and published 
them in his own press. He knew he would not be able  to express his views freely, if his 
journals were printed in a press owned by others. W hen he took charge of the weekly 
Indian opinion, it was a losing concern . He wanted  to shift the printing press from the city 
to the out of the way Phoenix settlement. His frien ds thought it would prove a failure. 
Gandhi got his printed machinery, equipment and fur niture neatly fitted in a shed. An old 
oil-engine was used to run the press. He had his of fice in a Separate room. No paid servant 
or peon was employed there. Indian Opinion was disp atched on Saturday. By Friday noon 
the articles were composed. The inmates of the sett lement, old and young, assisted in 
composing, printing, cutting and folding the sheets , pasting addresses and making bundles. 
They had to reach them to the railway station in ti me. They usually worked up to midnight . 
When the pressure of the work was heavy, Gandhi wit h others kept awake of the Friday 
night, Kasturba and other women sometimes helped th em.  
On the very first right, when Indian Opinion was be ing printed in the Phoenix Settlement, 
the oil engine failed. with the help of a hand-driv en wheel, Gandhi and all able bodied 
inmates ran the machine and issued the paper in due  time. This arrangements helped 
Gandhi to learn the details of press work. He wrote  articles, set types, lent a hand in 
printing and saw the proofs. Many youngsters became  apprentice workers. The publication 
and printing of one issue of Indian Opinion was onc e entirely done by the young boys. 
Indian Opinion was in the beginning printed in four  languages English, Hindi, Gujarati and 
Tamil. For want of editors and composers it was lat er printed in English and Gujarati only. 
When Gandhi came to India and visited Adyar, Annie Besant noticed how with an expert's 
trained eye he observed the printing process there.  
Apart from printing the weeklies, many books in Eng lish, Hindi and other languages were 
printed in Phoenix Press and Navajivan Press. Gandh i never deposited  any security were 
mainly spent on Khadi work. He made a trust deed of  the Navajivan Press worth one lakh of 
rupees.  
Bad printing he counted as an act of himsa. He insi sted on clear types, durable paper and 
neat simple jackets. he knew costly books in attrac tive jackets were out of the reach of 
general readers of a poor country like India. Durin g his lifetime, the Navajivan Press printed 
many books at a low price. His autobiography in Guj arati was priced 12 annas. There was 
also a cheap edition of this book printed in Devana gari.  
Gandhi stressed the need and advantage of using one  script throughout India as that would 
save much time and labour of the readers and the pr essmen. He preferred Devanagari 
because almost all the Indian languages were derive d from Sanskrit. In the Gujarati version 
of the Indian Opinion is found a full page descript ion of Tulsi Ramayana in Hindi script. 
Gandhi himself chose the types for Harijan.  He was not for copyright and writings in the journa ls edited by him were common property. 
Only when there arose a chance of his writings bein g twisted, he agreed to exercise 
copyright rules.  
He thought that children's books should be printed in bold types on good paper and each 
item should be illustrated with a sketch. He prefer red thin booklets. They do not tire out the 
children and are easy to handle. Once an ashramite in charge of national education brought 
out a primer. It had pictures on every page and was  printed on coloured art paper. With 
pride he asked: 'Bapuji, have you seen the primer? The whole conception is mine." Gandhi 
said: " Yes . It is beautiful, but for whom have yo u printed it? How many readers can afford 
to buy a five-anna worth books? You are in charge o f the education of the children of the 
starving millions of India. If other books sell at one anna, yours should be priced two pice." 
Gandhi once took charge of a weekly priced at two a nnas and brought it out for one anna 
per copy.  
In printing, saving money was not the last word wit h Gandhi. Once the Navajivan Press 
decided to publish a Gujarati translation of Gokhal e's writings and speeches. The translation 
was done by an educationist. When the book was prin ted, Gandhi was requested to write 
the foreword. He found the translation poor and sti ff and asked it to be destroyed . When 
he was told that seven hundred rupees had been spen t on it, he said: "Do you think it 
desirable to place this rubbish before the public a fter spending more on binding and cover? 
I do not want to ruin people's taste by distributin g bad literature." the whole lot was burnt 
and was not allowed to be sold even as waste paper.  
Gandhi always defended liberty of the press. He sto pped printing his journals when any 
Government order restricted him from publishing his  views freely on vital matters. For his 
love of freedom of the pen, his press was attached,  his flies were destroyed. He and his co-
workers were jailed. He was never discouraged and r emarked: " Let us break the idol of 
machinery and leaden type. The pen is our foundry a nd the hands of the copyists our 
printing machine. Let every one become his walking paper and carry the news from mouth 
to mouth. This no Government can suppress."  Fashion-Setter  
 
In South Africa, Gandhi began to wear sandals with trousers. At that time it was unusual. 
He preferred sandals to smart shoes because during summer they kept the feet cool and 
during winter they could as well be worn with socks . He himself made the sandals. General 
smuts, Prime Minister of South Africa, heard that t hese hand -made sandals were strong 
yet comfortable and wanted to use a pair. Gandhi go t a pair made with special care and 
presented it to him.  
Gandhi had a way of doing things in a manner differ ent from the accepted traditional form. 
Some of the fashions set by him were followed by ot hers, some lapsed due to in 
acceptance.  
When he first attended a Congress session,  he was astonished to see that separate 
Kitchens were set up not merely for different caste s, but for catering to the different tastes, 
but for catering to the different tastes of the del egates and volunteers. He attached 
importance to the small things of life and felt tha t there could be no swaraj till people gave 
up this separatist mentality and developed a sense of oneness. He wanted to stop this 
wastage of money, time and labour by simplifying fo od habits. He made experiments on 
diet. In his ashrams, simple spicelss vegetarian fo od  was cooked in a common kitchen. 
Muslims, Hindus, parsis and Christians shared the s ame vegetarian food, seated in a 
common dining hall.  
Gandhi stressed the food value of raw salads, fruit s, nuts, boiled vegetables, hand pounded 
rice and hand ground wheat flour. He explained how fresh gur or honey contained more 
vitamins than refined white sugar and thus tried to  train people to appreciate the substance 
more than the look of a thing.  
In the Faizpur Congress, delegates and visitors wer e for the first time served unpolished 
rice and whole meal bread. to hold the annual gathe ring of the Congress in a  village was 
Gandhi's idea. Previously, for 50 years, highly edu cated group of leaders and intelligentsia 
formed the bulk of the audience, Congress sessions were held in big cities like Calcutta, 
Bombay and Madras. Gandhi changed it into a people' s Congress and gave it a mass 
character. Clad in simple Indian style of dress, he  addressed the audience in Hindi.  
He planned out the details of the Tilak Nagar at Fa izpur. it was built by village artisans out 
of materials easily available in a village. Artist Nandalal Bose gave concrete shape to 
Gandhi's dream. The walls and the roof of the tents  were made of bamboo. Colored 
bamboos made the archway which was decorated with u pturned wicker baskets. The 
National flag flying aloft the gate was Gandhi's ow n creation. A few years earlier he had 
given the flag the final shape. It was to be three coloured saffron, white and green 
arranged horizontally. The white was to contain, in  the centre, a dark blue imprint of the 
spinning wheel that symbolized non-violence and the  common man in India.  To Gandhi goes the credit of evolving our simple ye t dignified national dress. When he led 
the epic march in south Africa, hundreds of miners and indentured labourers, mostly South 
Indians, joined the struggle. All were tortured, ma ny were jailed, some died. In sympathy 
with them and for identifying himself with them, Ga ndhi suddenly decided to don a kurta 
and a dhoti worn in a lungi fashion. He replaced th e walking stick with a lathi and carried a 
satchel.  
Gandhi developed satyagraha non-violent non-coopera tion and mass civil disobedience as a 
powerful weapon to meet the organised violence of a  mighty authority. He cited the ancient 
examples of Prahlad and Bibhisan as staunch non-co- operators with evil and brute force. He 
claimed no originally in doing so. But his bold eff ort to apply that technique of resistance to 
evil on amass scale and to impress it in the politi cal field was original. Its success, too, was 
striking. A foreign journalist your faith in truth and non-violence?"  Gandhi replied : " No, I 
swear by non-violence and truth together standing f or the highest order of courage before 
which the atom bomb is of no effect. Non-violence i s the only thing that the atom bomb 
cannot destroy."  Gandhi had contributed more than anyone else to mobilise the strength of 
the great mass of humanity in India.  
Under his leadership, India gained independence thr ough non-violence. He wanted India to 
remain the hope of all t exploited races of the ear th, whether in Asia, America of Africa : " 
struggle for the emancipation of all the oppressed races against superior might." After 
India's independence, many colonies gained freedom without blood-shed. The movement 
for securing human rights is spreading successfully  among the American Negroes.  
Along with his experiments in bringing a change of heart in an adversary, Gandhi's dress 
underwent a significant change. After his return to  india from South Africa, Gandhi took to 
wearing a dhoti, kurta, long coat and huge Khathiaw adi turban. He soon found that dress 
unsuitable for a warm climate. Moreover, yards of c loth were wasted on that turban. He 
then changed over to wearing a dhoti, kurta and cap . So called genteel folk were shocked 
to see him attended important meetings and public g atherings in that dress. When Gandhi 
learnt to spin and weave, his entire dress was made  of khadi. The Gandhi cap was 
something very akin to a kashmiri cap without its e mbroidery. Gandhi insisted on its being 
white. People complained that the white cap got eas ily soiled. Gandhi argued: " I choose 
the white cap for maintaining high standard of clea nliness. This thin cap is easily washable 
and does colour get equally dirty but conceal the d irt." Khadi dhoti or pyjama, kurta and 
Gandhi cap became popular and were accepted as the national dress..  
Many Biharis, Mavaris and Gujaratis discarded their  elaborate turbans for Gandhi cap and 
many Muslims their fez. Bengalese and South Indians , normally not used to ahead gear, 
began to wear it. During the swadeshi days the Gand hi cap worked as red rag to john bull. 
Volunteers wearing this white cap were cruelly hand led by the police and their caps were 
forcibly removed. Schoolboys were punished for spor ting it. Gandhi himself wore it for a 
short time. His final change in dress ended in wear ing a khadi loin cloth, wrap and chappal. He believed a leader should be a true representativ e of his people. He moved in Europe and 
England and even met the Emperor of India in that d ress. When foreign dignitaries and 
diplomats , renowned poets and authors wanted to me et him, he invited them to his 
ashram. Once a distinguished visitor from England w as brought to his ashram from the 
railway station in a bullock cart. These visitors s quatted on the floor of Gandhi, the man of 
the masses. They ate the ashram food. This sage of Sevagram was a good host, very 
considerate to the needs of his guests but never fe lt ashamed in extending a rustic's 
hospitality to sophisticated westerners. He did not  think that the dignity of a nation or 
state, especially of a poor country, could be maint ained by an exhibition of pomp. On the 
contrary, this display of false prestige, sham show  and concealment of poverty hurt him. 
From his village abode Gandhi often had to run to D elhi and Simla, Bombay and Calcutta to 
hold important discussions with the Viceroy, Govern ors, British diplomats and foreign 
dignitaries. To speed his ideas and to keep in touc h with his countrymen, he more than 
once traveled all over India, but never boarded a p lane. He traveled third. Before 
independence, other leaders followed his examples. He wanted to change the whole system 
of administration: In democracy, a kisan should be the ruler. A kisan Prime Minister would 
not ask for a palace to live in. he would live in a  mud hut, sleep under the sky and work on 
land whenever he is free."  
Gandhi knew how persons bred and brought up in soph isticated surroundings lacked the 
courage to adapt these bold ideas. He wanted to sta rt right from the beginning by 
educating children in a different way. He gave enou gh thought to the experimental methods 
of education tried by some noted educationists and suggested a basic method of training 
the minds of the youngsters. He called it Nayee Tal im. It gave less importance to literary 
training. Eradication of ignorance, not only of ill iteracy was his aim. By teaching through 
crafts, he hoped to develop the personality of youn g pupils and to create self-confidence in 
them. He wanted to initiate in them tolerance for a ll religions, love for all races and respect 
for all work.  
In mass prayer meetings, he tried to introduce a pr ayer culled from different religions of 
the world.  
Gandhi untiringly spoke of his ideas in hundreds of  public meetings and wrote numerous 
articles in his journals. In the many weeklies he e dited successfully, he left out all 
advertisements which fetched good revenue. He spurn ed money but loathed wastage in any 
form. He once advised the organisers of meetings to  avoid altogether expenses on 
decoration: " Flowers may be avoided altogether and  yarn garland may be presented. yarn 
must not be damaged by being tied in knots. flags a nd buntings, out of waste khaddar, can 
be used. Money can be saved by avoiding the printin g of addresses. The best calligraphists 
can write out the address on simple handmade paper and the paper can be nicely sewn on 
a piece of khaddar or boys and girls can embroider the letter on a piece of khaddar."  His ideas about interior with carpets, with did not  like a room stuffed with carpets, crowded 
with furniture and curio collection. Window curtain s had no fascination for him. Once he 
was the guest of a rich South Indian merchant. He d isliked the hotchpotch collection of 
decorative pieces and said; " I have felt oppressed  with the excessive furniture. There is a 
in the midst of it hardly any room to breathe in. S ome of your pictures are hideous. If you 
give me a contract for furnishing all the palaces i n Chetti Nad, I should give you the more 
comfort and fresh air and secure a certificate from  the best artists in India that I had 
furnished your houses in the most artistic manner."  This claim of Gandhi was justified by 
Nandalal Bose's appreciation of Gandhi's hut at sev agram: " the floor and walls were 
plastered with cow-dung. There was no picture, no p hotograph, figure or statue in the 
room. A mat was spread in the corner with folded Kh addar sheet and a cushion for sitting. 
On one side of the packing-case covered with Khadda r, to serve as a writing desk, was a 
small polished lota of bell metal covered with an i ron sheet shaped like a pipal leaf. The 
room had an atmosphere of cleanliness, tidiness and  quite beauty. He was sitting in the 
room sparsely clad in apiece of khaddar cloth worn tightly round the waist. A pleasant smile 
was always playing on his lips. He appeared to me l ike a sword of fine temper, kept 
unsheathed, having all the attributes of the sword save that of himsa."  Snake-Charmer  
 
As a boy Gandhi was afraid of snakes. He could not go out alone in darkness. He imagined 
thieves, ghosts and snakes were waiting to jump on him.  
He led the life of a semi-mendicant at 35 and lived  in ashrams. His ashram did not mean a 
hut to live in, but a big compound with a well, eno ugh land for cultivation and an orchard 
attached to it. It was a quite place, far away from  the dust and din of a city. Gandhi was 
not rich, so he acquired cheap waste lands. All the  ashrams the Phoenix Settlement, Tolstoy 
Farm, Sabarmati Ashram, Wardha Ashram and Sevagram were infested with snakes. Before 
the huts were built, the inmates had to live under canvas and it was risky to live like that 
with children. One day a poisonous snake would be f ound clinging to the roof in the 
farmyard, the other day a couple of serpents lying in a circle near a bicycle. Sometimes 
they entered bedrooms. What to do with them was a p roblem.  
Gandhi believed in ahimsa, he was a devoted Vaishna va. Even for saving the life of his son, 
his wife or his own self, he did not use an y medic ine or diet made from fish, flesh or fowl. 
Cows and she buffaloes were tortured for extracting  the last drop of milk from them and 
that made Gandhi give up cow's and buffalo's milk. How could then a snake be killed? The 
general rule was not to kill snakes even if they we re poisonous. A device was made from 
ropes to catch snakes and to let them loose at a sa fe distance from the ashram. But when 
they were in a such a position that they could not be caught or when a person had not the 
courage to go near them and catch them, what was to  avoid violence to the plants. With 
regret he admitted : " I don't feel so sorry on a s nake's slaughter as on there death of a 
child from snake-bite. I still am afraid of snakes so how can I ask others to be fearless." 
When all other methods of driving away snakes faile d, he gave permission to kill them. But 
that rarely happened.  
Gandhi had a keen desire to learn the details of sn ake-lore. With the help of Kallenbach he 
began to know a poisonous snake from a non-poisonou s one. For practical study Kallenbach 
caught a cobra, kept it in a cage and fed it with h is own hand. The Ashram children were 
greatly interested in watching it. None harassed th is new friend. Gandhi was not happy. He 
told Kallenbach: " We have imprisoned it to study i ts ways and habits . Our friendship may 
not be clear to the cobra. Neither you nor I have t he courage to play with it. Your 
friendliness is not free from fear. There is not lo ve in the act of taming the cobra." Perhaps 
the cobra too felt that men were not very friendly to it and one day escaped from the cage.  
another German inmate of the ashram could handle sn akes fearlessly. He caught young 
snakes and made them play on his palm. Gandhi wante d to cultivate such courage. He 
wished to reach that stage when a snake should know  from his touch that he did not want 
to hurt it. To him it was a great achievement to be  able to put his hand of in the mouth of a 
snake with Ramanam on his lips. But to the last day  of his life he could not take up a snake 
or a scorpion with his hand. Gandhi was ashamed of it.  He did not give up his interest in the study of sna kes even when he kept busy with 
important work. Some leaders once went to Gandhi fo r consultation and were alarmed to 
find a snake hanging coiled round his neck. He was absorbed in a talk with a snake charmer 
and eager to learn from him the art of handling sna kes and the cure of bites. One person 
was to ready for the snake-bite but his colleagues refused to allow this daring experiment 
on a such a valuable life, Gandhi lost the chance o f becoming a snake-charmer's chela at 
the age of 70.  
Years before, when Gandhi was in prison, his gum ke pt bleeding. A Negro prisoner attended 
on him. None of them understood the language of the  other. They talked with gestures. 
One day the Negro came howling to him with an ailin g finger. On enquiry Gandhi learnt he 
was bitter by something. Immediately he sent a note  to the jail hospital. He knew that to 
let out the poisoned blood was a sure relief. As no  clean knife was available, he began to 
suck venom out from the wound. It was dangerous to suck poison with a bleeding gum yet 
he could cot see the victim writhe in pain.  
Gandhi knew all snakes were not poisonous and all s nake-bites were not fatal. Only 12% 
snakes are venomous. He wanted to educate his count rymen, especially the villagers, in 
snake-lore.  we  published some articles on a snake s with apt diagrams and sketches. He 
once wrote in Harijan: "  We cannot  tell a poisono us from a non-poisonous snake and 
therefore kill all without thought. In many cases i t is the fright that kills the victim of a 
snake-bite. The poisonous once too do not bite unle ss they are trodden  upon or or 
mishandled. Snakes are called Kshetrapals guards of  the harvest land. On Nagapanchami  
day mothers in villages keep a saucer of milk for s nakes. It is a gesture of friendship with 
snakes. The picture of Vishnu lying on the serpent shesha with seven hoods appeals to me. 
I think it shows how God can fearlessly lie on the lap of a snake that spreads its hood on 
his head. Snake is not a source of danger in God's eyes."  
A batch of half-naked urchines were once seen crowd ing near Gandhi's hut. Their eyes were 
fixed on a snake kept in a glass jar. It was caught  and sent to a surgeon. He found it was a 
krait, one of the most poisonous varieties, smashed  its head and sent it back to Gandhi. Its 
spinal cord was intact and it did not die for three  days. To relieve it of pain it was killed and 
kept in a jar filled with rectified spirit. Gandhi wanted to exhibit alive or dead snakes to the 
villagers. He got a cage made for live specimens  
Gandhi once asked a philosopher friend: " what shou ld a seeker do, when a snake attacks 
him? " He replied : " He should not kill the snake and if it bites. he should let it do so. " 
Gandhi himself never hurt snakes and they too never  did any harm to him or to the ashram 
inmates. Nobody died of snake-bite in any of Gandhi 's ashrams. Snakes often honored him 
with their cool touch but did not give him a taste of their fangs.  
One cold evening Gandhi with a wrap round his body was convesing  with a friend. 
Suddenly a snake appeared on the edge of the wrap a nd wriggled its hood. Gandhi's friend 
asked him to keep calm. Gandhi showed no sign of ag itation and advised his friend not to be panicky. The friend caught hold of the wrap and threw it away with a jerk. On another 
occasion a snake crawled  on Gandhi's chest when he  was taking rest after meals. He was 
least disturbed. Once more, an educated modern snak e-charmer came to visit Gandhi when 
he was lying in a hospital. He wanted to display hi s power of control over the snakes and let 
loose some poisonous snakes on Gandhi's bed. They b egan  to dance gracefully on his 
blanket. Gandhi watched them with interest but kept  his legs perfectly still.  
Another evening, during prayers when Gandhi was obs erving silence, a snake lost its way 
and moved towards him. His companions got visibly m oved. The commotion made the 
snake nervous and it sought refuge in Gandhi's lap.  He made a sign to all to keep calm and 
continued his prayer. The snake quietly slipped awa y. When Gandhi was asked what his 
reaction was when he felt a snake was on him, he re plied: " For a moment I felt uneasy. 
Then I regained my calm. If that snake bit me, I wo uld have said, ' Don't kill it, don't do 
any violence to it. It should have nothing to fear and must be allowed to go free.'  Priest  
 
When Gandhi took to the life of a brahmachari and v oluntary poverty, he affirmed that 
those who wanted to do humanitarian service should remain unmarried.  
Before this idea gripped him, he was keen on gettin g his bachelor as members of one big 
family. He advised his Indian co-workers to come to  South Africa with their wives and 
encouraged his English friends, Mr. West and Mr. Po lak, to get married soon. Polak was 
hesitant because of his financial difficulties. Gan dhi said it was not right to postpone a long 
arranged match when there was a heart union. On the  next day of the bribe's arrival in 
South Africa from England, Polak married her. Gandh i made all arrangements for the 
marriage and himself acted as the best man.  
In his ashrams in India, Gandhi sometimes acted as the priest. His method of match-
making and of performing the priest's duty was unor thodox. He tried to reform the Hindu 
marriage system and defied its customary usages.  D owry, wealth, diplomas and high 
caste, he never considered as qualifications that m ade a bride or a groom more eligible. 
Health, character and fitness for doing body labour  were the essential qualifications. In a 
marriage blessed by him the bride and the groom wor e hand-spun hand-woven khadi, used 
no other ornament than hand spun yarn garlands whic h they exchanged before a sacrificial 
fire. they chanted Vedic mantras. No costly present s or dowry were given to the groom.  
Gandhi decried the evil custom of deti-leti (dowry)  and chastised college students for 
reducing women to slaves/ Instead of making their w ives the queens of their homes and 
their heart, they converted them into described as ardhanga the better half of men? he 
said: " If I had a girl under my charge. I would ra ther keep her a maiden all her life than 
give her away to one who expected a single pice for  taking her for his wife."  
Gandhi disliked a show of pomp and elaborate arrang ements for marriage feasts. He 
thought that in this age of democracy, more than te n rupees should not be spent for the 
religious ceremony. And nothing beyond the religiou s ceremonial should considered a part 
of marriage rites. Even for the poorest in the land  this tall order was very difficult to 
execute. To the peasants who incur heavy debts due to marriages or shradh ceremony, he 
said: " I shall become your priest. Much money is n ot needed to perform a marriage or 
shradh ceremony." he did not believe in the shradh ceremony as it is commonly understood 
by the people. To him, the only true way of celebra ting the shradh of one's ancestors was 
to translate into daily life their good qualities. He also did not accept the mystical meaning 
that a yajnopavita is supposed to possess: " I see no sense in investing people with it. The 
Aryans. If it is fit only for the distinction of hi gh and low, it is fit to be cast away. 
Observance of chastity is the best of threads."  
This priest did not demand any fee but sometimes as ked for donations to the Harijan fund. 
He once performed the marriage ceremony of an inter -caste couple and received five thousand rupees for building wells for the Harijans . Once a Harijan Christian acted as the 
priest in marrying a Hindu Brahmin couple in the as hram.  
At one marriage Gandhi served the guests with fresh  gur that cost him six annas.To a 
bridegroom he once wrote: " You come here alone, I shall marry you and send you in pair." 
He did not think that the groom needed any friends or relatives to accompany him. When 
he saw a party of seven he remarked : " Ah the sapt arshi has come." They added: " Yes, 
Arundhati ( bride's mother) too."  
At the marriage of his third son, Gandhi presented the couple with a copy of the Gita, 
Ashram Bhajanavali, a mangal mala and a takli. He t old his son: " You will guard your wife's 
honour and be consecrated to the service of the mot herland. You will both earn your bread 
by the sweat of your brow." The bride's mother pres ented a charkha to the bridegroom. 
Before the ceremony, the couple fasted, cleaned the  well basin and cow-shed and watered 
trees to symbolize unity with the whole creation. T hey also span and read the Gita. All 
these acts were parts of Gandhi's idea of saptapadi  ritual of the pair's moving seven steps 
forward. The groom's betrothal was kept pending for  two years till the bride reached her 
eighteenth year. Gandhi discouraged child marriages : " As i see the youngsters of the age 
of 13 about me I think of my own marriage. I am inc lined to pity myself... I can see no 
religion to have as one's wife a girl who is fit on ly to sit on one's lap. I do not regard a girl 
married, who is given away in marriage by her paren ts without her consent. I cannot 
conceive a girl of 15 becoming a widow. Widows have  as much right to remarry as have the 
widowers." He supported divorce under certain condi tions and once from jail sent his 
blessings to a Hindu woman who was going to marry a  second time, though her first 
husband was alive.  
In spite of claiming to be a sanatani Hindu, Gandhi  advocated inter-caste, inter-religious 
and inter-provincial marriage. Every mixed marriage , he thought, would bring people 
together. He was happy when his youngest son, a Guj arati bania, married a South Indian 
brahmin girl.  
Gandhi was greatly influenced by his devout Vaishna va parents. From the age of 12 he 
regarded untouchability as a sin, at 17 he learnt t o treat all men alike without distinction of 
caste or creed and at 21 he studied the Gita, Bible  and books of other religions. He believed 
it was foolish for the followers of one religion to  say, " Ours is the only true religion and all 
others are false." He was well versed in the Gita a nd Upanishads and read parts of the 
Vedas. He never quoted the scriptures unless he had  subjected them to the test of personal 
experience. His study of religions taught him toler ance and gave him courage to bear 
sorrow bravely. He also learnt that the man who dep ended on physical force understood 
true religion. Conversion was meaningless to him. H e could explain the basic tenets of 
Hinduism, Sikhhism, Buddhism, Islam and Christianit y with equal ease. He often attended 
services at churches. He once delivered a series of  four lectures on Hinduism in which he 
pointed out the distinctive merit of each religion.  He could quote Christ's sayings so aptly that some Europeans thought he was a born 
Christian. On the Christmas Eve, his co-passengers once requested him to speak on the 
teachings of Jesus on the deck of a steamer. During  prayers, he recited ayats from the 
Koran in mass prayers meetings. Some Hindus and Mus lims objected to it. He held very 
bold views about Hinduism and disowned inequality o f castes. This made the orthodox 
Hindus angry. They insulted him with black flag dem onstration, a garland of shoes and tried 
to kill him. Still he said: " I refuse to be a Hind u, if untouchability is apart of it. Hinduism 
ought to perish, if this blot on humanity is not re moved. Our religion is based on ahimsa 
which is nothing but love, love not only our neighb ours, not only to our friends, but love 
even to those who may be our enemies." Gandhi did n ot visit any temple that was not open 
to all. After years of pleading, he succeeded in ge tting many temples thrown open to the 
Harijans.  
To him God was truth and religion was to be lived. God was present in a drop of water or in 
tiny specks of dust. Gandhi preferred the worship b ecause " those who worship idols, 
worship not the stone but the God who resides in it ", while arguing on idol worship, he once 
told Tagore; " The outcaste's little piece of red-p ainted is the only link between himself and 
God. You dare not take the crutch from a lame man's  arm until you have taught the cripple 
how to walk." He also saw nothing harmful or evil i n tree-worship: " I find in it a thing 
instinct with a deep pathos and poetic beauty. It s ymbolizes true reverence for the entire 
Vegetarian Kingdom which declares the greatness and  glory of god."  
Gandhi strongly protested against the opening of " a temple to Gandhiji" and in the ashram 
made it criminal to touch his feet.  
This saintly soul initiated his countrymen in to a new mantra service to the motherland and 
Daridranarayan, the mantra of liberty, equality and  fraternity all human beings, the mantra 
of liberation of the mind from all fears and slaver y. He demonstrated the noble and brave 
art of sacrificing self in the various walks of lif e. He never got tired of repeating how" 
mankind has to get out of violence through non-viol ence and hatred can be overcome only 
by love".  
Gandhi led a very active life. He agreed with the t eaching of the Gita that he who eats food 
without offering a daily sacrifice, Karmayajna or b ody labour, steals his meal. Bread labour 
he counted as aone of the Karmayajnas. He never spe nt a day without doing some sort of 
body labour. He never told lies, never molested any  living creature and never uttered a 
slander. He woke up early before sun-rise and every  morning and evening offered his 
prayers. His daily prayer was a selection from the Gita and Upanishad, Koran and Zend-
Avesta. While on land or sea, on a moving train or ship, whether under the roof of a 
Muslim, Christian or an outcaste or while moving fr om village to village on foot, he stuck to 
this practice. Life in jail proved no exception. He  could deny himself food for 21 days but 
could not pass a day without saying his prayers. Pr ayer was not a lip-service to him, but a 
living faith in God. The object of prayer was not t o please God, but to practice brahmacharya and introduced congregational prayer i n the Phoenix Settlement. Every 
evening, bhajans and Christian hymns were sung ther e. in the late years of his life, in mass 
prayer meetings, he invited people to join singing Ramdhun to the beating of time with 
hands. He loved to see the whole of India covered w ith prayer gatherings.  
Gandhi could not put up with deception but he did n ot punish others for their lapses. If 
anyone told lies or did any wrong he himself fasted  for purification.  
In keeping images in temples and priestly class, he  more than once installed images in 
temples and performed opening ceremony of temples. He laid the foundation stones of 
schools and hospitals. In Noakhali, Gandhi reinstal led an image defiled by the Muslims. He 
opened the Laxminarayan Temple in Delhi, the Bharat mata Temple at Varanasi, a temple 
for the Harijans at Selu and the Maruti temple in R atnagiri. At Ratnagiri he said: " I install 
the image of Maruti not merely because he had the s trength of the giant. Even Ravana had 
that strength which was the direct fruit of his bra hmacharya and devotion to Rama."  
Gandhi's faith in Ramanam was unshakable. While goi ng to the prayer meeting, when he 
was shot by a fanatic Hindu, Gandhi breathed his la st uttering He Rama."  
 
/dodecastar4   /dodecastar4   /dodecastar4   /dodecastar4  
March of Events  
/head2right Gandhi born in Porbandar on October 2, 1869  
/head2right Married to Kasturba in 1881  
/head2right Matriculated in November, 1887  
/head2right Reached London for studies in October, 1888  
/head2right Enrolled as barrister in June, 1891  
/head2right Returned to India in June, 1891  
/head2right Sailed for South Africa in April, 1893  
/head2right Visited India in 1896 and 1901  
/head2right First attended the Indian National Congress in 1901  
/head2right Took charge of the Indian Opinions in 1903  
/head2right Established the Phoenix Settlement in 1904  
/head2right Led the Indian Ambulance Corps during the Boer War i n 1899 and during Zulu 
rebellion in 1906  
/head2right Took to a life of brahmacharya in 1906  
/head2right Went to England in 1906 and 1909  
/head2right First jailed in South Africa in 1908  
/head2right Established the Tolstoy Farm in 1910  
/head2right Led an epic march of satyagrahis in South Africa in  1913  
/head2right Left South Africa in 1914 and reached India in Janu ary, 1915  
/head2right Established Sabarmati Ashram in 1915, Wardha Ashram  in 1933 and Sevagram 
Ashram in 1936  
/head2right Champaran satyagraha launched in 1917  
/head2right First no-tax campaign launched in Kheda in 1918  
/head2right Jallianwala Baug massacre in Amritsar in 1919  
/head2right Became editor of Young India and Navajivan in 1919  
/head2right Launched non-co-operation movement in 1921  
/head2right First jailed in India in 1922  
/head2right His khadi tour in 1927  
/head2right Led Dandi March and salt satyagraha in 1930  /head2right Attended the Round Table Conference in London and v isited Europe in 1931  
/head2right His Harijan tour in 1933  
/head2right Started Harijan weekly in 1933  
/head2right Sponsored " Quit India" movement in 1942  
/head2right Last imprisonment in the Aga Khan Palace from 1942- 4 
/head2right Assassinated on January 30, 1948  
 
 