 
Bapu – My Mother 
 
 
 
By : Manubehn Gandhi  
 
 
 
 
 
Translated from the original in Gujarati by : Chitra Desai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 5/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
FOREWORD 
In this booklet Kumari Manu Gandhi describes a few incidents with Gandhiji. 
They throw light upon some aspects of Gandhiji's character and activities. 
Manu is a grandniece of Gandhiji. But he had constituted himself her 'Mother'. 
Shortly after he had entered upon the last great mission of his life - namely, 
Hindu- Muslim Peace - in Noakhali (East Bengal) in September 1946, Manu 
joined him and was his only constant companion thenceforth till his martyrdom 
on the 30th January 1948. As such, these pen pictures will be read with great 
interest. They were first contributed to the  Bhavnagar Samachar, a Gujarati 
weekly of Saurashtra - Kathiawad. They have been rendered into English by her 
friend. 
Bombay, 22-1-1949   K. G. Mashruwala 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  
I. BAPU AS MY MOTHER 
Bapu1 was father to innumerable men and women and the guru of many. There 
were many to whom he ministered as doctor or even as nurse. He was a dear 
friend to many colleagues. Countless people looked up to him as their 
redeemer. All this is aptly included in the term "Father of the Nation". For me, 
however, he was mother. Generally it is not possible for a man to become a 
mother to any one because he has not been endowed by God with a mother's 
loving heart. But Bapu appropriated for himself a share of even this divine gift. 
So Bapu mothered me. He had, no doubt, brought up quite a number of girls 
but to me he often said, "Have I not become your mother? I have been father to 
many but only to you I am mother. A father does of course concern himself with 
the bringing up of his children but the real education of a girl comes from her 
mother. If a girl does not know some household work, the mother-in-law or the 
sister-in-law rebukes her saying, 'Your mother does not seem to have taught you 
anything.' No one finds fault with her father." 
Iwas in the Nagpur jail in 1942 when Kasturba+ also was in jail. I was then only 
fourteen. My mother left this world when I was 12, but by her blessing I got a 
mother like Kasturba who never let me feel the want of my own mother. I was 
separated from Kasturba too, when during the '42 revolution the Government 
arrested her and Bapu. But by God's grace I obtained the rare chance of serving 
her again after nine months when I was transferred from the Nagpur jail. When 
I was at Nagpur I did not think that I would be able to meet Ba2 in this life 
again, since she used to have frequent heart-attacks after Bapu's fast. But 
devotion was not without its reward. 
Everyone was surprised that of all persons I was called to her side, and they 
wondered why they who had stayed with Ba and Bapu for years, should have 
been passed over in my favour. They argued, "How could this chit of a girl serve 
Ba?" But ever since my childhood, I had as much faith in Ba and Bapu as I had in 
God. Ba said, "If Manu is available I want none else." Just at that time she had a 
severe heart-attack. Dr. Gilder and Dr. Sushi la Nayar required a helping hand Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4 as they had to look after both Ba and Bapu. They asked for me as a nurse. But 
the Government was in a perverse mood. I cannot imagine what danger the 
Government scented in sending me to Bapu when I was a stripling of 14 then, 
and quite innocent of all politics. Shri Rajaji and Shri Devadas had heated 
discussions with Lord Linlithgow and Mr Tottenham. The former, however, 
prevailed and at last I was removed to the Agakhan Palace from the Nagpur 
Jail. 
When my father went to see Bapu during his fast, Ba had inquired after me. My 
father told her that I had become very weak and had spoilt my eyes. So she was 
waiting anxiously for me as a mother would for her daughter. She was standing 
at the gate when I entered the Agakhan Palace and her eyes were full of love. 
She was so anxious for me that she had requested the Superintendent to take 
my key and let me in before the inspection of my luggage was finished. It was 
my rare fortune to be allowed to serve such a loving mother day and night for 
thirteen months. All my daily work was now done under her guidance as before. 
My heart bowed to God for all this favour. If Ba could not sleep on account of 
severe cold or asthma, she would either come and lie down with me or take me 
to her bed and say, "My child, you must be tired; you may certainly go to sleep. 
I have brought you to my side only because I am not able to sleep." She would 
pat me and put me to sleep as if I were a baby to be lulled. 
On the 22nd February, 1944, God took away this darling mother of mine from 
me. That whole day, with tears trickling down my eyes, I stood almost 
transfixed and gazed at Ba as she lay with her head on Bapu's lap, bidding adieu 
to this world for ever, amidst the holy sounds of  Ramadhun and the recitation 
of the Gita. Before she died she begged pardon of us all. She said to me, "My 
child, you have served me a lot. May God bless you," and to Bapu, "Now, I am 
going." Even Bapu could not help shedding two drops of tears. She told my 
father, "Take Manu away. Let her study further." 
This was the first occasion in the Fifteen years of my life when I saw anybody 
on a deathbed, or a corpse and a funeral pyre. The second occasion was at the 
time of Bapu's death. People remarked, "How fortunate this girl is to have been Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5 with Ba and Bapu till their last breath." But I do not know if after all that can 
be called good fortune. 
For a time I was so depressed that I lost faith in God for taking away from me 
one who had tenderly mothered me till her last moment. Bapu asked me to sing 
a hymn. In a reckless spirit of childishness, I said, "I am not going to utter the 
name of the Lord. He has snatched away my Ba." My experience is that 
sometimes wonderful results come out of such childishness. On returning from 
the cremation ceremony that night, Bapu gave me some of Ba's things, such as 
a pair of ivory bangles, a necklace of  tulsi - a symbol of Vaishnava faith -, the 
string with which she tied her hair, her saffron and her sandals. He said, "As Ba 
wanted you so much, you are the rightful owner of these things. You should 
draw inspiration from them as Bharat did from Rama's sandals which he 
installed on the throne in the absence of Rama. And how godly Ba was! These 
five bangles remained intact amidst the huge fire, bearing witness to her 
saintliness." There is a custom in Maharashtra, according to which, when a 
woman passes away before her husband, five glass bangles, a coconut and some 
sesame and barley seeds are tied round her stomach. We had followed that 
custom. But all the five green glass bangles had remained undamaged. One of 
them I have kept as a memento of that saintly soul. 
The question of my further stay with Bapu was discussed by the Government as 
I was taken there only for the sake of Ba. I was released by the C. P. 
Government much earlier but they had allowed me to stay on with Ba as I 
wanted to serve her in illness. 
I was now distressed over the thought of a possible separation from Bapu in 
addition to that from Ba. All that night I woke up at intervals with a start. So 
Bapu and Sushilabehn had often to put me to sleep by patting me. To console 
me Bapu wrote a chit to me at 4 a.m. during his silence. The chit runs thus: 
"Dear Manudi, 
You did not sleep well. I wrote a long letter yesterday to have you and 
Prabhavati (Jai Prakash Narain's wife) continue here, but I lay awake thinking 
till at last I saw light. It is improper to make such a request. For if we do, what Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6 is the point of jail life? We ought to bear far greater separation. You are 
sensible enough. Forget your grief. You have great things to do. Give up this 
weeping and cheer up. Learn whatever you can after you are out of prison. In 
Whatever condition of life, you will always be happy that you rendered us so 
much service. I am very anxious about you. You are, just like yourself - 
innocent, simple and helpful. You have made service your religion. But you are 
uneducated and even foolish. If you remain uneducated, you would regret it 
and so would I if I continued to live. I shall miss you, but I do not like to keep 
you any longer here. It would be wrong. It would be a foolish kind of affection. 
It seems to me that you should go to Rajkot. There you will get the ennobling 
guidance of Naraindas. You will probably learn the art of work and certainly 
music, and whatever else you can pick up. If you stay there at least for a year, 
you will gain understanding. Then you can go lo Karachi or anywhere else. (I 
was at Karachi with my father, studying in the fifth standard before I went to 
Bapu.) Gurdial Mallik is indeed there but he will not stay there for long. So 
there you will get only schooling. Even that is useful. But what you can gain at 
Rajkot you can gain nowhere else. More when I break my silence. I am indeed 
your mother, am I not? If you grasp this much it is enough. 
Dated, 27-2-'44      Blessings from Bapu 
Agakhan Palace, Poona 
Preserve this letter." 
But fortunately I did not have to be separated from Bapu. I came out of the 
Agakhan Palace only when he did. 
Ever since then he began to bring me up just as a mother would bring up her 
own daughter of 14 or 15. A girl of that age wants to be with her mother and to 
be even closer to her mother than ever before. So he kept me very close to him 
and took interest in the minutest details of my life, such as food, clothes, 
sickness, my visits and companions, my studies, and even as to whether I 
thoroughly washed my hair every week, and he continued to do so till the end. Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 When he went to Bengal I was at Mahuva. But on my request to go with him to 
Noakhali he sent me his permission by wire. When I got to Bapu I was wearing a 
sari. As usual I kept my head covered, but as I bowed down to greet him, the 
sari slipped off my head and I was not aware of it, because as I put my head in 
his lap. He affectionately pulled my ear and said, "So you have come?" The 
same night at Shrirampur he told me, "Gujarati saris are for rich women who 
have nothing else to do but to loll in sofas or drive about in cars. Moreover, a 
Gujarati sari with head uncovered looks so immodest that one cannot bear to 
see it. So if one wears Gujarati saris, one must always be careful like Ba and 
other ladies of old not to let the sari slip off the head, and to readjust 
immediately if it does." I could not understand Bapu's real purpose in telling me 
all this, but lie went on, "I know you can't be as careful as Ba in this matter. So 
if you want to stay here, you will have to wear Panjabi dress as you did in the 
Agakhan Palace. It is not becoming to keep the head uncovered in that dress 
too; but in a girl of your age it may not seem as bad or as immodest as in 
Gujarati dress. You know I have become your mother and I ought to tell you 
this. Why do girls move about with uncovered heads nowadays? If they cover 
their heads, how can they show off their hair, made to appear long by woollen 
padding or false hair? I am one of those who move freely among women. I am 
engaged in bringing them into public life. Once I myself taught Ba to wear 
shoes and socks to make her look like a Parsi lady during our stay in South 
Africa. She, poor thing, did not know all this. There is no beauty in wearing 
false hair as there is none in paper-flowers as compared with real flowers. 
Natural beauty lies in keeping the hair just as God gave it. (From this talk he 
sudden digressed to spiritual matters.) I have no doubt that our women are 
molested only because of the artificiality that has crept into their lives. Jewels 
of false stones may shine for a time, but are sure to lose their lustre sooner or 
later. And this craze for false things has affected the purity of our inner self. I 
can never believe that persons who are false in their dress can be pure within. 
Hence this fall of our women - even their rot. How would they oppose 
molestation without weapon when they are incapable of doing so even with 
weapons? Even so powerful a being as Ravana, who could finish off anyone in a Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8 moment, dared not touch Sita, though frail and unarmed. What was the reason? 
Her purity was so powerful. Where do you find that saintliness today? If an 
attack is made on a woman's chastity nowadays, she simply submits. There have 
been so many such instances here. Many  goonckis have forced women to submit 
under the threat of death. Our women have preferred submission to death. 
Even if we do not believe in the historicity of Rama and Sita, and take the story 
to be imaginary, how magnificent and noble is the conception! It should be 
practised by women today. The character of Sita should be valued by all our 
girls. (What a turn Bapu gave to his talk on artificial jewelry!) And what do they 
call this newfangled fashion of painting the nails and lips?" I burst out laughing 
saying. "Bapu, I would have learnt the names had you asked me to. Lips are 
coloured by what they call lipstick. I do not know the name for the nail dye." 
"Oh yes, those poor girls paint their lips and nails, and the result is that they 
have no opportunity of seeing how pale and weak they are getting. Our women 
of old had such blood in the body that their lips and nails were naturally red. 
But we copied the West blindly. Both men and women are to blame for it. 
Women can by no means be excused for it. One ought to learn many things 
from Westerners such as discipline, good manners, becoming modesty, 
punctuality, energy and drive in action, perseverance, ardent desire to learn 
new things, sociability, etc. We have discarded all these and many other good 
things and rushed after vanities like powder and puff. I say from housetops that 
if anyone can bring both self-rule and good rule in the country, it is our women. 
Just as a house is not a home without a housewife, so also our independence 
will be incomplete without the co-operation of women. But that co-operation 
can come only when our women attain purity. Do you know what I mean by 
purity? I am against our purdah system but certainly there should be modesty. 
All these good qualities are summed up in the little word 'purity'. Without 
modesty, internal and external cleanliness, decency, love of truth, freedom 
from hypocrisy, self-respect, and yearning to serve, there is no purity. The 
word connotes many more such noble qualities. And there is no doubt that 
wherever there is purity, there God is manifest. If our women can secure this 
weapon, they do not need a sword or a spear. But this weapon of purity Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 requires far more training than the iron ones do. At the same time it must be 
understood that it is quite easy to learn this art. 
"See what a useful lesson I have taught you from an ordinary chat regarding 
saris, and I have done nothing more than I ought to. Your father or grandfather 
can lake up the role of your teacher, but as for me I shoulder the responsi-
bilities of your mother. You have to practise the lesson in your life throughout. 
So write down in your diary tomorrow, and show it to me." Bapu used to 
examine my diary and sign it daily. He had awakened me that night at 12-30 
and it was 1.15 a.m. when he concluded by saying, "Now you can go to sleep. I 
woke you up as I could not sleep. I felt that as I had taken on myself the 
responsibility of keeping you here I should teach you." 
Such was my dear mother who lost "her" sleep in worrying over me and who 
gave me lessons by waking me up when "she" could not refrain from giving 
them. 
God has now snatched away ail the three mothers I had. 
Here is a stanza from our Gujarati poet Botadkar, who sang thus of the glories 
of the mother:  
Holy indeed is the Ganga,  
But its water knows an ebb.  
But mother's love is even  
And none so sweet as she. 
And really this sweetness of mother's love was my experience too. I found the 
truth of this stanza in my life. Till their last moments never did the love of any 
of my mother’s fade. 
 
1 Bapu is the same as the English Papa; used for Gandhiji by some of his close followers. 
2 Gandhiji's wife. 
3 Ba is the same as the English Ma; used for Gandhiji's wife by some of his close followers. Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  
II. MEANING OF SACRIFICE 
In spite of all the work he had to do at Noakhali Bapu spent at least ten 
minutes everyday there teaching me the Gila. 
In the Agakhan Palace I had the good fortune to learn from him various subjects 
such as Arithmetic, Algebra, Geometry, Geography, History, Science, and 
Sanskrit; but English he never taught me. Others in the Agakhan Palace taught 
it to me. On account of want of time and Ba's illness, Bapu had to drop 
instructing me in the other subjects, but he never gave up teaching me 
Sanskrit. It was he who gave me my first lessons in the study of the Gita. I have 
passed through the hands of many teachers in school, but though at times I 
took a little help from others. Bapu has remained for me the only instructor in 
the Gita. 
In the Agakhan Palace, however, I could learn only to read the text of the Gita 
correctly. In Noakhali on the day following our arrival Bapu said, "Twenty-four 
hours have passed since you came here; now tell me how far you have 
progressed in the study of the Gita. You are here not only to do my work, I 
want you to pursue your studies a^ well." I replied, "I have at times tried to 
study the Gita after I was released from jail. But I have not wanted to learn 
pronunciation or meaning from anyone else. I didn't mind having number of 
teachers for other subjects but in respect of the Gita. I did not wish to have 
any other teacher than you. So without studying it under anyone I went on 
pronouncing and interpreting on my own." 
Bapu felt pained at this. He said, 'This is only your delusion. Why should we not 
have innumerable teachers to learn a good thing? We should learn even from a 
child. There is no shame in learning a good thing from another. But now let us 
start afresh. Let us begin our Gita lessons from this very day. As regards 
pronunciation, it matters little in your case, but it has always been on my 
conscience that I have not explained the meaning to you sufficiently. Daily you 
must write five couplets from it. You must dissolve the sandhis (write every 
word separately) and give its meaning." I did as I was told and Bapu used to Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11 correct what I had written and sign it, in spite of heavy work. He added. "The 
third chapter is on sacrifice. The study of the Gita is also a sacrifice. Let me 
explain to you in brief what sacrifice means. 
"The Lord says that he who eats without performing sacrifice, eats stolen food. 
This is a statement of great import.  
To take stolen food is like taking raw mercury - i.e. both are indigestible. He is 
a thief who spends even a moment without sacrifice. We all must perform this 
incessant sacrifice. For him who has, by good fortune, his heart in the right 
place, sacrifice is an easy task. He requires neither wealth, nor intelligence, 
nor education. Service rendered to anyone is a sacrifice. Only those are not 
thieves, who have completely dedicated themselves to service; and hence 
those who render service to a small extent are free from theft to that extent. 
Thus we all are thieves in some measure at least. Only when we give up all 
selfishness is our sacrifice complete. To wipe out the consciousness of 'I' and 
'mine' is what is really meant by giving up selfishness. 'This is my brother or 
sister but that one is a stranger' - such sentiments should be eradicated from 
one's heart. He only can do this who can dedicate every little thing to the Lord, 
who can render service knowing himself to be an instrument of the Lord. Such 
people are always happy and calm. To them joy and sorrow are the same. They 
utilize their all, body, mind and soul in the service of others. For most of us 
such sacrifice is only an ideal. If we have the desire to serve the whole world 
what is the type of work which could be suggested to a number of people for 
the benefit of many? It is spinning. Spinning can be practised by numerous 
people as service of others and so it can be considered as service of humanity. 
Innumerable poor people can be maintained through it. Even the blind can spin 
and Ramanama*  can be repeated with the drawing out of each length of yarn. 
"This is the way in which I want to teach you the Gita, not merely 
grammatically. I have given merely one instance to explain to you the meaning 
of sacrifice. In spinning there is sacrifice and in sacrifice there is spinning." 
 
1 The name of God. Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  
III. LESSONS OF THE GITA 
Although Bapu thus looked alter my studies I complained to him at times that 
he had made me give up my education, since he called me away from Karachi, 
where I was going to school. I wanted to pass examinations and had a fascina-
tion for degrees like girls of today. I am grateful to God, however, for His 
having saved me from that delusion. My great teacher imparted such 
instruction, to me as cannot be had even in B.A. or M.A. classes. All the same 
this wisdom has dawned upon me only now. When Bapu was alive I complained 
bitterly to him that he did not let me go to school. 
He replied, "I want to impart to you both knowledge and wisdom." I retorted, 
"Mahadevbhai could become your secretary only because he was so highly 
educated. Have not all others also, who have risen and become great, done so 
because of their degrees?" Bapu laughed and said, "No use being great. You had 
better use the word  upadhi1 (i.e. burden) for a degree. A degree is really a 
burden. I regret having become a barrister and. if you believe me, I am not 
even conscious of being one. Because of my experience, I would rather save 
others from that burden. One may of course study several languages. But what 
troubles me is this cramming for university degrees for which students ruin 
their health. Today our country needs constructive work. There is immense 
work to be done in the villages. The whole face of our country will be changed 
if our students utilize for some constructive work the time spent on studies. It 
would certainly be a different story if the idea behind all this reading was to 
gain knowledge. The aim should be knowledge through reading, and reading on 
the basis of knowledge. But at present there is the vicious circle of 
examinations for studies, and studies for examinations. And then? Ultimately 
the knowledge gained is utilized for earning money. Some become doctors, 
some pleaders, some engineers; and the mad hunt for employment begins. Even 
with employment one may not get enough for one's needs. So the one idea 
behind all education is to obtain the highest post. I admit there are exceptions 
to this rule. I certainly do not mean to say that all the forty crores have only Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13 this one object in view. But this is the main idea behind education. It is 
altogether wrong to believe that service can be rendered only after a certain 
amount of education. One can serve under any circumstance. God has endowed 
man with such powers that he can reasonably find no excuse for not rendering 
service. But man is so wicked, that he snatches at any pretext whatsoever for 
avoiding work. If some have money to serve with, others have a healthy body or 
intelligence. Whatever capacities we have we should utilize in service. We shall 
get cent per cent marks if we dedicate to the Lord all we have. If one who 
owns a crore of rupees gives only half a crore, he will get only 50 per cent 
marks; but if he who has only a pie gives that pie away, he will get cent per 
cent marks. 
"One's service should be untainted. If a person renders service on account of 
fear or selfishness, that is no service. There is no place for selfishness where 
everything is offered to the Lord. A man who renders service in this spirit adds 
daily to his strength. Even work for his daily bread should be a part of service. 
One who is dedicated to service, renders service through everyone of his acts 
including even trifling actions like laughing, or just playing. His acts will in this 
sense be pure. God endows such devotees with all the 
necessary strength. Hence these verses in the Gita:  
अन᭠याि᳟᭠तय᭠तो  मां ये जनाः पयुᭅपासते । 
तेषां िन᭜यािभयुᲦानां  योगᭃेमं वहा᭥यहम् ॥ ९-२२ ॥ 
To those who worship Me, thinking on Me alone and nothing else and are ever 
attached to Me, I take on Myself the burden of giving what they need. 
मिᲬᱫा म᳄तᮧाणा बोधय᭠तः पर᭭परम् । 
कथय᭠त᳟ मां िन᭜यं तु᭬यि᭠त च रमि᭠त च ॥ १०-९ ॥ 
With Me in their thoughts, their whole soul devoted to Me, teaching one 
another, with Me ever on their lips, they live in contentment and joy. 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14 तेषां सततयुᲦानां  भजतां ᮧीितपूवᭅकम्  । 
ददािम बुि᳍योगं तं येन मामुपयाि᭠त  ते ॥ १०-१० ॥ 
To these, ever in tune with me. worshipping Me with affectionate devotion, I 
give the power of selfless action, whereby they come to Me. 
"Just ponder over these verses. The last verse has deep significance. 
Unbounded faith is required to realize it; but what I want to impress on you is 
that all your degrees will not help you in doing God's work. Where would you 
have been, had you studied enough to have entered a college by now? If I could 
have my way, I would ask all college girls and boys to throw themselves into 
this communal fire to quench it. India, which appears like a mere speck on the 
world map, will become as big as an ocean if our students gave up this 
infatuation for degrees. The wise saying that, 'one should cut one's coat 
according to one's cloth' holds good not only for small families but for big 
nations as well. Our customs and activities should conform to the genius of our 
nation. We shall be heading for disaster if we blindly imitate the English. The 
crow saved himself when he reverted to his own gait and gave up imitating that 
of the swan. You know that story, don't you? Stories are not only for 
entertainment. They are meant to convey valuable lessons. Of course there are 
many bad customs in India, but if she proceeds according to her genius, she will 
occupy an unimaginable high position, for there is nothing to match Indian 
culture. New meanings will emerge as I go on explaining the Gita to you. But 
today it is enough if you digest this much. Write it down. Don't do it for the 
sake of mere writing. The Gila should be learnt with a view to practising its 
teachings. Today's whole lesson is based on the Gita." 
I was taught this lesson because of my complaint about his coming in the way of 
my studies. It was an invaluable one. Bapu was so kindhearted that he took all 
criticism, as he would honeyed water. We were free to say to him, whatever 
we thought, without hesitation. How unfortunate it is that only today I realize 
how childishly impertinent I was to him! How true is the Gujarati proverb, 'Even 
if children are naughty parents never forsake them!' God alone knows why Bapu Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15 insisted that I should write my diary, even if had to give up a part of my service 
to him. Perhaps he had a presentiment of his death within a year. The diary, 
therefore, turned out to be his will and testament for me. 
 
1 A pun on the word upadhi  which means degree as well as worry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  
IV. EXTRAVAGANCE IS VIOLENCE 
Gandhiji was to meet Lord Mountbatten on the 30th March 1947 for the first 
time. This was his first journey after he had plunged in the ordeal of Noakhali 
and Bihar. 
He declined to go by 'plane offered to him by the Viceroy. He decided to travel 
by train, saying that he could not travel in a vehicle which could not be used by 
crores of poor people, and that the train would do as well for him. It was very 
warm and it was a twenty-four hour journey, and as usual there were crowds of 
people at every station for  darshan of their beloved Bapu. But did he ever mind 
the discomforts he had to undergo? He called me and said: 
"Now mind you, you are my only companion in this ordeal; and I am going to 
Delhi for the first time. When I decided to go to Noakhali, I had resolved to do 
or die there and had sent away from me all my companions. But I allowed you 
to join me in this sacrifice. You are with me here as you were there. 
Devprakash and Hunar (a Muslim friend) are also here, but they will stay with 
Mridulabehn, who will look after the work on my behalf, but I am duty bound 
not to leave you. You also would not wish  me to leave you, and so you are 
coming with me. But remember this will be a severe test for you. You have to 
take the least possible luggage and choose the smallest third class 
compartment." 
I took the least possible luggage but chose a double compartment because I 
thought that it would not be possible for Bapu to have sufficient rest in a single 
compartment. There would be a lot of noise on account of hordes of people 
coming to have his  darshan at every station, and I would have to keep account 
of collections at every station for the Harijan Fund. So I got the luggage put in 
one of the two compartments and arranged the other for Bapu's use. 
The railway train for Delhi leaves Patna at 9.30 in the morning. We (Bapu and I) 
came to the station at 9.25. There was an immense crowd but we managed to 
get into the compartment. As customary with him Bapu utilized every minute at Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17 his command, and collected money for the Harijan Fund in the remaining few 
minutes. The train left the station exactly at half-past nine. 
As Bapu used to take his midday meals at 10 a.m. during summer I went to the 
other compartment to unpack the luggage in order to prepare meals for him. 
After sometime I came back to his compartment. He was busy writing. He asked 
me, "Where were you all this while?" I replied, "I was preparing your food over 
there." He looked out of the window and asked me to look also. I sensed that I 
had committed some mistake. I looked out and saw passengers hanging on to 
the footboards. I got a gentle rebuke. "Did you ask for this second 
compartment?" He questioned me. "Yes, Bapu," I replied. "I asked Tor it as I 
thought you would be disturbed by my heating the milk on the primus, cleaning 
the vessels, etc." 
"What a lame excuse? This is what is called blind (undiscerning) love. You do 
know that to save me trouble the Government offered me a special train if I did 
not want to go by 'plane. How many trains would be held up and what a lot it 
would cost to run a special train? How can I tolerate it? I am very cost-minded. 
You asked only for a second compartment, but had you asked for a saloon you 
would surely have got it. But would it become you? Your request for an extra 
compartment is like asking for a saloon. I know that you did it out of love but I 
have to teach you to rise lo greater heights, and not to descend. So you must 
not shed tears like that. Now the only way of repentance is to remove all the 
luggage into this compartment and to request the station-master to see me at 
the next station." 
I was trembling all over. I removed the luggage indeed but was worried about 
Bapu, for it often happened that he abandoned a meal as vicarious suffering for 
a mistake, however small, committed by others. At the same time he would do 
all his usual voluminous work such as writing, reading, spinning, and teaching 
me, in the train. 
When we reached the next station, I called the station-master. Bapu 
acquainted him with the situation. "She is my grand-daughter," he said: "but she 
is a simple soul. She does not understand me fully as yet. Hence she occupied Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18 two compartments. It is not her fault. The fault is mine, for there must be 
something lacking in my training of her. Now we both have got to repent for 
the mistake and so we have vacated the other compartment. I would partly be 
relieved of my pain if you use it for the passengers hanging on to the 
footboards." 
The station-master tried to plead with him. but Bapu would not listen to him. 
The station-master offered to attach another bogie for the passengers. But 
Bapu said. "Of course, you ought to get an extra bogie attached, but you should 
utilize this compartment too. To use for oneself what is not essential is 
violence. Do you want to spoil this girl by letting her misuse the privileges she 
gets?" The poor station- master was nonplussed and had to comply with his 
wishes. 
Bapu was the father of the nation. How could he ever bear to travel in comfort 
when his children had to hang on to the train? Thus they got sitting 
accommodation and I learnt a valuable lesson, namely, to take as little as 
possible of the good things of life for myself. Of course I was deeply hurt by the 
rebuff I received at the time; but today, I realize its immense value. Thus did 
Bapu live minding the minutest details of conduct based on non-violence, and 
howsoever little I may have been able to learn from him, it is bound to remain 
with me all my life. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  
V. BAPU'S PUNCTUALITY 
Bapu's pilgrimage on foot from one village to another in Noakhali began 
everyday exactly at 7 a.m. He got very annoyed even if there was a delay of 
two minutes. Once it took me five minutes longer to get ready as certain things 
could be packed only after he was ready, whereupon he said, "See, the  kirtan 
singers and village people have been standing outside for a long lime and still 
you are delaying. You have stolen five minutes of live hundred people and how 
can this be ever tolerated? I am going; you follow. I don't like this waste of 
time. Don't think that in future too you can take your time and follow me later. 
You can of course overtake me by running since you are young and I am old. But 
it is wrong to be late. Work should be done according to schedule, and when 
people have been told seven as my starting time, and there is delay even of 
two seconds I am pained." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  
VI. BAPU'S THOROUGHNESS 
Narayanpur is a village in Noakhali. Bapu reached there at seven in the evening. 
We stayed at a poor weaver's place. On arrival at his destination, it was usual 
for Bapu to have his feet washed with hot water and to do some writing. 
Meanwhile, I would arrange for his massage and bath. He never used soap for 
his bath. He used instead a rough stone. This stone had been given to him years 
ago by Mirabehn. I had, however, inadvertently left it behind in the village 
where we halted last. I remembered it when I was arranging for the bath. I told 
Bapu that I had forgotten to bring the stone he used for his bath and that it 
might be at the weaver's. "I don't know what to do now," I added. Bapu thought 
for a while and replied, "You have no doubt made a mistake; I want you to go 
back and find the stone. Ask Nirmalbabu to prepare my meals. And you go alone 
and look for the stone. Only then, you will not forget it next time." I suggested 
with some trepidation, "There are many volunteers here. May I take one of 
them?" "Why?" asked Bapu. To this I could not reply. The forests of coconut and 
betel-nut trees were so dense in Noakhali that a stranger might easily lose his 
way. Moreover, those were days of communal trouble. It was a lonely way and 
the few houses there belonged to Muslims only. How could I go alone? But I had 
to as I had committed an offence. And so I set out without answering him. 
I asked myself what I would do if some  goondas were to pounce upon me on the 
way. But with Ramanama (the name of the Lord) on my lips and following our 
footprints I went back the way we had come. 
On reaching the village with great difficulty, I managed to locate the weaver's 
house. Only an old woman lived in it. She did not of course know that the stone 
was so precious. And so she had thrown it away. After a good deal of trouble I 
found it and I was overjoyed. Immediately I started back for Narayanpur. At 
one in the afternoon I reached home which I had left at half-past nine in the 
morning. I was very hungry. But greater than this hunger was the pain at the 
thought that I had been deprived of serving Bapu during that time because of 
this lapse on my part. Placing the stone on Bapu's lap I burst into tears. He said, Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21 "Today you have been put to the test. Whatever God does, he does for our 
good. On the very first day you came to me, you remember that I had warned 
and explained to you at length till two o'clock at night that it needs courage to 
join me in my sacrifice. If you falter even a little, you will be considered to 
have failed. You can even at this stage return to Maluiva if you like, but once 
the pilgrimage has begun you will not be allowed to leave. Thanks to the stone 
you have had your first test so early. You have passed. You have no idea how 
happy I feel. The stone has been my cherished companion lor the past twenty-
five years. Whether in prison or in pal-ace it has been with me. Had it not been 
found it would have distressed me and Mirabehn as well. Moreover, you have 
learnt a good lesson to be always careful with every useful thing. One should 
not be careless, thinking that as many such stones are available one can easily 
replace a lost one." 
I said, "But Bapu, if ever I took Ramanama with all my heart il was today. My 
heart trembled as I went along that deserted path." Thereupon he laughed and 
said, "Oh yes, one remembers the Lord only when one is in trouble!" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  
VII. BAPU THE MISER 
Once there was a slight delay in heating the drinking water in the morning. I 
could not light the fire on account of damp weather. So tearing a piece of the 
border of my sari I dipped it in kerosene. Bapu observed it from behind. When I 
was preparing to light it he said to me, "Will you show me the cloth you are 
going to use for lighting the fire?" I gave it to him. Bapu opened out the folded 
piece which was long enough to be used as a tape. He said, "Wash this piece 
and put it in the sun to dry. Is it proper to use for lighting the fire a long piece 
of cloth which can serve as a tape? You know how miserly I am. Where is the 
harm if we were to get the hot water a little late? What a lot ol kerosene was 
wasted in soaking this long piece, and would it not have been burnt had I not 
seen it?" 
I said. "Bapu, now why should we be so miserly?" He replied jokingly, "You are a 
daughter of a generous father. But I have no father who will give things to me." 
Then, suddenly becoming serious he said, "There is always some meaning even 
in my jokes, which, if you can understand, I shall be satisfied." In the end the 
piece had to be washed and dried and I was made to use it as a tape. I was 
taught to light the fire with the straw that was lying nearby. Bapu always felt 
great joy in teaching such small things even in the midst of his multifarious and 
momentous activities in the service of the nation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  
VIII. LOVER OF CLEANLINESS 
Bapu was always very particular about cleanliness. He was certainly keen about 
external cleanliness but inner cleanliness was one of his unique requirements. 
Whenever he found anything done in an unclean manner, then rather than find 
fault with the person concerned, he would teach him cleanliness by doing the 
thing himself 
Noakhali was full of narrow paths; some were so narrow that Bapu and I could 
not walk abreast. So he held a staff for support. He could not bear to see dirt 
anywhere and yet sometimes he had to walk along very dirty tracks. Once he 
began cleaning up with leaves some spittle, excreta, rubbish, etc. I was taken 
aback for a while. The villagers also looked on in amazement. 
I protested in a fit of anger, "Bapu, why do you put me to shame? Why did you 
start cleaning this yourself instead of calling me to do it when I was just 
behind?" At this he laughed and said, "You have no idea of the enjoyment I 
derive from such work. And is it not less troublesome for me to do it than to 
order someone else?" I retorted, "But the people are watching you." Bapu said, 
"You will see that from tomorrow I shall not have to clean such dirty roads, for 
the people will realize that this type of work is not derogatory. And I would be 
pained if they were to do it only to please me." I said, "Suppose they clean it 
only tomorrow, then what?" Turning the tables on me he said, "I shall send you 
to inspect it and if the road is dirty I myself will come and clean it. To clean 
what is unclean is my work." 
And it turned out just as he had predicted. On the following day when I went 
back to see the road, I found it dirty, but instead of telling Bapu I cleaned the 
road myself. Then I reported, "Bapu. I have cleaned the road. The villagers 
joined me and have promised that hereafter they would clean it themselves 
and I need not go." He said, "You have robbed me of merit. I wanted to clean 
the road myself, but it does not matter now. Two things, have been 
accomplished: first, the people have to this extent learnt cleanliness and Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24 secondly, if they adhere to their promise they will have learnt to keep to their 
word." The road was kept clean thereafter. 
Referring to the above incident Bapu said to me after a few days, "Do not think 
that only the people of Noakhali have the habit of committing nuisance and 
spitting in the lanes and bypaths. People of our Kathiawad also have the same 
habit of dirtying the roads. This bad practice prevails in many parts of India. 
More so in Kathiawad. I had a desire in my youth to eradicate this unhygienic 
habit but as fate would have it, I could not stay long enough in Kathiawad. Your 
anger with me was uncalled for. Just as one's hunger is satisfied only when one 
oneself eats, so I am happy only when I myself engage in sanitary work. I derive 
infinite pleasure from the work of sanitation." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  
IX. RAMANAMA  
At Amki I could not get goat's milk for Bapu. I tried my best to procure it but 
failed. So I had to inform Bapu who said to me, "What does it matter? In the 
place of goat's milk coconut milk will do as well, and fresh coconut oil will 
serve the purpose of ghee." 
Bapu showed me how to prepare them and accordingly I gave them to him. As 
he usually took eight ounces of goat's milk he took the same quantity of 
coconut milk too. But he could not digest it and so had an attack of diarrhoea. 
The frequent motions made him weak till in the evening when he was coming 
back to the hut he felt a reeling sensation. Generally symptoms like yawning, 
perspiration, coldness of hand and feet, etc. precede such a reeling sensation 
in his case. He yawned, but there was only four feet more to the hut and I 
thought he would be able to get there, but I was mistaken. Bapu who was 
walking with my support was already collapsing. I held his head with care and 
shouted for Nirmalbabu. He came and we both helped Bapu to bed. Then it 
struck me that I should send for Dr. Sushilabehn who was in a village nearby; I 
feared that I would be taken for a fool if Bapu's illness suddenly took a serious 
turn, and if I did not send for her in time. I wrote a chit and just as I was giving 
it to Nirmalbabu for despatching, Bapu woke up from his faint and called out, 
"Manudi," (that was Bapu's term of endearment for me), "I do not like your 
calling Nirmalbabu. As you are still young, however, I can excuse you. But at 
such a time I expect you to do nothing else but take  Ramanama  .with all your 
heart. As for myself I was already engrossed in taking His name. I would have 
liked it immensely had you started taking  Ramanama  instead of shouting for 
Nirmalbabu. Now don't inform Sushi la or call her. The real doctor is my Rama. 
As long as Rama needs service from me, He will keep me alive. When He does 
not, He will call me back to Himself." 
A shiver passed through my body when the words "don't inform Sushila or call 
her" struck my ears. I snatched the chit from Nirmalbabu and tore it to pieces. 
Bapu saw this and remarked, "So you had already written to her." I had to admit Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26 the fact. Then he said, "Today the Lord has saved us both. On reading the chit 
Sushila would have left her work and immediately run to us. I would not have 
liked it at all. That would have made me angry with myself and with you. Thank 
God, I was tested today. I am convinced that I shall not die of sickness if  
Ramanama  has penetrated deep down into my heart. This rule is for everybody. 
One has to suffer for one's mistakes and in that spirit I went through the pain. 
One should have  Ramanama  on one's lips till one's last breath, but it should not 
be repeated parrot-like; it should spring from the heart as in the case of 
Hanuman. When Sitaji presented a pearl necklace to him he broke the pearls to 
see if the name of Rama was written in them. It does not matter whether the 
incident actually took place or not. We may not be able to make our bodies as 
strong as that of Hanuman but we can certainly make our souls as great. One 
can achieve the devotion of Hanuman if one is intent on acquiring it. If one 
cannot reach that height it is enough if one makes a sincere attempt. Has not 
Mother Gita taught us to make every effort and leave the result in the hands of 
God? We should try our very best to follow that teaching. 
"Now you have understood what my attitude is towards the sickness of anybody, 
be it you, me or anyone else." And that very day he wrote to an ailing sister: 
"There is only one panacea in the whole world and that is Ramanama.  But His 
name can only prove effective if the rules pertaining to it are strictly adhered 
to. But who cares to observe the rules?" 
Strangely enough the above incident occurred on the 30th of January 1947 
according to my diary, exactly a year before his death. 
That unshakable faith in  Ramanama  remained with him 
till his last breath. I did not then imagine that on the same day a year later, I 
should have the heart-rending experience of hearing  Rama, Ra.... ma  as the 
last audible words of the great departing soul. Mysterious indeed are the ways 
of the Lord. 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  
X. IMPORTANCE OF SMALL THINGS 
Since the time that he sent away his companions to different villages, Bapu was 
overburdened with work. It used to be difficult even for six persons to cope 
with his office work. Now it had to be managed by two, viz. Bapu himself and 
Nirmalbabu. But Nirmalbabu was unacquainted with the work. Moreover, he 
could manage only the Bengali and the English correspondence. Gujarati, Hindi 
and Marathi were foreign to him and Bapu had to look after correspondence in 
those languages. Then many came to see him. Besides, he had to go through his 
Hindi and English post-prayer talks for the Press as press-reporters could not 
interpret him accurately. The most difficult work was that of packing up the 
luggage daily and seeing that not the smallest thing was lelt behind. Though it 
was I who was doing this Bapu always saw that everything was all right. One 
may wonder what luggage he carried on his pilgrimage on foot, that was 
difficult for anyone to pack. He always carried his daily requirements with him, 
as he did not want to be a burden to anyone. And these were not merely pencil 
and paper. Here is a list of things which we had to take: From needle and 
thread to the cooker with all its accessories such as pincers, cooking pan, etc. 
Then there were vegetable knife, earthen bowl, wooden spoon, bucket, 
tumbler, commode, etc. These were our companions not because they could 
not be obtained owing to the ravages of fires in Noakhali but because Gandhiji 
liked to use his own things. So they found their way even to the palaces of Shri 
Birlaji. In addition, his office requirements were packed separately in a 
handbag from which the loss of the smallest chit of paper would bring Bapu's 
work to a standstill. This bag contained sundry important things such as letters 
from Pandit Jawaharlalji, the Sardar and the Viceroy, a copy of the Gita, 
Ramayana, Bible, Quran-e-Shareef and his  Bhajanavali  (book of hymns). It also 
contained his rough drafts of letters written on the back of those he got by 
post. I had to look after this valuable bag and if anything was lost from it, the 
responsibility was mine. Still Bapu would say, "If anything is lost from there you 
may escape blame, but how can I?" This shows how much he was concerned Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28 about the smallest thing in it. Again nothing could be left ill-arranged simply 
because our stay was to be very short at a particular place. Unawares Bapu may 
inspect my arrangement. 
Here is an excerpt of a letter which shows how much he was worried about his 
work in Noakhali: "How can I cope with the work here? All around there is 
conflagration. It is only through God's grace that my work goes on. My truth and 
non-violence are being weighed against the finest weight - not that which 
weighs a pearl but by one which is too heavy for weighing even a hundredth 
part of a hair. All round there is exaggeration and untruth as if truth had en-
tirely deserted us. Violence stalks the land under the guise of non-violence and  
Adharma in the name of  Dharma. But my truth and non-violence can be tested 
only under such an ordeal. And I am here to go through the test." 
Such was Bapu's plight in his great work at Noakhali. 
To cope with this tremendous work he used to get up at 2 a.m. and wake me 
also. To get up so early and that too in such cold was a trying situation for me, 
but never for him. Half in jest once I said to him, "Bapu, I would light a candle 
to God as a mark of thanks if either you wake up late or make some mistake in 
looking at the watch." 
He burst into laughter and said, "God is not so susceptible to bribe as you/' And 
really God did not seem to care at all for my votive offering; and lo! no sooner 
did the hour of 2 a.m. strike than fondly slapping me on the head he woke me 
up saying, "Get up Manudi, see, God was not tempted by your offer." Then he 
asked me to light the lamp which he would always have put out on going to 
bed. I remarked, "Bapu, we sleep at about 10 or 11 p.m. and we get up at 2 
a.m., so why not keep the lamp burning dimly?" He replied, "That is true but 
who will give me so much kerosene? Neither you earn for me nor do I earn 
myself. It is quite natural for you to think like that, because your father in 
Mahuva is earning. And moreover, do you realize that I have two purposes 
served in having the lamp put out? One is that the moment you light the lamp 
sleep is shaken off, so that you don't doze when I dictate anything to you, and 
second, so much of kerosene is saved. Thus I can kill two birds with one stone, Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29 but do you know the meaning ,of the proverb?" I gave him the generally 
understood meaning but he gave me a different interpretation. He said, "One 
stone (one way) and two birds (two jobs). What is that way by following which 
two jobs are always accomplished? Two did not literally mean only two jobs. 
But two here may mean two or a hundred. Here in Noakhali thousands have 
been ruined. This leads me to think that we should not let even one moment go 
waste. Sleep, food, etc. we should have just enough to keep, us going. We 
should be restrained in all things." 
Here he made a reference to poet Lalit's devotional song beginning with – 
‘आजनो ᭨हावो लीजीये रे, काल कोणे दीठी छे?’ 
'Take advantage of today, who knows what will happen tomorrow? That is why I 
am saying all this to you just now at 2 a.m. If the Lord wants to take away 
either of us He may do so. It is all in His hands. So this verse needs to be fully 
understood and assimilated. 
"Then what is that golden path by pursuing which we can achieve all purposes? 
That path is the Path of Service - that is, service of one's neighbour, or service 
of the Lord. Devotional marks on the forehead or telling the beads of the rosary 
does not connote the service of the Lord. To put such a mark and then to stab 
someone - as is happening nowadays - that is sheer hypocrisy. But as saint 
Narsinha Mehta has said. 'Devotion means absolute self-surrender (lit. offering 
of one's head).' So remember if you cannot serve with your body, then you must 
do so with your mind. Your getting up, sitting, eating, drinking, playing, 
laughing, all should be for the welfare of the world, and with such a mind you 
should render whatever service falls to your lot. If you understand even this 
much you have learnt a good deal. See, what deep meaning our sayings have. 
Even through these little incidents I have taught you a valuable lesson." 
And thus this great teacher spoke to me for about 20 minutes in the stillness of 
the night at two o'clock in a low tone in order not to disturb any one else. 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  
XI HOMELESS 
The huts in Noakhali are made of mud and coconut leaves. There are very few 
buildings of brick. The few that were there were burnt to ashes during the 
communal disturbances. 
Bapu's headquarters in Noakhali was in a village called Shrirampur. The house 
was made of mud and its roof was thatched with coconut leaves, but friends 
had made every arrangement in it to make Bapu comfortable. But now 
everyday we had to move from one village to another. Many huts had been 
destroyed by fire, and when it rained, it came down in torrents, so it was 
impossible to spend the night under the trees. Bapu might walk on foot during 
his tour but where was he to stay? This was the problem that worried friends. 
Among them, Satishbabu who managed the whole Gandhi Camp was the most 
worried. But being resourceful he constructed a folding hut which was at once 
artistic and useful. It had doors and windows, light planks of wood for sleeping 
on, some straw with a mat in case the ground was rough. There was also a 
small bathroom at the back. Bapu knew that Satishbabu was making a folding-
hut but he did not realize that he was making a hut which he later described as 
"like a palace". 
Bapu used to stay at Shrirampur. His real tour, however, began from Chandipur, 
a village two miles off. The area which was greatly devastated was about seven 
to eight miles from Shrirampur. As this would be a very long distance for him 
we halted for the night at Chandipur. This village also was not immune from 
the disturbances. 
Before he started from Chandipur some ladies came and put the auspicious 
mark on his forehead and then our prayers began. Bapu had instructed me 
beforehand to sing Vaishnavajana to tene kahiye  and substitute Christianjana, 
Parsijana, Sikhajana, Muslimjana and Harijanjana for Vaishnavajana at every 
repetition of the first line and he too joined in the song. This song was not sung Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31 daily but only on special occasions. He discarded his sandals in Chandipur. The 
reason he gave was: "When we go to holy places like 
temples or masjids or churches we put off our sandals and I have to go to  
Daridranaraycma.  I am going to people whose kith and kin have been looted, 
where innocent women and children have been slaughtered and where they do 
not have sufficient clothes to cover their nudity. To tread on such ground and 
to meet such people is, to my mind, a pilgrimage; so how is it possible to keep 
my sandals on?" While he said this, his heart was stirred to its depths like 
buttermilk in the process of churning. Even now his pathetic- voice rings in my 
ears. Bapu's feet were even more tender than our palms; so his feet were often 
pierced by thorns and they became cracked. 
Exactly at 7-30 a.m. he commenced his pilgrimage through betel nut and 
coconut forests, with one hand on my shoulder, a bamboo slick in the other and 
the song "Walk on Alone" of the Poet Rabindranath Tagore, on his lips: 
"If they answer not to thy call walk alone,  
If they are afraid and cower mutely facing the wall,  
O thou of evil luck, 
Open thy mind and speak out alone.  
If they turn away and desert you when crossing 
the wilderness, 
O thou of evil luck, 
Trample the thorns under thy tread and along the  
blood-lined track travel alone.  
If they do not hold up the light,  
When the night is troubled with storm,  
O thou of evil luck, 
With the thunder flame of pain ignite thine own heart Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32 and let it burn alone." 
This song in Bengali was sung everyday before setting out, and then all day long 
we went on singing hymn after hymn and Ramadhun. On the way Bapu saw 
places where bones were scattered about, huts had been burnt down and 
people had been killed; his heart was broken, only the hymns gave him solace. 
On 7th January, 1947. at 9-30 a.m. we reached Masimpur where devastation 
had been indeed great. As there was no place tor him to stay, the folding hut 
was put up. Entering it, Bapu observed minutely every nook and corner, up and 
down and sat down on one of the wooden planks and 1 started washing his feet. 
For a few moments he was silent and then said, "Have you marked what a lot of 
trouble Satishbabu has taken on this  palace of mine? He has made it all in such 
small parts that even children can carry it from place to place. .So overflowing 
is his love for me! How can I exclusively enjoy his boundless love? So I have 
decided against this  palace being carried to any other village. It can be used 
either as a hospital or for some other such purpose. I can be comfortable 
anywhere. Even if there is no house there are so many trees here to give us 
shelter. Let God do what He wills. Why should we worry about it? I have told all 
our workers who have gone into the villages that they should depend for all 
their necessities on the villagers only. They should look upon themselves as 
members of the villagers' family. They should not think that they were 
somebody and that they had gone to serve and oblige the villagers. If they 
entertained any such ideas they would not be able to carry on for a long time. 
If they fell sick they should use only such medicines as may be available locally 
or be prescribed by the local physician or in the last resort depend upon the 
five elements (earth, fire, etc.). This rule applies to me as well." 
The next day Bapu did not allow us to carry the folding- hut. Thereafter he 
used to slay with one of the villagers. This enabled him to live with people of 
all sorts of both the communities. Hindus, Muslims, weavers, potters, barbers, 
blacksmiths, traders, Brahmanas, Harijans, etc. so much so that he stayed even 
with those who had indulged in killing in Noakluili. Bapu's presence helped in 
bringing about a change of heart. And it seemed as if the people too thought Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33 that by extending hospitality to him, they got an opportunity to atone for their 
sins in this very life and thus to get themselves absolved. Bapu considered 
himself fortunate to live with the people, and there was a glow of happiness on 
his face in spite of so much that was painful. Many said that they did not mind 
the outrage of Noakhali as because of it Bapu's feet had sanctified their 
villages! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  
XII. RECEPTION WITH COSTLY GARLANDS 
In Devi pur the local workers and the people had arranged a grand reception for 
Bapu. We came to know later that they had spent about Rs 200 on it. Usually he 
was welcomed by the womenfolk of the village with an auspicious mark on his 
forehead. Sometimes they used also to decorate the village with coconut 
leaves. He took no objection to such a welcome, because it did not involve any 
expenditure except labour with their own hands. 
In Devipur, however, the decoration was made with flowers. coloured paper, 
silken, silver and gold threads, bought from Chandipur. They had also small 
lights of ghee and oil. Bapu saw this and became serious for a while. He then 
asked me to gather information about the local leaders, the population of the 
village, etc. Subsequently I informed him that there were 300 Hindus who were 
mainly Brahmanas, Kayasthas and Shudras, and 150 Muslims. He called the 
leader and asked him in an angry tone, "From where did you get all this?" The 
leader answered, "Your visit is a blessed occasion for us and so we Hindus only 
collected Rs.300 by giving according to our purse, with 8 annas as the minimum 
subscription, to buy flowers and other decorations." Bapu was all the more 
enraged and said. "All these decorations and flowers will vanish in an instant. It 
makes me feel that you are all playing me false. My visit has emboldened you 
to put up this big show only to add fuel to the fire of communalism. Don't you 
realize that I am thrown into the fire myself? I would not mind it so much, had 
these garlands been of yarn as they would have served two purposes - one of 
decoration and the other, of utility when the yarn is converted into cloth. 
There seems to be an overabundance of money in this village or else you would 
not have thought of these decorations in such hard limes. This is not the way to 
show your love for me if that is your object. If you have real love for me, do 
what I say. I cannot imagine how you could think of wasting money like this 
after this terrible holocaust. 
"And moreover, you are a Congress worker, a public worker, and you say you 
have read my books; you are an M.A. and you have been to prison; you wear Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35 this short khaddar dhoti, and still you have used all this foreign silk and 
ribbons. I only want to impress upon you that all this is very painful to me. This 
makes me think of my fellow workers and wonder whether they who are known 
today as servants of the people, will also start receiving and giving costly 
garlands if appointed to honourable posts in future. 
"I realize today that even now I cannot say for certain that every one of my 
workers would ever be simple and that he would not swerve from his ideal even 
if he owns a number of cars or big bungalows. Well, this incident has made me 
more vigilant, more awake. I do not find fault with you; merely disclosed your 
real self. Who can help that? But through this incident God has shown me where 
I stand. I wonder what more is still in store for me to see." 
How could those poor workers have anticipated that Bapu would suffer such 
unbearable pain through their action? The worker in question went away 
downcast and removed all the decorations within half an hour. Bapu asked 
them to make a reel of all the threads used in the garlands. The reel thus made 
was a big one. It was given away to the people for sewing purposes. The thread 
was long enough to make about 20 reels of the usual size. But for Bapu all this 
thread would have gone waste. Thereafter he was welcomed only with hand-
spun yarn, and 50 yards of cloth woven out of it was distributed to the poor. 
Indeed Bapu was a real friend of the poor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  
XIII. BAPU'S REMARKABLE ACHIEVEMENT 
We were at Calcutta with Bapu at the time of the attainment of freedom after 
years of slavery. 
The Hindus of Noakhali feared an outburst of disturbances on the 15th August 
1947, and hence Bapu went to Calcutta from Kashmir to reach Noakhali on that 
day. 
At the time he reached Calcutta, there was an outburst of communal violence 
there and so Shri Prafulla Ghosh, the then Prime Minister of Bengal, asked him 
to stop there for two days. He agreed to do so. Though the outrage took a turn 
for the worse in Calcutta he decided to adhere to his original programme to go 
to Noakhali; and we packed up accordingly. But just then Shri Shaheed 
Suhravardy came to see him and said, "You please proceed to Noakhali after 
you have quelled the riots in Calcutta. Nobody but you can quench the fire that 
is aflame here." Bapu replied, "I cannot do anything single-handed. I am 
prepared to be your secretary; but as I have promised to go to Noakhali. I ought 
to proceed. However, I am prepared to stay here and quell the riots, provided 
you take up the responsibility for Noakhali. But tor bringing peace here you 
shall have to stay with me all along and live like a fakir." 
After thinking for a while Shri Suhrawardy said, "All right, I shall send a man to 
Noakhali and try my best." Bapu said, "Trying your best won't suffice. You give 
me your answer after mature consideration; because, just as, I have said that I 
shall go on a fast unto death if anything happened in Bihar, so also I shall be 
justified in taking the same course for Noakhali if further disturbances lake 
place there." 
These talks were held on the 13th August. How cleverly Bapu can find a way 
out! He put all the responsibility for the outrage at Noakhali and for future 
peace on the people there and so Shaheed Saheb was baffled for a while. For 
him it was not a difficult task; for responsible Muslims of Noakhali, who had 
charges brought against them, had been acquitted, and were used to obeying Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37 Shaheed Saheb. Bapu had indeed a wonderful method of getting work done by 
the guilty person himself, by putting all the responsibility for future good 
behaviour on him. Thus he would venture to hand over all that he had to a 
servant who daily stole and in this manner appeal to the best in him, and 
awaken his sense of honour and responsibility. 
The next day Shaheed Saheb came with his group. Ail of them promised, "We 
will see that there is perfect peace in Noakhali and we will be on the guard to 
prevent future trouble. But you please stay here." Thus Bapu accomplished his 
work in Noakhali without stirring out of Calcutta. Muslims went to Noakhali and 
offered every kind of help to Hindus in order to allay their fear Suhrawardy 
Saheb agreed to stay with Bapu day and night. They both agreed not to have 
any interviews without the presence of the other and to issue joint statements 
only. On the 14th afternoon we went to stay in Haidari Mansion, Beliaghata, 
where Muslims dared not go. 
The building was very dirty and we had not experienced such inconveniences as 
we did here, even in the Noakhali tour. There was only one room and numerous 
people came for  darshan.  Bapu could not get even a moment's peace. Some 
young men were angry with him on the day we went to stay there. They said, 
"You are an enemy of the Hindus. You have come here only because a few 
Muslims have been killed the last three or four days. Where were you up till 
now?" Bapu smiled in reply and calmed them down by saying. "You are all 
youths. But to me you are like children. Even my youngest son Devadas is older 
than everyone of you. Why can't you realize that I, a Hindu by birth, a Hindu by 
action, can never be an enemy of the Hindus? Who was it but I that went to 
Noakhali? I was going there today too. I want help from you. I can't do anything 
single- handed. It is in your hands to be either protectors or destroyers. If you 
destroy trie I do not mind. I am old. I don't wish to live long. I have served 
enough. I have come here merely to explain and calm you down if I can. I am a 
servant of both Hindus and Muslims. To me all religions are the same. Now see, 
have I not arranged for permanent peace in Noakhali, even from here?" He then 
told them how Shaheed Saheb had joined him in this work. Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38 Could it have been a premonition when he said, "It is in your hands to be either 
protectors or destroyers?" For in the end it was the Hindus who turned out to be 
his destroyers! 
Those young men were pacified and they themselves then began to spread 
Bapu's message of peace. And in Calcutta, 
which was till then the scene of mutual slaughter between Hindus and Muslims, 
people of both the communities came together in a lorry to Bapu, with sky-
rending shouts of Hindu Muslim Bhai Hain  (Hindus and Muslims are brothers),  
Hindu Muslim Ek Ho  (Let Hindus and Muslims unite), at 11-30 p.m. i.e. just half 
an hour before the clock ushered in the day of freedom. This noisy atmosphere 
of warm fraternization continued for the whole night. Bapu could not get a 
wink of sleep, as not only men but also women and children of both 
communities came together to him as if for darshan of the father of their 
freedom, and as if begging forgiveness for their misdeeds and vowing not to 
behave so in the future. So at any rate it appeared. Every city celebrated this 
great day with blazing lights, processions, etc. but Bapu's way of celebrating it 
by creating permanent Unity within half an hour, surpassed them all. And ever 
since there has not been any serious untoward incident in Noakhali. Bapu's 
workers are there now as they were then. 
Bapu had asked us to fast that day but I objected and said, "Bapu, shouldn't you 
give us sweets today?" To that he replied, "You know that I ask you to fast on 
occasions like marriage, birth or death and especially so on auspicious 
occasions. Besides, from today we shoulder a great burden of responsibilities. 
Just as when we fast on  ekadashi  (a holy day) our minds are drawn more 
towards devotion, so also we shall become more conscious of our 
responsibilities by observing a fast on this day. Moreover, the spinning wheel is 
the weapon of freedom and we can hardly afford to forget it. The observance 
of silence is equally important, for through it we pray to the Almighty to keep 
us always awake to our responsibilities. All this is necessary to save us from 
pomp, luxury and pride when we get power. From today we should become 
more and more humble." Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39 Bapu's face was serene. Within half an hour he had brought about an 
unimaginable change in the whole atmosphere and yet there was not even an 
iota of pride in him. On the contrary he said, "What can any man do single- 
handed? Why do you congratulate me alone? This achievement is due to the co-
operation of all of you." 
Bapu and the rest of us observed the day by spinning and a fast. He addressed 
all the local Ministers who had come to him for his blessings, "You see, from 
today onwards you wear a crown of thorns. Even after getting power you should 
remain as simple as you are today. Take care that pride does not possess you; 
for power is a great allurement. Don't go in for pomp and luxury. Do not be 
tempted by the glamour of authority. Set an example to the public by your 
simplicity, humility, non-violence and tolerance. Villages have to be uplifted. 
The down-trodden have to be raised. Never give up truth. Now starts your real 
test. During the British days, in a sense, there was no test for you; but from 
today a series of tests begins. May God give you complete success in them!" 
The 15th August, 1947 was a Friday and it was on a Friday that he died as a 
victim to a Hindu's fury. It is our fault that he is no more with us to advise us! 
Let us remember his wise words and pray to God to give us strength to follow 
them, as a means of repentance for that crime of murder committed by us on 
him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  
XIV. BAPU'S GLORIOUS BIRTHDAYS 
I have used the word 'birthday' here in the plural as Bapu's birthday falls on the 
2nd October according to the English calendar and on the 12th day of the dark 
half of the month of Bhadarva according to the Indian calendar, and so both 
these days are celebrated. In the year 1947 the 2nd of October came first. 
Now we shall have to celebrate his birthdays without the light of his presence. 
Bapu had prophesied on the 2nd of October 1947 that his next birthday would 
see India either transformed or him no more alive. Who could then have 
thought that his prophecy would prove so tragically true? 
At 3-30 a.m. on the 2nd October 1947, we got up for prayers. Many inmates of 
the Birla House had already assembled. One by one we bowed to Bapu. By way 
of joke I remarked, "This is not fair. It is you who should bow to others on your 
birthday, but today, instead of you bowing down, you are quietly accepting our 
bows!" Bapu replied, "'Yes, the ways of Mahatmas are contrary to those of the 
world. Haven't you all raised me to the pedestal of a Ma- hatma? It doesn't 
matter if the Mahatma is only a counterfeit coin; but once the word is applied, 
he is above the rules of ordinary courtesy!" 
At that time Bapu was suffering from a severe cough, cold and fever. The cough 
at times was so violent that a bystander could hardly bear to look on. Bapu, 
however, instead of resting for a while, began his daily correspondence and 
writing for the  Harijan weeklies, immediately after prayers. 
The kind of cough he had, a periodic duration of three weeks. The doctors, 
therefore, requested him to take a pennicilin injections so that he may have 
some relief during the period. There was a tussle between the doctors and 
Bapu about this. 
He said, "And what about my  Ramanama'! If  Ramanama saturates my heart, I 
am sure my cough will vanish tomorrow; and if it continues for your three 
weeks' period, I am prepared to proclaim to the world that I was found wanting 
in the matter of  Ramanama." Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41 A doctor argued, "Maybe, but how can you dismiss summarily all these laborious 
researches in science? Bring me your most perfect devotee of  Ramanama  and I 
will infect him with cholera." 
Bapu said. "That is only a presumptuous claim of science. Science has yet a long 
way to go to get at truth. But I am sure that one who chants the Lord's name 
with real faith can never fall ill. Disease as such will be rooted out if people 
become so pure. You are mistaken. Tomorrow someone may suggest that I 
should eat liver or take liver-injections. Should I then take such foreign 
articles? India is a lazy country and the laziest community in it is that of 
doctors. They cannot prepare anything here. They simply believe in remedies 
manufactured elsewhere. What a pathetic situation! India - a beggar country! 
Nature has provided us with everything and yet we have to stretch our hands to 
foreigners. I feel extremely pained about it whenever I think of it. I have done 
my best. Only when fortune favours India, her condition will improve. Now I 
have no desire to do anything. I am longing to disappear from the world 
quietly, with  Ramanama  on my lips. It is my lack of ability that I am unable to 
impress upon people the full import of the potency of  Ramanama.  Today I am 
in a potter's kiln with flames all around me. Just as you doctors are making re-
searches in science, so also I am in search of  Ramanama. If I succeed, well and 
good; if not, I shall die in the attempt. That today, because of this 2nd of 
October, you have all come to greet me lovingly, is a fine indication of your 
love lor me; but personally, my only desire now is either not to be alive on my 
next birthday so that I may not have to see this fire, or to see a changed India. 
So please pray for what I wish instead of for my long life." 
These were the words he uttered at 5-30 a.m. on the 2nd October, 1947. 
It is generally believed that on a happy occasion we ought not to say anything 
ominous or weep or get angry whatever may be the provocation. Today I find 
that there is some significance in that belief. 
At 7 a.m. that day we went out for our morning walk with Bapu. On the road he 
was annoyed with an Englishman who attempted to take his photograph. Bapu 
disliked photographers as a class since they had harassed him often enough. Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42 "Today is a day for prayer," he remarked sharply, "instead of that you are doing 
this." 
Kripalaniji, Suchetabehn and many others came up to greet him. We had 
observed a fast and so had he. I said, "Bapu, why observe a fast today?" He 
replied, "This day should be observed as the birthday of the Spinning Wheel, 
i.e. of the God of Service. So we should fast on His birthday and try to become 
purer by repeatedly offering prayers saying, '0 Spinning Wheel, keep us at Your 
feet'. My fast today is by way of such a prayer, not as a celebration of my 
birthday to which I attach no importance." 
As usual Bapu finished his massage, bath, etc. at 8-30 a.m. Mirabehn had 
artistically arranged flowers in the shape of  ॐ, हे राम ! and a Cross just in front 
of his seat. Putting our garlands of yarn round his neck, we all again bowed to 
him. Then there was a short prayer attended by Jawaharlalji, Indira Gandhi, 
Ghanshyamdas Birla and family, Sardar Patel, K. M. Munshi, C. H. Bhabha, Dr. 
Jivraj Mehta, and many others, who crowded the room to overflowing. When 
they dispersed after the prayers, which were from all religions, Bapu had a 
sudden attack of severe cough. A friend remarked, "Bapu, you have not yet 
been cured of your cough." He replied, "I shall be free from cough if the Lord 
favours; if not I should like to die of it. I have no desire now to live for 125 
years. Today you must all pray to God either to take me away from this fire or 
to grant good sense to India. I had never been so downcast in any of my numer-
ous fights with the British. But what am I to do today with my own kith and kin? 
People try to kill their own brothers nowadays. I don't want to live to see this 
fratricidal war." Everyone who had come for prayers left at 10 a.m. But others 
continued to flock into the room for Bapu's  darshan. Gadgil, Devadas Gandhi 
and his family, Bhatnagar, Dr. Jivraj Mehta, Sir Datar Singh, Arthur Moore, 
Shanmukhan Chety and Prof. Abdul Majid, were among them. Then at 11-40 
a.m. came the Sardar, Manibehn, Ganeshdatta, H. L. A. Aung, High 
Commissioner for Burma, and Dr. M. Oung Sieu. High Commissioner for China. 
The High Commissioners had brought with them their Prime Ministers' letters 
and IVuits. At last, at about 12-30 p.m. Bapu could snatch some rest, but only Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43 for fifteen minutes; for the stream of people started again. We had mass 
spinning for an hour from 2 to 3 p.m. Lady Mountbatten came at 4-10 and left 
at 4-35, and then came, Humayun Kabir, Shridharani, and Monsieur and 
Madame Logier (of France). 
The rupees offered at Bapu's feet made quite a heap. Some ladies had given 
even ornaments. 
We passed the whole of that 2nd October very happily. There was a fine 
programme on the radio that night. "Bapu," I pleaded, "please do listen to the 
radio at least' today." He said, "What is there in the radio to listen to? Why not 
listen to the music of the  rentiyo, rather than to the bhajans of the radio?" (A 
pun upon the words 'Radio' and 'Rento' which means in Gujarati the spinning 
wheel.) Nearly a thousand telegrams came from India and foreign countries. 
The Gujaratis of Delhi had collected a fund to be given to Bapu on his birthday 
according to the Hindu calendar. As  Bapu's health was bad, the Sardar had a go 
at him, "Why did you agree to attend the meeting of the Gujaratis when you 
are suffering so severely from cough? But you are so greedy that scent of money 
from any place will make you rise up even from deathbed to go there. Such 
funds are sure to be subscribed even otherwise. Why then should you go, 
coughing so violently all the time? But I know you won't listen." We all had a 
hearty laugh over it. So sweet were the relations which subsisted between Bapu 
and the Sardar. Some of the audience then asked the Sardar to address a few 
words to them. He cut them short with a joke, "Is this my birthday that I should 
speak? It is the Mahatma to whom you give all these funds and why should I be 
asked to speak? You know Bapu is a  bania and hernias are always greedy. See 
how soon he regained his energy to try and loot you even in spite of his severe 
cough and weakness. (There was an outburst of laughter at this sally.) But now 
my only request to you is, please do let him have some rest." 
Bapu reminded the people to galvanize the Charkha programme. 
The birthdays of Bapu will be as dark this year (1948) as they were glorious in 
1947. But just as we content ourselves with the dim light of an earthen oil-lamp 
rather than be in utter darkness, so will repeated reminders and an attempt to Bapu – My Mother 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44 follow him, give us light in the darkness of his absence from us. Let us 
remember his favourite prayer 'Thy name is both Ishwar and Allah; pray show 
everybody the right path', and send our respects to Bapu through the prayer. 
Let us also repeat his wish uttered on the birthday of 1947, that either India 
should become pure or that he should not live; and let us pray to God ancr to 
him to show us the right path, and to forgive us our sins and enable us to begin 
a clean chapter in our lives. 
 