CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 1  
CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
(Its Meaning and Place)  
 
 
By : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISBN 81-7229-067-5 
 
 
 
 
 CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2  
FORWARD 
 
This is a thoroughly revised edition of the *Constr uctive Programme* which I first 
wrote in 1941. The items included in it have not be en arranged in any order, 
certainly not in the order of their importance. Whe n the reader discovers that a 
particular subject though important in itself in te rms of Independence does not find 
place in the programme, he should know that the omi ssion is not intentional. He 
should unhesitatingly add to my list and let me kno w. My list does not pretend to be 
exhaustive; it is merely illustrative. The reader w ill see several new and important 
additions. 
Readers, whether workers and volunteers or not, sho uld definitely realize that the 
constructive programme is the truthful and non-viol ent way of winning Poorna 
Swaraj. Its wholesale fulfillment is complete Indep endence. Imagine all the forty 
crores of people busying themselves with the whole of the constructive programme 
which is designed to build up the nation from the v ery bottom upward. Can anybody 
dispute  the  proposition  that  it  must  mean  co mplete Independence in every 
sense of the expression, including the ousting of f oreign domination? When the critics 
laugh at the proposition, what they mean is that fo rty crores of people will never co-
operate in the effort to fulfill the programme, No doubt, there is considerable truth 
in the scoff. My answer is, it is still worth the a ttempt, Given an indomitable will on 
the part of a band of earnest workers, the programm e is as workable as any other 
and more so than most. Anyway, I have no substitute  for it, if it is to be based on 
non-violence.  
Civil Disobedience, mass or individual, is an aid t o constructive effort and is a full 
substitute for armed revolt, Training is necessary as well for civil disobedience as for 
armed revolt. Only the ways are different. Action i n either case takes place only 
when occasion demands. Training for military revolt  means learning the use of arms 
ending perhaps in the atomic bomb. For civil disobe dience it means the Constructive 
Programme. 
Therefore, workers will never be on the look-out fo r civil resistance. They will hold 
themselves in readiness, if the constructive effort  is sought to be defeated. From one 
or two illustrations it will be seen where it can b e, and where it cannot be, offered.  CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  
Political pacts we know have been and can be, but p ersonal friendship with 
individuals cannot be, prevented. Such friendships,  selfless and genuine, must be the 
basis for political pacts. Similarly, centralized k hadi can be defeated by the 
Government, but no power can defeat individual manu facture and use of khadi. The 
manufacture and use of khadi must not be imposed up on the people, but it must be 
intelligently and willingly accepted by them as one  of the items of the freedom 
movement. This can be done only from the villages a s units. Pioneers even in such 
programmes can be obstructed. They have had to go t hrough the fire of suffering 
throughout the world. There is no Swaraj without su ffering. In violence, truth is the 
first and the greatest sufferer; in non-violence it  is ever triumphant. Moreover, men 
composing the Government are not to be regarded as enemies. To regard them as 
such will be contrary to the non-violent spirit. Pa rt we must, but as friends. 
If this preliminary observation has gone home to th e reader, he will find the 
constructive programme to be full of deep interest.  It should prove as absorbing as 
politics so-called and platform oratory, and certai nly more important and useful. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  
INTRODUCTORY 
The constructive programme may otherwise and more f ittingly be called construction 
of Poorna Swaraj or complete Independence by truthf ul and non-violent means. 
Effort for construction of Independence so called t hrough violent and, therefore, 
necessarily untruthful means we know only too painf ully. Look at the daily 
destruction of property, life and truth in the pres ent war. 
Complete Independence through truth and non-violenc e means the independence of 
every unit, be it the humblest of the nation, witho ut distinction of race, colour or 
creed. This independence is never exclusive. It is,  therefore, wholly compatible with 
interdependence within or without. Practice will al ways fall short of the theory, 
even as the drawn line falls short of the theoretic al line of Euclid.  Therefore, 
complete Independence will be complete only to the extent of our approach in 
practice to truth and non-violence. 
Let the reader mentally plan out the whole of the, constructive programme, and he 
will agree with me that, if it could be successfull y worked out, the end of it would 
be the Independence we want. Has not Mr. Amery said  that an agreement between 
the major parties, translated in my language, any a greement *after* communal unity 
which is only one item in the constructive programm e, will be respected? We need 
not question his sincerity, for, if such unity is h onestly, i.e., non-violently, attained, 
it will in itself contain the power to compel accep tance of the agreed demand, On 
the other hand there is no such thing as an imagina ry or even perfect definition of 
Independence through violence, For, it presupposes only ascendancy of that party of 
the nation which makes the most effective use of vi olence. In it perfect equality, 
economic or otherwise, is inconceivable. 
But for my purpose, which is to convince the reader  of the necessity of following out 
the constructive programme in the non-violent effor t, the acceptance of my 
argument about the ineffectiveness of violence for the attainment of independence 
is not required. The reader is welcome to the belie f that Independence of the 
humblest unit is possible under a scheme of violenc e, if this effort enables him also 
to admit that it is a certainty through the complet e execution of the programme by 
the nation. 
Let us now examine the items. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  
COMMUNAL UNITY 
 
Everybody is agreed about the necessity of this uni ty. But everybody does not know 
that unity does not mean political unity which may be imposed. It means an 
unbreakable heart unity. The first thing essential for achieving such unity is for every 
Congressman, whatever his religion may be, to repre sent in his own person Hindu, 
Muslim, Christian, Zoroastrian, Jew, etc., shortly,  every Hindu and non-Hindu. He 
has to feel his identity with every one of the mill ions of the inhabitants of Hindustan. 
In order to realize this, every Congressman will cu ltivate personal friendship with 
persons representing faiths other than his own. He should have the same regard for 
the other faiths as he has for his own. 
In such a happy state of things there would be no d isgraceful cry at the stations such 
as "Hindu water" and "Muslim water" or "Hindu tea" and "Musrim tea". There would be 
no separate rooms or pots for Hindus and non-Hindus  in schools and colleges, no 
communal schools, colleges and hospitals. The begin ning of such a revolution has to 
be made by Congressmen without any political motive  behind the correct conduct. 
Political unity will be its natural fruit. 
We have long been accustomed to think that power co mes only through Legislative 
Assemblies. I have regarded this belief as a grave error brought about by inertia or 
hypnotism. A superficial study of British history h as made us think that all power 
percolates to the people from parliaments. The trut h is that power resides in the 
people and it is entrusted for the time being to th ose whom they may choose as their 
representatives.  Parliaments  have  no  power  or  even existence independently of 
the people. It has been my effort for the last twen ty-one years to convince the 
people of this simple truth. Civil Disobedience is the storehouse of power. Imagine a 
whole people unwilling to conform to the laws of th e legislature, and prepared to 
suffer the consequences of non-compliance! They wil l bring the whole legislative and 
executive machinery to a standstill. The police and  the military are of use to coerce 
minorities however powerful they may be. But no pol ice or military coercion can 
bend the resolute will of a people who are out for suffering to the uttermost. 
 
 CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  
And Parliamentary procedure is good only when its m embers are willing to conform 
to the will of the majority. In other words, it is fairly effective only among 
compatibles. Here in India we have been pretending to work the parliamentary 
system under separate electorates which have create d artificial incompatibles. 
Living unity can never come out of these artificial  entities being brought together on 
a common platform. Such legislatures may function. But they can only be a platform 
for wrangling and sharing the crumbs of power that may fall from rulers whoever 
they may be. These rule with a rod of iron, and pre vent the opposing elements from 
flying at one another's throats. I hold the emergen ce of complete Independence to 
be impossibility out of such a disgrace. 
Though I hold such strong views, I have come to the  conclusion that so long as there 
are undesirable candidates for elective bodies, Con gress should put up candidates in 
order to prevent reactionaries from entering such b odies. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  
REMOVAL OF UNTOUCHABILITY 
 
At this time of the day it is unnecessary to dilate  upon the necessity of the removal 
of this blot and curse upon Hinduism. Congressmen h ave certainly done much in this 
matter. But I am sorry to have to say that many Con gressmen have looked upon this 
item as a mere political necessity and not somethin g indispensable, so far as Hindus 
are concerned, for the very existence of Hinduism. If Hindu Congressmen take up the 
cause for its own sake, they will influence the so- called *Sanatanis* far more 
extensively than they have hitherto done. They shou ld approach them not in a 
militant spirit but, as befits their non-violence, in a spirit of friendliness. And so far 
as the Harijans are concerned, every Hindu should m ake common cause with them 
and befriend them in their awful isolation - such i solation as perhaps the world has 
never seen in the monstrous immensity one witnesses  in India. I know from 
experience how difficult the task is. But it is par t of the task of building the edifice 
of Swaraj. And the road to Swaraj is steep and narr ow. There are many slippery 
ascents and many deep chasms. They have all to be n egotiated with unfaltering step 
before we can reach the summit and breathe the fres h air of freedom. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  
PROHIBITION 
 
Although like communal unity and removal of untouch ability prohibition has been on 
the Congress programme since 1920, Congressmen have  not taken the interest they 
might have taken in this very vital social and mora l reform. If we are to reach our 
goal through non-violent effort, we may not leave t o the future government the fate 
of lakhs of men and women who are labouring under t he curse of intoxicants and 
narcotics. 
Medical men can make a most effective contribution towards the removal of this 
evil. They have to discover ways of weaning the dru nkard and the opium-addict from 
the curse. 
Women and students have a special opportunity in ad vancing this reform. By many 
acts of loving service they can acquire on addicts a hold which will compel them to 
listen to the appeal to give up the evil habit. 
Congress committees can open recreation booths wher e the tired labourer will rest 
his limbs, get healthy and cheap refreshments, and find suitable games, All this work 
is fascinating and uplifting. The non-violent appro ach to Swaraj is a novel approach. 
In it old values give place to new. In the violent way such reforms may find no place. 
Believers in that way, in their impatience and, sha ll I say, ignorance, put off such 
things to the day of deliverance. They forget that lasting and healthy deliverance 
comes from within, i.e. from self-purification. Con structive workers make legal 
prohibition easy and successful even if they do not  pave the way for it. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  
KHADI 
 
*Khadi* is a controversial subject. Many people thi nk that in advocating *Khadi* I am 
sailing against a headwind and am sure to sink the ship of Swaraj and that I am 
taking the country to the dark ages. I do not propo se to argue the case for *Khadi* in 
this brief survey. I have argued it sufficiently el sewhere. Here I want to show what 
every Congressman, and for that matter every Indian , can do to advance the cause of 
*Khadi*.  
It connotes the beginning of economic freedom and e quality of all in the country. 
"The proof of the pudding is in the eating." Let ev eryone try, and he or she will find 
out for himself or herself the truth of what I am s aying. *Khadi* must be taken with 
all its implications. It means a wholesale Swadeshi  mentality, a determination to find 
all the necessaries of life in india and that too t hrough the labour and intellect of the 
villagers. That means a reversal of the existing pr ocess. That is to say that, instead 
of half a dozen cities of India and Great Britain l iving on the exploitation and the ruin 
of the 7,00,000 villages of India, the latter will be largely self-contained, and will 
voluntarily serve the cities of India and even the outside world in so far as it benefits 
both the parties. 
This needs a revolutionary change in the mentality and tastes of many. Easy though 
the non-violent way is in many respects, it is very  difficult in many others. It vitally 
touches the life of every single Indian, makes him feel aglow with the possession of a 
power that has lain hidden within himself, and make s him proud of his identity with 
every drop of the ocean of Indian humanity. This no n-violence is not the inanity for 
which we have mistaken it through all these long ag es; it is the most potent force as 
yet known to mankind and on which its very existenc e is dependent. It is that force 
which I have tried to present to the Congress and t hrough it to the world. *Khadi* to 
me is the symbol of unity of Indian humanity, of it s economic freedom and equality 
and, therefore, ultimately, in the poetic expressio n of Jawaharlal Nehru, "the livery 
of India's freedom". 
Moreover, *Khadi* mentality means decentralization of the production and 
distribution of the necessaries of life. Therefore,  the formula so far evolved is, every CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  village to produce all its necessaries and a certai n percentage in addition for the 
requirements of the cities. 
Heavy industries will needs be centralized and nati onalized. But they will occupy the 
least part of the vast national activity which will  mainly be in the villages, having 
explained the implications of *Khadi*, I must indic ate what Congressmen can and 
should do towards its promotion. Production of *Kha di* includes cotton growing, 
picking, ginning, cleaning, carding, slivering, spi nning, sizing, dyeing, preparing the 
warp and the woof, weaving, and washing.  These,  w ith the exception of dyeing, are 
essential processes. Every one of them can be effec tively handled in the villages and 
is being so handled in many villages throughout Ind ia which the A.I.S.A, is covering. 
According to the latest report the following are th e interesting figures: 2,75,146 
villagers, including 19,645 Harijans and 57,378 Mus lims, scattered in at least 13,451 
villages received, as spinners, weavers, etc. Rs. 3 4,85,609 in 1940. The spinners 
were largely women. 
Yet the work done is only one-hundredth part of wha t could be done if Congressmen 
honestly took up the *Khadi* programme. Since the w anton destruction of this 
central village industry and the allied handicrafts , intelligence and brightness have 
fled from the villages, leaving them inane, lustrel ess, and reduced almost to the 
state of their ill-kept cattle. 
If Congressmen will be true to their Congress call in respect of *Khadi* they will carry 
out the instructions of the A. I.S.A. issued from t ime to time as to the part they can 
play in Khadi planning. Only a few broad rules can be laid down here: 
1. Every family with a plot of ground can grow cotton at least for family use. Cotton 
growing is an easy process. In Bihar the cultivator s were by law compelled to grow 
indigo on 3/20 of their cultivable land. This was i n the interest of the foreign  indigo  
planter.  Why  cannot we  grow cotton voluntarily f or the nation on a certain portion 
of our land? The reader will note that decentraliza tion commences from the 
beginning of the *Khadi* processes. Today cotton cr op is centralized and has to be 
sent to distant parts of India. Before the war it u sed to be sent principally to Britain 
and Japan. It was and still is a money crop and, th erefore, subject to the 
fluctuations of the market. Under the Khadi scheme cotton growing becomes free 
from this uncertainty and gamble. The grower grows what he needs. The farmer CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  needs to know that his first business is to grow fo r his own needs. When he does 
that, he will reduce the chance of a low market rui ning him. 
2. Every spinner would buy--if he has not his own enou gh cotton for ginning, which he 
can easily do without the hand-ginning roller frame . He can gin his own portion with 
a board and an iron rolling pin. Where this is cons idered impracticable, hand-ginned 
cotton should be bought and carded. Carding for sel f can be done well on a tiny bow 
without much effort. The greater the decentralizati on of labour, the simpler and 
cheaper the tools. The slivers made, the process of  spinning commences. I strongly 
recommend the *dhanush takli*. I have used it frequ ently. My speed on it is almost 
the same as on the wheel. I draw a finer thread and  the strength and evenness of the 
yarn are greater on the *dhanush takli* than on the  wheel. This may not, however, 
hold good for all. My emphasis on the *dhanush takl i* is based on the fact that it is 
more easily made, is cheaper than and does not requ ire frequent repairs like the 
wheel. Unless one knows how to make the two mals an d to adjust them when they 
slip or to put the wheel right when it refuses to w ork, the wheel has often to lie idle. 
Moreover, if the millions take to spinning at once,  as they well may have to, the 
*dhanush takli* being the instrument most easily ma de and handled, is the only tool 
that can meet the demand. It is more easily made ev en than the simple *takli*. The 
best, easiest and cheapest way is to make it onesel f. Indeed one ought to learn how 
to handle and make simple tools. Imagine the unifyi ng and educative effect of the 
whole nation simultaneously taking part in the proc ess up to spinning! Consider the 
leveling effect of the bond of common labour betwee n the rich and the goer!  
Yarn thus produced may be used in three ways: by pr esenting it to the A.I.S.A. for 
the sake of the poor, by having it woven for person al use, or by getting as much 
*Khadi* for it as it can buy. It is clear enough th at the finer and better the yarn the 
greater will be its virtue. If Congressmen will put  their heart into the work, they will 
make improvements in the tools and make many discov eries. In our country there has 
been a divorce between labour and intelligence, The  result has been stagnation. If 
there is an indissoluble marriage between the two, and that in the manner here 
suggested, the resultant good will be inestimable. 
In this scheme of nation-wide spinning as a sacrifi ce, I do not expect the average 
man or woman to give more than one hour daily to th is work. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12   
OTHER VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
 
These stand on a different footing from *Khadi*. Th ere is not much scope for 
voluntary labour in them. Each industry will take t he labour of only a certain number 
of hands. These industries come in as a handmaid to  *Khadi*. They cannot exist 
without *Khadi*, and *Khadi* will be robbed of its dignity without them. Village 
economy cannot be complete without the essential vi llage industries such as hand-
grinding, hand-pounding, soap-making, paper-making,   match-making, tanning, oil-
pressing, etc. Congressmen can interest themselves in these and, if they are villagers 
or will settle down in villages, they will give the se industries a new life and a new 
dress. All should make it a point of honour to use only village articles whenever and 
wherever available. Given the demand there is no do ubt that most of our wants can 
be supplied from our villages. When we have become village-minded, we will not 
want imitations of the West or machine-made product s, but we will develop a true 
national taste in keeping with the vision of a new India in which pauperism, 
starvation and idleness will be unknown. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
VILLAGE SANITATION 
 
Divorce between intelligence and labour has resulte d in criminal negligence of the 
villages. And so, instead of having graceful hamlet s dotting the land, we have dung-
heaps. The approach to many villages is not a refre shing experience. Often one 
would like to shut one's eyes and stuff one's nose;  such is the surrounding dirt and 
offending smell. If the majority of Congressmen wer e derived from our villages, as 
they should be, they should be able to make our vil lages models of cleanliness in 
every sense of the word. But they have never consid ered it their duty to identify 
themselves with the villagers in their daily lives.  A sense of national or social 
sanitation is not a virtue among us. We may take a kind of a bath, but we do not 
mind dirtying the well or the tank or the river by whose side or in which we perform 
ablutions. 1 regards this defect as a great vice wh ich is responsible for the 
disgraceful state of our villages and the sacred ba nks of the sacred rivers and for the 
diseases that spring from insanitation. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14   
NEW OR BASIC EDUCATION 
 
This is a new subject. But the members of the Worki ng Committee felt so much 
interested in it that they gave a charter to the or ganizers of the Hindustani Talimi 
Sangh which has been functioning since the Haripura  session. This is a big field of 
work for many Congressmen. This education is meant to transform village children 
into model villagers. It is principally designed fo r them. The inspiration for it has 
come from the villages. Congressmen who want to bui ld up the structure of Swaraj 
from its very foundation dare not neglect the child ren. Foreign rule has 
unconsciously, though none the less surely, begun w ith the children in the field of 
education. Primary education is a farce designed wi thout regard to the wants of the 
India of the villages and for that matter even of t he cities. Basic education links the 
children, whether of the cities or the villages, to  all that is best and lasting in India. 
It develops both the body and the mind, and keeps t he child rooted to the soil with a 
glorious vision of the future in the realization of  which he or she begins to take his or 
her share from the very commencement of his or her career in school, Congressmen 
would find it of absorbing interest benefiting them selves equally with the children 
with whom they come in contact. Let those who wish,  put themselves in touch with 
the Secretary of the Sangh at Sevagram. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15   
ADULT EDUCATION 
 
This has been woefully neglected by Congressmen. Wh ere they have not neglected it, 
they have been satisfied with teaching illiterates to read and write. If I had charge of 
adult education, I should begin with opening the mi nds of the adult pupils to the 
greatness and vastness of their country. The villag er's India is contained in his 
village. If he goes to another village, he talks of  his own village as his home. 
Hindustan is for him a geographical term. We have n o notion of the ignorance 
prevailing in the villages. The villagers know noth ing of foreign rule and its evils. 
What little knowledge they have picked up fills the m with the awe the foreigner 
inspires. The result is the dread and hatred of the  foreigner and his rule. They do not 
know how to get rid of it. They do not know that th e foreigner's presence is due to 
their own weaknesses and their ignorance of the pow er they possess to rid 
themselves of the foreign rule. My adult education means, therefore, first, true 
political education of the adult by word of mouth, Seeing that this will be mapped 
out, it can be given without fear. I imagine that i t is too late in the day for authority 
to interfere with this type of education; but if th ere is interference, there must be a 
fight for this elementary right without which there  can be no Swaraj. Of course, in 
all I have written, openness has been assumed; Non- violence abhors fear and, 
therefore, secrecy. Side by side with the education  by the mouth will be the literary 
education. This is itself a speciality. Many method s are being tried in order to 
shorten the period of education, a temporary or per manent board of experts may be 
appointed by the Working Committee to give shape to  the idea here adumbrated and 
guide the workers. I admit that what I have said in  this paragraph only points the way 
but does not tell the average Congressman How to go  about it. Nor is every 
Congressman fitted for this highly special work. Bu t Congressmen who are teachers 
should find no difficulty in laying down a course i n keeping with the suggestions 
made herein. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16   
WOMEN 
 
I have included service of women in the constructiv e programme, for though 
Satyagraha has automatically brought India's women out from their darkness, as 
nothing else could have in such an incredibly short  space of time, Congressmen have 
not felt the call to see that women became equal pa rtners in the fight for Swaraj. 
They have not realized that woman must be the true helpmate of man in the mission 
of service. Woman has been suppressed under custom and law for which man was 
responsible and in the shaping of which she had no hand. In a plan of life based on 
non-violence, woman has as much right to shape her own destiny as man has to 
shape his. But as every right in a non-violent soci ety proceeds from the previous 
performance of a duty, it follows that rules of soc ial conduct must be framed by 
mutual co-operation and consultation. They can neve r be imposed from outside. Men 
have not realized this truth in its fullness in the ir behaviour towards women. They 
have considered themselves to be lords and masters of women instead of considering 
them as their friends and co-workers. It is the pri vilege of Congressmen to give the 
women of India a lifting hand. Women are in the pos ition somewhat of the slave of 
old who did not know that he could or ever had to b e free. And when freedom came, 
for the moment he felt helpless. Women have been ta ught to regard themselves as 
slaves of men. It is up to Congressmen to see that they enable them to realize their 
full status and play their part as equals of men. 
This revolution is easy, if the mind is made up. Le t Congressmen begin with their 
own homes. Wives should not be dolls and objects of  indulgence, but should be 
treated as honoured comrades in common service. To this end those who have not 
received a liberal education should receive such in struction as is possible from their 
husbands. The same observation applies, with the ne cessary changes, to mothers and 
daughters. 
It is hardly necessary to point out that I have giv en a one-sided picture of the 
helpless state of India's women. I am quite conscio us of the fact that in the villages 
generally' they hold their own with their men folk and in some respects even rule 
them. But to the impartial outsider the legal and c ustomary status of woman is bad 
enough throughout and demands radical alteration. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
EDUCATION IN HEALTH & HYGIENE 
 
 Having given a place to village sanitation, the qu estion may be asked why give a 
separate place to education in health and hygiene? It might have been bracketed 
with sanitation, but I did not wish to interfere wi th the items. Mention of mere 
sanitation is not enough to include health and hygi ene. The art of keeping one's 
health and the knowledge of hygiene is by itself a separate subject of study and 
corresponding practice. In a well-ordered society t he citizens know and observe the 
laws of health and hygiene. It is established beyon d doubt that ignorance and neglect 
of the laws of health and hygiene are responsible f or the majority of diseases to 
which mankind is heir. The very high death rate amo ng us is no doubt due largely to 
our gnawing poverty, but it could be mitigated if t he people were properly educated 
about health and hygiene. 
*Mens sana in corpore sane* is perhaps the first la w for humanity. A healthy mind in a 
healthy body is a self-evident truth. There is an i nevitable connection between mind 
and body. If we were in possession of healthy minds , we would shed all violence and, 
naturally obeying the laws of health, we would have  healthy bodies without an 
effort. I hope, therefore, that no Congressmen will  disregard this item of the 
constructive programme. The fundamental laws of hea lth and hygiene are simple and 
easily learnt. The difficulty is about their observ ance. Here are some:  
Think the purest thoughts and banish all idle and i mpure thoughts.  
Breathe the freshest air day and night. 
Establish a balance between bodily and mental work.  
Stand erect, sit erect, and be neat and clean in ev ery one of your acts, and let these 
be an expression of your inner condition. 
Eat to live for service of fellow-men. Do not live for indulging yourselves. Hence your 
food must be just enough to keep your mind and body  in good order. Man becomes 
what he eats. 
Your water, food and air must be clean, and you wil l not be satisfied with mere 
personal cleanliness, but you will infect your surr oundings with the same three-fold 
cleanliness that you will desire for yourselves. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18   
PROVINCIAL LANGUAGES 
 
Our love of the English language in preference to o ur own mother tongue has caused 
a deep chasm between the educated and politically-m inded classes and the masses. 
The languages of India have suffered impoverishment . We flounder when we make 
the vain attempt to express abstruse thought in the  mother tongue. There are no 
equivalents for scientific terms. The result has be en disastrous. The masses remain 
cut off from the modern mind. We are too near our o wn times correctly to measure 
the disservice caused to India by this neglect of i ts great languages; It is easy enough 
to understand that, unless we undo the mischief, th e mass mind must remain 
imprisoned. The masses can make no solid contributi on to the construction of 
Swaraj. It is inherent in Swaraj based on non-viole nce that every individual makes his 
own direct contribution to the Independence movemen t. The masses cannot do this 
fully unless they understand every step with all it s implications. This is impossible  
unless every  step is explained  in  their own lang uages. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
NATIONAL LANGUAGE 
 
And then for all-India intercourse we need, from am ong the Indian stock, a language 
which the largest number of people already know and  understand and which the 
others can easily pick up. This language is indispu tably Hindi. It is spoken and 
understood by both Hindus and Muslims of the North.  It is called Urdu when it is 
written in the Urdu character. The Congress, in its  famous resolution passed at the 
Cawnpore session in 1925, called this all-India spe ech Hindustani. And since that 
time, in theory at least, Hindustani has been the R ashtra Bhasha. I say 'in theory' 
because even Congressmen have not practised it as t hey should have. In 1920 a 
deliberate attempt was begun to recognize the impor tance of Indian languages for 
the political education of the masses, as also of a n all-India common speech which 
politically-minded India could easily speak and whi ch Congressmen from the different 
provinces could understand at all-India gatherings of the Congress. Such National 
languages should enable one to understand and speak  both forms of speech and write 
in both the scripts. 
I am sorry to have to say that many Congressmen hav e failed to carry out that 
resolution. And so we have, in my opinion, the sham eful spectacle of Congressmen 
insisting on speaking in English and compelling oth ers to do likewise for their sakes. 
The spell that English has cast on us is not yet br oken. Being under it, we are 
impeding the progress of India towards her goal. Ou r love of the masses must be skin-
deep, if we will not take the trouble of spending o ver learning Hindustani as many 
months as the years we spend over learning English.  CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
ECONOMIC EQUALITY 
 
This last is the master key to non-violent Independ ence. Working for economic 
equality means abolishing the eternal conflict betw een capital and labour. It means 
the leveling down of the few rich in whose hands is  concentrated the bulk of the 
nation's wealth on the one hand, and the leveling u p of the semi-starved naked 
millions on the other. A non-violent system of Gove rnment is clearly impossibility so 
long as the wide gulf between the rich and the hung ry millions persists. The contrast 
between the palaces of New Delhi and the miserable hovels of the poor labouring 
class nearby cannot last one day in a free India in  which the poor will enjoy the same 
power as the richest in the land. A violent and blo ody revolution is a certainty one 
day unless there is a voluntary abdication of riche s and the power that riches give 
and sharing them for the common good. 
I adhere to my doctrine of trusteeship in spite of the ridicule that has been poured 
upon it. It is true that it is difficult to reach. So is non-violence. But we made up our 
minds in 1920 to negotiate that steep ascent. We ha ve found it worth the effort. It 
involves a daily growing appreciation of the workin g of non-violence. It is expected 
that Congressmen will make a diligent search and re ason out for themselves the why 
and the wherefore of non-violence. They should ask themselves how the existing 
inequalities can be abolished violently or non-viol ently. I think we know the violent 
way. It has not succeeded anywhere. 
This non-violent experiment is still in the making.  We have nothing much yet to show 
by way of demonstration. It is certain, however, th at the method has begun to work 
though ever so slowly in the direction of equality.  And since non-violence is a process 
of conversion, the conversion, if achieved, must be  permanent. a society or a nation 
constructed non-violently must be able to withstand  attack upon its structure  from 
without or within.  We  have  moneyed Congressmen i n the organization. They have 
to lead the way. This fight provides an opportunity  for the closest heart-searching on 
the part of every individual Congressman. If ever w e are to achieve equality, the 
foundation has to be laid now, Those who think that  the major reforms will come 
after the advent of Swaraj are deceiving themselves  as to the elementary working of 
non-violent Swaraj. It will not drop from heaven al l of a sudden one fine morning,  CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21   
But it has to be built up brick by brick by corpora te self-effort, We have traveled a 
fair way in that direction, But a much longer and w eary distance has to be covered 
before we can behold Swaraj in its glorious majesty , Every Congressman has to ask 
himself what he has done towards the attainment of economic equality. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
KISANS 
 
The programme is not exhaustive. Swaraj is a mighty  structure. Eighty crores of 
hands have to work at building it, Of these *kisans *, i.e., the peasantry are the 
largest part. In fact, being the bulk of them (prob ably over 80%) the *kisans* should 
be the Congress, But they are not, When they become  conscious of their non-violent 
strength, no power on earth can resist them. 
They must not be used for power politics. I conside r it to be contrary to the non-
violent method. Those who would know my method of o rganizing *kisans* may 
profitably study the movement in Champaran when *Sa tyagraha* was tried for the 
first time in India with the result all India knows . It became a mass movement which 
remained wholly non-violent from start to finish. I t affected over twenty lakhs of 
*kisans*. The struggle centered round one specific grievance which was a century 
old. There had been several violent revolts to get rid of the grievance. The *kisans* 
were suppressed, The non-violent remedy succeeded i n full in six months. The 
*kisans* of Champaran became politically conscious without any direct effort. The 
tangible proof they had of the working of non-viole nce to remove their grievance 
drew them to the Congress, and led by Babu Brijkish oreprasad and Babu 
Rajendraprasad they gave a good account of themselv es during the past Civil 
Disobedience campaigns.  
The reader may also priofitably study the kisan mov ements in Kheda, Bardoli and 
Borsad, The secret of success lies in a refusal to exploit the *kisans* for political 
purpose outside their own personal and felt grievan ces. Organization round a specific 
wrong they understand. They need no sermons on non- violence. Let them learn to 
apply non-violence as an effective remedy which the y can understand, and later 
when they are told that the method they were applyi ng was non-violent, they readily 
recognize it as such. 
From these illustrations Congressmen who care could  study how work can be done for 
and among *kisans*. I hold that the method that som e Congressmen have followed to 
organize *kisans* has done them no good and has pro bably harmed them. Anyway 
they have not used the non-violent method. Be it sa id to the credit of some of these 
workers that they frankly admit that they do not be lieve in the non-violent method.  CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
My advice to such workers would be that they should  neither use the Congress name 
nor work as Congress-men. 
The reader will now understand why I have refrained  from the competition to 
organize *kisans* and Labour on an all- India basis . How I wish that all hands pulled in 
the same direction! But perhaps in a huge country l ike ours it is impossible. Anyway, 
in non-violence there is no coercion. Cold reason a nd demonstration of the working 
of non-violence must be trusted to do the work. 
In my opinion, like labour, they should have under the Congress, a department 
working for their specific question. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24   
LABOUR 
 
Ahmedabad Labour Union is a model for all India to copy, Its basis is non-violence, 
pure and simple, It has never had a set-back in its  career. It has gone on from 
strength to strength without fuss and without show.  It has its hospital, its schools for 
the children of the mill-hands, its Glasses for adu lts, its own printing press and 
*khadi* depot, and its own residential quarters. Al most all the hands are voters and 
decide the fate of elections. They came on the vote rs' list at the instance of the 
Provincial Congress Committee. The organization has  never taken part in party 
politics of the Congress. It influences the municip al policy of the city. It has to its 
credit very successful strikes which were wholly no n-violent. Mill-owners and labour 
have governed their relations largely through volun tary arbitration. If I had my way, I 
would regulate all the labour organizations of Indi a after the Ahmedabad model. It 
has never sought to intrude itself upon the All-Ind ia Trade Union Congress and has 
been uninfluenced by that Congress. A time, I hope,  will come when it will be 
possible for the Trade Union Congress to accept the  Ahmedabad method and have 
the Ahmedabad organization as part of the All-India  Union. But I am in no hurry. It 
will come in its own time. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
ADIVASIS 
 
The term *adivasi*, like *raniparaj*, is a coined w ord. *Raniparaj* stands for 
*kaliparaj* (meaning black people, though their ski n is no more black than that of 
any other). It was coined, I think by Shri Jugatram . The term *adivasi* (for Bhils, 
Gonds, or others variously described as Hill Tribes  or aboriginals) means literally 
original inhabitants and was coined, I believe, by Thakkar Bapa, Service of *adivasis* 
is also a part of the constructive programme. Thoug h they are the sixteenth number 
in this programme, they are not the least in point of importance. Our country is so 
vast and the races so varied that the best of us ca nnot know all there is to know of 
men and their condition. As one discovers this for oneself, one realizes how difficult 
it is to make good our claim to be one nation, unle ss every unit has a living 
consciousness of being one with every other. 
The *adivasis* are over two crores in all India. Ba pa began work among the Bhils 
years ago in Gujarat. In about 1940 Shri Balasaheb Kher threw himself with his usual 
zeal into this much-needed service in the Thana Dis trict. He is now President of the 
Adivasi Seva Mandal. 
There are several such other workers in other pacts  of India and yet they are too 
few. Truly, "the harvest is rich but the labourers are few." Who can deny that all 
such service is not merely humanitarian but solidly  national, and brings us nearer to 
true independence? CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
LEPERS 
 
Leper is a word of bad odour. India is perhaps a ho me of lepers next only to Central 
Africa. Yet they are as much a part of society as t he tallest among us. But the tall 
absorb our attention though they are least in need of it. The lot of the lepers who 
are much in need of attention is studied neglect. I  am tempted to call it heartless, 
which it certainly is, in terms of non-violence. It  is largely the missionary who, be it 
said to his credit, bestows care on him. The only i nstitution run by an Indian, as a 
pure labour of love, is by Shri Manohar Diwan near Wardha. It is working under the 
inspiration and guidance of Shri Vinoba Bhave. If I ndia was pulsating with new life, if 
we were all in earnest about winning independence i n the quickest manner possible 
by truthful and non-violent means, there would not be a leper or beggar in India 
uncared for and unaccounted for. In this revised ed ition I am deliberately introducing 
the leper as a link in the chain of constructive ef fort. For, what the leper is in India, 
that we are, if we will, but look about us, for the  modern civilized world. Examine 
the condition of our brethren across the ocean and the truth of my remark will be 
borne home to us. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
STUDENTS 
 
I have reserved students to the last. I have always  cultivated close contact with 
them. They know me and I know them. They have given  me service. Many ex-
collegians are my esteemed co-workers. I know that they are the hope of the future. 
In the heyday of non-co-operation they were invited  to leave their schools and 
colleges. Some professors and students who responde d to the Congress call have 
remained steadfast and gained much for the country and themselves, the call has not 
been repeated for there is not the atmosphere for i t. But experience has shown that 
the lure of the current education, though it is fal se and unnatural, is too much for 
the youth of the country. College education provide s a career. It is a passport for 
entrance to the charmed circle. Pardonable hunger f or knowledge cannot be 
satisfied otherwise than by going through the usual  rut. They do not mind the waste 
of precious years in acquiring knowledge of an utte rly foreign language which takes 
the place of the mother tongue, the sin of it is ne ver felt. They and their teachers 
have made up their minds that the indigenous langua ges are useless for gaining 
access to modern thought and the modern sciences; I  wonder how the Japanese are 
faring. For, their education, I understand, is all given in Japanese. The Chinese 
Generalissimo knows very little, if anything, of En glish. 
But such as the students are, it is from these youn g men and women that the future 
leaders of the nation are to rise. Unfortunately th ey are acted upon by every variety 
of influences. Non-violence offers them little attr action. A blow for a blow or two for 
one is an easily understandable proposition. It see ms to yield immediate result 
though momentary. It is a never-ending trial of bru te strength as we see in time of 
war among brutes or among human beings. Appreciatio n of non-violence means 
patient research and still more patient and difficu lt practice. I have not entered the 
list of competitors for the students' hand, for the  reasons that have dictated my 
course about *kisans* and Labour. But I am myself a  fellow student, using the word in 
its broader sense. My university is different from theirs. They have a standing 
invitation from me to come to my university and joi n me in my search.  
 
 CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28   
Here are the terms: 
1. Students must not take part in party politics. They  are students, searchers, not 
politicians. 
2. They may not resort to political strikes. They must  have their heroes, but their 
devotion to them is to be shown by copying the best  in their heroes, not by going 
on strikes, if the heroes are imprisoned or die or are even sent to the gallows. if 
their grief is unbearable and if all the students f eel equally, schools or colleges 
may be closed on such occasions, with the consent o f their principals. If the 
principals will not listen, it is open to the stude nts to leave their institutions in a 
becoming manner till the managers repent and recall  them On no account may 
they use coercion against dissentients or against t he authorities. They must have 
the confidence that if they are united and dignifie d in their conduct, they are 
sure to win. 
3. They must all do sacrificial spinning in a scientif ic manner. Their tools shall be 
always neat, clean, and in good order and condition . If possible, they will learn to 
make them themselves. Their yarn will naturally be of the highest quality. They 
will study the literature about spinning with its e conomic, social, moral and 
political implications.  
4. They will be *khadi*-users all through and use vill age products to the exclusion of 
all analogous things, foreign or machine-made. 
5. They may not impose *Vande Mataram* or the National  Flag on others. They may 
wear National flag buttons on their own persons but  not force others to do the 
same. 
6. They can enforce the message of the tri-color flag their own persons and harbour 
neither communalism nor untouchability in their hea rts. They will cultivate real 
friendship with students of other faiths and with H arijans as if they were their 
own kith and kin. 
7. They will make it a point to give first aid to thei r injured neighbours and do 
scavenging and cleaning in the neighbouring village s and instruct village children 
and adults.  CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29   
8. They will learn the national language, Hindustani, in its present double dress, two 
forms of speech and two scripts, that they may feel  at home whether Hindi or 
Urdu is spoken and nagari or urdu script is written . 
9. They will translate into their own mother tongue ev erything new they may learn, 
and transmit it in their weekly rounds to the surro unding villages.  
10. They will do nothing in secret, they will be above board in all their dealings, they 
will lead a pure life of self-restraint shed all fe ar and be always ready to protect 
their weak fellow-students, and be ready to quell r iots by non-violent conduct at 
the risk of their lives. And when the final heat of  the struggle comes they will 
leave their institutions and, if need be, sacrifice  themselves for the freedom of 
their country. 
11. They will be scrupulously correct and chivalrous in  their behaviour towards their 
girl fellow-students,  
For working out the programme I have sketched for t hem, the students must find 
time. I know that they waste a great deal of time i n idleness. By strict economy, 
they can save many hours. But I do not want to put an undue strain upon any 
student. I would, therefore, advise patriotic stude nts to lose one year, not at a 
stretch but spread it over their whole study. They will find that one year so given 
will not be a waste of time. The effort will add to  their equipment, mental, moral 
and physical, and they will have made even during t heir studies a substantial 
contribution to the freedom movement. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30   
PLACE OF CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE 
 
I have said in these pages that Civil Disobedience is not absolutely necessary to win 
freedom through purely non-violent effort, if the c o-operation of the whole nation is 
secured in the constructive programme, But such goo d luck rarely favours nations 
or individuals.  Therefore; it is necessary to know  the place of Civil Disobedience in a 
nation-wide non-violent effort. 
It has three definite functions:  
1. It can be effectively offered for the redress of a local wrong. 
2. It can be offered without regard to effect, though aimed at a particular wrong or 
evil, by way of self-immolation in order to rouse l ocal consciousness or 
conscience. Such was the case in Champaran when I o ffered Civil Disobedience 
without any regard to the effect and well knowing t hat even the people might 
remain apathetic. That it proved otherwise may be t aken, according to taste, as 
God's grace or a stroke of good luck,  
3. In the place of full response to constructive effor t, it can be offered as it was in 
1941. Though it was a contribution to and part of t he battle for freedom, it was 
purposely centered round a particular issue, i.e. f ree speech. Civil Disobedience 
can never be directed fur a general cause such as f or Independence. The issue 
must be definite and capable of being clearly under stood and within the power of 
the opponent to yield. This method properly applied  must lead to the final goal. 
I have not examined here the full scope and possibi lities of Civil Disobedience. I have 
touched enough of it to enable the reader to unders tand the connection between the 
constructive programme and Civil Disobedience. In t he first two cases, no elaborate 
constructive programme was or could be necessary. B ut when Civil Disobedience is 
itself devised for the attainment of Independence, previous preparation is necessary, 
and it has to be backed by the visible and consciou s effort of those who are engaged 
in the battle. Civil Disobedience is thus a stimula tion for the fighters and a challenge 
to the opponent. It should be clear to the reader t hat Civil Disobedience in terms of 
Independence without the co-operation of the millio ns by way of constructive effort 
is mere bravado and worse than useless. CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
CONCLUSION 
 
This is not a thesis written on behalf of the Congr ess or at the instance of the Central 
Office. It is the outcome of conversations I had wi th some co-workers in Sevagram, 
They had felt the want of something from my pen sho wing the connection between 
the constructive programme and Civil Disobedience a nd how the former might be 
worked, I have endeavoured to supply the want in th is pamphlet. It does not purport 
to be exhaustive, but it is sufficiently indicative  of the way the programme should be 
worked. 
Let not the reader make the mistake of laughing at any of the items as being part of 
the movement for Independence. Many people do many things, big and small, 
without connecting them with non-violence or Indepe ndence, They have then their 
limited value as expected, The same man appearing a s a civilian may be of no 
consequence, but appearing in his capacity as Gener al he is a big personage, holding 
the lives of millions at his mercy. Similarly. the charkha in the hands of a poor widow 
brings a paltry pice to her, in the hands of a Jawa harlal it is an instrument of India's 
freedom. It is the office which gives the charkha i ts dignity. It is the office assigned 
to the constructive programme which gives it an irr esistible prestige and power. 
Such at least is my view. It may be that of a mad m an, If it makes no appeal to the 
Congressman. I must be rejected. For my handling of  Civil Disobedience without the 
constructive programme will be like a paralyzed han d attempting to lift a spoon. 
 
Poona, 13-11-1943 
 CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
APPENDICES 
 
I 
IMPROVEMENT OF CATTALE 
(This is what Gandhiji wrote sometime ago about add ing Goseva as one more item in 
the Constructive Programme. J. Desai) 
Extract from a letter written by Gandhiji to Shri J ivanji Desai: 
Sodepur, 
16-1-'46 
"...You are right: cow service (goseva) should be i ncluded as one more item in the 
Constructive Programme. I would phrase it as improv ement of cattle. I think it should 
not have been left out. We shall see about it when the next edition is out." 
 
II 
CONGRESS POSITION 
Indian National Congress which is the oldest nation al political organization and which 
has after many battles fought her non-violent way t o freedom cannot be allowed to 
die. It can only die with the nation. A living orga nism ever grows or it dies, The 
Congress has won political freedom, but it  has  ye t  to  win  economic  freedom,  
social  and  moral freedom. These freedoms are hard er than the political, if only 
because they are constructive, less exciting and no t spectacular. All-embracing 
constructive work evokes the energy of all the unit s of the millions. 
The Congress has got the preliminary and necessary part of her freedom. The hardest 
has yet to come. In its difficult ascent to democra cy, it has inevitably created rotten 
boroughs leading to corruption and creation of inst itutions, popular and democratic 
only in name. How to get out of the weedy and unwie ldy growth? 
The Congress must do away with its special register  of members, at no time 
exceeding one crore, not even then easily identifia ble. It has an unknown register of 
millions who could never be wanted. Its register sh ould now be co-extensive with all CONSTRUCTIVE PROGRAMME  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  the men and women on the voters' rolls in the count ry. The Congress business should 
be to see that no faked name gets in and no legitim ate name is left out. On its own 
register it will have a body of servants of the nat ion who would be workers doing the 
work allotted to them from time to time. 
Unfortunately for the country they will be drawn ch iefly for the time being from the 
city dwellers, most of whom would be required to wo rk for and in the villages of 
India. The ranks must be filled in increasing numbe rs from villagers. 
These servants will be expected to operate upon and  serve the voters registered 
according to law, in their own surroundings. Many p ersons and parties will woo them. 
The very best will win. Thus and in no other way ca n the Congress regain its fast 
ebbing unique position in the country. But yesterda y the Congress was unwittingly 
the servant of the Nation, it was *khudai khidmatga r*--God's servant. Let it now 
proclaim to itself and the world that it is only Go d's servant-nothing more, nothing 
less. If it engages in the ungainly skirmish for po wer, it will find one fine morning 
that it is no more. Thank God, it is now no longer in sole possession of the field. 
I have only opened to view the distant scene. If I have the time and health, I hope to 
discuss in these columns what the servants of the N ation can do to raise themselves 
in the estimation of their masters, the whole of th e adult population, male and 
female. 
 
New Delhi, 27-1-'48 
M, K. Gandhi 
 
 