 
Diet and Diet Reform 
 
 
 
By: M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
First Published : July 1949 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 30/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed 
Navajivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91 
E-mail: 
Website: 
 Diet and Diet Reform  
July 1949  
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA)  
Phone: +91 -79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 
mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  
Website:  www.navajivantrust.org  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
EDITOR'S NOTE 
Health is undoubtedly of supreme importance to man,  for without it, it is not 
possible for the average individual to develop in m ind or spirit. And just as 
bodily health is essential for mental and spiritual  development, even so 
nourishing food is essential for bodily health. Unl ess the body gets from food all 
that it requires to keep it in a fit condition, it will suffer from disease, prevent 
the individual from functioning to his full capacit y and cause early death. So it 
is most necessary that we should become diet-consci ous and should concern 
ourselves with feeding the body with the kind of fo od it requires. 
Gandhiji's interest in food arises partly from his concern for those around him. 
When he took to public life he had a group of follo wers and their children living 
with him. He held himself responsible for their wel l-being. Naturally, therefore, 
when any of them fell ill he had to see what could be done to restore them to 
health. He did not wish to use drugs if he could he lp it, as he believed they 
were injurious to the human system. He was convince d that disease was due to 
some maladjustment in the system, and that all that  was necessary to 
overcome it was to help nature to rectify the wrong . A fruitful way of aiding 
nature to do this and maintaining the body in healt h, he believed, was through 
proper diet. He therefore became involved in resear ch on Diet. 
Moreover, Hinduism had always laid great stress on the subject. Even the  
Bhagavadgita  speaks of the various psychological effects produc ed by different 
kinds of food, and there is a rich mine of literatu re, tradition and folklore in 
India regarding dieting for health. So Gandhiji's i nterest in questions relating to 
Diet is nothing strange. It is in line with India's  ancient wisdom. 
Only the rest of us of today have tended to ignore the vital importance of Diet 
and have made of food a mere matter of habit and ta ste. The result is that all 
of us, both rich and poor, educated and illiterate,  the former probably even 
more than the latter, suffer from the ill effects o f malnutrition. We are going in 
for highly processed foods like polished rice, whit e flour, sugar and vegetable 
'ghee' in the place of the more wholesome unpolishe d rice, wholewheat flour,  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  gur  and pure ghee. Even our cooking is faulty. We thro w away the water in 
which rice is boiled. We fry till most of the valua ble elements in the food- 
article have been destroyed. We do not eat enough g reens, fruits or vegetables 
and we consume milk-sweets, tea and coffee instead of milk. 
In regard to all these Gandhiji has some wise thing s to say. And not from mere 
theory or second-hand knowlege, for his  ashramas  were always places where he 
incessantly carried on experiments in Diet. He star ted his dietetic experiments, 
as a matter of fact, very early, even when he was a n eighteen-year old student. 
The reader will find his experiments on uncooked fo od, recorded in  Young India 
and included in Chapters 3 to 7 of Part I of this b ook, interesting not only from 
the dietetic point of view but also as revealing th e eager scientific mind which 
he brought to bear on the subject. Ever since, he h as been carrying on 
experiments on Diet. He has experimented with ovens , vessels for cooking, 
quantity of water to be used, steaming, boiling, ba king determining what 
ingredients are to be used or avoided in cooking, v arious ways of making bread, 
manufacture of jams and  murabbas  out of fruits and orange-skins which might 
otherwise be wasted or thrown away, use of green le aves as salads, preparing 
dishes out of oilcake and Soya Beans, combining var ious articles to constitute a 
balanced diet, and making up of suitable diets for invalids and convalescents. 
He had the weights of his  ashramites  recorded regularly and observed carefully 
the effects on them of changes introduced in their diet. He took nothing for 
granted. His experiments were conducted with a view  to finding out the most 
wholesome food and the wisest way of preparing it, all the time keeping in 
mind the poverty of our people and their slender re sources. 
The aim of this book is to bring together Gandhiji' s writings on the subject in 
his weeklies, the  Young India and the  Harijan.  As Gandhiji himself could not 
give exclusive attention to a study of this subject , he obtained the help of 
experts in the field. Their opinion and the writing s of others interested in the 
topic were published in the Harijan.  Gandhiji's writings are included in Part 1 of 
this book, and those of others in Part II. For the convenience of the reader the 
matter has been arranged topically, so that from a mere glance at the table of Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  Contents a person may be able to pick out readily w hat he is seeking. In some 
cases the titles of the articles have been changed,  and only relevant portions 
and not the entire reproduced. 
Much research requires still to be carried on, both  in laboratories and in homes, 
on matters pertaining to Diet. Even more, the knowl edge, we already have 
needs to be put into practice and to be broadcast. Food is a matter on which 
we are very conservative. If this booklet stimulate s research, makes at least 
some people take interest in what they eat and lead s them to reform their food 
habits, it will fulfill its purpose. Considering th e importance of the subject, the 
overwhelming ignorance and apathy which prevail in regard to it are most 
deplorable, and need to be combated. It is to serve  towards this end that this 
book is published. 
BHARATAN KUMARAPPA 
Bombay, November 20, 1948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DIET AND DIET REFORM 
PART I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M.  K.  GANDHI 
Harijan,  29-4-1933, p.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION I : GENERAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
01. MY FAITH IN VEGETARIANISM 
The Gandhis were Vaishnavas. My parents were partic ularly staunch 
Vaishnavas.... Jainism was strong in Gujarat, and i ts influence was felt 
everywhere and on all occasions. The opposition to and abhorrence of meat-
eating that existed in Gujarat among the Jains and Vaishnavas were to be seen 
nowhere else in India or outside in such strength. These were the traditions in 
which I was born and bred. 
*  *  * 
A wave of "reform" was sweeping over Rajkot at the time when I first came 
across this friend.... It began to grow on me that meat-eating was good, that it 
would make me strong and daring, and that, if the w hole country took to meat-
eating, the English could be overcome.... It was no t a question of pleasing the 
palate. I did not know that it had a particularly g ood relish.... We went in 
search of a lonely spot by the river, and there I s aw, for the first time in my life 
- meat. There was baker's bread also. I relished ne ither. The goat's meat was as 
tough as leather. I simply could not eat it. I was sick and had to leave off 
eating. I had a very bad night afterwards. A horrib le nightmare haunted me. 
Every time I dropped of to sleep it would seem as t hough a live goat were 
bleating inside me, and I would jump up full of rem orse. But then I would 
remind myself that meat-eating was a duty and so be come more cheerful. My 
friend was not a man to give up easily. He now bega n to cook various delicacies 
with meat, and dress them neatly.... This went on f or about a year. But not 
more than half a dozen meat feasts were enjoyed in all.... If my mother and 
father came to know of my having become a meat-eate r, they would be deeply 
shocked. This knowledge was gnawing at my heart. Th erefore I said to myself: 
"Though it  is  essential to eat meat, and also essential to take up food 'reform' in 
the country, yet deceiving and lying to one's fathe r and mother is worse than 
not eating meat. In their lifetime, therefore, meat -eating must be out of the 
question. When they are no more and I have found my  freedom, I will eat meat Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  openly, but until that moment arrives I will abstai n from it." This decision I 
communicated to my friend, and I have never since g one back to meat. 
*  *  * 
I was yet a stripling of eighteen without any exper ience of the world.... I sailed 
at last from Bombay.... An English passenger, takin g kindly to me, drew me into 
conversation.... He laughed at my insistence on abj uring meat, and said in a 
friendly way when we were in the Red Sea: "It is al l very well so far but you will 
have to revise your decision in the Bay of Biscay. And it is so cold in England 
that one cannot possibly live there without meat." "But I have heard that 
people can live there without eating meat," I said.  "Rest assured it is a fib," said 
he. "No one, to my knowledge, lives there without b eing a meat- eater.... You 
cannot live without meat." "I thank you for your ki nd advice, but I have 
solemnly promised to my mother not to touch meat, a nd therefore I cannot 
think of taking it. If it be found impossible to ge t on without it, I will far rather 
go back to India than eat meat in order to remain t here." 
*  *  * 
I could not relish boiled vegetables cooked without  salt or condiments. The 
landlady was at a loss to know what to prepare for me. We had oatmeal 
porridge for breakfast, which was fairly filling, b ut I always starved at lunch 
and dinner. The friend continually reasoned with me  to eat meat, but I always 
pleaded my vow and then remained silent. Both for l uncheon and dinner we 
had spinach and bread and jam too...there was no mi lk either for lunch or 
dinner.... One day the friend began to read to me B entham's  Theory of Utility.  
I was at my wits' end. The language was too difficu lt for me to understand. He 
began to expound it. I said: "Pray excuse me. These  abstruse things are beyond 
me. I admit it is necessary to eat meat. But 1 cann ot break my vow. I cannot 
argue about it.... A vow is a vow. It cannot be bro ken." The friend looked at me 
in surprise. He closed the book and said: "All righ t. I will not argue any more." 
*  *  * Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  I launched out in search of a vegetarian restaurant . The landlady had told me 
that there were such places in the city. I would tr ot ten or twelve miles each 
day, go into a cheap restaurant and eat my fill of bread, but would never be 
satisfied. During these wanderings I once hit on a vegetarian restaurant in 
Farringdon Street. The sight of it filled me with t he same joy that a child feels 
on getting a thing after its own heart. Before I en tered I noticed books for sale 
exhibited under glass window near the door. I saw a mong them Salt's  Plea for 
Vegetarianism. This I purchased for a shilling and went straight t o the dining 
room. This was my first hearty meal since my arriva l in England. God had come 
to my aid. I read Salt's book from cover to cover a nd was very much impressed 
by it. From the date of reading this book, I may cl aim to have become a 
vegetarian by choice. I blessed the day on which I had taken the vow before my 
mother. I had all along abstained from meat in the interests of truth and of the 
vow I had taken, but had wished at the same time th at every Indian should be a 
meat-eater, and had looked forward to being one mys elf freely and openly 
some day, and to enlisting others in the cause. The  choice was now made in 
favour of vegetarianism, the spread of which hencef orward became my mission. 
*  *  * 
My faith in vegetarianism grew on me from day to da y. Salt's book whetted my 
appetite for dietetic studies. I went in for all bo oks available on vegetarianism 
and read them. One of these, Howard Williams'  The Ethics of Diet, was a 
"biographical history of the literature of humane d ietetics from the earliest 
period to the present day."... Dr. Anna Kingsford's  The Perfect Way in Diet  was 
also an attractive book. Dr. Allinson's writings on  health and hygiene were 
likewise very helpful. He advocated a curative syst em based on regulation of 
the dietary of patients. Himself a vegetarian, he p rescribed for his patients also 
a strictly vegetarian diet. The result of reading a ll this literature was that 
dietetic experiments came to take an important plac e in my life. Health was 
the principal consideration of these experiments to  begin with. But later on 
religion became the supreme motive. 
*  *  * Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  Meanwhile my friend had not ceased to worry about m e.... When he came to 
know that I had begun to interest myself in books o n vegetarianism, he was 
afraid lest these studies should muddle my head; th at I should fritter my life 
away in experiments, forgetting my own work, and be come a crank. He 
therefore made one last effort to reform me. He one  day invited me to go to 
the theatre. Before the play we were to dine togeth er at the Holborn 
Restaurant, to me a palatial place and the first bi g restaurant I had been to 
since leaving the Victoria Hotel.... The friend had  planned to take me to this 
restaurant evidently imagining that modesty would f orbid any questions. And it 
was a very big company of diners in the midst of wh ich my friend and I sat 
sharing a table between us. The first course was so up. I wondered what it 
might be made of, but durst not ask the friend abou t it. I therefore summoned 
the waiter. My friend saw the movement and sternly asked across the table 
what was the matter. With considerable hesitation I  told him that I wanted to 
inquire if the soup was vegetable soup. "You are to o clumsy for decent society," 
he passionately exclaimed. "If you cannot behave yo urself, you had better go. 
Feed in some other restaurant and await me outside. " This delighted me. Out I 
went. There was a vegetarian restaurant close by, b ut it was closed. So I went 
without food that night. I accompanied my friend to  the theatre, but he never 
said a word about the scene I had created. On my pa rt, of course, there was 
nothing to say. 
*  *  * 
There was a Vegetarian Society in England with a we ekly journal of its own (the 
London Vegetarian Society and its paper  The Vegetarian -  R.W.). I subscribed to 
the weekly, joined the society and very shortly fou nd contact with those who 
were regarded as pillars of vegetarianism, and bega n my own experiments in 
dietetics. I stopped taking the sweets and condimen ts.... I gave up tea and 
coffee as a rule, and substituted cocoa.... There w ere many minor experiments 
going on along with the main one; as for example, g iving up starch foods at one 
time, living on bread and fruit alone at another, a nd once living on cheese, 
milk and eggs. This last experiment is worth noting . It lasted not even a Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  fortnight.... I gave up eggs and the experiment ali ke.... This was a hardship 
inasmuch as inquiry showed that even in vegetarian restaurants many courses 
used to contain eggs. Full of the neophyte's zeal f or vegetarianism, I decided to 
start a vegetarian club in my locality, Bayswater. I invited Sir Edwin Arnold, 
who lived there, to be Vice-President. Dr. Oldfield  who was Editor of  The 
Vegetarian  became President. I myself became the Secretary. T he club went 
well for a while, but came to an end in the course of a few months. For I left 
the locality.... 
*  *  * 
On the eve of my departure for home ... I invited m y vegetarian friends to 
dinner in the Holborn Restaurant referred to in the se chapters. "A vegetarian 
dinner could be had," I said to myself, "in vegetar ian restaurants as a matter of 
course. But why should it not be possible in a non- vegetarian restaurant too?" 
And I arranged with the manager of the Holborn Rest aurant to provide a strictly 
vegetarian meal. The vegetarians hailed the new exp eriment with delight. 
An Autobiography  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
2. THE MORAL BASIS OF VEGETARIANISM 
[Address to the London Vegetarian Society by Gandhi ji on 20th November, 1931.] 
When I received the invitation to be present at thi s meeting, I need not tell you 
how pleased I was, because it revived old memories and recollections of 
pleasant friendships formed with vegetarians. I fee l especially honoured to find 
on my right Mr. Henry Salt. It was Mr. Salt's book,  A Plea for Vegetarianism,  
which showed me why, apart from a hereditary habit,  and apart from my 
adherence to a vow administered to me by my mother,  it was right to be a 
vegetarian. He showed me why it was a moral duty in cumbent on vegetarians 
not to live upon fellow-animals. It is, therefore, a matter of additional pleasure 
to me that I find Mr. Salt in our midst. 
I do not propose to take up your time by giving you  my various experiences of 
vegetarianism, nor do I want to tell you something of the great difficulty that 
faced me in London itself in remaining staunch to v egetarianism, but I would 
like to share with you some of the thoughts that ha ve developed in me in 
connection with vegetarianism. Forty years ago I us ed to mix freely with 
vegetarians. There was at that time hardly a vegeta rian restaurant in London 
that I had not visited. I made it a point, out of c uriosity, and to study the 
possibilities of vegetarianism and vegetarian resta urants in London, to visit 
everyone of them. Naturally, therefore, I came into  close contact with many 
vegetarians. I found, at the tables, that largely t he conversation turned upon 
food and disease. I found also that the vegetarians  who were struggling to stick 
to their vegetarianism were finding it difficult fr om the health point of view. I 
do not know whether, nowadays, you have those debat es, but I used at that 
time to attend debates that were held between veget arians and vegetarians, 
and between vegetarians and non-vegetarians. I reme mber one such debate, 
between Dr. Densmore and the late Dr. T. R. Allinso n. Then vegetarians had a 
habit of talking of nothing but food and nothing bu t disease. I feel that that is 
the worst way of going about the business. I notice  also that it is those persons 
who become vegetarians because they are suffering f rom some disease or other Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  - that is, from purely the health point of view - i t is those persons who largely 
fall back. I discovered that for remaining staunch to vegetarianism a man 
requires a moral basis. 
For me that was a great discovery in my search afte r truth. At an early age, in 
the course of my experiments, 
I found that a selfish basis would not serve the pu rpose of taking a man higher 
and higher along the paths of evolution. What was r equired was an altruistic 
purpose. I found also that health was by no means t he monopoly of vegetarians. 
I found many people having no bias one way or the o ther, and that non-
vegetarians were able to show, generally speaking, good health. I found aiso 
that several vegetarians found it impossible to rem ain vegetarians because they 
had made food a fetish and because they thought tha t by becoming vegetarians 
they could eat as much lentils, haricot beans, and cheese as they liked. Of 
course those people could not possibly keep their h ealth. Observing along these 
lines, I saw that man should eat sparingly and now and then fast. No man or 
woman really ate sparingly or consumed just that qu antity which the body 
requires and no more. We easily fall a prey to the temptations of the palate, 
and therefore when a thing tastes delicious we do n ot mind taking a morsel or 
two more. But you cannot keep health under those ci rcumstances. Therefore I 
discovered that in order to keep health, no matter what you ate, it was 
necessary to cut down the quantity of your food, an d reduce the number of 
meals. Become moderate; err on the side of less, ra ther than on the side of 
more. When I invite friends to share their meals wi th me I never press them to 
take anything except only what they require. On the  contrary, I tell them not 
to take a thing if they do not want it. 
What I want to bring to your notice is that vegetar ians need to be tolerant if 
they want to convert others to vegetarianism. Adopt  a little humility. We 
should appeal to the moral sense of the people who do not see eye to eye with 
us. If a vegetarian became ill, and a doctor prescr ibed beef tea, then I would 
not call him a vegetarian. A vegetarian is made of sterner stuff. Why? Because 
it is for the building of the spirit and not of the  body. Man is more than meat. It Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  is the spirit in man for which we are concerned. Th erefore vegetarians should 
have that moral basis - that a man was not born a c arnivorous animal, but born 
to live on the fruits and herbs that the earth grow s. I know we must all err. I 
would give up milk if I could, but I cannot. I have  made that experiment times 
without number. I could not, after a serious illnes s, regain my strength, unless I 
went back to milk. That has been the tragedy of my life. But the basis of my 
vegetarianism is not physical, but moral. If anybod y said that I should die if I 
did not take beef tea or mutton, even under medical  advice, I would prefer 
death. That is the basis of my vegetarianism. I wou ld love to think that all of us 
who called ourselves vegetarians should have that b asis. There were thousands 
of meat-eaters who did not stay meat- eaters. There  must be a definite reason 
for our making that change in our lives, for our ad opting habits and customs 
different from society, even though sometimes that change may offend those 
nearest and dearest to us. Not for the world should  you sacrifice a moral 
principle. Therefore the only basis for having a ve getarian principle is, and 
must be, a moral one. I am not to tell you, as I se e and wonder about the 
world, that vegetarians, on the whole, enjoy much b etter health than meat-
eaters. I belong to a country which is predominantl y vegetarian by habit or 
necessity. Therefore I cannot testify that that sho ws much greater endurance, 
much greater courage, or much greater exemption fro m disease. Because it is a 
peculiar, personal thing. It requires obedience, an d scrupulous obedience, to 
all the laws of hygiene. 
Therefore, I think that what vegetarians should do is not to emphasize the 
physical consequences of vegetarianism, but to expl ore the moral 
consequences. While we have not yet forgotten that we share many things in 
common with the beast, we do not sufficiently reali ze there are certain things 
which differentiate us from the beast. Of course, w e have vegetarians in the 
cow and the bull - which are better vegetarians tha n we are - but there is 
something much higher which calls us to vegetariani sm. Therefore, I thought 
that, during the few minutes which I give myself th e privilege of addressing 
you, I would just emphasize the moral basis of vege tarianism. And I would say 
that I found from my own experience, and the experi ence of thousands of Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  friends and companions that they find satisfaction,  so far as vegetarianism is 
concerned, from the moral basis they have chosen fo r sustaining vegetarianism. 
In conclusion, I thank you all for coming here and allowing me to see 
vegetarians face to face. I cannot say I used to me et you forty or forty-two 
years ago. I suppose the faces of the London Vegeta rian Society have changed. 
There are very few members who, like Mr. Salt, can claim association with the 
Society extending over forty years. Lastly, I would  like you, if you want to, to 
ask me any questions, for I am at your disposal for  a few minutes. 
Mr. Gandhi was then asked to give his reasons for l imiting his daily diet to five 
articles only, and replied: That has no connection with vegetarianism.... There 
was another reason. I had been a pampered child of nature. I had acquired then 
that notoriety that when I was invited to friends, they placed before me ample 
dishes of food. I told them I had come there to ser ve, and, personally, I should 
find myself dying by inches if I allowed myself to be pampered like that. So, in 
limiting myself to five ingredients of food, I serv ed a double purpose. And I 
must finish all my eating before sundown. I have be en saved many pitfalls by 
that. There are many discoveries about that in rega rd to health reasons. 
Dietists are saying we are more and more tending to wards simplifying diet, and 
that if one must live for health, one must have one  thing at a time and avoid 
harmful combinations. I like the process of exclusi on better than that of 
inclusion, because no two doctors have the same opi nion. 
Then I think those restrictions to five articles of  food have helped me morally 
and materially — materially, because in a poor coun try like India it is not 
always possible to procure goat's milk, and it is a  hard thing to produce fruit 
and grapes. Then, I go to visit poor people, and if  I expected hot-house grapes, 
they would banish me. So, by restricting myself to five articles of food, it also 
serves the law of economy. 
Harijan,  20-2-1949 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
3. DIET FOR  BRAHMACHARYA  
Control of the palate is the first essential in the  observance of the vow. I saw 
that complete control of the palate made the observ ance very easy and so I 
now pursued my dietetic experiments not merely from  the vegetarian's but also 
from the  brahmachari's  point of view. I saw as the result of these experi ments 
that the brahmachari's  food should be limited, simple, spiceless, and, if  
possible, uncooked. 
Six years of experiment have showed me that the brahmachari's  ideal food is 
fresh fruits and nuts. The immunity from passion th at I enjoyed when I lived on 
this food was unknown to me after I changed that di et. Brahmacharya  needed 
no effort on my part when I lived on fruits and nut s alone. It has been a matter 
of very great effort ever since I began to take mil k. How I had to go back to 
milk from a fruit diet will be considered in its pr oper place. It is enough to 
observe here that I have not the least doubt that m ilk diet makes the  
brahmacharya vow difficult to observe. Let no one deduce from th is that all  
brahmacharis  must give up milk. The effect on brahmacharya  of different kinds 
of food can be determined only after numerous exper iments. I have yet to find 
a fruit substitute for milk which is an equally goo d muscle-builder and easily 
digestible. The doctors,  vaids and  hakims  have alike failed to enlighten me. 
Therefore though I know milk to be partly a stimula nt, I cannot, for time being, 
advise anyone to give it up. 
Young India,  27-1-1927 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18   
4. GREENS AND DIETETIC  AHIMSA  
Dieteticians are of opinion that the inclusion of a  small quantity of raw 
vegetables like cucumber, vegetable marrow, pumpkin , gourd, etc. in one's 
menu is more beneficial to health than the eating o f large quantities of the 
same cooked. But the digestions of most people are very often so impaired 
through a surfeit of cooked fare that one should no t be surprised if at first they 
fail to do justice to raw greens, though I can say from personal experience that 
no harmful effect need follow if a tola or two of r aw greens are taken with 
each meal provided one masticates them thoroughly. It is a well established 
fact that one can derive a much greater amount of n ourishment from the same 
quantity of food if it is masticated well. The habi t of proper mastication of food 
inculcated by the use of uncooked greens therefore,  if it does nothing else, will 
at least enable one to do with less quantity of foo d and thus not only make for 
economy in consumption but also automatically reduc e the dietetic  himsa  that 
one commits to sustain life. Therefore whether rega rded from the viewpoint of 
dietetics or that of  ahimsa  the use of uncooked vegetables is not only free fr om 
all objection but is to be highly recommended. Of c ourse it goes without saying 
that if the vegetables are to be eaten raw, extra c are will have to be exercised 
to see that it is not stale, over-ripe or rotten or  otherwise dirty. 
Young India,  15-11-1928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
5. 'FOOD FADDISTS' 
I have been known as a crank, faddist, mad man. Evi dently the reputation is 
well deserved. For wherever I go, I draw to myself cranks, faddists and mad 
men. Andhra has its fair share of all these. They o ften find their way to 
Sabarmati. No wonder then that I found these specim ens in abundance during 
my Andhra tour. But 1 propose to introduce to the r eader only one fellow crank 
who by his living faith in his mission compelled my  admiration and induced me 
to plunge into a dietetic experiment which I had le ft unfinished at the age of 20 
when I was a student in London. This is Sundaram Go palrao of Rajahmundry. 
The ground was prepared for him by a survey superin tendent whom I met at 
Vizagapatam and who told me he was practically livi ng on raw food. Gopalrao 
has a Nature Cure establishment in Rajahmundry, to which he devotes the 
whole of his time. He said to me, "The hip-baths an d other kindred appliances 
are good so far as they go. But even they are artif icial. To be rid of diseases it 
is necessary to do away with fire in the preparatio n of foods. We must take 
everything in its vital state even as animals do." 
"Would you advise me to adopt entirely raw diet?" I  asked. 
"Certainly, why not? I have cured cases of chronic dyspepsia in old men and 
women through a balanced diet containing germinatin g seeds," was Gopalrao's 
reply. 
"But surely there should be a transition stage," I gently remonstrated. 
"No such stage is necessary," rejoined Gopalrao. "U ncooked food, including 
uncooked starch and protein are any day more digest ible than cooked. Try it 
and you will feel all the better for it." 
"Do you take the risk? If the cremation ceremony ta kes place in Andhra, the 
people will cremate your body with mine," I said. 
"I take the risk," said Gopalrao. 
"Then send me your soaked wheat. I commence from to day," I said. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  Poor Gopalrao sent the soaked wheat. Kasturbai, not  knowing that it could 
possibly be meant for me, gave it to the volunteers  who finished it. 'So I had to 
commence the experiment the following day - 9th May . It is therefore now a 
month when I am writing these notes. 
I am none the worse for the experiment. Though I ha ve lost over five pounds in 
weight, my vitality is unimpaired. During the last eight days the weight has 
shown a decided tendency to increase. 
Fellow faddists should know what I am doing. 
I take generally: 
8 tolas of germinating wheat, 
8 tolas of sweet almonds reduced to a paste, 
8 tolas of green leaves pounded, 
6 sour lemons, and 
2 ounces of honey. 
Wheat is replaced twice or thrice during the week b y an equal quantity of 
germinating gram. And when gram is taken in the pla ce of wheat, coconut milk 
replaces almond paste. The food is divided into two  parts, the first meal is 
taken at 11 a.m. the second at 6-15 p.m. The only t hing touched by fire is 
water. I take in the morning and once more during t he day boiling water, lemon 
and honey. 
Both wheat and gram germinate in 36 hours. The grai n is soaked in water for 
twenty-four hours. The water is then strained. The grain is then left in a piece 
of wet Khadi overnight. You find it sprouting in th e morning ready for use. 
Those who have sound teeth need not pound the grain  at all. For coconut milk a 
quarter of the kernel is grated fine and you squeez e the milk through piece of 
stout Khadi. 
It is unnecessary to enter into further details. Wh at I have given is enough for 
diet reformers to help me with their suggestions. I  have lived for years on 
uncooked fruits and nuts but never before beyond a fortnight on uncooked Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  cereals and pulses. Let those therefore who know an ything of unfired food 
favour me with literature of their own experiences.  
I publish the facts of this experiment because I at tach the greatest importance 
to it. If it succeeds it enables serious men and wo men to make revolutionary 
changes in their mode of living. It frees women fro m a drudgery which brings no 
happiness but which brings disease in its train. Th e ethical value of uncooked 
food is incomparable. Economically this food has po ssibilities which no cooked 
food can have. I therefore seek the sympathetic hel p of all medical men and 
laymen who are interested in reformed dietetics. 
Let no one blindly copy the experiment. I have not Gopalrao's faith. I do not 
claim success for it yet. I am moving cautiously. T he facts are published so as 
to enable me to compare notes with fellow food refo rmers. 
Young India,  13-6-1929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
6. UNFIRED FOOD EXPERIMENT 
Unusual and unexpected interest has been evoked by my experiment in unfired 
food. It has given rise to interesting and instruct ive correspondence. I observe 
that there is quite a number of men living on unfir ed food and many more who 
have at one time lived on such food. My corresponde nts will excuse me for my 
not acknowledging all such letters individually. Bu t they may rest assured that I 
have taken in whatever was new and acceptable in th eir suggestions. Several 
have asked me for further information on the progre ss of my experiment. 
The experiment still continues. There have been mom ents when I have weakly 
doubted the wisdom of continuing it. This was when extreme weakness had 
overtaken me during the Andhra tour. But my faith i n the correctness of the 
theory behind unfired food and my partiality for it  are so great that I would not 
easily give up the experiment. For it has for me a value not merely sanitary but 
also economic and moral or spiritual. It is of grea t importance to national 
workers who have to work in different parts of the country often in trying 
circumstances. This food surmounts all the difficul ty arising from the different 
food of the different provinces. But of this more i f I can write of the 
experiment with fairly absolute confidence. At the time of writing all I can say 
is that it seems to have done me no harm. Dr. Ansar i, who knows my body well, 
examined it carefully whilst I was in Delhi on the 5th instant and was of opinion 
that he had never found me to be in better health t han now. My blood pressure 
(systolic) which after the breakdown at Kolhapur ha d never been found to be 
below 155 was now registered at 118, pulse pressure  at 46. Though 118, he 
thought to be subnormal, it was no bad sign as I ha d just risen from a slight 
attack of malaria and I was then living on juicy fr uits only. 
My resolve to continue the experiment has been cons iderably strengthened by 
reading Dr. Muthu's great work on Tuberculosis and Colonel McCarrison's 
instructive and carefully written food primer. The former contains an il-
luminating chapter on diet and the latter which is dedicated to the children of 
India is popularly written and gives in a very conc ise manner all the information Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  on nutrition that a layman need possess. It is a bo ok which needs to be read 
with caution. It puts, naturally for the author but  unduly, according to my 
experiences, much emphasis on the necessity of anim al food such as meat or 
milk. The unlimited capacity of the plant world to sustain man at his highest is 
a region yet unexplored by modern medical science w hich through force of 
habit pins its faith on the shambles or at least mi lk and its by-products. It is a 
duty which awaits discharge by Indian medical men w hose tradition is 
vegetarian. The fast developing researches about vi tamins and the possibility of 
getting the most important of them directly from th e sun bid fair to 
revolutionize many of the accepted theories and bel iefs propounded by the 
medical science about food. Be that as it may, both  these authors seem to me 
to agree that it is best to take all foods in their  natural state if we are to derive 
the highest benefit from them and especially if we are not to destroy some of 
the important vitamins they contain. They opine tha t fire destroys some of the 
vitamins and the most essential salts and vitamins are removed when the 
covering of wheat is removed for the attainment of extreme fineness or of rice 
for its polish. 
In my previous article, I have warned the reader ag ainst copying my 
experiment. But after two months' trial I am able t o say with confidence that 
anyone may try it provided he retains a small quant ity of milk and ghee. 
Though my own experiment is both unfired and milkle ss, I am not yet in a 
position to recommend avoidance of milk and ghee. T hough my belief in the 
possibility of avoiding milk and ghee without endan gering health is unshakable, 
I cannot claim as yet to have found a combination o f vegetarian foods that will 
invariably produce the results claimed today for mi lk. These authors are 
undoubtedly of opinion that little addition of milk  and - or- ghee (pure) raises 
the food value of vegetarian proteins and fats and promotes assimilation of the 
latter. 
I may now tell the reader what I am taking at prese nt: 
Sprouted wheat  ..  tolas  8 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  Pounded almonds  ..  ,,  4 
Whole almonds  ..  ,,  1 
Green vegetable, e.g., marrow, 
dudhi  or cucumber or the like 
(grated) ..  ,,  16  
Raisins (or fresh fruits)  ..  ,,  20  
Lemons  ..  ,,  2 
Honey  ..  ,,  4 
 
Neither the quantity nor the variety is absolutely fixed. Often I avoid almonds 
or wheat or both. Sometimes I take sprouted gram an d grated coconut instead 
of wheat and almonds. The reader need not take hone y. He may take gur  but in 
no case white sugar which is decidedly harmful. Sug ars are best obtained from 
raisins, figs or dates all of which should be taken  in moderation. He may 
increase the quantity of wheat if he finds it to be  insufficient. In the beginning 
stages there will probably be a feeling of emptines s. It will be due to the fact 
that by ill usage the stomach is distended. Till it  assumes its natural size, the 
emptiness should be put up with. It may be partly o vercome by taking juicy 
fruit or a little more vegetable or better still by  drinking plenty of water, never 
by exceeding the maximum quantity of wheat or gram.  Milk may undoubtedly 
be increased if the purse allows it. Over thirty co mrades have taken up the 
experiment with me. The maximum fixed for them is: 
Sprouted wheat  ..  tolas  20  
.. Gram  ..  ,,  8 
Vegetables  ..  ,,  16  
Cocoanut  ..  ,,  8 
Kismis (raisins)  ..  ,,  4 
Lemon  ..  ,,  1 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  Milk  ..  lb.  ½  
Fresh fruit when available     
Ghee instead of cocoanut  ..  tolas  2 
 
The quantity of milk and ghee is the minimum. Those  who need more are at 
liberty to take more. We all take a little salt. I omitted it for one month. But 
some medical friends have warned me against giving it up. And fancying that I 
was feeling weak or being really weak, I began taki ng salt in Almoda. The 
quantity taken by me is not more than 30 grains dur ing the day. Honey is taken 
3 times a day separately with hot water. Too much s tress cannot be laid on the 
great necessity of thorough mastication. We have so  ill used our teeth and gums 
that we now find it difficult to make proper use of  them. 
Young India,  18-7-1929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
7. UNFIRED FOOD 
The interest evinced in my experiment in unfired fo od and the testimony 
received in support are truly remarkable. Some corr espondents even send their 
experiences for publication. But I refrain. I have found among enthusiasts a 
tendency towards exaggeration. They often build the ir conclusions on 
insufficient data or see a connection between a res ult and their experiment not 
warranted by actuality. Whilst therefore these expe riences are very helpful to 
me, as I am able to check them by my own, I am char y of sending them out as a 
guide to fellow seekers. I therefore propose period ically to give the verified 
results of my own experiences and observation coupl ed with the caution that 
even they are liable to variation. I have found aft er prolonged experiment and 
observation that there is no fixed dietetic rule fo r all constitutions. All that the 
wisest physicians claim for their advice is that it  is likely to benefit in a given 
case as in a majority of cases they have found it t o answer fairly well. In no 
branch of science is the scientist so hampered in h is research as in the medical. 
He dare not speak with certainty of the effect of a  single drug or food or of the 
reactions of human bodies. It is and will always re main empirical. The popular 
saying that one man's food may be another's poison is based on vast experience 
which finds daily verification. Such being the case , the field for experiment on 
the part of intelligent men and women is limitless.  Laymen ought to acquire a 
workable knowledge of the body which plays such an important part in the 
evolution of the soul within. And yet about nothing  are we so woefully 
negligent or ignorant as in regard to our bodies. I nstead of using the body as a 
temple of God we use it as a vehicle for indulgence s, and are not ashamed to 
run to medical men for help in our effort to increa se them and abuse the 
earthly tabernacle. 
But now for nothing the results to date: 
1. There are now twenty-two in the Mandir making the e xperiment with me. 
Most of them have given up milk. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  2. They are now having bananas added to their diet and  the quantity of 
cocoanut taken has been increased. 
3. It can be stated with tolerable confidence that whe n milk is retained there 
is no danger of weakness or any other untoward resu lt. 
4. There is no difficulty about digesting uncooked spr outed grains and pulses 
and uncooked green vegetables. 
5. Cases of constipation have in most cases yielded to  the elimination of 
grains and pulses and a liberal use of coconut milk  and green vegetables 
such as  dudhi  (marrow), pumpkin, cucumber, etc., all taken with their 
skins well washed. Coconut milk is prepared by grat ing an undried 
cocoanut fine and mixing it with its own or other c lean water and straining 
and pressing through a stout cloth. A whole cocoanu t may be thus taken 
without the slightest injury or discomfort. 
6. In the majority of cases weight has been lost, but the medical authorities 
who favour unfired food assert that the loss of wei ght is a healthy reaction 
up to a point and is a sign of the body throwing of f poisonous matter. 
7. The majority still experience weakness but persist in their experiment, 
believing in the above-mentioned authorities that w eakness is an 
intermediate stage in this experiment. There is no doubt that the stomach 
which has undergone distention through overfeeding with starchy and fatty 
foods feels an emptiness till it resumes its natura l size. 
8. The experiment is not an easy thing nor does it yie ld magical results. It 
requires patience, perseverance and caution. Each o ne has to find his or 
her own balance of the different ingredients. 
9. Almost every one of us has experienced a clearer br ain power and 
refreshing calmness of spirit. 
10. Many have found the experiment as a decided help in  allaying animal 
passion. 
11. Too much stress cannot be laid on the imperative ne cessity of thorough 
mastication. I observe that even many of the carefu l inmates do not know 
the art of mastication and have therefore bad teeth  and spongy gums. A Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  few days of hard and conscientious chewing of the c ocoanut and green 
vegetable has brought about wonderful results in th is direction. 
Several physicians are taking an interest in my exp eriment. They send me texts 
from Ayurvedic writings for or against the articles  I have been using. Two or 
three have sent me the identical text against takin g honey mixed with hot 
water and pronouncing dire results. When I ask them  whether they have 
verified the text from their own experience they ar e silent. My own experience 
of taking honey mixed with hot water extends to mor e than four years. I have 
experienced no ill effect whatsoever. Objection has  also been raised against 
the use of honey on humanitarian grounds. This obje ction has, I admit, 
considerable force though the Western method of gat hering honey is cleaner 
and less open to objection. I fear that if I would be strictly logical I should have 
to cut down many things I take or use. But life is not governed by strict logic. It 
is an organic growth, seemingly irregular growth, f ollowing its own law and 
logic. I began taking honey in Yeravda jail under m edical advice. I am not sure 
that its use is now necessary for me. Western docto rs bestow high praise upon 
it. Most of them who condemn the use of sugar in un measured terms speak 
highly of honey which they say does not irritate as  refined sugar or even  gur  
does. I do not want to weaken my present experiment  by abjuring honey just 
now. The humanitarian aspect will be infinitely mor e served, if the unfired food 
experiment succeeds beyond doubt. 
Another physician quotes a text against the use of sprouted pulses but he too 
lacks actual experience for supporting his text. An d this has been my complaint 
against many Ayurvedic physicians. I have no doubt that there is abundant 
ancient wisdom buried in the Sanskrit medical works . Our physicians appear to 
be too lazy to unearth that wisdom in the real sens e of the term. They are 
satisfied with merely repeating the printed formula . Even as a layman I know 
many virtues are claimed for several Ayurvedic prep arations. But where is their 
use, if they cannot be demonstrated today? I plead for the sake of this ancient 
science for a spirit of genuine search among our Ay urvedic physicians. I am as 
anxious as the tallest among them can be to free ou rselves from the tyranny of Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  Western medicines which are ruinously expensive and  the preparation of which 
takes no count of the higher humanities. 
Young India,  8-8-1929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30   
8. UNFIRED FOOD 
Dear Sir, 
I have read the further account of your dietetic ex periment - reprinted in the  Hindu of 
July  22 - with much interest; and I am glad to see that  you do not carry your objections to 
milk and its products to the extent of recommending  the 'youth of India" not to use it. 
Indeed, you are, if 1 may say so, recording the res ults of your experiment with much 
open-mindedness. But there are in your account two mis-statements of fact - (a) the 
capacity of the plant-world to sustain man at his h ighest is not an unexplored field to 
modern medical science, and this science has shown it to be not unlimited: one reason for 
the nutritive limitations of a purely vegetable die t for man is the difference in length and 
structure between the human gastro-intestinal tract  and that of herbivorous animals. 
Man's digestive tube is not long enough nor capacio us enough to accommodate a sufficient 
mass of suitable vegetable food, nor to extract fro m such as it can contain all the 
nutriment man needs for  his fullest well-being ; (b) there is only one vitamin - vitamin D - 
for which man can rely (to a considerable extent) u pon the sun. There are, of course, 
more things in Heaven and Earth than are dreamt of in our philosophy; but so far as 
nutritional science has progressed, there is nothin g to indicate the possibility of 'getting 
the most important of the vitamins from the sun', t hough, no doubt, the sun plays a great 
part in their production in the foods available for  mankind. There are, by the way. no 
vitamins which can truthfully be said to be more im portant than others. 
One of the  great  faults in Indian diets at the present day is their  deficiency in vitamin A, 
in suitable proteins and in certain salts; and the greatest nutritional need of India is the 
freer use of good milk and its products which suppl y these factors. There can be no doubt 
in the minds of those of us who have devoted a life time to the study of nutrition that milk 
is one of the greatest blessings given to mankind. And to one like myself, whose work is to 
learn the Truth and spread it, the scarcity of this  food in India and the lack of 
appreciation of its value are matters of grave conc ern. Do not. I beg of you, decry it; for a 
pint of milk a day will do more for 'Young India' t han most things I wot of. It is, for 
example, to deficiency of vitamin A that we owe so much disease of the bowels and lungs, 
so much disease of the bladder (such as "stone') an d so much anaemia in this country. 
I am glad you are interesting yourself in the matte r of food and I agree with much that you 
say. But let me assure you that a little more "fort issimo' on the 'milk and milk-products 
theme' will do great good when you are leading the orchestra of Truth.  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  Coonoor, 26-7-1929 
I am,  
Yours sincerely,  
R. McCarrison 
PS. - When next you make an Andhra tour, avoid "the  extreme weakness" which overtook 
you in your last one, by taking a pint of milk a da y! 
I publish this letter thankfully and wish that othe r men versed in medical 
science would also guide me. In making the experime nt, I am trying to find out 
the truth about food in so far as it is possible fo r a layman to do so. 
As for Dr. McCarrison's argument about the necessit y of animal food, I dare not 
as a layman combat it, but I may state that there a re medical men who are 
decidedly of opinion that animal food including mil k is not necessary for 
sustaining the human system to the full. By instinc t and upbringing I personally 
favour a purely vegetarian diet, and have for years  been experimenting in 
finding a suitable vegetarian combination. But ther e is no danger of my 
decrying milk until I have obtained overwhelming ev idence in support of a 
milkless diet. It is one of the many inconsistencie s of my life that whilst I am in 
my own person avoiding milk, I am conducting a mode l dairy which is already 
producing cow's milk that can successfully compete with any such milk 
produced in India in purity and fat content. 
Notwithstanding Dr. McCarrison's claim for medical science I submit that 
scientists have not yet explored the hidden possibi lities of the innumerable 
seeds, leaves and fruits for giving the fullest pos sible nutrition to mankind. For 
one thing, the tremendous vested interests that hav e grown round the belief in 
animal food prevent the medical profession from app roaching the question with 
complete detachment. It almost seems to me that it is reserved for lay 
enthusiasts to cut their way through a mountain of difficulties even at the risk 
of their lives to find the truth. I should be satis fied if scientists would lend their 
assistance to such humble seekers. 
I am thankful for Dr. McCarrison's more accurate st atement about vitamins. 
Young India,  15-8-1929 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32   
9. UNFIRED FOOD 
Instead of hopeful progress I have to report a trag edy this week. In spite of 
great carefulness in experimentation along an unbea ten track, I have been laid 
low. A mild but persistent attack of dysentery has sent me to bed and not only 
to cooked food but also to goat's milk. Dr. Harilal  Desai used all his skill and 
patience to save me from having to go back to milk,  which I had left last 
November in the hope of not having to go back to it , but he saw that he could 
not reduce the mucus and the traces of blood that p ersistently appeared in the 
bowels without making me take curds. At the time of  writing this therefore I 
have had two portions of curds, with what effect I shall note at the foot of this 
article which is being written on Sunday night. 
It appears that I was not digesting the raw foods I  was taking, and what I had 
mistaken for good motions were precursors of dysent ery. The other conditions 
including vitality being good, I had no cause to su spect any evil. 
My companions too have one after another fallen off , except four, of whom one 
has been on raw food for nearly a year with great s uccess as he thinks.  
The companions have left off because they were feel ing weak and were losing 
weight week by week. 
Thus Sjt. Gopalrao's claim that unfired food is sui table for any stomach and can 
be taken with impunity by young and old, sick and h ealthy is to say the least of 
it ;un- proven'. This apparent failure should serve as a warning to the zealots 
that they should move most cautiously and be scrupu lously exact in their 
statements and careful in their deductions. 
I call the failure apparent, because I have the sam e faith in unfired food that I 
first had nearly forty years ago. The failure is du e to my gross ignorance of the 
practice of unfired food and of right combinations.  Some of its good results are 
really striking. No one has suffered seriously. My dysentery has been painless. 
Every doctor who has examined me has found me other wise in better health 
than before. For my companions I have been a blind guide leading the blind. I Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  have sadly missed the guidance of someone who has k nown the virtue of 
unfired food and who would have the patience of a s cientist. 
But if I regain my health and have a little leisure , I hope to revert to the 
experiment with better hope in that I shall know wh at mistakes to avoid. As a 
searcher for Truth I deem it necessary to find the perfect food for a man to 
keep body, mind and soul in a sound condition. I be lieve that the search can 
only succeed with unfired food, and that in the lim itless vegetable kingdom 
there is an effective substitute for milk, which, e very medical man admits, has 
its drawbacks and which is designed by nature not f or man but for babies and 
young ones for lower animals. I should count no cos t too dear for making a 
search which in my opinion is so necessary from mor e points of view than one. I 
therefore still seek information and guidance from kindred spirits. To those, 
who are not in sympathy with this phase of my life and who out of their love for 
me are anxious about me, I give my assurance that I  shall not embark upon any 
experiment that would endanger my other activities.  I am of opinion that 
though I have been making such experiments since th e age of 18, I have not 
often suffered from serious illness and have been a ble to preserve tolerably 
good health. But I would also like them to feel wit h me that so long as God 
wants me for any work on this earth, He will preser ve me from harm and 
prevent me from going too far. 
Those who are making the experiment must not give i t up because of the 
temporary check I have received. Let them learn fro m the causes of my failure. 
1. If there is the slightest danger of insufficient ma stication, let the 
ingredients be finely pulverised and dissolved in t he mouth instead of 
being swallowed. 
2. If there is an undissolved residue in the mouth, it  must be put out. 
3. Grains and pulses should be used sparingly. 
4. Green vegetables should be well washed and scrapped  before being used 
and should also be used sparingly. 
5. Fresh and dried fruits (soaked) and nuts should be the staples at least in 
the beginning stages. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  6. Milk should not be given up till the unfired foods have been taken without 
any harm for a sufficiently long period. All the li terature I have read points 
to fruits and nuts with only a small quantity of gr een vegetables as a 
perfect food. 
[I am able to report on Tuesday morning that dilute d curds are working well.] 
Young India,  22-8-1929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
10. NATIONAL FOOD 
I believe that we should be able to accommodate our selves to the food eaten in 
the provinces other than our own. I know that this is not so simple a question as 
it appears. I know southerners who have made hercul ean effort to take to 
Gujarati food and failed. Gujaratis will not take t o the southern mode of 
cooking. Bengal produces dainties which the other p rovinces will not easily 
relish. If we would be national instead of provinci al, we would have to have an 
interchange of habits as to food, simplify our tast es and produce healthy dishes 
all can take with impunity. This means a careful st udy of the foods taken by 
different provinces, castes and denominations. Unfo rtunately, or fortunately, 
there are not only different combinations in differ ent provinces, but there are 
different styles in the same province, among the di fferent communities. It is 
necessary, therefore, for national workers to study  the foods and the methods 
of preparing them in the various provinces and disc over common, simple and 
cheap dishes which all can take without upsetting t he digestive apparatus. In 
any case, it must be a matter of shame for workers not to know the manners 
and customs of different provinces and communities.  In liberal households 
cooks ought to be able to cook foods eaten in the v arious provinces. Why should 
not a Gujarati be able to produce dishes which a Ta milian or an Andhra or a 
Bengali ordinarily eats? I know that we cannot meet  at the top. Nor is such a 
meeting necessary or desirable. Rich people will ha ve not only provincial 
combinations but specialities designed for their ow n households. These cannot 
be universalized. What can be and should be aimed a t are common dishes for 
common people. This I know is easily possible if we  have the mind. But to make 
this possible, volunteers will have to learn the ar t of cooking and for this 
purpose they will have also to study the values of different foods and evolve 
common dishes easily and cheaply prepared.  
Harijan,  5-1-1934 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
11. MINIMUM DIET 
What statistics I have received go to show that all  over India except in the 
Punjab, the articles of diet the masses live on are  deficient in nutritive value. 
The most helpful pamphlet on the minimum diet scale  is the one prepared by 
Dr. H.V. Tilak, on behalf of the Bombay Presidency Baby and Health Week 
Association (Delisle Road, Bombay-11). It is called  Balanced Diets. Its price is 4 
annas. It has been translated in Marathi and Gujara ti. The diet recommended 
by the pamphlet, containing a variety of whole grai n (some of which is 
sprouted) including soya beans, dried skim milk and  vegetables, increases a 
white rat to 55 grammes in weight from 13 grammes w hen fed on a diet 
containing an excess of highly polished rice with v ery little vegetables and milk. 
The diet scale recommended in the pamphlet has been  prepared after careful 
experimentation. It costs in Bombay Rs. 5/- per mon th. I have my doubts about 
the possibility of introducing soya beans and dried  skim milk in the poor man's 
diet even in a place like Bombay. The sprouting of pulses and malting of  jowari  
recommended by Dr. Tilak is also very difficult of enforcement in private 
households. It is almost impossible of introduction  in villages. Skim milk is 
unobtainable in the villages, and I know that in hu ndreds of them not a drop of 
fresh milk or good ghee is to be had. I mention the se difficulties in order that 
taking Dr. Tilak's carefully prepared scale as a ba sis, experts may work out a 
scale more suited to the villages in their province s and yet produce the results 
that Dr. Tilak's diet is claimed to have achieved.  
Harijan,  31-8-1935 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37   
12. FOR FOUR RUPEES A MONTH 
Dr. Aykroyd, Director of Nutrition Research at Coon oor, recently delivered an 
instructive lecture at Bangalore. From the lecture as published in the daily 
press it appears that a well-balanced diet need not  cost more than Rs. 4/- per 
month. Thus the lecturer said that 
"the dietary requirements of an adult man per day w ere 16 oz. of soya bean, 
two oz. of  arhardal,  an oz. of jaggery, four oz., each of spinach and a maranth, 
an oz. each of potatoes and colacasia, 1.5 oz. of c oconut oil and six oz. of 
buttermilk - all costing about two annas."  
Harijan,  12-10-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38   
13. A TALK TO VILLAGE WORKERS 
[The following is an extract from a summary made by  M. D. of a talk given by Gandhiji to 
village workers who were his guests on the 22nd Oct ober 1935.] 
As today's menu was selected by me with some carefu l thought, and especially 
with a view to the needs of village workers, I must  speak to you about it at 
some length. The idea was to provide you with food,  nourishing and yet within 
the means of an average villager and within the pos sibility of an eight hours' 
minimum wage as we have fixed it, i.e., 3 annas. 
We were 98 diners today and the total cost of our f ood was Rs. 9-14-3, which 
means that each meal cost slightly more than 6 pice . Here are the details: 
  Rs.  as.  ps.  
36  lb. Wheat Flour  1 8 0 
12  „ Tomatoes  0 11  3 
4 „ Jaggery  0 6 3 
24  „ Red Gourd  0 7 6 
6 „ Linseed Oil  1 2 0 
50  „ Milk  3 13  0 
4 „ Soya Beans  .0  6 0 
4 „ Cocoanuts  0 4 0 
16  Koth  Fruit  0 2 0 
 Tamarind & Salt.  0 2 3 
 Fuel  1 0 0 
 Total 9 14 3 
 
Vinoba had passed cm the suggestion to me that I ne ed not worry about giving 
all of you  roti  but might simply give you wheaten porridge (that w e have here Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  every morning) and thus save a lot of trouble. No, said I to myself, you young 
men whom God has given strong teeth must have good hard well-baked  
bhakhari  which anyone can make, which one can easily carry on one's person 
from place to place, and which can keep for a coupl e of days. Before the dough 
was kneaded it was treated with linseed oil. This r endered it both soft and 
crisp. Then, as we must have some greens and raw ve getables, we had 
tomatoes and two  chatnis  - one made of  koth  fruit available in plenty in these 
parts and another made of leaves available in our g arden.  Koth  fruit is known 
for both its aperient and astringent properties and  jaggery goes well with it and 
makes a delicious  chatni.  The other  chatni contained some cocoanut, tamarind 
and salt to spice the leaves. Green leaves must be eaten by us in some form or 
other in order that we may get proper vitamins in o ur diet. The vegetable 
chosen was the cheapest available and grows everywh ere in our villages. You 
will see that I allowed the use of tamarind in the preparation of  chatni. In spite 
of the popular prejudice against tamarind, it has b een found that it is a good 
aperient and blood purifier. I gave copious doses o f tamarind water to one of 
the inmates suffering from malaria with very good e ffect and have tried it in 
several cases of constipation. 
Milk is an essential article of diet. Your menu con tained half a pound of milk, 
but you must have seen that I gave you no ghee. I h ope, however, that you did 
not miss it. For I gave you soya beans and oil. Soy a beans are rich in oil (20 per 
cent) and proteins (40 per cent). Groundnuts also a re rich in oil, but they have 
the disadvantage of containing too much starch from  which soya beans are 
comparatively free. Milk with soya beans gives us a lmost all that we need in the 
shape of fats and there is no need for ghee at all.  Why then go to all the waste-
ful trouble of making ghee? And where procuring goo d ghee is a doubtful 
proposition, why have spurious ghee? But milk or bu tter-milk we ought to have, 
no matter how little. Medical men say that it helps  in the assimilation of the 
vegetable fats and proteins. Therefore ghee you can  omit with impunity. I had 
recently two little children under my care whose di et I carefully regulated. I 
cut out ghee from it and found that they were none the worse for the cutting 
out of ghee. Of course I gave them as much milk as they wanted. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  Our menu has cost us a little more than 6 pice. It was a full meal and the other 
meals need not be so heavy as this. They, therefore , need not cost more than 
an anna or so. Milk may be omitted for the other me als. Wheat bhakhari,  soya 
beans and  chatni  should be quite enough. 
Harijan,  2-11-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
14. MINIMUM DIET 
Use one grain at a time.  Chapati,  rice and pulses, milk, ghee,  gur  and oil are 
used in ordinary households besides vegetables and fruit. I regard this as an 
unhealthy combination. Those who get animal protein  in the shape of milk, 
cheese, eggs or meat need not use pulses at all. Th e poor people get only 
vegetable protein. If the well-to-do give up pulses  and oils, they set free these 
two essentials for the poor who get neither animal protein nor animal fat. Then 
the grain eaten should not be sloppy. Half the quan tity suffices when it is eaten 
dry and not dipped in gravy. It is well to eat it w ith raw salads such as onion, 
carrot, radish, salad leaves, tomatoes. An ounce or  two of salads serve the 
purpose of eight ounces of cooked vegetables.  Chapatis  or bread should not be 
eaten with milk. To begin with, one meal may be raw  vegetables and chapatis  
or bread, and the other cooked vegetables with milk  or curds. 
Sweet dishes should be eliminated altogether. Inste ad gur  or sugar in small 
quantities may be taken with milk or bread or by it self. 
Fresh fruit is good to eat, but only a little is ne cessary to give tone to the 
system. It is an expensive article, and an over-ind ulgence by the well-to-do has 
deprived the poor and the ailing of an article whic h they need much more than 
the well-to-do. 
Any medical man who has studied the science of diet etics will certify that what 
I have suggested can do no harm to the body, on the  contrary, it must conduce 
to better health. 
Harijan,  25-1-1942 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42   
15. PLEA FOR MORE FRUITS 
Dr. Menkel, who is also a dietetist, comments as fo llows in  The Oriental 
Watchman  on my note* in  Harijan of January 25th: 
"First is the statement that food taken in excess o f actual requirement for repair and 
energy is as much food actually wasted. Excess food  is not only wasted food, but this 
excess also places a tax on the organs of digestion , detoxication and elimination, 
producing premature exhaustion with such developmen ts as diabetes, nephritis and auto-
intoxication. Another economy recommendation is tha t half the quantity of grain as wheat 
or rice will meet the food purposes when not taken in sloppy form. Cooked or baked grains 
when taken as near dry as possible must then be mas ticated and moistened with saliva to 
be swallowed. This results in better digestion and therefore less food providing the needed 
energy. Mr. Gandhi suggests that an ounce or two of  raw salad vegetables is worth eight 
ounces of cooked vegetables. This applies particula rly to their vitamin and mineral values. 
There is also something vital in raw fruit and vege table which is destroyed by cooking. For 
this reason it is desirable that some uncooked raw fruit and vegetables be taken daily. 
India needs to make more extensive use of such raw uncooked foods. The elimination of 
sweet dishes as advocated would greatly relieve the  stress upon the pancreas and liver 
imposed by the average Indian diet, and thus reduce  the incidence of diabetes. It is in 
regard to Mr. Gandhi's statement about fruit that w e do not find ourselves quite in 
agreement. He writes: 'Fresh fruit is good to eat, but only a little is necessary to give tone 
to the system.' While we can hobble along on low po wer with little fruit in the diet, it is 
the contrary that is required. Because so little fr uit is available and consumed by the 
population, that there is so much vitamin and miner al deficiency in India. Writing about 
fruits and berries in his book  Food,  Sir Robert McCarrison states: They are among the b est 
of all foodstuffs and  should form a considerable part of our daily diet.  They contain much 
mineral salts of the alkaline kind which keep the b lood pure and prevent it becoming acid 
and sour. Fruits are most useful in keeping the bow els healthy and active.' (p.88). Man's 
physical structure indicates that he is intended to  be a frugivorous creature. His natural 
food, the food on which he can be at his best, is f ruit, nuts, milk and the more succulent 
vegetables. Cereals would be better introduced as a dditional rather than as basic to the 
diet because of their strongly acid-ash-forming ten dency. On the other hand, as stated by 
Sir Robert McCarrison, the fruits and vegetables ar e rich in the alkali minerals. The im-
portance of this difference will be recognized when  it is recalled that most of our ailments 
and all our pains, except those due to accident, ar e of acid origin. Obviously there would Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  be less pain, and more enjoyment of life, if we kep t more definitely on the alkaline side. 
This necessitates more fruit and vegetables, with p roportionately less of the acid-tending 
cereals. The normal proportion is four parts of the  alkaline - fruit and vegetables - to one 
of acid, which includes all other foods. This would  be the diet of health economy, and 
should be made economically within the reach of all , in a well-organized world. Under 
existing emergency Mr. Gandhi has advocated very ra tional and possible food economy. His 
suggestions merit careful study and application." 
While I appreciate Dr. Menkel's endorsement of my r emarks, I like better his 
correction of my apparent lukewarmness about fruit.  No one perhaps, as far as 
I know, has eaten as much fruit as I have, having l ived for six years entirely on 
fruits and nuts and always having had a liberal sup ply of fruit as part of my 
ordinary diet. But I had in my mind, when writing, the special conditions of 
India. Its people should have, by reason of its ext ent and variety of climate, a 
most liberal supply of fruits, vegetables and milk.  Yet it is the poorest country 
in this respect. I therefore suggested what seemed to me to be feasible. But I 
heartily endorse the proposition that for retaining  health fresh fruit and fresh 
vegetables should form the main part of our diet. I t is for the medical pro-
fession to study the peculiar condition of India an d suggest the list of 
vegetables and fruit which are or can be easily and  cheaply grown in the 
villages for local consumption. Wild berries, for i nstance, grow abundantly. 
They may not be taken to the market for sale but ca n be used for the picking. 
This is a vast field for research. It can bring nei ther money nor perhaps fame. 
But it may earn the gratitude of dumb millions. 
Sevagram, 28-2-1942 
Harijan,  15-3-1942 
 
1 A part of this note appears just previous to this  chapter, as 14, "Minimum Diet" in this 
volume. 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
16. CARRION-EATING I 
Dear Dr. Deshmukh, 
I badly need your assistance in one or two things. 
1. Is there any chemical physiological distinction bet ween carrion and 
slaughtered meat? If there is, what is it? 
2. Do you know of any medical reason for the great rep ugnance that even 
meat-eaters have against carrion? 
3. If you are of opinion that there is no difference b etween fresh carrion and 
slaughtered meat, can you say whether flesh of dead  cattle treated two or 
three days after death or even 24 hours after death  would make any 
difference? 
4. You may know that some  Chamars  poison cattle for possessing the 
carcasses and they are said to eat their flesh. Wil l not the flesh of 
poisoned cattle affect the eater in any way? Is the  flesh not tainted by the 
poison, or are there any poisons which, while they kill the cattle do not 
harm their flesh? 
Yours sincerely,  
M. K. Gandhi 
 
II 
Dear Mahatmaji, 
Between carrion of an healthy animal and slaughtere d meat there is no 
chemical or physiological difference. I know this w ill come as a surprise to 
many, as the popular opinion is that there should b e a difference, but from the 
scientific as well as medical point of view, there is none. 
In the slaughter of animals, the animal bleeds and,  nearly all the blood being 
drained away, the slaughtered meat contains less bl ood. In the case of carrion, Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  all the blood remains in the tissues of the animals  and consequently the meat 
contains more blood. 
Decomposition sets in every dead animal, whether ki lled or dead naturally. This 
decomposition is liable to set in earlier in moist tissues and tissues containing 
more blood. The carrion, therefore, is liable to de compose earlier than 
slaughtered meat. 
If the meat whether carrion or slaughtered is eaten  before the decomposition 
sets in, it will be seen that this difference betwe en the two vanishes at this 
stage. The larger quantity of blood in carrion migh t even be to the taste of a 
certain type of people. 
You might possibly think that meat, when it starts decomposing, is universally 
rejected by human beings as food. It is not only th e depressed classes of our 
country who partake of decomposing meat, but this p ractice is not uncommon 
in other parts of the world. Gypsies in Europe have  been known to be fond of 
this practice; they go to the extent of even disint erring the dead carcasses of 
buried animals for food purposes. Decomposing fish is estimated to be an 
article of diet of more than three hundred millions  of human beings in the 
world. It is not even a matter of poverty or ignora nce. Certain persons of supe-
rior taste make a point of decomposing meat before eating, to pander to their 
epicurean taste. 
DISEASED MEAT: - But all this is in the case of hea lthy animals. This cannot hold 
good in the case of diseased animals. Many epidemic s of meat poisoning have 
occurred in the West which have been proved to be d ue to eating of meat from 
diseased animals, and the diseases in animals which  lead to poisoning are not 
the prominent diseases in cattle which kill them, s uch as  Anthrax  and Glanders,  
but common, pus-producing diseases which do not att ract so much attention in 
life. Hence the necessity of meat inspection in all  civilized countries. In Indian 
villages where this practice of eating carcasses is  more common, it will be seen 
how dangerous this practice is likely to be, on acc ount of animals dying of 
diseases to which no importance is attached but whi ch are particularly 
dangerous to human beings. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  I do not believe in the economic reason of eating d ead carcasses. After all, in 
villages, animals do not die daily and the carrion forms a very insignificant part 
of the supply of food — an occasional variety or lu xury, if it can be so called. 
Besides, the lower labouring classes in villages ar e in no better position 
economically than the depressed classes, and yet th ey can do without eating 
carrion. 
On account of the excess of blood in carrion, carri on not only decomposes 
earlier but is also difficult to preserve. Decompos ition is liable to set in earlier 
than even 24 hours in a hot climate like ours. So, although treated, carrion 
meat is not so wholesome as slaughtered meat as foo d. 
POISONED MEAT: - The meat of poisoned cattle is not  poisonous to eat. This is 
another surprise. This charge of poisoning cattle h as been brought against the 
depressed classes from time immemorial - from the V edic times. I think it may 
be true, and may partly explain the hostility of th e agricultural Aryan against 
the Dasyu who destroyed his agricultural wealth. Yo u know how fond the Vedic 
population was of their cows and cowpens and bulls and heifers. Poison is used 
by the Red Indians'of America, also the Akas Tribe near Brahmaputra, in hunting 
for food with poisoned arrow, but the meat of this poisoned animal is eaten by 
them without any detriment to health. 
Probably the poison used in India is strychnine (Kuchala)  for killing cattle, but 
the meat of the dead animal is not poisonous to eat . Experiments have been 
carried on animals, such as dogs, by feeding them o n poisoned meat of the 
animal killed by vegetable poison such as strychnin e, escerine, pilcarpine, 
veratrine and mineral poisons such as arsenic and a ntimony; and meat in all 
these cases has proved to be harmless. The explanat ion is that, although the 
poison is strong enough to kill the animal, the poi son is further oxidized into a 
harmless product and the meat, therefore, remains h armless. In the case of 
mineral poison and caustics, very little is absorbe d into the system of animals 
and the meat, therefore, contains very little of th e mineral poison. Meat of 
poisoned animals, therefore, is harmless for eating  purposes. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  QUESTION OF REPUGNANCE: - I now come to the most di fficult of your 
question, as to why there is such repugnance agains t those who eat carrion. 
That there is such a feeling of repugnance, not onl y in India but all the world 
over, cannot be denied. Logically if there is not m uch difference between the 
carrion of a healthy animal and slaughtered meat, s uch repugnance should not 
exist; and if the repugnance is to exist, it should  then extend to all meat 
eaters. The answer to this question might have been  difficult before the advent 
of the science of Analytical Psychology of Freud an d Jung. In the light of this 
science an adequate explanation can be given. The e xplanation lies in the 
fundamental property of the human mind of Displacem ent and Transference 
(Verdraengung and Verschiebung). Everything which i s not killed but dead, 
decomposing and putrefying excites a feeling of fri ght, aversion or repugnance 
in the human mind. This instinct of repugnance is a s necessary for Race 
Preservation as other instincts; otherwise, this hu man animal would have died 
of dirt long ago and have been extinct by now. If t he dead carcass instead is 
used for food or alimentation, which is one of the two fundamental necessities 
of life, it can be imagined why so much loathing is  attached to this practice. 
The feeling of repugnance gets displaced from the a ct to the person who does 
it. Economics, Logic or Science does not seem to me  to be capable of annulling 
this faculty of displacement of the human mind. It is a psychological fact, in 
the same way as the flowing of water or rotation of  the Earth is a physical fact; 
as such, use of carrion for food in normal times is  bound to create a feeling of 
loathing in the human mind, and feeling of repugnan ce for the human being 
who practises this. The displacement is from the ac t to the subject. The 
conclusion is plain: This practice must disappear. Our depressed class brethren 
must give it up. Universal human psychology is agai nst it and, therefore, it must 
go. 
Yours sincerely, 
G. V. Deshmukh 
Harijan,  8-4-1933 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION II : RICE, WHEAT AND  GUR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
17. POLISHED v. UNPOLISHED  
If rice can be pounded in the villages after the ol d fashion the wages will fill 
the pockets of the rice pounding sisters and the ri ce-eating millions will get 
some sustenance from the unpolished rice instead of  pure starch which the 
polished rice provides. Human greed, which takes no  count of the health or the 
wealth of the people who come under its heels, is r esponsible for the hideous 
rice-mills one sees in all the rice-producing tract s. If public opinion was strong, 
it will make rice-mills an impossibility by simply insisting on unpolished rice and 
appealing to the owners of rice-mills to stop a tra ffic that undermines the 
health of a whole nation and robs the poor people o f an honest means of 
livelihood. 
But who will listen to the testimony of a mere laym an on the question of food 
values? I, therefore, give below an extract from  The New Knowledge of 
Nutrition  by Mr. Collum and Simmonds which a medical friend,  to whom I had 
appealed for help, has sent with his approbation: 
"Rice is the most important cereal grain in the die t of more than half of the human race. It 
is used especially in the wettest parts of the worl d. It has never found much favour in the 
United States but is used in small amounts. Among p rimitive peoples rice is eaten without 
polishing, in which form it is known as red rice, b ut it is usually treated so as to lose a 
large part of its germ. This loss results from the pounding of the kernels in rude mortars. 
The bran layer, which is richer in mineral salts th e endosperm of the seed, is retained in 
this process. 
"Rice which is used for export and for sale in the large cities at some distance from the 
place of production is polished by abrasion. The ab rasive action results in wearing away 
the bran and germ. This mixture is known as rice po lishing. The germ of rice, like that of 
wheat or maize, consists of cellular structures whi ch are the seat of protoplasmic activity, 
and is a more complete food than any other part of the kernel. It contains almost all the 
fats found in the grain, and is more efficient in n ourshing insects as well as higher animals, 
than is the polished grain. Hamada (1923) reports t hat rice embryo protein has a high 
nutritive value. Unpolished rice loses its flavour owing to the fats becoming rancid when 
kept for considerable periods in a warm climate. Po lished rice can be handled without 
commercial hazard. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  "McCarrison (1923) concluded that vitamin A is pres ent in paddy before it is milled. The 
milling of raw paddy does not remove the whole, con tent of this substance as it is not 
confined to the peripheral layers of the grain. He states that it is destroyed in great 
measure by steam passing through paddy when it is c ontained in the vats, as in parboiling. 
"The practice of polishing rice had its origin in t he desire to improve its keeping quality, 
and the incidental whitening of the kernels has led  to the establishment of a demand for a 
white product. This and the artificially establishe d liking for white flour and white corn 
meal, is an illustration of the failure of the inst inct of man to serve as a safe guide in the 
selection of food. The aesthetic sense is appealed to in greatest measure in this case by 
the products of lowest biologic values. 
"Attractiveness of rice to the eye is so important a factor commercially that the practice 
of artificial whitening of the polished kernels has  come into vogue. This is accompanied by 
coating the kernels with talcum powder, the latter adhering by means of a thin coating of 
Glucose. The milky appearance of the water in which  rice is washed is due to the talcum 
remaining in suspension. Rice which has been polish ed, but not coated in this way, is 
called brown rice as contrasted with the coated or white rice. 
"Chart III shows that there are four dietary factor s in which polished rice is of such poor 
quality as to require improvements before it become s a complete food. Its proteins are of 
low value. It is too poor in all essential mineral elements to meet the needs of a growing 
animal, and is nearly free from vitamins A and B. T he data in Chart III were obtained with 
the rats and do not bring out the fact that rice is  lacking in the vitamin C. This substance 
is not essential in the diet of the rat. 
"Kennedy (1924) found wild rice to contain a higher  percentage of protein than most other 
cereals, but it resembles the cereals in containing  proteins of rather low biological value. 
It also resembles other cereals in containing inorg anic material unsuitable for the 
promotion of growth. Its content of vitamin A is lo w but it contains a sufficient amount to 
prevent xerophthalmia. Wild rice has a greater food  value than the cultivated polished 
rice, because its proteins are of better quality. I t contains adequate amounts of vitamin B 
for growth."   
Harijan,  26-10-1934 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51   
18. RICE, WHEAT AND  GUR  
Dr. Ansari's is the latest reasoned opinion receive d on unpolished rice, whole 
wheatmeal and  gur.  I share it with the readers. 
"Of all cereals, rice is the richest in starch, of which it has nearly 50 p.c.; the starch in 
rice has the further advantage of being present in small and easily digestible grains. When 
boiled, rice swells up and absorbs nearly five time s its weight of water, while some of its 
mineral and other constituents are lost in the proc ess of boiling. But the most important 
ingredient lost in this process of boiling is the w ater-soluble Vitamin B. In the process of 
polishing rice, all outer coverings of the grains a re removed, consisting of the husk as well 
as the pigmented covering containing Vitamin B, Fat  and Protein, which are necessary for 
health and growth. It has been proved that the abse nce of Vitamin B from polished rice 
has been instrumental in causing Beri-Beri. Unpolis hed rice, on the other hand, not being 
subjected to the boiling process used in polishing rice in the mills, retains Vitamin B as 
well as the Protein, Fat and mineral matter in whic h rice is none too rich. The unpolished 
rice, hand-pounded, is superior to the unpolished r ice turned from the mills, in so far as 
the former is not subjected to the heating process,  even though it is dry- heating which it 
has to undergo in the mills, 
"Wheat is the most important of cereal foods in Ind ia. The wheat grain consists of bran or 
outer envelope, mainly composed of cellulose, the k ernel consisting of starch and the 
germ consisting of soluble starch, protein and some  fat. According to professor Church, a 
whole wheat grain has the following composition:  
Water  Nitrogenous Fat Starch Cellulose  Mineral 
 matter  & Sugar  matter 
14.5% 11%  1.2% 69%  2.6%  1.7% 
"In the process of milling, the germ and the bran a re rejected, and with it undoubtedly are 
discarded some of the most useful chemical constitu ents of the wheat, for, with the germ 
a considerable amount of protein and fat are lost, and with the bran are lost mineral 
matter as well as some protein. The recognition of this has led to some process during 
milling to prevent it, but the wheatmeal ground in the mills is never so rich in these 
ingredients as the whole wheatmeal flour ground in the indigenous  chakki. The latter 
consists of all the three ingredients, i.e.. the br an, the kernel and the germ and is hence 
superior in nutritive value, besides being cheaper and more readily available to the poor 
people in the countryside. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  "Gur,  jaggery or molass is produced as by-product in the  manufacture of crystallized sugar. 
The juice from the sugar-cane is cooked in a big pa n. the water being allowed to 
evaporate, and dark-brown syrupy substance is thus produced which contains crys 
tallizable cane-sugar, uncrystallizable fruit-sugar  and some impuri ties and colouring 
matter. The following are their composition:  
 Cane Fruit Extraneous and Salts Water 
 Sugar Sugar colouring matter 
  47% 20% 2.7%  2.6% 27.3% 
"Refined crystalline cane-sugar, or Sucrose, is the  most familiar of all kinds of sugar. It is 
chemically indistinguishable from sugar derived fro m beetroot, maple, etc. Sucrose is 
assimilated in the process of digestion, only after  it has been inverted by ferments and 
acid secretions of the stomach. It is then stored u p in the liver as glycogen. On the other 
hand, fruit-sugar is all ready to be assimilated in to glycogen. It is. therefore, clear that 
crystalline or refined cane-sugar and  gur,  taken quantity for quantity would take different 
times in their assimilation.  Gur  consisting of cane- sugar and fruit-sugar in the p roportion 
of 2 to 1, would be assimilated more rapidly than c ane-sugar alone taken in the same 
quantity. Therefore, the nutritive value of  gur  is at least 33 p.c. superior to that of 
refined sugar." 
The truth of the opinion can be tested by everybody  for himself by trying pure  
gur, chakki-ground  whole wheatmeal and hand-pounded unpolished rice. 
Harijan,  28-12-1934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53   
19. UNPOLISHED RICE 
The following is the result of my observations to d ate. 
Whole, unpolished rice is unprocurable in the bazar s. It is beautiful to look at 
and rich and sweet to the taste. Mills can never co mpete with this unpolished 
rice. It is husked in a simple manner. Most of the paddy can be husked in a light  
chakki  without difficulty. There are some varieties the h usk of which is not 
separated by grinding. The best way of treating suc h paddy is to boil it first and 
then separate the chaff from the grain. This rice, it is said, is most nutritious 
and, naturally, the cheapest. In the villages, if t hey husk their own paddy, it 
must always be cheaper for the peasants than the co rresponding mill- husked 
rice, whether polished or unpolished. The majority of rice found ordinarily in 
the bazars is always more or less polished, whether  hand-husked or mill-
husked. Wholly unpolished rice is always hand-huske d and is every time cheaper 
than the mill-husked rice, the variety being the sa me. 
Subject to further research, the observations so fa r show that it is because of 
our criminal negligence that rice-eating millions e at deteriorated rice and pay a 
heavy price into the bargain. Let the village worke r test the truth of these 
observations for himself. 
Harijan,  25-1-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54   
20. WHEAT AND  GUR  
Last week I dealt with rice. Let us now take up whe at. It is the second most 
important article of diet, if not the first. From t he nutritive standpoint, it is 
the king of cereals. By itself, it is more perfect than rice. Flour bereft of the 
valuable bran is like polished rice. That branless flour is as bad as polished rice 
is the universal testimony of medical men. Whole-wh eat flour ground in one's 
own chakki  is any day superior to, and cheaper than, the fine  flour to be had in 
the bazars. It is cheaper because the cost of grind ing is saved. Again, in whole-
wheat flour there is no loss of weight. In fine flo ur there is loss of weight. The 
richest part of wheat is contained in its bran. The re is a terrible loss of 
nutrition when the bran of wheat is removed. The vi llagers and others who eat 
whole-wheat flour ground in their own  chakkis  save their money and, what is 
more important, their health. A large part of the m illions that flour-mills make 
will remain in and circulate among the deserving po or when village grinding is 
revived. 
But the objection is taken that  chakki  grinding is a tedious process, that often 
wheat is indifferently ground and that it does not pay the villagers formerly to 
grind wheat themselves. If it paid the villagers fo rmerly to grind their own 
corn, surely the advent of flour-mills should make no difference. They may not 
plead want of time, and when intelligence is allied  to labour, there is every 
hope of improvement in the  chakki.  The argument of indifferent grinding can 
have no practical value. If the chakki  was such an indifferent grinder, it could 
not have stood the test of time immemorial. But to obviate the risk of using 
indifferently ground whole-wheat flour, I suggest t hat, wherever there is 
suspicion, the flour of uneven grinding may be pass ed through a sieve and the 
contents may be turned into thick porridge and eate n with or after chapati.  If 
this plan is followed, grinding becomes incredibly simple, and much time and 
labour can be saved. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  All this change can only be brought about by some p revious preparation on the 
part of workers and instruction of villagers. This is a thankless task. But it is 
worth doing, if the villagers are to live in health  and elementary comfort. 
Gur  is the next article that demands attention. Accord ing to the medical 
testimony I have reproduced in these columns,  gur  is any day superior to 
refined sugar in food value, and if the villagers c ease to make  gur  as they are 
already beginning to do, they will be deprived of a n important food adjunct for 
their children. They may do without  gur  themselves, but their children cannot 
without undermining their stamina.  Gur  is superior to bazaar sweets and to 
refined sugar. Retention of  gur  and its use by the people in general means 
several crores of rupees retained by the villagers.  
But some workers maintain that  gur  does not pay the cost of production. The 
growers who need money against their crops cannot a fford to wait till they 
have turned cane-juice into  gur  and disposed of it. Though I have testimony to 
the contrary, too, this argument is not without for ce. I have no ready-made 
answer for it. There must be something radically wr ong when an article of use, 
made in the place where also its raw material is gr own, does not pay the cost 
of labour. This is a subject that demands local inv estigation in each case. 
Workers must not take the answer of villagers and d espair of a remedy. 
National growth, identification of cities with vill ages, depend upon the solution 
of such knotty problems as are presented by  gur.  We must make up our mind 
that  gur must not disappear from the villages, even if it me ans an additional 
pice to be paid for it by city people. 
Harijan,  1-2-1935 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56   
21. ALL ABOUT RICE 
The problem of rice is daily presenting interesting  features. Shri Shankarlal 
Banker has already commenced experiments on unpolis hed rice. He writes: 
"When formerly paddy was hand-husked, it underwent three polishes after the removal of 
the outermost husk, and many people indeed believe even now that that process has to be 
gone through. I therefore had some paddy got and, a fter removing the husk, had three 
polishes by pounding once, twice and thrice, of whi ch specimens are being herewith sent. 
The rice that was only once polished was much sweet er to the taste than that which was 
polished twice and thrice. The first process of rem oving the husk was gone through by 
means of  chakki,  and the polishing or pounding was done by, using t he village pestle and 
mortar. The rice which was obtained by merely remov ing the husk was in colour almost 
like that which was first polished. But it took a l onger time to cook. The next time, 
therefore, I soaked the rice in water for some time , and there was no difficulty about 
cooking. The sweetness was all the greater. Some co ntend that rice that is not polished at 
all is difficult to digest. But this is not likely.  The part that is removed by polishing 
contains vitamins and salts, which help digestion. If, however, this belief is not well-
founded, you will perhaps procure authentic informa tion. You will be interested to know 
that on removing the mere husk from 10 seers of pad dy it was reduced to 7 ½, seers. Thus 
the weight was reduced by 25 per cent. On polishing  three times it was reduced by 40 per 
cent. The paddy that I used for my observation was the variety called  jirasal." 
The only comment I would like to offer on this lett er is that I do not think that 
any further medical opinion will help. The opinion I have gathered and 
reproduced in these columns is emphatic in favour o f unpolished rice. But so far 
as I am aware, we have nothing in medical literatur e describing experiments of 
which Shri Banker has, like many of us, made the co mmencement. Proof of the 
pudding is in the eating; let everyone make the exp eriment for himself. 
One caution, however, as a practised cook I would l ike to utter. Among the 
many domestic quarrels I used to have with my wife was one over rice-cooking. 
She would have every grain separated. 1 had develop ed into a dietetic reformer 
and I knew that that rice was not half as good as t hat which was well and 
properly cooked. Not an ounce of water in which I c ooked rice was thrown 
away. But at that time I knew no distinction betwee n polished and unpolished Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  rice. I simply took the ordinary bazar rice and coo ked it through till it became 
one mass. The reader will be glad to know that the quarrel ended in a victory 
for the reform, and the wife became a convert to pr operly cooked rice. The 
precaution about unpolished rice is all the more ne cessary, because the 
pericarp of rice, which contains all its richer con stituents, requires to be 
cooked thoroughly. Therefore, if unpolished rice is  soaked in cold water for at 
least three hours before cooking, and then well boi led, there is not only no 
danger of its proving undigestible, but it will be decidedly more palatable, as 
has already been found at Maganwadi, the abode of t he Village Industries 
Association in Wardha. We have been having here wha t may be called half-
polished rice, not the perfect variety that is desc ribed in the foregoing letter. 
Nevertheless, the rice is well cooked. Nobody has c omplained about its 
indigestibility. But, being far more nutritious tha n polished rice, which is 
almost pure starch, naturally unpolished rice, cann ot be, and must not be, 
eaten in the same quantity as polished rice. This i s true of all conservative 
cookery. 
Harijan,  15-2-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58   
22. WASTE INTO WEALTH  
Those who have been following what is being written  in these columns on 
balanced diet will not have failed to understand th e vast importance of bran 
which we simply throw away and give to our cattle. I do not grudge the cattle 
what they get. But it seems to me that we are thoug htless about cattle-feeding 
as about many other things. Cattle do not need bran  so much as green fodder 
and seed cakes which they can easily divide with us  if we will revert to the 
village oil-presses. But we need every ounce of the  bran of wheat and rice if we 
are to become efficient instruments of production, not to be beaten on this 
earth by any race, and yet without the necessity of  entering into killing 
competition or literally killing one another. But I  must not prolong what is 
becoming a heavy preface to a simple recipe which a  friend has passed on to 
me for treating wheat bran. He is obliged to his si ster for it. Here it is: 
Grind sufficient wheat coarse to give you one pound  of bran which you get by 
passing the meal through a medium sieve. Add 112 lb . of cold water, eight tolas 
of pulverized clean  gur  and half a tea-spoonful of clean salt to the bran and stir 
well. Pour the mixture in a flat vessel, cover and let it stand for full half hour. 
Then put a well-fitting  tava  or dish on the pot containing the mixture and stan d 
it on hot coal and heat hot coals on top. Keep the pot between the two fires for 
full five minutes. Then transfer the mixture on to an iron  kadai  and roast on a 
slow fire till the water is fairly dried out. Then take the pot off the  chula  and 
let the contents cool. Then strain them through a s ieve with clean hands and 
the contents will drop on a clean cloth or board in  the form of threads. Expose 
these to the sun till thoroughly dry. These can be taken as they are or with hot 
or cold milk or hot water or whey. Two ounces will make a good breakfast and 
is claimed to be a valuable aid to remove constipat ion the bane of civilized life 
and precursor of many diseases. 
Harijan,  12-10-1935 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION III: SOYA BEANS AND GROUND-NUTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60   
23. SOYA BEANS 
As soya beans are claimed to possess high nutritive  value, I reproduce the 
following from pamphlet No. 7 published by the Bomb ay Presidency Baby and 
Health Week Association to enable the food reformer  to make experiments: 
"Generally speaking, yellow beans are the richest i n protein and fat, especially in the 
latter; then come green beans, with black beans las t. Farmers in any part of the world 
who take up the cultivation of the soya beans shoul d therefore grow the yellow beans in 
preference to others. 
"The soya bean is one of the most important article s of diet. It contains far more proteins 
than any grain or pulse seed known so far. It has a s much as 40 per cent proteins, i.e. 2 
times more than in pulses and beans, 3 times more t han in wheat, and 5 times more than 
in rice. 
"Its proteins are of high biological value as they contain all the important Amino-Acids; 
particularly, Glycine, Trypto-phane and Lycine. In fact, the protein of soya beans is similar 
to that found in cow's milk and animal foods. It is  a boon to vegetarians as its protein 
resembles animal protein. Soya bean oil contains a large amount of Lecithin and Vitamins 
A & D and in this respect it resembles butter. Leci thin of soya beans is identical with that 
of yolk of eggs. 
"Soya bean is one of the few seeds containing three  Vitamins A, B & D, which are 
indispensable in a staple food consumed by mankind.  
"The mineral salts in soya beans are far more than in many other seeds and they consist 
mostly of phosphates and calcium. It can therefore be used to great advantage for the 
cure of nervous diseases. 
"Soya beans are on account of their low starchy con tent (only 24 per cent) very important 
in the dietary of diabetic patients. Modern researc hes in diabetic dietary recognize the 
importance of a carbohydrate equivalent containing starch in small proportion. Soya beans 
fulfill this condition. 
"To prepare soya bean coffee the beans are roasted like coffee beans and ground to a fine 
powder for use. 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61  Soya Bean Milk 
"The straw-yellow or yellowish-green seeded varieti es of soya beans are always used in the 
manufacture of vegetable milk. The bean pulse shoul d be soaked in water for several 
hours. This soaking causes the pulse to swell up an d is said to facilitate the extraction of 
the bean proteids. It is then crushed on a stone sl ab or ground through a native mill which 
consists of two pieces of flat circular stones, one  on top of the other. 
"The crushed mass is strained through a cloth, dilu ted with water (usually three times the 
amount of water as there is of bean material) and b oiled. After boiling, it is again strained 
and the white milk run off into containers. 
"The flour of soya bean pulse can be used in the sa me manner and gives fully as good 
results as the above method. It is a rather conveni ent method of preparing the milk as it 
involves less labour and greatly reduces the amount  of time. The flour is added to the 
boiling water and the mixture boiled for ten minute s stirring constantly. Experiments with 
the different methods of preparing the milk have sh own that as much bean curd can be 
obtained by use of the flour as with soaking the pu lse and crushing, the latter being the 
method used in the Orient. After the flour and wate r are boiled, the mixture is strained 
through a cloth. If a more concentrated milk is des ired, the proportion of water may be 
reduced. 
 
Soya Bean Flour 
"The soya beans are dried in the sun for two days. It becomes now easy to make 
its pulse. All the small particles of the pulse sho uld be included in the pulse and  
only the thin husk should be thrown away.  This pulse should be mixed with rice 
or wheat or bajri  in the proportion of one part of soya pulse to 6 o r 8 parts of 
other grains for the preparation of rotis or puris in the usual way. 
"The soya bean is not generally used by itself but as an addition to other foods. 
Our food then becomes richer in proteins, fats and salts which is a great 
advantage to vegetarians."  
Harijan,  28-9-1935 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62   
24. SOYA BEANS 
It has been found that soya beans can be cooked who le and eaten like any 
other beans. Shri Narhar Bhave of Baroda, who has g iven his three gifted and 
gentle sons, Vinoba, Balkrishna and Shivaji to nati onal service, is himself a 
careful observer, 61 years old. He is living almost  wholly on milk and 6 ounces 
of soya beans and is keeping perfect health and str ength. He is of opinion that 
soya beans help him to avoid constipation which mil k alone or milk taken in 
combination with cereals and vegetables could not d o. Soya beans have in his 
opinion helped him also to avoid flatulence which o ther pulses or milk pro-
duced. He has come to this conclusion after an unbr oken experience of over ten 
months. 1 may add that Shri Bhave used to suffer fr om gout and corpulence and 
had a trace of diabetes. He got rid of this triple disability by mere careful 
dieting. In imitation of Shri Bhave the inmates of Maganwadi including me have 
been trying soya beans for the last few days. It is  too early yet to pronounce 
any opinion for ourselves. Each inmate gets a heape d dessert spoonful per day. 
This is how the beans are cooked. Clean the beans o f foreign particles or dirt. 
Wash in cold water and soak at least for twelve hou rs, and not more than 
eighteen and drain off superfluous water. Put these  beans in boiling water and 
cook for fifteen minutes on a quick fire. No salt o r soda to be added while 
cooking. Salt may be added after. At Maganwadi we s team them for two hours. 
Let those who are interested in food reform from th e poor man's point of view, 
try the experiment. It should be remembered that so ya beans are a most 
nutritious diet. It stands at the top of all the kn own articles of diet because of 
its low percentage of carbohydrates and high percen tage of salts, protein and 
fat. Its energy value is 2,100 calories per lb. aga inst 1,750 of wheat and 1,530 
of gram. It contains 40 per cent of protein and 20. 3 per cent of fat against 19 
and 4.3 respectively of gram and 14.8 and 10.5 of e ggs. Therefore no one 
should take soya beans in addition to the usual pro tein and fatty foods. The 
quantity, therefore, of wheat and ghee should be re duced and  dal omitted 
altogether, soya beans being themselves a highly nu tritious  dal. 
Harijan,  19-10-1935 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
25. SOYA BEANS 
Inquiries are being made as to where soya beans are  to be had and how they 
are to be sown and in what ways they are to be cook ed. 
The leaflet published by the Bombay Health Associat ion was condensed in these 
columns only recently. I now give below a free tran slation of the main parts of 
a Gujarati leaflet published by the Baroda State Fo od Survey Office. Its cost is 
one pice: 
"Soya beans grow on a plant from one foot to fiftee n inches in height. Every pod has on an 
average three beans. The plant has many varieties. The bean may be white, yellow, 
blackish, variegated, etc. The yellow variety has t he largest percentage of protein and 
fat. This variety is more nutritious than meat or e ggs. The Chinese eat beans with rice. 
Soya beans flour may be mixed with ordinary flour i n the proportion of 1 to 5 parts of 
wheat and turned into  chapatis.  
"Soya bean crop improves the soil. Instead of deriv ing nitrogen like other plants from the 
soil, soya bean derives it from the air and thus en riches the soil. 
"Soya bean grows in practically all soils. It thriv es most in soils favourable to cotton or 
grain crops. Salt soil improves if soya bean is sow n in it. In such soil more manure should 
be used. Fermented cow-dung, grass, leaves and dung -heap manure are quite serviceable 
for this crop. 
"Temperate climate suits the bean. It thrives where  the rainfall is not more than 40 
inches. It should not be sown in water-logged soil.  The bean is generally sown after the 
first rains, but it can be sown during any season. In the dry season it requires to be wa-
tered once a week, or twice if the soil is inclined  to dry quickly. 
"The soil is best prepared in summer. It should be ploughed up and exposed to the sun's 
rays. Then the clods should be broken up and pulver ized. 
"The seed should be sown in rows twenty-four to thi rty-six inches apart. The plants should 
be three or four inches apart in their rows. There should be frequent weeding. One acre 
would take from 20 to 30 lb. of seeds. They should not be sown deeper than two inches. 
One acre will require about 10 cartloads of manure.  After the sprouting of the seeds there 
should be proper weeding with a light plough. All c rust should be broken up. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  "The pods are ready for picking in 120 days after s owing. They should be picked as soon as 
the leaves begin to turn yellow and drop off. They should not be allowed to be on the 
plants till they open, or else the seeds will drop out and be lost in the soil." 
So much for the crop. 
Now a word as to the results of the experiment bein g made in Maganwadi. 
It is too early to draw deductions as yet. It may b e said that the weight of the 
inmates has kept constant. In a few cases there has  been a decided increase in 
one case as much as 4 1/, lb. in a fortnight. Ghee has been stopped since the 
close of the first week. The absence of it has yet made no impression on the 
weight. One ounce of oil is being issued instead. T he ration of beans has been 
increased for the current week from two ounces to t hree per head. The bean is 
served both morning and evening. They are soaked fo r some hours and then 
cooked well. Water in which it is steamed is strain ed out and tamarind and salt 
added to it. It makes a very popular soup. To the b eans after straining are 
added linseed or  til  oil and salt making a tasty dish. In the morning t he bean is 
served with  chapati  or  bhakhri  and in the evening with rice. The bean requires 
to be chewed well. No ill effect has yet been repor ted. 
Harijan,  9-11-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65   
26. IN PRAISE OF GROUND-NUT CAKE 
[A friend sends the following opinion of Prof. D. L . Sahasrabuddhe, in praise of 
ground-nut cake. It certainly deserves a trial. - M . K. G.] 
There is a good deal of preaching done to encourage  the use of soya beans as a food 
material, while ground-nut which is extensively gro wn in India is not given the 
consideration it deserves. Ground-nut is a very val uable oilseed and food material. 
Groundnut itself is not easy for digestion and many  times causes digestive disturbances. 
This is, however, due to the presence of a very hig h proportion of oil - 50 per cent. If the 
oil is extracted from well-cleaned seed, the oilcak e left behind is a highly nutritious food 
material for human consumption and does not cause a ny trouble. The following is the 
average analysis of ground-nut cake and soya beans:  
 Ground-nut cake per cent  Soya beans per cent 
Moisture  8    8 
Proteids  49   43 
Carbohydrates  24   19.5 
Fat  10   20 
Fibre  4    5 
Mineral matter  5    4.5 
The ground-nut cake compares very favourably with t he soya beans. It is actually better 
than soya beans in the essential constituents. name ly the proteids and the mineral matter. 
Further, the ground-nut proteid is better than soya  bean proteid in essential amino-acid as 
shown by the following figures: 
 Essential Ground-nut Soya bean 
  proteids proteids 
 Amino acids  per cent per cent 
 Tyrodine 5.5 1.86 
 Agrinine 13.5 5.12 
 Histidine 1.88 1.39 
 Lysine 5.50 2.71 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66   Eystine 0.85 -  
If at all any biliousness is caused by ground-nut c ake, use of a small quantity of jaggery or 
a little soda-bi-carb will be a good preventive. 
The ground-nut cake has a very good taste and its k eeping quality can be improved by 
heating and keeping the cake in a properly closed v essel. 
Sweets and ordinary articles of food can be prepare d from ground-nut cake. Attempts 
must, therefore, be made to spread the knowledge ab out the usefulness of ground-nut 
cake. It is certainly equal to and even better than  soya beans. 
Harijan,  14-12-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION IV : GREEN LEAVES, ETC.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68   
27. GREEN LEAVES 
Take up any modern text-book on food or vitamins, a nd you would find in it a 
strong recommendation to take a few edible green le aves uncooked at every 
meal. Of course, these should always be well washed  half a dozen times to 
remove all dirt. These leaves are to be had in ever y village for the trouble of 
picking. And yet greens are supposed to be only a d elicacy of cities. Villagers in 
many parts of India live on  dal  and rice or  rod,  and plenty of chilies, which 
harm the system. Since the economic reorganization of villages has been 
commenced with food reform, it is necessary to find  out the simplest and 
cheapest foods that would enable villagers to regai n lost health. The addition 
of green leaves to their meals will enable villager s to avoid many diseases from 
which they are now suffering. The villagers' food i s deficient in vitamins; many 
of them can be supplied by fresh green leaves. An e minent English doctor told 
me in Delhi that a proper use of green leaves was c alculated to revolutionize 
the customary notions of food and that much of what  was today being supplied 
by milk might be supplied by green leaves. That, of  course, means elaborate 
research and examination in detail of the nourishin g properties of the 
innumerable leaves that are to be found hidden amon g the grasses that grow 
wild in India. 
For nearly five months I have been living entirely on uncooked foods. I used to 
take what appeared to me an enormous quantity of a vegetable every day. For 
the past five months I have been taking green leave s in the place of cooked 
leaves or other vegetables. It then seemed to me mo nstrous that I should have 
to depend upon the Wardha bazar for the few ounces of leaves I needed. One 
fine morning Sjt. Chhotelalji of the Wardha Ashram brought to me a leaf that 
was growing wild among the Ashram grasses. It was  luni.  I tried it, and it 
agreed with me. Another day he brought  chakwat.  That also agreed. 
Since these were received, I had introduced to me t he leaves of  sarsav, suva,  
turnip-tops, carrot-tops, radish-tops and pea plant  leaves. Besides these, it is 
hardly necessary to state that the radish, turnip a nd carrot tubers are also Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69  known to be edible in their raw state. It is waste of money and 'good' taste to 
cook these leaves or tubers. The vitamins contained  in these vegetables are 
wholly or partially lost in cooking. I have called cooking these waste of 'good' 
taste, because the uncooked vegetables have a natur al good taste of their own 
which is destroyed by cooking. 
Harijan,  15-2-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70   
28.  NEEM  LEAVES AND TAMARIND 
In answer to certain questions Dr. Aykroyd, Directo r of Nutrition Research, 
sends the following interesting replies: 
"You ask about food values. Data on this point are being rapidly gathered here 
and elsewhere in India, and I hope that at no very distant period an 
authoritative book or pamphlet giving the chemical composition, vitamin 
potency, etc. of all common foods will become avail able for those interested in 
dietetics. I have little doubt that you are right i n stating that in practice 
different vegetable fats and oils produce different  physiological effects. This is 
probably due to their chemical make-up, but unfortu nately we are not yet in a 
position to correlate chemical composition and diet ary effect in this case. In all 
probability some research worker somewhere in the w orld will soon enlighten 
us. 
"We have analysed  neem  leaves in the laboratory. As compared with a numbe r 
of other green vegetables previously investigated, they have a high nutritive 
value. Both mature and tender leaves are rich in pr otein, calcium, iron and 
vitamin A activity and are superior in these respec ts to amaranth leaves, 
coriander leaves, and spinach. This perhaps explain s the tradition of their high 
nutritive value. I believe that modern laboratory i nvestigations in China have 
not infrequently demonstrated that herbs and other types of food 
recommended in ancient Chinese books are rich in vi tamins, etc. 
"With regard to vitamin content, tamarind and lemon  are roughly similar, 
except that the latter is richer in the anti-scorbu tic vitamin C. Tamarind pulp, 
unlike lemon, contains a good deal of tartaric acid  - about 14 per cent, the 
chief acid in lemon is citric acid. Otherwise the t wo fruits resemble each other 
in food value. Tamarind is stated to contain a laxa tive principle. I can offer 
nothing in support of the popular belief that it in duces fever and rheumatism." 
The reader should know that I have been making exte nsive experiment in  neem  
leaves and tamarind.  Neem leaves have been taken with impunity by several. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  My difficulty has been to make them palatable. Take n in the form of  chatni  
containing sufficient tamarind pulp and salt, or le mon and salt, it is least 
objectionable. Some take two to three tolas of whol e leaves with relish. I am 
unable to say definitely what effect the taking of leaves produces on the 
system. I have been tempting volunteers to try them  because of the high merit 
attributed in Ayurveda to them and because of their  decidedly good effect on 
Shri Bhansali. Their common use would enable the po or people without extra 
cost to take the green leaves upon which modern die t experts lay much stress. 
That the use of the leaf produces no ill effect can  be stated with perfect 
confidence. 
Of the good effect of tamarind I can write with equ al confidence. One ounce of 
pulp taken with meals has in several cases induced free movement of bowels. It 
can be mixed with vegetables or rice or  dal.  It can be eaten as jam when mixed 
with sufficient quantity of gur. I have used it wit h beneficial effect for reducing 
fevers by giving it in the form of tamarind water. In no case have I found it to 
have induced cold or rheumatism or boils as many pe ople believe it does. There 
is hardly a man or woman in the south who does not eat tamarind in some 
shape or form. It is the base for its famous  rasam.  
Village workers will have to find out cheap, effect ive and harmless substitutes 
for the expensive yet useful articles one uses in c ities and which one cannot get 
in the villages for love or money. Tamarind and  neem  leaf are such substitutes. 
Harijan,  16-11-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72   
29. NEED FOR CARE 
[Apropos of my reproduction of Dr. Aykroyd's letter  on neem  leaves and 
tamarind, the reader will appreciate the following further letter from the 
Director of Nutrition Research.      - M. K. G.] 
"1. I think there is a certain danger in publishing  small items of dietetic knowledge apart, 
as it were, from their scientific context. Ignorant  readers are apt to make faulty 
interpretations. For example, on re-reading the par agraph in my letter of November 6th 
relating to  neem  leaves, which you wish to publish in your paper, I  think it might possibly 
give the impression that everyone should consume gr eat quantities of this vegetable as a 
cure for all human ills. Actually, the small series  of analyses we have carried out to date 
show  neem  leaves to be somewhat richer in certain food facto rs than a number of other 
leafy vegetables, but it is only a question of degr ee. In a word, it would be better, or 
purposes of popular education, to stress the value of all green leafy vegetables rather than 
to single out one particular vegetable for special commendation. I should therefore prefer 
the paragraph, which refers to the bitter variety o f  neem  leaves  (Azadirachta Indica)  to 
read as follows : 
Question : What is the nutritive value of  neem  leaves? 
Answer:  'Neem  leaves resemble other green leafy vegetables in co mposition. Both mature 
and tender leaves are richer in protein, calcium, i ron and carotene than amaranth leaves, 
corriander leaves, drumstick leaves, lettuce, murra ya leaves, and spinach. Their com-
position makes them valuable as a supplement to a d iet largely composed of cereals, and 
in this respect they resemble the leafy vegetables in general.' 
I append a table giving, as requested, the chemical  composition of  neem  leaves, as far as 
we have studied it. 
COMPOSITION OF NEEM  LEAVES ( AZADIRACHTA INDICA ) 
 Thick and mature leaves  
grammes per 100 grammes Very tender leaves  
grammes per 100 grammes 
Moisture  59.44  59.36  
Crude proteins  7.09  11.56  
Ether extractives  1.04  2.97  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73  ( commonly designated fat )  
Mineral matter  3.36  2.61  
Carbohydrates ( by difference )  29.07  23.50  
Calcium  1.07  0.127  
Phosphorus  0.056  0.189  
Iron  0.039  0.030  
Caloric value per 100 grammes  154.0 calories  167.0 calories  
Carotene content  45 .6 * per gram   
 
2. The paragraph relating to tamarind and lemon might be modified as 
follows: 
COMPOSITION OF TAMARIND AS COMPARED TO THAT OF LEMO N 
With regard to vitamin content tamarind and lemon a re roughly similar except 
that the latter is richer in the antiscorbutic vita min C. Tamarind pulp, unlike 
lemon, contains a good deal of tartaric acid - abou t 14 per cent; the chief acid 
in lemon is citric acid. Fresh tamarind, which is m ore solid than fresh lemon 
contains a somewhat higher percentage of protein, c arbohydrate, and minerals 
than lemon; in the dried state tamarind yields abou t 3 per cent protein and 
73.00 per cent carbohydrate (by difference). Tamari nd is stated to contain a 
laxative principle. I can offer nothing in support of the popular belief that it 
induces fever and rheumatism. 
3. Calocasia   in Hindi = Arbi 
 do Perennial  in Hindi = Bathu 
Amaranth Gangeticus in Hindi = Palack 
Prickly amaranth  in Hindi  = Karund 
The botanical name of non-bitter flavouring  neem  is Murraya konigii.  In Urdu = 
Karepak." 
Harijan,  30-11-1935 
 
1 gamma ( ) = .001 milligram or 1 millionth of a gr ame. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74   
30. GUAVA SEEDS 
Col. Sumshere Singh sends me the following: 
"I have been at pains for some time to gather what information I could on the subject of 
guavas and their seeds. All that 1 could elicit fro m my environment was the fact that the 
seeds of this fruit were as a rule swallowed down w ithout masctication, probably for their 
laxative effect. A few indigenous practitioners of medicine stated that the seeds also 
possessed cardiac tonic properties. 
"I was very glad, therefore, to be furnished with t he following authoritative note on the 
subject by a friend from Calcutta: 
'Guava has been shown recently by Dr. B. C. Guha of  the Bengal Chemical & 
Pharmaceutical Works Ltd., to be quite rich in vita min B. Its seeds have got the following 
constituents: 
Proteins 15.25 per cent 
Fat 14.3 
Starch 13.25 
Sugar 0.1 "etc. 
showing that these (i.e., the seeds) are quite rich  in nutritive value. Consequently, the 
seeds and fruit should be well masticated. If eaten  without proper mastication, the seeds 
will only act as laxative. No work has been done on  the cardiac tonic properties of Guava.'" 
Harijan,  18-5-1835 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75   
31. MANGO SEED KERNEL 
A friend has sent me an extract from  Current Science showing how mango seed 
kernel is a fair substitute for cereals and fodder:  
"According to a recent estimate, the concentrates a vailable in India are sufficient only for 
29.1 per cent and fodder for 78.5 per cent of adult  bovine population. This does not take 
into account the requirements of goats, sheep and e quines. The shortage is further 
accentuated during periods of famine. In order to m eet the shortages, the Nutritional 
Research Laboratory at Izatnagar have been explorin g new sources of foodstuffs. This 
investigation relates to the use of mango seed kern el as a cattle and human food. At 
present the material is thrown away as a waste. Fro m chemical analysis of kernel it has 
been found to be rich in carbohydrates and fats (cr ude protein 8.5 per cent, ether extract 
8.85 per cent and soluble carbohydrates 74.49 per c ent on dry basis). 
"The observations credit mango seed kernel with a p lace in the category of foodgrains and 
make available every year about 70 million lb. dige stible protein and 780 million lb. of 
starch equivalent from a hitherto unutilized source . It has been also calculated that the 
digestible protein obtained from 80 lb. of oats is equal to that of 100 lb. of the kernel and 
the starch equivalent for 86 lb."' 
I have known this use from my early youth. But no o ne seems to have thought 
of conserving this seed for food. The mango season is upon us and though much 
time has been lost, it will be a good thing if ever y mango seed was saved and 
the kernel baked and eaten in the place of cereals or given to those who need 
it. Every ounce of food saved is so much gained.  
Delhi, 21-5-1946  
Harijan,  26-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION V : MILK  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77   
32. COW’S MILK v. BUFFALO’S 
The question whether cow's milk is superior to buff alo's has come up for inquiry 
in considering that of village reconstruction. I ha ve addressed friends on the 
subject. Shri Haribhau Phatak has forwarded to me a  letter received by him 
from Prof. Rao Bahadur Sahastrabuddhe, which reads as follows: 
"With regard to your enquiry about the differences between cow milk and buffalo milk, I 
have to say that the fat and casein of cow milk are  more easily digestible than those of 
buffalo milk. The cow milk has also greater amount of vitamins than buffalo milk. These 
qualities affect children and adults equally, but a n adult can digest buffalo milk while a 
child cannot. I think this is all that you want." 
He has also received an opinion from Dr. S. K. Apte  of Sholapur, Vice-President, 
Gopalak Sangh, which is reproduced below, the names  of those who sent replies 
themselves being omitted. 
"This question whether cow milk is superior to buff alo milk is being discussed during the 
last three years, and this has had a good effect in  attracting public attention to the utility 
of cow milk. In India, from older writings and age- long belief, it is conceded that cow milk 
is superior to buffalo milk. The same conclusion ca n be drawn from the fact that in other 
countries only cow's milk is used. But in this age of science, no theory is taken as accepted 
until it is proved by demonstrations. It will not d o merely to say that cow milk is superior 
to buffalo milk because our ancestors did, and othe r countries do, use cow milk. The 
burden of proving that it is superior lies on those  who assert so. There are several ways of 
proving this scientifically. They can be enumerated  as follows: 
1 To compare the merits and demerits of both milks by  analysis of their components. It 
is possible chemically to ascertain the nutritive v alue of their components. Such an 
experiment has been made by Prof. Rao Bahadur D. L.  Sahasrabuddhe of the Agricultural 
College, Poona, the details of which he has publish ed in the Dnyanprakash  dated 11-9-
1934. He has made it clear therein not only that co w milk is very useful for the nutrition 
of young children but that buffalo milk is actually  harmful to them. Prof. Sahasrabuddhe 
says : 
'The buffalo milk is rich in fat, which children ca nnot digest. On account of indigestion 
they suffer from Diarrhoea. The acids in the undige sted fat draw up salts from the body 
which are necessary for the building of bones and t he lack of which is responsible for Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  rickets. The fats in cow milk and buffalo milk diff er from each other in their digestive 
properties. The percentage of volatile and soluble acids is greater in cow ghee, and 
consequently it is more easily digested.' 
The experiment which Prof. Sahasrabuddhe has made a lso proves that the casein in cow 
milk is digested in the stomach more easily than th at in the buffalo milk. His whole essay 
is informative and instructive. 
To make two equal groups of boys or men living unde r the same conditions and to provide 
one batch with about a seer of cow milk and the oth er with an equal amount of buffalo 
milk for a certain period and to watch and record t he physical, mental, and intellectual 
development of each member of both the groups. This  is second way of ascertaining which 
milk is superior to the other. No such experiment i s made in Europe or America as there 
are no buffaloes there. The Gopalak Sangh of Sholap ur had written to the Hoard's Dairy-
man  for information as to which countries except India  use buffaloes as dairy animals. The 
reply to this query shows that buffalo milk is used  outside India only in the Philippine 
Islands and the southern part of China. As for the Philippine Islands, however, the 
residents there prefer cow milk to buffalo as they are convinced of the utility and 
importance of the former (vide  Gorakshan,  Poona of 28-4-'34). An experiment of the above 
nature is, therefore, not likely to be made anywher e outside India. This experiment will 
have to be made on some students residing in a Boar ding House. This being an expensive 
task, the Gopalak Sangh, Sholapur, had requested ot her cow-protection societies and 
philanthropic rich men to finance the Sangh for a c omparative study of this nature, but it 
is regrettable that none of them came forward. If s ufficient pecuniary help had been 
obtained, the experiment could easily have been car ried on in the Dr. Chati Anath 
Vidyarthi Graha, Sholapur, by selecting two groups of boys in that boarding, and providing 
each group with a sufficient quantity of either mil k and marking the results. 1 earnestly 
request every institution and individual to see if any one can make such an experiment 
and to publish the result thereof. 
3. This comparative experiment on human beings is a  matter of great expense. It is 
possible to try this experiment on animals, especia lly rats and guinea-pigs kept in 
experimental laboratories. As the Gopalak Sangh has  no material available for this sort of 
experiment it has written to the Government Pasteur  Institute at Coonoor to try such an 
experiment: but no reply has yet been received from  the authorities there. 
4. The Gopalak Sangh, Sholapur, took recourse to a fourth, and the easiest, way towards 
this end. A questionnaire regarding cow and buffalo  milks was prepared and sent some six 
months back to various doctors, physicians, researc h experts, newspapers and periodicals, Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  and Government officers in Medical and Health Depar tments in and outside India. About 
seven hundred copies in Marathi and English of this  questionnaire were then sent out. 
Many newspapers and periodicals in India and  Hoard's Dairy-man in America published it 
and asked for the views of their readers thereon. O f the replies we received, only two 
came from outside India - one from America and the other from the Government Medical 
Department in Ceylon. About fifty replies have been  received so far. 
The following are the conclusions deducible from th e replies : 
1. Buffalo milk is injurious to the development of chi ldren and only cow milk is,, in the 
absence of mother's milk, useful to them. 
2. Cow milk, being easily digestible, is more benefici al to patients than buffalo milk. 
3. There is no definite evidence to show that the use of buffalo milk by adults is in any 
way injurious. Mr. Bruen, the livestock expert to t he Government of Bombay, says 
that buffalo milk is hard to digest by a person of any age, because the excess fat in 
buffalo milk when it forms soap in the intestine, i s hard to digest with usual amount 
of salts, and it takes the deficient quantity of th e mineral salts from bones, which 
are consequently weakened. This does not occur in t he digestion of cow milk. 
4. Cow milk is useful for intellectual growth mainly o f children. No definite conclusion 
can be drawn regarding better effect of cow milk on  the intellectual growth of 
adults. 
5. If, instead of rearing up buffaloes, cows are kept in the city, it will produce a 
beneficial effect on the general hygiene of that ci ty with less expense." 
The experiment that Dr. Apte has suggested is worth  making. The question of 
the comparative merits of the cow and the buffalo i s of national importance 
from many points of view. In no other country in th e world do these animals 
play the part that they do in the life of the natio n in India. 
Even without further experiment, the opinions colle cted by Dr. Apte of eminent 
medical men and dairy experts sufficiently prove th e superiority of cow's milk 
over buffalo's.  
Harijan,  22-2-1935 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80   
33. SKIMMED MILK 
Prof. Warner of Allahabad Agricultural Institute se nds me a copy of a note 
submitted by him to a Municipal Board in U.P. The B oard has passed a bye-law 
requiring that "all skimmed milk sold in the city s hould be coloured in order 
that it may be easily identified as skimmed milk, t hereby preventing its use in 
diluting or adulterating whole milk." Prof. Warner is of opinion that this is a 
dangerous bye-law whose effect would be total destr uction of a valuable 
protective food. He has shown in the note, I think conclusively, that skimmed 
milk as an article of food is not to be despised, t he only difference between 
whole milk and skimmed milk being that a large perc entage of fat is-removed 
from skimmed milk for preparing butter, but the mil k retains all the salts and 
all the proteins. Adulteration, therefore, of whole  milk with skimmed milk 
produces very little effect upon its nutritive valu e. Only the percentage of fat 
is reduced somewhat. He gives figures in support of  his agrument which I need 
not reproduce. He does not mind bye-laws preventing  adulteration even with 
skimmed milk. But he strongly objects, and I think rightly, to destroying 
skimmed milk by colouring it, and he shows that not  only is a valuable article of 
diet taken away from the mouths of poor people, but  the danger of 
adulteration of milk with water increases. And this  danger is very real, because 
the greater the percentage of water the lower is th e nutritive value of milk. 
And add to this the fact that the water itself may be impure. Prof. Warner 
draws a distinction between requiring the colouring  of vegetable ghee for 
preventing adulteration of real ghee, and the colou ring of skimmed milk. It is 
wholly necessary that vegetable ghee should be colo ured with some innocuous 
dye. Coloured vegetable ghee will be used by the pe ople for its cheapness. But 
as there is already prejudice against skimmed milk,  people will refuse to take 
coloured skimmed milk, even though the colouring ma tter may' be utterly 
innocuous. I would on my own behalf enforce Prof. W arner's argument by sug-
gesting that municipalities  will do well to popularize the use of skimmed milk.  
It can be sold very cheap and it is a perfectly who lesome thing both for the rich Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81  and the poor, and is a good sick man's diet, when w hole milk is rejected bv the 
digestive apparatus.  
On the train to Calcutta, 16-2-1940  
Harijan,  9-3-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82   
34. COW’S MILK FOR LEPERS 
 [Dr. Santra is an authority on leprosy. What he sa ys should carry weight. .Apart 
from my views on the cow, the medical profession ow es a duty to the country 
to discover the relative values of different milks.  
- M. K. G.] 
"I cannot offer scientific argument in favour of th e theory that protection of the cow will 
protect us from leprosy, but there are indications that the use of milk reduces the 
virulence of leprosy. 
"In the last century a Sikh Baba got the reputation  of curing leprosy at Sitalani in the 
Amritsar district. This reputation reached the ears  of the Government, and the popular 
belief regarding the cure was so strong that the Go vernment instituted an enquiry. The 
Civil Surgeon of Amritsar visited Sitalani and repo rted that the reported improvement w as 
true, and that it was due not to any secret remedy but to the inclusion of a liberal amount 
of milk in the diet of the lepers w ho came to stay there. 
"Dr. Muir, the father of anti-leprosy campaign in I ndia, advised that lepers should take two 
seers of milk a day. The propaganda leaflets that h e prepared had the picture of a cow, 
and he advanced the use of cow's milk. 
"In recent days Dr. Cochrane of South India found t hat children having a malignant type of 
leprosy became benign more quickly when they got sk immed milk in addition to 
treatment. He would have done a great service, if h e had obtained the milk locally rather 
than getting the powder from foreign countries. Tha t would have given an opportunity to 
the lepers to do Goseva and provide manure for the kitchen gardens. Some time back it 
was claimed that vitamin A produced changes in lepr osy towards good. We know that cow's 
milk, specially of those who feed on green grass, i s very rich in vitamin A. Thus we have 
some scientific indication that the use of cow's mi lk will decrease the virulence of leprosy. 
When it becomes benign, the disease being unable to  propagate itself, the number of 
lepers will naturally decrease."  
Sevagram, 23-3-1942 
Harijan,  29-3-1942 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION VI : GHEE AND OIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84   
35. COW'S GHEE v. BUFFALO'S GHEE 
Dr. Prafulla Ghosh has been examining the comparati ve value of cow's milk-
ghee and buffalo's milk-ghee. He writes : 
"I have ascertained the opinion of three chemists: (1) Dr. Mahendra Goswami, D.Sc., Prof, 
of Oil and Fat Chemistry in the Department of Appli ed Chemistry, University College of 
Science, Calcutta, (2) Dr. K. P. Bose, D.Sc.,Ph.D.,  Head of the Department of Bio-
Chemistry, Dacca University and (3) Mr. Ramaswamy A yyar, Fat and Oil Expert of the 
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. I have also  consulted the literature myself. The 
comparative vitamin contents of both varieties of g hee have also been examined by Dr. B. 
C. Guha of the Bengal Chemical Works at my request.  By collecting all the facts I have 
come to the following conclusion: 
In the present state of our knowledge, it is not po ssible to pronounce definitely which of 
the two varieties of ghee is better from the dietet ic point of view." 
Harijan,  22-3-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85   
36. BUFFALO MILK-FAT v. COW MILK-FAT 
Dr. Godbole, Professor of Industrial Chemistry in t he Banaras Hindu University, 
has sent me at my request an elaborate and critical  analysis of these two fats. 
It is far too technical for the lay reader. I shall  gladly lend it to any student of 
this important subject. Meanwhile I content myself with giving his conclusions : 
"1. Cow's butter-fat is known to have iodine in its  composition, whereas no data is 
available on this point in the case of buffalo butt er-fat. 
"2. Both cow's butter-fat and buffalo-butter-fat co ntain vitamins A and D; but cow's butter-
fat is richer in vitamins A, while the other is ric her in vitamin D. 
"3. Butter-fat as such is any time better than tall ow, lard or vegetable ghee. 
"4. Cow's butter-fat is richer than the buffalo-but ter-fat in the total assimilable and 
digestible part and is, therefore, comparatively mo re suitable for children and weaklings. 
"5. From an economic point of view, the buffalo is a better butter-producing machine than 
the cow. 
"Of the two butter-fats, cow's is in a sense nearer  to the composition of human body-fat 
than the buffalo-butter-fat."   
Harijan,  29-3-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86   
37. GHEE 
Those who can afford it are fond of eating ghee. It  enters into the preparation 
of almost all the sweetmeats. And yet, or perhaps b y reason of it, it is one of 
the most adulterated articles of food. The vast bul k of it that one gets in the 
bazar is undoubtedly adulterated. Some, if not most , of it is mixed with 
injurious fats which non-meat-eaters must not eat. Vegetable oils are often 
mixed with ghee. This mixture diminishes the vitami n value of ghee when it 
does not contain rancid oils. When the oils mixed a re rancid, the ghee is unfit 
for consumption. 
At Maganwadi we have been insisting on procuring co w's ghee. It has meant 
much difficulty and great expense. We have paid as much as Rs. 50 per 40 lb. 
plus railage. 
This can only be for a rich man's pockets. We are t rying as much as we can to 
approximate the poor man's standard consistent with  balanced diet scale. I 
observed that Dr. Aykroyd had omitted ghee from his  balanced diet scale. 
Medical testimony, while it insists on milk or butt er-milk, does not insist on 
butter or ghee as an indispensable part of the dail y menu. We have tentatively 
dropped ghee from our menu, except for those who co nsider it to be necessary 
for their health. We are issuing an equivalent in w eight of pure fresh vegetable 
oils. Millions in India never know the taste of ghe e. After all it should be borne 
in mind that those who take milk get some ghee in t he purest and most 
assimilable form. Apart from the question of relish  it may safely be said that 
village workers can with impunity omit ghee from th eir diet so long as they can 
procure some milk or curds or buttermilk. 
At the same time it is the duty of wealthy people a nd public bodies like 
municipalities to place at the disposal of poor peo ple cheap wholesome 
unadulterated milk and its products. Adulteration o f milk or other foods should 
be as difficult as counterfeit coin or note or post age stamp, and their value 
should be standardized as is that of postage stamps . Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87  If half the skill that is today devoted to the mana gement of commercial 
concerns meant for private gain were devoted to the  conduct of dairies for the 
public benefit and shops for foodstuffs, they could  be run as self-supporting 
institutions. There is nothing to prevent them from  becoming so, except the 
public disinclination to give the requisite skill a nd capital to such philanthropic 
concerns. The benevolence of the wealthy is exhaust ed in the effort to run 
Sadavrats, to misfeed the ever-increasing army of b eggars who are a burden on 
society. For they eat without labouring. It is bene volence misplaced, if it may 
not be described as mischievous. The difficulty amo unting to impossibility of 
getting wholesome articles of diet at reasonable ra tes in every town and 
village, is a great stumbling block in the way of t he village worker. Time is not 
wasted when village workers attempt to find out by experiments what in spite 
of this handicap are the indigenous sources of proc uring an adequate diet. 
Harijan,  2-11-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88   
38. ADULTERATION OF GHEE 
Shri Pannalal, an old member of Sabarmati Ashram, i s a lover of cattle. He has 
for years been a lay farmer and dairyman. He has tr ied to study the cattle 
question. Very few people realize that conservation  of cattle wealth of India is 
a major economic problem beset with many complexiti es. Adulteration of ghee 
has always been one of them. During the last few ye ars it has become growing 
menace owing to the import of cheap vegetable oil m iscalled ghee because of 
its having been congealed and otherwise processed s o as to look like ghee. Shri 
Pannalal says that middlemen and sellers of dairy p roducts profusely adulterate 
real ghee and thus undersell the farmer or cattle-k eeper. He says that it is 
impossible for farmers to hold out against this com petition if the mischief con-
tinues for any length of time, especially as such v egetable ghee is being 
manufactured in Bombay and elsewhere on a large sca le. Shri Pannalal rightly 
adds that agriculture without dairying and cattle b reeding for draft purposes 
will be an impossibility if real ghee disappears fr om the market. Cattle-keeping 
will then become a luxury instead of a paying occup ation. Shri Pannalal, 
therefore, suggests that drastic measures should be  taken to prevent adultera-
tion. I heartily endorse the suggestion. There shou ld be a well regulated public 
agitation against adulteration, and preventive legi slation should be passed if 
necessary. In addition to the economic this adulter ation has a medical aspect 
which is no less important than the economic. It is  well known that vegetable 
'ghee' has a much lower protective value than ghee.  From the health point of 
view, doctors say, vegetable ghee can never be a su bstitute for real ghee. This 
is, therefore, a question for corporations, medical  men and humanitarian 
leagues to tackle without delay. If corporations ha ve not adequate powers, 
they should have them. Shri Pannalal says: "The rem edy is not very difficult if 
they will to be there. It is quite feasible to make  it compulsory by law to add 
some edible colour or flavour to each and every tin  of vegetable ghee, whether 
imported or produced in India. This will readily di stinguish the vegetable 
product from the genuine ghee and make detection ea sy. If it is possible to Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  stamp each match box with a Government seal, surely  it is not difficult to have 
every tin of vegetable ghee duly coloured or flavou red similarly."  
Segaon, 8-1-1940 
Harijan,  20-1-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90   
39. ADULTERATION OF GHEE  
Dr. Kailas Nath Katju writes: 
"I have read with great interest in  Harijan  of 20th January your note on adulteration of 
ghee. It may interest you to know that before we re signed office in the U.P. this problem 
had engaged our closest consideration. Adulteration  is rampant and must be stopped. The 
misfortune is that it is not only the ghee-dealer a nd the middleman who have taken to 
adulteration, but even the ghee producers in the vi llages are resorting to adulteration in 
their own homes before they bring ghee to the marke t. The cheap vanaspati and other 
vegetable ghee so-called make adulteration such an easy process. We considered the 
question of compulsory admixture of vegetable oils with some edible colour or flavour, but 
the difficulty is to discover some such harmless co lour or flavour. In the hot climate of 
India there is a danger of injury to health by the use of such fast colour. 
"We had drafted and introduced in the U.P. Legislat ure a comprehensive bill to stop this 
mischief. It was at the committee stage when we res igned. The bill confers power on the 
Provincial Government to prescribe colouring or fla vouring of artificial ghee or vegetable 
oils. But I think the more useful and really import ant provision in the bill for the purpose 
in hand is that which arms the Provincial Governmen t with the power to prohibit sale of 
artificial or vegetable ghee in ghee-producing area s. I have known of rural areas where 
ghee is produced on a large scale and where practic ally no one consumes vegetable ghee, 
yet vegetable ghee is sold in huge quantities and p urchased by people for purposes of 
adulteration. We thought that in such areas where v egetable ghee is really sold for these 
universal purposes the only proper method is to pro hibit its sale altogether, and thus 
protect and foster the genuine ghee industry. 
"I hope this measure will meet with your approval. Agriculture without dairy industry 
cannot flourish. In the U.P. we also encouraged the  formation in large numbers of ghee 
co-operative societies. and I insisted that the bye -laws of such societies must have 
stringent regulations to stop and check adulteratio n by its members. That was also proving 
efficacious. 
"I am writing this to you in the hope that it may i nterest the readers of  Harijan."  
The suggestion made by Dr. Katju about specially de aling with ghee producing 
areas is worthy of consideration. Indeed the questi on of adulteration of this Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91  important article of national diet is so important that it requires all-India 
treatment. It need not wait for disposal of the so-  called higher politics. 
On the way to Delhi, 5-2-1940  
Harijan,  17-2-1940 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92   
40.  VANASPATI  AND GHEE 
Sardar Sir Datar Singh has been putting up a fight on behalf of the cow in India. 
The cow includes the buffalo. In that case both can  live. If the buffalo includes 
the cow then both die. "The cow is the mother of pr osperity." To understand 
how this is so, the reader should see Shri Satish C handra Das Gupta's two 
instructive volumes. 1 Here I want to confine myself to ghee which is in danger 
of being swamped by  Vanaspati,  as the so-called vegetable ghee is called. In 
reality ghee is pure animal product. One thoughtles sly uses the expression 
vegetable ghee or  Vanaspati,  but it is a contradiction in terms. Sardar Datar 
Singh has shown in a considered note that the sale of  Vanaspati  has risen from 
26,000 tons in 1937 to 137,000 tons in 1945, i.e., it has increased more than 
400 per cent during seven years.  Pari passu  the ghee industry has declined. 
Those who would study the whole note should procure  a copy from Sardar Datar 
Singh or the Goseva Sangh in Wardha. I condense bel ow the Sardar's conclusions 
1. Vanaspati  as an article of diet is a very poor substitute fo r ghee. It not only lacks 
absorption by the human system, but has no vitamin potency. 
2. Due to its similarity with ghee in texture and flav our, most of it is being used as an 
adulterant or is passed off as genuine ghee and is therefore a great menace to ghee. 
3. Due to great margin of profit in this industry, it has developed from 26 thousand tons 
per annum in 1937 to 105 thousand tons in 1943 and there are proposals afoot to at 
least double this production in the near future. 
4. The ghee industry is India's greatest cottage indus try involving production of 
23,000,000 maunds of ghee per annum at a cost of on e hundred crores of rupees. 
5. The destruction of the ghee industry will not only adversely affect the welfare of the 
cultivators but it will have a very deleterious eff ect on the cattle industry upon 
which the prosperity of the whole nation directly d epends 
In order to overcome the difficulties explained abo ve, the following remedial 
measures are suggested: 
1. If due to some reasons the Government cannot actual ly ban the manufacture 
altogether of  Vanaspati,  it must at least be brought under strict control 
immediately. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93  2. All manufacturers, and wholesale and retail dealers  of Vanaspati  should be licensed. 
Such persons should not be permitted to trade in or  stock ghee on their premises. 
3. It should be made compulsory to colour all  Vanaspati  at the source of its 
manufacture in India and to colour all such importe d product immediately on its 
landing at an Indian port. Manufacturers must mix t en per cent of  til  oil with  
Vanaspati.  The advantage of this would be that if pure ghee i s adulterated with  
Vanaspati containing 10 per cent  til  oil, the detection will become extremely simple. 
The presence of  til  oil can be most easily detected by well-known chem ical 
reactions. 
4. The addition of synthetic essences to give  Vanaspati  a semblance of ghee should be 
prohibited. 
5. Persons selling food production in the preparation of which they use  Vanaspati  should 
be required, under marketing law, to display a sign  to that effect. The presence of  
Vanaspati  on the premises not displaying the sign should be made an offence under 
law. This will eradicate the evil of Halwais and co nfectioners using  Vanaspati  for 
their preparations and passing them off as made fro m genuine ghee. 
6. Vanaspati should not be allowed to go in the market  under names such as 'Vegetable 
ghee' or 'Vanaspati ghee' or any other name which i s apt to deceive the customer as 
to its real origin or composition.  
7. Vanaspati should not be allowed to be marketed in p ackages of the same pattern as 
used for packing ghee and all packages containing V anaspati should be distinctly 
labelled.  
It is clear that the mischief arises principally fr om the greed of the very persons 
who worship the cow.  Vanaspati is wholly superfluous. Oils may be refined of 
injurious property, but they do not need to be soli dified nor need they be made 
to look like ghee. An honest manufacturer will not stoop to counterfeits. The 
market is flooded with them. Counterfeit coins are heavily punishable. Why not 
counterfeit ghee, since the genuine article is much  more precious than coins? 
But the sovereign remedy lies in all- round honesty  among dealers who are in a 
hurry to become rich even at the cost of the health  of the nation.  
New Delhi, 8-4-1946 
Harijan,  14-4-1946 
 
1 The Cow in India,  Vol. I, Rs. 10. Vol. II, Rs. 7, both together Rs. 16. Khadi Prathishthan, 
Sodepur, Calcutta Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94   
41. THE DANGER OF  'VANASPATI'  
"In  Harijan  of 14-4-'46 you supported Sardar Datar Singh's ple a regarding a ban on  
'Vanaspati'.  There were several suggestions in that article whi ch had they been acted 
upon, would have checked the evil. But unfortunatel y no action has been taken. In the 
Punjab, in Akola, Segaon and Kurnool permission has  actually been given for starting new 
factories. At any rate this should be stopped. In t he Punjab the Government has not even 
ordered the colouring of ' Vanaspati'."  
The above is the substance of a letter to me. I hav e advisedly put  'Vanaspati'  in 
inverted commas. It ought really to be  Vanaspati  Ghee. No one can have any 
quarrel with  Vanaspati  which means the leaves of flowers, fruits and 
vegetables. But when it presumes to pass as somethi ng else, it becomes a 
poison. Vanaspati  is not and can never be ghee. If ever it were to b ecome ghee, 
I would be first loudly to proclaim that there is n o further need for real ghee. 
Ghee or butter are the fat contents of milk drawn f rom an animal. To sell 
vegetable oil or butter in the form and name of ghe e is to deceive the Indian 
public. It is thoroughly dishonest. It is the clear  duty of tradesmen not to sell 
any product of this nature in the guise of ghee, an d no government should 
countenance such sale. The crores of India today ge t neither milk nor ghee nor 
butter, nor even buttermilk. No wonder that mortali ty figures are on the 
increase and there is lack of energy in the people.  It would appear as if man is 
really unable to sustain life without either meat o r milk and milk products. 
Anyone who deceives people in this regard or counte nances the fraud is an 
enemy of India. 
New Delhi, 6-10-1946  
Harijan,  13-10-1946 
(From the Original in Hindustani)  
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DIET AND DIET REFORM 
PART II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION I : GENERAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97   
1. PRECAUTIONS AGAINST ILLS OF THE SEASON 
In the wake of rain has come malaria and we have tw o or three sick beds every 
now and then. But our precautions and aftercare hav e ensured plain sailing so 
far. The rigid rules we have laid down and are foll owing may be of use 
everywhere during this season. The first rule, appl icable to all, is the general 
rule to leave your meal when it tastes sweetest, i. e., to leave it partially 
hungry. The second rule is to avoid foods containin g an excess of proteins (all  
dais  - pulses for instance) and to skip a meal as soon as you feel ready. The 
third rule, as soon as you feel out of sorts, or ha ve a feeling of feverishness is 
to have an opening dose of castor oil and a fast. W hilst a fever or cold is on, 
repeated doses of hot water and lime and salt (or  gur  or honey) is the usual 
treatment. All food, even milk, is to be scrupulous ly eschewed, and there 
should be no hurry to resume normal diet on the dis appearance of cold or 
fever. The forth rule, for those who can afford, is  the use of a mosquito net 
and for the poorest to smear the exposed parts of t he body, whilst sleeping, 
with kerosene oil. In almost all cases here we have  fought colds and fevers 
successfully by this treatment and have not had to have recourse to quinine 
(though quinine is by no means taboo). 
M. D. 
Harijan,  27-7-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98   
2. DIETETIC CHANGES 
We have taken care to consult medical opinion in al l our dietetic experiments, 
and whilst books on diet and vitamins have been use ful, we have had quite a lot 
of support from Dr. Tilak's little booklet on  Balanced Diets* which contains all 
necessary information on a balanced diet of enough proteins, carbohydrates, 
fats, organic salts and vitamins, to keep a man per fectly fit and healthy. The 
book is based on experiments made in the improvemen t of the diet of over a 
hundred children in the Byramjee Jeejeebhoy Home, M atunga (Bombay), whose 
diet was remodelled and brought as near to a balanc ed diet as possible by the 
inclusion of soya beans, rice polishings, fresh oil cake, dried skim milk, and 
preparations of sprouted seeds, the children having  been on this diet for over 
eight months. Soya beans and oilcake we have not ye t tried. We made a 
beginning with oilcake this week. Oilcake is more p roteinous than milk and less 
than pulses, and Gandhiji wondered if during the ra iny season at any rate, we 
might not substitute it for  dal.  The first day's preparation in which oilcake was 
mixed with water and served in liquid form scared m any of us away, more be-
cause it was sticky being linseed, than because it was unpalatable. The next 
day it was served in the form of dry powder. That d id not scare people away, 
and the third day it was served in a liquid form, m ixed with buttermilk and 
slightly spiced. This last carried people off their  feet and promises to be very 
popular. 
The  dal  has not yet been eschewed, but we seem to be on a fair way to it. Dr. 
Tilak's balanced diet chart allows two ounces of pu lses and hal f an ounce of 
oilcake for and adult. We propose to try next the i ntroduction of soya beans. 
The introduction of this new article in our diet wa s the occasion of considerable 
excitement in our midst and Gandhiji asked everyone  to express in writing what 
he or she felt about it. The next day came a little  slip of paper signed by three 
members of the household expressing strong disappro val of the innovation. 
Gandhiji who had given only oilcake that day in sub stitution of  dal,  imme-Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99  diately restored  dal  in our menu and reassured the family that he did n ot want 
to rush these innovations. 
M. D. 
Harijan,  27-7-1935 
 
1 To be had of Dr. H. V. Tilak, Bombay Presidency B aby and Health Week Association, 
Bombay-11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100   
3. MORTIFICATION OF THE FLESH 
Whilst Gandhiji insists, as we have seen, on a vill age worker living on a 
villager's diet not costing say three annas a day, he is far from insisting on 
starvation or mortification of the flesh. To a work er who has imposed on 
himself a strict regimen involving only one meal a day, consisting generally of 
15 tolas of raw rice boiled, amti  (made of vegetable and  dal)  and buttermilk, 
all costing only one anna per day, Gandhiji wrote: 
"Your meal is very meagre, it is starvation diet. I n my opinion, you are not 
making full use of the instrument that God has put at your disposal. You know 
the story of the talents* that were taken away from  him who did not know how 
to use them, or having known would not use them ? 
"Mortification of the flesh is a necessity when the  flesh rebels against one; it is 
a sin when the flesh has come under subjection and can be used as an 
instrument of service. In other words there is no i nherent merit in mortification 
of the flesh." 
M. D. 
Harijan,  2-11-1935 
 
1 'Take therefore the talent from him' (who had not  used his talent but buried it) 'and give 
it unto him which hath ten talents' (who had made t en out of the five given him). 'For unto 
everyone that hath shall be given, and he shall hav e abundance; but from him that hath 
not shall be taken away even that which he hath.' M at. 25: 28-29. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101   
4. VITAMINS - I  
Absence or insufficiency of minute traces of certai n substances other than 
protein, carbohydrate, fat and mineral salts presen t in natural foodstuff causes 
certain well- defined symptoms of diseases and ulti mately produces death. 
These substances were called vitamins. The name was  first given to an impure 
chemical compound isolated from rice polishing by F unk. That compound 
contained nitrogen, and as it was essential for lif e it was termed vitamine-life-
mine. Later investigations on these compounds have shown that most of them 
(so far isolated) do not contain any nitrogen. So t he name vitamine is a mis-
nomer. But as the term was a current coin for a lon g time, only the terminal 'e' 
was dropped at the suggestion of Drummond and these  compounds are now 
designated by the general term 'vitamin'. 
Existence of vitamins was first recognized by the w ell- known principle of cause 
and effect. Even in 1928 McCarrison wrote: "Though these substances are 
essential to life and are builders of our bodies, w e cannot as yet make them nor 
see them nor weigh them, as we can make, see and we igh the other 
constituents of our food: the proteins, the fats, t he starches, the sugars, the 
mineral salts and water." But the painstaking serie s of researches of scientists 
during the past few years have altered the position  considerably. Of the eight 
or nine vitamins known today four have been isolate d in a pure state. These are 
vitamins A: the fat soluble factor of growth, B: th e antineuritic vitamin, C: the 
antiscorbutic vitamin, and D: the anti-rachitic vit amin. Not merely these four 
have been isolated, the scientists have gone furthe r. Through their efforts 
vitamin C can now be obtained in any desired amount  in a pure crystalline 
condition. It has also been synthesized. Vitamin D has been obtained in a pure 
crystalline condition by irradiating ergosterol pre sent in animal and vegetable 
fats. "It is of interest to learn that vitamin D pu rchased as pure crystals now 
costs only one-eighth of its price in cod-liver oil  and the daily- dose can be 
brought for less than one-tenth of a penny." (Carr)  Although vitamin A has not 
yet been synthesized, its reduction product Perhydr o-vitamin A has been Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  synthesized. Of the four vitamins structural formul as can only be advanced for 
vitamins A and C, the credit for which is mainly du e to Karrer and his co-
workers of the Chemical Institute of Zurich. 
With these preliminary remarks I shall proceed to d iscuss the four vitamins in 
detail.   
 
Vitamin A  
It was recognized that night-blindness and Xerophth almia (a disease of the eye) 
occur when fresh green vegetables, pure good milk a nd certain other things are 
eliminated from the diet, and they are cured when c od-liver oil is administered 
for some time. Previous administration of cod-liver  oil also prevents the 
occurrence of these diseases. This indicates the pr esence of certain substance 
in cod-liver oil as well as those natural foods whi ch is a preventive as well as 
curative for night-blindness and Xerophthalmia. It was also recognized that the 
absence of this factor inhibits the growth of the a nimal. It was designated as 
vitamin A. Although cod-liver oil is a very good so urce of vitamin A, it is present 
in such a minute quantity there that vitamin A coul d not be isolated from it. It 
may be mentioned here that cod-liver oil contains 9 9 per cent fat and of the 1 
per cent non-fatty substances vitamin A is only a m inute trace. This shows what 
minute quantities of this vitamin we require for a healthy life. 
It was only after the discovery by Von Euler and Ka rrer that certain fish-liver 
oils were found to contain 200-2000 times the amoun t of vitamin A present in 
common cod-liver oil that the isolation of vitamin A was possible. One such fish 
is Halibut. But fish-liver oils are much richer in vitamin A in summer than in 
winter. For instance, Halibut oil contains 20 times  more in summer. This 
depends on the nature of food taken. 
Vitamin A is a viscous light oil, containing only c arbon, hydrogen and oxygen. It 
is a complex alcohol soluble in fat and is very lit tle soluble in water. As it is a 
compound containing four conjugated double bonds it  is readily oxidised. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  Only the animal world contains vitamin A, but it is  derived from the vegetable 
source which supplies carotene and similar other pl ant pigments. Therefore 
carotene is called Pro-Vitamin A. One molecule of c arotene is converted into 
two molecules of vitamin A in the animal and human systems. Up-till now 
carotenes and kryptoxanthin (pigment of the yellow maize) have been 
recognized as Pro-vitamin A. Carotene is present in  all green leafy vegetables, 
peas and beans, carrots, orange or yellow fruits an d vegetables. Excellent 
sources of vitamin A are fish-liver oils, butter, c ream, eggs and cow's milk. But 
the vitamin A content of milk depends on the nature  of food taken by the cow. 
An abundant supply of green fodder is to be ensured  in order to get milk rich in 
vitamin A. Of course it goes without saying that bu tter and cream contain more 
vitamin A than milk, but their vitamin content also  depends on the nature of 
milk from which they are prepared. Generally town c ow's milk contains less 
vitamin A as they get more of cereals than of green  fodder. 
But no one need go to these animals and costly sour ces for vitamin A. It is 
immaterial for men in general whether the vegetable  world contains carotene 
or vitamin A, so long as the ultimate effect is the  same. Let me quote from 
Vitamins: A Survey of the Present Knowledge  (1932 edition): "Animal sources of 
vitamin A such as milk-fat, eggs, mammalian-liver a nd cod-liver oil are 
expensive, but when it is remembered that this vita min is supplied by all green 
vegetables and others which contain the yellow colo uring matter carotene, the 
problem can be cheaply solved wherever vegetables c an be grown. For 
example, green spinach and green cabbage (but not w hite) are weight for 
weight as good as the best New Zealand butter." We have in the  Annual Review 
of Biochemistry for 1935,  p.396 also: "Green leafy vegetables (spinach, kale , 
collards, turnip greens, beet tops, mustard greens) , peas, asparagus and snap 
beans are economical sources of iron and vitamins A  and G. Carrots, apricots 
and other coloured (orange or yellow) fruits or veg etable furnish vitamin A." 
Moreover, long-continued feeding of foods rich in c holesterol, vitamin D and 
fats (eggs, cod-liver oil and other animal fats) ma y produce arteriosclerosis in 
man. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104  Ripe mangoes and  papayas  contain a good deal of carotene. Sweet pumpkins 
which grow abundantly in many parts of India also c ontain carotene. 
It is not essential to take everyday the required a mount of vitamin A as it is 
necessary to take carbohydrate for supplying requir ed calories. When the 
intake of carotene is in excess of the requirement it is converted into the 
vitamin and stored up in the liver for future use, specially when there is 
deficient intake. 
Harijan,  30-11-1935 
P. C. GHOSH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105   
5. VITAMINS - II 
Vitamin B 1 
The disease beri-beri is commonly attributed to def iciency of this vitamin, 
although whether this is the sole cause or some oth er additional factor is 
necessary has not been finally ascertained. Deficie ncy of this vitamin also 
causes lack of appetite and defective movements in the alimentary canal. It has 
been isolated from yeast and rice polishings. It is  soluble in water. It contains 
carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulphur and oxygen. It is one of the most stable 
vitamins, is fairly resistant to heat and oxidation . It is destroyed at 120° C but 
the decomposition at 100° C (the temperature of boi ling water) is insignificant. 
"Continued heating of foodstuffs at 100° C, however , leads to some loss of the 
vitamin. In preserving and canning foodstuffs the t emperatures employed are 
frequently much higher than 100° C, and canned food s of all description may 
contain very little or no vitamin B 1 and, as a practical rule, should therefore be 
regarded as free from it, unless they have been spe cially investigated and 
found to contain it." Foodstuffs should not be boil ed for more time than is 
necessary to keep this vitamin almost intact. Most people derive their supply of 
vitamin B 1 from cereals and pulses. Different parts of cereal s vary widely in 
their Vitamin B 1 content; the largest amount is found in the embryo  or germ, 
the bran (pericarp, and aleurone layer) comes next in order, whereas the 
endosperm is deficient in the anti-neuritic factor.  Hence the inferiority of 
white wheaten flour or mill-polished rice as diet. 
This vitamin is soluble in water; therefore boiling  of any foodstuff with excess 
of water and then decanting to supernatant liquid w ould deprive the foodstuffs 
of almost the whole of its vitamin B, content. In B engal people generally use  
dhenki- husked rice but they boil that rice with excess of water and after it is 
well boiled decant the liquid from the solid. Such rice is no protection against 
beri-beri. The people of Bengal should give up this  bad practice. In the 
preparation of  chapati  from wheat there is no danger of vitamin B 1 content of 
the wheat being diminished. Yeast is the richest so urce of vitamin B,. Eggs are Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  also valuable sources of the anti-beri-beri factor.  Large deposits of this vitamin 
in the seeds of plants and eggs of animals (birds a nd fishes) suggests a due 
provision made for the wants of the young offspring  during the early period of 
life. The prevalence of beri-beri among pregnant wo men in countries where the 
disease is endemic also suggests that they require more of this vitamin for the 
growth of their yet unborn offspring. 
"Of the green vegetables tested, watercress and let tuce proved to be about 
twice as rich as cabbage and spinach and not inferi or to egg yolk or the embryo 
of cereals, if dry weights are compared."  (Vitamins: A Survey of the Present 
Knowledge).  Of the common Bengali foodstuffs the richest sourc e is  pooin-shak 
(Bassela cordifolia),  then we have  dherosh Bhindi, gima shak  and cabbage. 
Potato contains.a small quantity of vitamin B 1, but the large quantities of 
potato consumed make it a good source the vitamin i n an ordinary diet. Milk is 
poor in this vitamin. 
Toddy contains a good quantity of this vitamin, but  no one should advocate 
toddy drinking on this ground. Toddy has its bad ef fects. "The balance of the 
pharmacological opinion is in favour of the view th at had alcohol been 
discovered late it would have never been used as a medicine." (Pyman : 
Synthetic Drugs.)  
 
Vitamin C  
Deficiency of this vitamin leads to scurvy, a disea se characterized by a spongy 
condition of the gums and a tendency to haemorrhage s into the gums, muscles, 
joints and internal organs. It was for centuries th e scourge of the sailor and the 
explorer who could not get fresh vegetables or frui ts. They discovered 
empirically that an addition of lime juice to the d iet would prevent it. But 
certain animals, such as the rat, mice, pigeons and  chickens do not get this 
disease even when they are kept on vitamin C- free diet. Probably they can 
synthesize vitamin C from other articles of diet wh ich the human system cannot 
do. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  Vitamin C was first isolated in a crystalline condi tion in 1928 from the cortex of 
the adrenal gland. Later on it has been isolated fr om lemon juice and other 
substances. It is an acid and it has got anti-scorb utic properties, so it is now 
known by the name of ascorbic acid. It is a compoun d of carbon, hydrogen and 
oxygen. It has been synthesized. Ascorbic acid is e xceedingly soluble in water, 
and of all the vitamins it is most easily destroyed  by heat. Human milk contains 
more of it than cow's or goat's milk. It is the pra ctice in India to take boiled 
milk which contains still less vitamin C. Therefore , children who do not get 
sufficient mother's milk but depend on cow's or goa t's milk should be given 
orange, grape or tomato juice to make up for the as corbic acid deficiency. Very 
recently ascorbic acid content of many Indian foods tuffs has been analysed and 
it has been found that  Kul  (plum),  Batabi- Lebu (citrus decumana),  guava, 
marfgo,  lichi  and green chilli are the richest sources of vitami n C. All the 
above- mentioned fruits are now found to be richer than the Indian lemon and 
orange, the well-known antiscorbutics (Indian Journal of Medical Research,  
October 1935, p. 350). We should depend on uncooked  foodstuffs for this 
vitamin. Fruits are as a rule taken uncooked. The a bove- mentioned fruits are 
more or less abundant throughout India and in seaso n they become cheap also.  
 
Vitamin D  
Deficiency of this vitamin is the chief cause of ri ckets, which is also produced 
by deficiency of calcium or of phosphate. In the pr esence of ample D much 
smaller amounts of calcium and of phosphate are suf ficient to prevent rickets 
than when there is only a small amount of the vitam in present. It conserves 
these mineral constituents in the body. The vitamin  is also growth promoting. 
But it’s over-dosage is toxic to most species of an imals. It has been shown 
conclusively that continued excessive doses of vita min D prove fatal to mice, 
rats, guinea-pigs, rabbits, cats and dogs. Man has greater capacity for resis-
tance against overdose, although fatal cases in chi ldren have been reported. 
Birds are, however, unaffected by the overdose. Dea th is preceded by loss of 
appetite, loss of weight, and sometimes marked diar rhoea. Moderate over-Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  dosage of the vitamin is, however, without harmful effect. It is soluble in fat 
and is moderately resistant to heat. It is produced  from ergosterol by 
irradiation or exposure to sunlight. Ergosterol is present in all animal and 
vegetable fats as well as in human skin. In a sunny  country like India no one 
need, therefore, suffer from deficiency of this vit amin. Rubbing the body with 
some amount of oil and the exposing it to sunlight for some time is the best 
way of getting this vitamin. In Bengal villages the re is a custom of rubbing the 
body of infants with oil and then exposing them to sunlight. This is a very good 
custom. But no one need think that a long continued  exposure to sunlight would 
ensure maximum intake of the vitamin. Ultra-violet rays of sunlight which 
convert ergosterol into vitamin D also destroy the vitamin. So a moderate expo-
sure which the system also enjoys would be the idea l thing. 
It is also an alcohol like ergosterol and it contai ns the same number of carbon, 
hydrogen and oxygen atoms and double bonds as ergos terol, and as it has an 
influence on calcium (metabolism) the name calcifer ol has been given to it. 
Excellent sources of calciferol are the liver oils of the halibut, tarbot and cod 
and the body oils of certain fishes. Egg yolk is a good source. Excellent sources 
of calciferol after irradiation are yeast and egg y olk. Good sources are oils and 
fats.  
 
Conclusion  
As a result of the painstaking researches of scient ists the importance of 
vitamins in our diet has been brought to light and some of these substances, 
which were at one time considered to be mysteries, have also been prepared in 
a pure state. But as night follows day some evil al so followed this very laudable 
work of the scientists. There came a large number o f artificial preparations in 
the market which brought fortunes to some at the co st of many poor men. 
These artificial preparations should by all means b e avoided. Nature has 
provided ample amount for us - even for the poorest  amongst us. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109  We can get enough of these vitamins from green leaf y vegetables, cereals and 
pulses, cheap season fruits and sunlight. We need n ot make any abnormal 
change in our diet for the vitamins. 
P. C. GHOSH 
Harijan,  15-2-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110   
6. PHYSIOLOGICAL BASIS OF NUTRITION 
[The following are the findings of the Internationa l Commission of Experts appointed by 
the Health Committee of the League of Nations.] 
Part 1  
ENERGY, PROTEIN AND FAT REQUIREMENTS  
1. Calorie Requirements  
a) An adult, male or female, living an ordinary everyd ay life in a temperate 
climate and not engaged in manual work is taken as the basis on which the 
needs of other age-groups are reckoned. An allowanc e of 2,400 calories 
net per day is considered adequate to meet the requ irements of such an 
individual. 
b) The following supplements for muscular activities s hould be added to the 
basic requirements in (a) : 
 Light work: upto 50 calories per hour of work 
 Moderate work: „ 50-100 ” ” 
 Hard work: „ 100-200 ” ” 
 Very hard work: „ 200 calories and upwards per hou r of work. 
c) The energy requirements for other ages and for moth ers can be obtained 
from the following table of co-efficients: 
Age (years)  Co -efficient  Calories  
1-2 0.3  720  
2-3 0.4  960  
3-5 0.5  1,200  
5-7 0.6  1,440  
7-9 0.7  1,680  
9-11  0.8  1,920  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  11 -12  0.9  2,160  
12  and upwards  1.0  2,400  
 (male and female)   
Women:  Co -efficient  Calories  
Pregnant  1.0  2,400  
Nursing  1.25  3,000  
 
The requirements for babies under 1 year are diffic ult to specify except in 
terms of body-weight, but the following allowance a re considered adequate: 
 Age (months) Calories per kilogramme 
  of body-weight  
 0-3 100 
 3-6 90 
 6-12 80-90 
The muscular activities characteristic of every hea lthy child and adolescent 
necessitate additions to the basic requirements sho wn in (c). It is suggested 
that the activities of children of both sexes from 7-11 years be considered as 
equivalent to light work, of boys from 11-15 years as moderate work, and of 
girls from- 11-15 upwards as light work. 
Allowance must also be made for women engaged in ho usehold duties, whether 
pregnant or not; these have to be reckoned as quiva lent to light work for eight 
hours daily.  
 
2. Protein Requirements  
In practice, the protein intake for all adults shou ld not fall below 1 gramme of 
protein per kilogramme of body- weight. The protein  should be derived from a 
variety of sources, and it is desirable that a part  of the protein should be of 
animal origin. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112  During growth, pregnancy and lactation, some animal  protein is essential and in 
the growing period it should form a large proportio n of the total protein. 
The following allowances of total protein are recom mended: 
Age (years)  Grammes per kilogramme of body -weight  
1-3 3.5  
3-5 3.0  
5-15  2.5  
15 -17  2.0  
17 -21  1.5  
21 and upward Women:  1.0  
Women: Pregnant  2.0  
Women : Nursing  2.0  
 
3. All the above figures on which the Commission has a greed are average 
values and it is essential that they should be inte rpreted in the light of this 
fact. 
 
4. Fat Requirements 
Fat must be a constituent of the normal diet, but t he data at present available 
do not suffice to permit a precise statement of the  quantity required.  
 
5. The Influence of Climate on Dietary Requirements  
In cold climates, the energy-content of the diet sh ould be increased.  
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113   
Part II  
6. Mineral and Vitamin Requirements 
The Commission recognizes the fact that the deficie ncies of modern diets are 
usually in the protective foods (foods rich in mine rals and vitamin) rather than 
in more strictly energy-bearing foods (rich in calo ries). Among the former are, 
first and most important, milk and milk products, e ggs and glandular tissues; 
then green-leaf vegetables, fruit, fat, fish and me at (muscle). Among the 
energy-bearing foods of little or no protective pow er are sugar, milled cereals 
and certain fats. 
Of energy-giving foods, unmilled cereals are not ri ch in protective nutrients and 
the more they are refined the less is their protect ive power. Many fats, 
especially when refined, possess little or no prote ctive constituents. Refined 
sugar is of value only as a source of energy; it is  entirely devoid of minerals and 
vitamins. The increasing habit of large sugar consu mption tends to lessen the 
amount of protective foods in the diet and is to be  regarded with concern. 
 
7. Requirements of Pregnancy and lactation 
The Commission has attempted to define the quantita tive needs of protective 
foods for perfect nutrition in terms of the require ments for the pregnant and 
nursing woman. She should be regarded as the member  of the population 
needing the greatest "protection" in order to ensur e adequate physical 
endowment for the child at birth and optimum nutrit ion during infancy. 
The greatest difficulty in arranging such a diet is  to provide adequate calcium, 
phosphorus, iron and vitamins B 1, B 2, C & D.  
 
8. Milk, whole or skimmed, is a rich source of calc ium salts and phosphates and 
of vitamin B.,, also a good source of vitamin B,; m ilk fat is an excellent source 
of vitamin A. Eggs contain vitamins A, B^ B,, and D  and are rich in iron. The Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  proteins of these foods are not only themselves of the highest nutritive value, 
but also improve the utilization of the protein con tained in cereals and veg-
etables. Milk has an additional advantage in the ab undance and availability of 
its calcium salts and phosphates; these enhance the  effect of any vitamin D 
derived from other articles of diet or from sunshin e. Milk, although itself poor 
in iron, renders more effective the iron contained in the diet.  
 
9. Ordinary diets are usually inadequate in vitamin  D and except in sunny 
seasons and sunny countries a small daily ration of  cod-liver oil is to be 
recommended in the diet of the pregnant and nursing  mother and in that of the 
growing child. Fish-liver oils are the richest know n natural sources of vitamin A 
and are also important sources of iodine. In goitro us regions, where sea-fish are 
not available the provision of extra iodine in the form of iodized salt or in some 
other way is recommended.  
 
10. An extended dietary use of the potato is recomm ended to replace part of 
the sugar and highly milled cereals in the ordinary  diet. Potatoes provide extra 
vitamin C and more readily available calcium and ph osphorus than are present 
in cereals. Potatoes also yield more iron and B vit amins than milled cereals. 
The above paragraph applies to countries where pota toes are abundant, but it 
is of general application, due account being taken of local resources.  
 
11. General Recommendations  
A. Although a simplified diet may be so constituted fr om a few protective 
foods as to be satisfactory, it is a general princi ple that  Variety in Diet  
tends to safety, provided it contains a sufficiency  of the protective types 
of food materials. 
B. White flour in the process of milling is deprived o f important nutritive 
elements. Its use should be decreased and partial s ubstitution by lightly 
milled cereals and especially by potatoes recommend ed. The consumption Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  of an excessive amount of sugar is to be condemned and in this case also 
partial replacement by potatoes is urged. 
C. Milk should form a conspicuous element of the diet at all ages. The 
Commission commends the tendency manifested in some  countries to 
increase the daily intake up to one litre per day f or pregnant and nursing 
women, as well as to provide an abundant supply for  infants, children of 
all ages and adolescents. The practice of providing  milk either free or at a 
reduced price to these is highly recommended. 
The Commission desires to draw attention to the hig h nutritive value of 
skimmed and separated milk, which, although deprive d of its vitamin A 
through removal of the fat, retains the protein, th e  B and C vitamins, the 
calcium and other mineral elements. The Commission deplores the large 
wastage in many countries of this valuable food. 
D. Fresh vegetables and/or fruit should always be cons tituents of the normal 
mixed diet. Adequate provision of the vitamins othe r than vitamin D can 
be readily accomplished by inclusion in the diet of  optimum amounts of 
protective foods. Where these are not available, on ly such vitamin 
preparations as are officially controlled and appro ved should be permitted. 
E. The Commission emphasizes the need for provision of  extra vitamin D, 
either as cod-liver oil or as irradiated products, wherever and whenever 
sunshine is not abundant, especially in the period of growth and during 
pregnancy. 
Harijan,  25-4-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116   
7. ARE YOU ACID? 
[Under the above heading Dr. H. C. Menkel, M. D. co ntributes to the  Oriental Watchman 
and Herald of Health  an interesting and instructive article from which we take the 
following important extracts. - Ed.] 
"Quite frequently one hears the remark during a dis cussion about health, 'The 
doctor says I am too acid.' Just what does it mean being too acid? And how does 
one become acid? 
"Being acid or having acidosis, is only a relative term. There is no such 
experience in actual life as a person being acid an d still remaining conscious to 
tell about his acidosis. Acidity of the body tissue s means death. The life 
process, and therefore, all the essential phases pe rtaining to health, well-
being, and resistance are predominantly alkaline. 
"The human body represents a precarious organizatio n of matter. Chemical 
study of the body materials reveals eighty parts al kali, and twenty parts acid. 
This relationship of four to one is the basic secre t of health, normal functional 
activities, and efficient old age. 
"All our practices, habits, customs, indulgences or  deficiencies, both physical 
and mental, either promote or disturb this eighty-t wenty ratio. 
"However, the most determining factors for acid or for alkali formation are 
contained in food and drink. These are: 
Acid Forming  
Phosphorus 
Sulphur 
Silicon 
Chlorine 
Flourine 
Iodine Alkali Forming  
Potassium 
Sodium 
Calcium 
Magnesium 
Iron 
Manganese Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  Arsenic  
Bromine 
 Aluminium  
Copper 
Lithium 
Zinc 
Nickel 
"These several mineral elements are so arranged in the different foods of daily 
use as to separate such foods into two classes - th e alkali forming foods, and 
the acid forming foods. For convenience of referenc e we will list the more 
important foods under their respective classificati on: 
Acid Forming  
Fish Fowl 
Flesh foods of all kinds 
Eggs Cheese 
Cereals (wheat, oats, rice, corn) 
Bread  
Chapati 
Legumes Nuts 
Refined sugar Sweets 
Confectionary 
Chocolate 
Lard 
Hydrogenated oils  
Coffee and tea  
Alcoholic beverages  
Fruits in syrups  
Flavoured soda waters  
Milk when boiled  
Milk puddings  Alkali Forming  
Green leafy vegetables 
Cabbage 
Asparagus 
Beets 
Carrots 
Cauliflower 
Celery 
Cucumbers 
Marrow 
Olives (ripe) 
Onions 
Peas when fresh green 
Potatoes 
Pumpkins 
Radishes 
Spinach 
Tomatoes 
Turnips Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118  Fried and ghee -cooked foods  Nearly all fruits  
Apples 
Apricots 
Bananas when thoroughly ripe, 
with skin spotted in  
brown Cherries Currants Dates 
Figs 
Grapes 
Lemon juice 
Oranges 
Peaches 
Pears 
Prunes 
Melon 
Milk when uncooked Whey 
"Do you desire discovering if you have an acid tend ency? Then answer the 
following questions under "Alkali effects" and "Aci d effects". Allow yourself a 
mark of ten for each positive answer under both col umns. Total the figures and 
you will have a fairly accurate gauge to your acid tendencies. 
Acid Effects  
Having local infection,  
teeth, tensil, nose or elsewhere 
Smoker  
Using alcohol  
Heavy protein diet (over 2½  OZ . daily of 
pulses, fish, fowl, meat, eggs, cheese)  
Heavy starch consumption (more than one 
serving daily of bread, porridge, cake, rice, 
cereals, chapati  or other equally high starch Alkali Effects  
No known local infection  
Non-smoker  
Non-user of alcohol 
 Low protein diet (2½ oz. daily) 
Sparing use of starchy food (bread, chapati, 
rice, oat meal, cake, toast, sweets) 
No fried foods  
One fruit meal daily  
Abundant use of both raw and cooked green Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  containing foods)  
Foods cooked in fats or fried 
Sparing use of fresh fruits  
Only scant use of green vegetables  
Drink little water  
Constipated 
Using Aspirin and other drugs 
Given to worry and anger  
Little outdoor exercise  
Frequent late nights veg etables  
Drink several glasses water daily 
Two or three bowel movement daily  
Never use  
Aspirin or similar drugs  
Hardly ever worried or become angry  
Regular outdoor exercise  
Retire early and secure full night sleep 
 
"A good concept of the acid process within the body  can be gained from the 
quantity of acid waste substances which are constan tly being eliminated. 
"Thirty quarts of carbonic acid gas is normally eli minated by the lungs every 
hour. All this quantity of acid gas is largely the result of digesting the sugar, 
starch, fat and protein of the daily food intake. I f the meals contain an excess 
of these carbonic acid forming substances there is a heavier tax on elimination. 
Sedentary habits with 'good feeding' may easily ove rburden lung elimination, 
with resultant chronic acidosis effects. 
"It is estimated that one-third of the total body a cid wastes are disposed of 
through the lungs. This leaves another two-thirds t o be eliminated by kidneys, 
skin and bowels. 
"An amount of blood equal to all the blood in the b ody (six quarts) passes 
through the two kidneys every seven minutes for the  purpose of eliminating 
acid waste products of a nature that cannot be elim inated in the form of gas 
through the lungs. 
"A test of urinary acidity is a very good index to body acidity. This should be 
done at frequent intervals as a check upon health s tandard. Normally the urine Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120  is slightly acid. It is found that persons who are producing an excess of acid may 
have a urine reaction showing from 100 to 1000 time s as acid as the blood. 
"Such excessive strain on the eliminative function of the kidneys will result in 
disease of these organs. Nature attempts to guard a gainst such damage by the 
following measures. 
"Acids are not normally eliminated or disposed of i n a free acid state since any 
attempt to pass free acid substances through the bl ood or eliminative organs 
would produce serious damage to all the tissues con tacted. Therefore as 
quickly as acids are freed through digestion and me tabolism nature binds them 
up with alkali substances, thus forming organic com pounds with an acid radicle 
but hedged about with alkalis to render the acid as  little acid as possible until 
it is safely disposed off from the body. 
"When the daily food intake does not provide these acid binding buffer 
substances in the required quantity, then nature's only recourse is to withdraw 
reserve alkalis from the blood and body tissues. Te eth and bones are a good 
source. When calcium is withdrawn from the teeth th ey begin to decay. For 
meeting quick demand the supply is obtained from th e softer tissues. 
"Whenever the tissue alkali reserve is lowered only  a few points of a degree the 
depleted tissues become irritable, painful and infl amed. This state of tissues 
irritability due to depleted alkalinity is termed r heumatism, neuritis, arthritis, 
myalgia, fibrasitis, lumbago, and various other nam es according to the location 
or structures affected. The cause is the same in ea ch case, depleted alkalinity, 
produced by attempting to safeguard the organism fr om the deadly acid effects 
of our habits and practices. 
"A small amount of acid forming substances are nece ssary for incorporating into 
muscle and nerve tissues. The quantity thus require d is represented by two 
ounces of meat, or one large egg, or two ounces mil k curds, with the addition 
of one or two slices of bread (double  roti ) or the equivalent in  chapatis  made 
from freshly ground, unsifted wheat flour. More tha n this quantity of the acid 
forming foods means excess, and tends to acidosis. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  "The principal alkalis used for binding acids are s odium, potassium, calcium, 
magnesium, iron, copper, zinc, nickel and aluminium . 
"These acid-binding alkalis in their most desirable  state, and in abundance, are 
found in vegetables, particularly the green leaves,  and ripe, fresh, uncooked 
fruits. 
"The renowned Dr. George W. Crile is reported as st ating, 'There is no natural 
death; all deaths from so- called natural causes ar e merely the end and point of 
a progressive acid saturation.' 
"We should, therefore, avoid hastening the point of  acid-saturation by providing 
nature with an abundance of acid-binding foods, and  by adopting other alkali-
favouring habits and practices. 
"After checking your acid-alkali standing by these two tables, and, should you 
find yourself quite definitely on the acid side, th is indicates that you are 
positively overdrawing your deposit of health credi t, and it is only a matter of 
how much alkali you still have deposited in body st orage system, and how 
rapidly you are depleting this reserve, to determin e the time when you will 
begin having pains, discomforts, ill health and suc cumb easily to infection. 
"Having thus discovered what practices are putting you strongly on the acid side 
you will also have learned what to do, and how to r eserve this process, and to 
place yourself on the alkali and health constructiv e regime. 
"Let it be remembered that ripe fruit and fresh gre en coloured vegetables 
represent both the first line of defence and the re serves in health conservation 
and rebuilding. These wonderful alkali forming food -medicines were intended 
in nature's original plan to constitute eighty per cent of our food intake. 
Accordingly there should be in all of our meals fou r ounces of fruit or green 
vegetables for everyone ounce of food listed in the  acid forming column." 
H. C. MENKEL 
Harijan,  22-2-1936 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122   
8. WHAT AND HOW MUCH TO EAT? 
[Dr. Menkel’s article “Are you Acid?” reproduced in  these columns seems to have proved 
an eye-opener to many. We summarize three more arti cles of his from the  Oriental 
Watchman and Herald of Health under a heading which suits the summary. – Ed. ] 
How Much and How Often?  
There are diseases consequent to excessive eating, too frequent meals, and the 
over-indulgence of concentrated starches, sugars an d proteins. To avoid them 
there are certain axioms which should be borne in m ind. Only a certain definite 
quantity of food material can be appropriated by th e body organism during any 
given 24-hour day. This required quantity for an av erage person of about 150 
pounds weight has been ascertained to be approximat ely: 
12 ounces starch and sugar containing foods 
2½ ounces protein foods  
2 ounces fats 
Suitable quantity of roughage  
Adequate amount of organic salts 
Small but essential quantity of vitamins 
The above six classes of food elements are provided  by nature in the form of 
rice, wheat,  dal,  vegetables, nuts, fruit and milk. The digestion of  these 
requires  at least fourteen hours  in a normal individual. In a subnormal 
individual it will require more time. The digestion  of food is a physical and 
chemical process requiring expenditure of a conside rable quantity of body 
energy. It has been estimated that three meals dail y require more energy for 
their digestion, oxidation and elimination than is expended in any other form of 
average work or play. Three or more meals daily mea ns keeping all body tissues 
and organs constantly at work without any free peri od of rest, repair and 
recharging the vital batteries. This continual stra in results in organic exhaustion 
and needs a regular recurring fast period. The fast  is not a prolonged fast, but a Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123  regular planned part of daily regime, one or two re st periods between meals, of 
sufficient length to promote reconstruction and hea lth building.  This will 
require less than three meals during the twenty-fou r hours.  For the average in-
valid or below par individual, two meals well diges ted with plenty of rest 
period between will promote recovery far better tha n three meals. Still other 
would do better on only one meal daily, as this is all they can really digest and 
assimilate. Begin by dropping first one daily meal.  After a few days drop 
another, until you have reduced the number of meals  to two. But do not make 
the mistake of eating as much in those two meals as  you ate before reducing 
the frequency of eating.  
 
Disease and Its Cure  
Barring unusual accidents or strong hereditary tran smissions, the major cause 
for ill-health is violation of nature's laws. Drugs  never cure. The best that any 
such so-called remedy can do is to contribute some mineral element, vitamin, 
enzyme, hormone, chalon, or some other factor which  nature can utilize for 
the emergency. All of what we may call essential me dicines are contained in 
our natural foods. 
Col. Robert McCarrison, in a paper read before the Far Eastern Association of 
Tropical Medicine, stated that "the most fundamenta l of all rules for the 
physician" was "that the right kind of food is the most important single factor in 
the promotion of health, and the wrong kind of food  the most important single 
factor in the promotion of disease." Many of the di seases can be cured by 
altering our diet and methods of cooking our food w hich destroy much of the 
vitamins and mineral elements originally present in  our food. The diseases 
resulting from bad food can be prevented and cured only by the use of less 
cooked food and more raw fruits, green uncooked veg etables and sprouted 
pulses, and by learning to use more freshly ground whole wheat flour instead of 
polished and stored rice. The following table will provide a ready reference to 
the more important regulating food factors: 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124   
Diseases Due to  
Deficiency of Vitamin A  
Loss of appetite, Physical weakness, 
tendency to diseases of eyes, ears, kidneys, 
lungs, skin, bladder, stomach and colon, 
pyorrhoea, anaemia. Slow mentality.  
 
Vitamin B  
Indigestion of stomach and intestine, 
Constipation, Loss of weight and vigour, 
Sub-normal temperature, Paralysis of 
muscle groups, Neuritis, Glandular and en-
docrine disturbance including thyroid, 
adrenals, liver and pancreas.  
Vitamin  C 
Loss of weight and physical weakness, Rapid 
heart and shallow rapid breathing, Bleeds 
easily, 
Low red blood count. 
Teeth decay easily and become brittle, 
pyorrhoea, heart and blood vessel disease, 
scurvy.  
Vitamin D  
Unstable nervous system. Low resistance to 
tuberculosis and other infections. Deformed 
bones, rickets. 
Vitamin E  
Anaemia due to inability to digest the food 
iron. Failure of placental function thus 
affects child-birth. Food Source  
 
Whole milk, butter, cheese, egg yolk, 
yellow bhuta, yellow sweet potatoes, 
carrots and other naturally yellow and 
green coloured foods, fish oils, — destroyed 
by cooking of these foods. 
Whole grain cereals, milk, buttermilk, green 
peas and legumes,  dal,  raw fruits, 
vegetables, egg yolk, honey, yeast, 
marmite. 
Part of group B is destroyed by cooking of 
these foods. 
 
Raw fruit, especially oranges, lemons, 
tomatoes, guavas, leeches, mangoes, 
pineapples, chillies, sprouted grams, green 
leafy raw vegetables, potatoes, cabbage, 
milk. This vitamin is destroyed by cooking. 
 
 
 
Egg yolk, whole milk, fish oils. Few foods 
contain this vitamin, but it may be secured 
by daily exposing some part of the skin to 
direct sunlight. 
Whole grain cereals, milk, green vegetables 
and raw fruits. 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  Organic Salts, Sodium  
Diabetes, Disturbed bile secretion. 
Flatulence with indigestion, constipation. 
Sodium is necessary to render lime and 
magnesia soluble for assimilation. 
Elimination of carbonic acid is facilitated by 
sodium in the blood.  
Potassium  
Defective growth with impaired glycogen 
function of the liver. 
Low red blood cell formation. Spleen 
function impaired. Low nerve energy. 
Calcium and Magnesium  
In nature calcium is always accompanied by 
magnesium. A large number of diseases of 
childhood involving tissue changes and 
development are due to deficiency of these 
combined elements. 
Abnormal intra-uterine development and 
difficult patturition. 
Softening of bones (magnesium). 
Iron  
About 75 grains of iron in the human body. 
It enters into the most complicated 
compound found in the human organism. 
Good blood with all its vital consequences 
can only be formed with the presence of 
organic iron compounds. Raw fruits and veg etables.  
 
 
 
 
 
Vegetables and cereals. Muscle tissue. 
 
 
 
Fruit, vegetables and cereals. The green 
leaves contain relatively more calcium, 
while the seeds contain relatively more 
magnesium. 
 
 
Nuts, milk, yolk of eggs. 
 
 
 
Green leafy vegetables, onions, radishes, 
carrots, strawberries, tomatoes, dates, 
apples, figs, coconut, walnuts. Bran of rice 
and wheat. Pulses, yolk of egg, milk. 
 
 
Avoid Wrong Combinations  
A modified form of mono-diet is often useful in som e circumstances as a 
therapeutic measure. This may be accomplished by ea ting only one kind of food Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126  at a meal but varying the food with each meal to av oid monotony and still 
provide needed factors found in different foods. Fo r persons with impaired 
nutritional function, this regime permits the diges tive organs to give full 
attention to the 
digestion of the one food partaken during that meal . It also encourages better 
mastication and discourages overeating. 
Recently while reading the book  Ministry of Healing  I found this very practical 
advice on the matter of food combinations: "Here is  a suggestion for all whose 
work is sedentary or chiefly mental; let those who have sufficient moral 
courage and self-control try it:  At each meal take only two or three kinds of 
simple food,  and eat no more than is required to satisfy hunger ." 
It is not well to eat fruit and vegetables at the s ame meal. If the digestion is 
feeble, the use of both will often cause distress, and inability to put forth 
mental effort. It is better to have the fruit at on e meal, and the vegetables at 
another. 
The plan here suggested of allowing each meal to do minate in one distinctive 
type of food can with advantage be extended beyond the two examples 
mentioned. A favourable plan is to divide the daily  food ration into one protein 
meal, one starch meal, and one fruit meal. 
The first rule is to avoid combining at any one mea l foods of a decided starch 
nature with foods that are acid. 
Starch-containing foods require the fullest possibl e action of the alkali saliva 
for their digestion. Therefore such foods should be  retained in the mouth and 
masticated until quite dissolved and reduced to a s emi-liquid state. Each 
mouthful of starch food should receive this treatme nt which is not difficult 
after one has formed the habit of thorough masticat ion. 
For this reason it is advisable to recommend taking  one's starch requirement at 
one meal during the day, and refraining from introd ucing any form of acid food 
or acid- containing combination of food at that mea l. Such combinations as 
follows are to be avoided: Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127  Tomato sandwiches: Tomatoes with potatoes; Tomatoes  and rice or breads; 
Macaroni with tomatoes; Pies, tarts and pudding mad e of flour or other starch 
with acid fruits; Orange and corn flour pudding; Or ange juice and bread, rice, 
potatoes or banana, should not be taken together; V inegar,  chutni  or pickles 
should not be taken together with any starchy food like rice or potatoes; 
Marmalade or jam made of acid fruits, with bread or  cake; Tea is acid, it will 
retard digestion if taken with bread, cakes, or oth er starch foods. 
In our experience at the Simla Sanitarium we have o bserved that the foods 
which combine best and cause the least trouble duri ng their combined digestion 
are : 
1. Fruits and milk, j 2. Bread,  chapati  or porridge cereals with butter or 
cream, may be combined with any one or two of the f ollowing: 
2. Bananas, almonds, dates, figs, sweet raisins, honey , milk. Any three of 
these would make a good conbination. 
3. Bread,  chapatis,  porridge or rice will also combine with vegetables  and  dal  
but none of the above fruits should then be used. 
4. Rice with tuber and green vegetables,  dal  and olive oil. 
5. Green leafy vegetables, both raw and cooked, combin e well with such 
protein food as fish, fowl, eggs or meat, if one is  using animal foods. 
6. Flesh foods combine best with green leafy vegetable s, but they will also 
combine well with acid fruits as apples, guavas, pe ars, oranges, mangoes, 
but it is best not to use both vegetables and acid fruit at the same meal 
with meat. 
H. C. MENKEL 
Harijan , 21-3-1936 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128   
9. QUESTIONS ON DIET 
[We summarized some time ago Dr. H. C. Menkel's art icles in the  Oriented Watchman and 
Herald of Health under headings "Are You Acid?' (issue of February 2 2nd) and "What and 
How Much to Eat?' (March 21). A reader of  Harijan  sent us a few questions arising out of 
these articles. Dr. Menkel has been good enough to answer those questions for us. - aid.] 
Q.  1. Does 'fruits in syrup' include those cooked wit h gur  (jaggery) or only those 
cooked with sugar? 
A.  The reference to "fruits in syrups' usually applie s to the fruits in cane sugar 
syrup as found in the general market.  Gur  or jaggery would have an advantage 
over refined cane sugar as it has not been deprived  of its valuable mineral 
constituents. However, it must be emphasized that c ooked fruit or fruit put up 
in syrup can never .take the place of fruit in its raw or ripe natural stage. The 
cooking process destroys certain valuable constitue nts, and others are so 
altered that they are no longer available in their original values.  
 
Q.  2. Can  gur  be taken (uncooked) wherever honey is mentioned? ( Honey is 
expensive here.) 
A. Gur  is the best of the available substitutes for honey , but is a different class 
of sweet, more difficult of digestion and not so we ll suited for meeting the 
body requirements as is honey and the natural fruit  sugars.  
 
Q.  3. Suppose one is unable sometimes to get the full  quantity of vegetables, 
how much soda should one take per day to give the n ecessary alkaline effect? 
A.  Soda bi-carbonate serves as an emergency remedy wh en it becomes 
necessary to administer an alkali as a remedy, but it cannot be recommended 
for regular use to replace the organic alkali salts  supplied in natural fruits, 
vegetables and unprocessed cereals. During the seas on when vegetables do not 
thrive well under ordinary cultivation, it has been  found possible to grow fresh 
vegetables in boxes as these can be kept in a favou rable situation to encourage Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129  growth. Some are finding it possible to keep fresh green vegetables of the. 
leafy type, all during the season by planting seeds  in different boxes so that 
they will come to usable size at properly spaced in tervals. Another useful 
substitute is the dried vegetable which may be used  during the off-season.  
 
Q.  4. Is butter acid-forming or alkaline? 
A.  Butter in its natural state is neutral, being neit her acid nor alkali.  
 
Q.  5. It is sad to know that boiled milk is acid-form ing. Is there any simple 
means of safeguarding milk without boiling it? I ha ve heard of peptorized milk 
but do not quite know what it is. Likewise can curd s be made alkaline? 
A.  The boiling of the milk is the only easily availab le means of rendering it safe. 
The boiling process produces certain chemical chang es which renders 
unavailable some of the alkali salts, and therefore  boiled milk serves as a drain 
on the alkali reserves of the tissue. This gives it  an acidlike action in lowering 
body alkalinity. 
Curds being protein, they contain an excess of the acid ash-forming salts. This 
is the normal construction of proteins and they can not be rendered alkali. The 
necessary provision is to use a sufficient amount o f alkali ash-forming foods to 
provide the normal ratio of one part of acid- formi ng to four parts of alkali-
forming. It is not a question of converting the nat ural acid-forming food into al-
kali, but of providing a well-balanced supply, one part of acid-forming into four 
parts of alkali-forming.  
 
Q. 6. Do you know junket powder (rennet)? It turns milk into junket (sweet 
curds) within about 15 minutes and without making i t sour. Do you know if that 
is just the same as curds or is it alkaline? 
A.  Junket made with rennet powder is a very excellent  form in which to take 
whole milk. This is better than curds as it leaves the milk in its normal balance.  
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130  Q.  7. The article says that ghee-cooked foods are aci d. Is ghee itself just put on 
the food at the time of eating also acid? 
A.  Ghee is not acid in itself. When food is cooked in  hot fat it produces certain 
changes in the food, making it difficult of digesti on and fixing certain alkali 
factors so that they become unavailable as such. Fo od so prepared while not 
actually acid in itself, does have an acidlike effe ct in that it calls upon alkali 
reserves to facilitate its processing within the bo dy. This depleting of the 
essential reserve alkali produces the same final ef fect as though the food were 
actually acid-forming. Cooking in hot fat or frying  is the least desirable method 
of preparing foods. When food is thus prepared it l oses important food values 
and is highly productive of digestive disturbance, fermentation and flatulence. 
H. C. MENKEL 
Harijan,  11-7-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131   
10. IMPROVED DIETS 
"One of the tasks of those who are striving to impr ove diet in India is to educate 
the educated," writes Dr. Aykroyd in  Health Bulletin  No. 23. He bemoans the 
fact that it is not only the poor, whose choice is extremely limited, who are 
ignorant and prejudiced, but also those who can aff ord an excellent diet who 
do not feed properly, with the result that their ch ildren suffer from mal-
nutrition and food-deficiency diseases. Even for pe ople with limited incomes 
effective improvement can be made with little incre ase in cost. He says it is 
desirable that children should consume upwards of 8  oz. of milk a day, but, if 
funds do not admit, then buttermilk or skimmed milk  may be supplied, for 
"even a little milk is better than none. Careful ex periments have shown that 
the giving of 8 oz. of skimmed milk daily to childr en fed on an average 'ill-
balanced' Indian diet results in an acceleration of  growth and a great 
improvement in health and well-being." Calcium is f ound abundantly in milk, 
and children need relatively more calcium and other  minerals than adults, just 
as they need relatively more protein. Rice being ve ry deficient in calcium, its 
insufficiency is one of the most important defects of the rice-eater's diet. The 
milled rice-eater, therefore, needs more "protectiv e" foods - milk, green 
vegetables, fruits etc., than the consumer of whole  wheat or  ragi.  "Parboiled 
rice, even when milled, is superior in nutritive va lue (particularly as regards 
the anti-beri-beri vitamin) to raw rice milled to t he same degree." Since diets 
among the general population are low in fat, Dr. Ay kroyd suggests that 
"addition of extra vegetable oil (at the expense of  a quantity of cereal 
supplying an equivalent number of calories) does no t greatly increase 
expenditure. Pure ghee or butter is, of course, pre ferable to vegetable fat, but 
very much dearer." Fruits, he avers, must always be  included in children's diets. 
Tomatoes, oranges and other juicy fruits are richer  in vitamins than bananas. 
A. K. 
Harijan , 12-4-1942 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 132   
11. PLACE OF CEREALS IN FOOD 
[Shri Ishverbhai Amin, Chief Chemist and Technical Superintendent of the Alembic 
Chemical Works of Baroda, has prepared a chemical a nalysis of principal cereals and 
pulses, commonly used in Gujarat and a note thereon . I give the important part of it 
below, omitting the detailed analysis as being too technical for the reader. The note gives 
the reader sufficient information for his guidance.  - M. K. G.] 
The investigation was undertaken with a view to stu dy the chemical 
constituents of cereals and pulses which form the m ain "bulk of the daily food 
of a village farmer. 
Referring to the results of analysis in the followi ng pages, one can see that the 
lecithin in the soya beans on which much stress is laid nowadays is in a fair 
proportion in almost all the pulses and one need no t be afraid of its deficiency, 
in spite of its being lower than that in soya beans  or eggs, because while the 
latter are not consumed in a very large quantity, t he ordinary cereals and 
pulses are, and therefore supply sufficient lecithi n. The farmer's daily food in 
Gujarat is  Kodari,  Millet,  Dal  of  Tuver  or Math  the last two being replaced 
sometimes by  Mag, Val or  Dal  of  Udad.  
The next important thing is that Millet, which form s the main food in the 
evening contains 7.436 per cent oil, and  Kodari  which is the noon day meal, 
contains 5.941 per cent oil. In spite of the farmer 's inability to provide for 
necessaiy portion of free fat in his daily diet, he  is still getting it unawares by 
taking  Kodari  and Millet. Lecithin also is sufficiently present in Millet and  Dal  of 
Vdad,  while fairly good in  Math, Dal  of  Tuver,  and to some extent in  Mag, Val  
and  Kodari. 
The total Nitrogen content in cereals allows easily  to calculate the percentage 
of total proteins, but does not allow us to judge t heir quantity. All the pulses 
contain 20 to 22 per cent of protein, but the propo rtion of protein soluble in 
cold water is highest in  Mag  and  Tuver,  which is two-thirds of the total 
proteins. 
It is an established fact that medical men prescrib e the use of boiled and 
spiced aqueous extracts of  Mag  and  Dal of  Tuver  to even very weak patients, 
who first are allowed to begin taking food after th ey have abstained from 
taking it for a very long time. It is because they contain about 66 per cent of 
total proteins in water-soluble form and hence are very easily digestible, Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 133  causing thus minimum strain either to the stomach o r the intestines.  Val  and  
Dal of  Udad  contain less soluble proteins which form four- fif ths of the total 
proteins, one-fifth being only in the soluble form.  It is a common experience to 
everybody that Val  produces a lot of gases in the intestines due to t he insoluble 
nature and hence bad digestibility of its proteins.  
Analysis of Ash gives a clue to their mineral conte nts. Calcium and Iron which 
are absolutely necessary in bone and blood formatio n are highest in  Math,  
while potassium, whose importance is established in  the metabolic changes of 
the human system, is highest in  Dal  of  Tuver.  Phosphorus is fairly well 
represented in all of them. The mineral constituent s may vary in the same 
cereal or pulse on account of the changing nature o f available plant foods in 
the soils. While raising crops, the village farmer should be particular in at least 
properly manuring the land on which he grows corn f or his own consumption, 
otherwise he and his family are likely to be lackin g in nourishment due to low 
contents of minerals in their daily food. It is not  that grains and pulses alone 
should be the sole guiding factors in their nourish ment, but there are other ar 
tides of food such as green and fresh vegetables an d milk and butter which 
supply all the necessary vitamins. 
The farmer's food should be balanced if his present  stamina and vigour and 
health are to be raised to a higher standard, and s ome economical and 
philanthropical ways and means should be found out by which he is able to 
retain for consumption at least some milk, butter a nd green vegetables. His 
present poor condition does not permit him to do so , in spite of his producing 
them, as he has to sell all these products for maki ng money. The farmer should 
be taught to reduce his monetary wants as far as po ssible, so that some of his 
produce is left to himself and his family for nouri shment. 
ISHVERBHAI AMIN 
Harijan,  12-12-1936 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 134   
12. AN EXPERIMENT IN NATIONAL DIET 
A striking experiment was carried out in Denmark in  the last year of the Great 
War which has a moral for us in the present food cr isis. The Danes as a people 
were, in the first instance, largely lacto-vegetari an in their diet. Then about 
1870-1880 American wheat and barley from the virgin  soil of the prairies began 
to pour in and forced the Danes to change their agr icultural methods quickly. 
They began to raise pigs and poultry and became exp orters of eggs and butter 
to England. They also became big eaters of meat and  eggs themselves. 
The blokcade following the entry of the United Stat es into the war created a 
serious situation for the Danes. Denmark had a popu lation of 35,00,000 human 
beings and 50,00,000 domestic animals. Grain and fo dder used to come from 
America. The sudden stoppage of the American import s created an acute 
shortage of these articles. 
Professor Mikkel Hindhede, Superintendent of the St ate Institute of Food 
Research, was appointed Food Adviser to the Danish Government to deal with 
the crisis. The question which he was called upon t o decide was this. So far the 
pigs had provided ham and bacon for the English as well as the Danes. Would it 
be wise in this crisis to get rid of the pigs and l et men eat the grain which oth-
erwise the pigs would eat? Hindhede decided it woul d be wise and so some 
four-fifths of the pigs and about one- sixth of the  cattle were killed. The pigs 
gone, the bran which was fed to them was set free a nd was utilized for making 
whole meal bread with the entire coarse bran incorp orated. This was the 
celebrated Kilebrot which was made official for the  whole country. In addition 
to it the Danes ate porridge, green vegetables, mil k, butter and fruit. "No grain 
or potatoes were allowed for distillation of spirit s, so there were no spirits." 
Half the previous quantity of beer was permitted. O nly people on the farms got 
meat. The people in the cities, about 40 per cent o f the population got very 
little meat. Only the rich could afford beef. 
The food regulations were begun in March, 1917, and  were made stringent from 
October 1917 to October 1918. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 135  An amazing result followed from the enforcement of this national diet. Death 
rate which had been 12.5 in 1913-14 now fell to 10. 4 per thousand "which is the 
lowest mortality figure that has been registered in  any European country at any 
time" (Hindhede). To express the results in another  way, taking the average 
from 1906 to 1916 as 160, in the October to October  year it was 66. "Even in 
men over 65 the figure fell to 76." 
Before the fiat the Danes ate fine meal bread and w hole meal bread. Hindhede 
made them eat only whole meal bread with extra bran . Its proportions were 
given out as 67 per cent rye, 21 per cent oats and 12 per cent bran. 
"Except for the bran which added vegetable meat for  those who were animally 
meatless or meat short," observes Hindhede, "this b read was the bread which 
the Danes used to eat before the invasion of Americ an wheat," and which had 
been the "national bread of Denmark for centuries."  
Hindhede attributed the remarkable improvement in t he national health of the 
Danes to (1) less meat, (2) less alcohol. "The bran  largely filled the gap of the 
scanty or absent meat, bran having a good proportio n of vegetable meat 
protein." He regarded his experiment as a "triumph of his previous teaching." 
"The reader knows," he wrote in  Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift  of March 
1920, "how sharply I have emphasized the advantage of a lacto- vegetarian 
diet. I am not in principle a vegetarian but I beli eve I have shown that a diet 
containing a large amount of meat and eggs is dange rous to health." 
PYARELAL 
Harijan,  26-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 136   
13. REVEALING FIGURES 
The following facts and figures taken from a pamphl et entitled  Food Crisis,  
1946, are of special interest in view of the food s hortage : 
Production of Foodstuffs in India (1945-46) 
Rice 25.8  million  tons 
Wheat 8.3    ’’    ’’ 
Gram 3.0   ’’    ’’ 
Millets 7.5   ’’    ’’ 
Maize 2.2   ’’    ’’ 
Barley 1.7   ’’    ’’ 
The above quantity has been found insufficient for the total population of India 
and the estimated deficit is 6 million tons. 
The Punjab, C. P. and Berar, Sind, Orissa and Assam  are not exporters of 
cereals in normal times. The deficit areas are the N.W.F.P., Bihar, U.P., 
Madras, Bombay, Bengal, the States of Travancore an d Cochin, all of which 
have to import either wheat, rice, millet, or all. 
The production v. requirements of foodstuffs annual ly is as follows: 
Foodstuffs  Production  Requirements  Deficit  
 million tons  million tons  million tons  
Cereals  50  60  10  
Pulses  7 12  5 
Vegetables  
& Fruits Unassessed  At least double  - 
Fish  0.6  9 8.4  
Milk  22  35  13  
Eggs  2660  146000  143340(No.)  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 137   
The following is a table of balanced diet for the m aintenance of proper health: 
Cereals 14 Oz. 
Pulses 3 " 
Green leafy vegetable 3 " 
Root vegetable 3 " 
Other vegetables 3 " 
Fruits 3 " 
Milk 10 " 
Sugar and Jaggery 2 " 
Vegetable oil, Ghee, etc. 2 " 
Fish and meat 3 " 
Egg 1 Only 
This diet yields about 2600 calories. 
The adult Indian male requires 2600 calories 
Female 2100 ” 
Child 12 and 13 year 2100 ” 
Child 10 and 11 year 1800 ” 
Child 8 and 9 year 1600 ” 
Child 6 and 7 year 1300 ” 
Child 4 and 5 year 1000 ” 
Pregnant woman 2400 ” 
Nursing mother 3000 ” 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 138   
But how much do they get in comparison with other c ountries? The figures 
reveal a sorry tale: 
Country Calories per head per day 
America   ... 3,200 
Great Britain   ... 2,600 
Germany (after the war)   ... 1,600 
Japan (under American occupation)  1,575 
'Grim and dangerous level'   1,500 
And India    960 
No wonder the death rate and infant mortality figur es are appalling: 
Country  1942 Infant mortality 
 Death rate per 1000 
 per 1000 births 
Australia 10.5 39 
Canada 9.7 54 
America 10.4 40 
Germany 12.7 (1940) 68 
England  12.2 (1940) 54 
Japan  17.6 (1938) 114 (1937) 
India 22.0 163 
and our expectation of life woefully short: 
Country  Expectation of life at birth  
 Males  Females  
Netherlands  65.70  67.20 (1931 -40)  
New Zealand  65.46  68.45 (1934 -38)  
Sweden  64.30  66.92 (1936 -40)  
America  63.65  68.61  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 139  Denmark  63.50  65.80 (1936 -40)  
Union of S.A.  61.46  66.80 (1940)  
Canada  60.90  64.70 (1940 -42)  
Ireland  59.00  51.00 (1940 -42)  
England  60.18  64.40 (1937)  
Germany  59.86  62.80 (1932 -34)  
Italy  53.76  56.00 (1930 -32)  
Japan  46.92  49.63 (1935 -36)  
India  26.91  26.56 (1931)  
Not until our people are able to get enough to eat,  can all our schemes for 
proper housing or roads or even education and healt h be of any real avail. 
Adequate and proper diet is the first requirement o f man, and to this end the 
energy of all Provincial Governments must be divert ed forthwith if we are to 
live. 
A. K. 
Harijan , 8-9-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 140   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION II : RICE, WHEAT AND  GUR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 141   
14. THE MIRACLE OF UNPOLISHED RICE 
Where rice is the staple diet, and there are hardly  other articles of food like 
wheat to supplement it, the miracle that unpolished  rice can work within a few 
weeks of its taking the place of polished rice is a pparent from the following 
cutting from the  Madanpal,  the monthly magazine of the Madanpalle 
Theosophical School: 
"The introduction of brown rice in the hostel has m ade a great difference to the weights of 
the boys. In the first two months, July and August one added nine pounds, one eight 
pounds, one seven pounds, four added six pounds, th ree added five pounds, four four 
pounds, four three pounds, six two pounds, and six one pound. Four remained as they 
were, two lost one pound, one lost three pounds, an d one who was excessively fat lost a 
superfluous five pounds. 
"Nearly all the main increase 'were during August, when only the brown rice served.  Many 
who lost weight in the first month, when brown rice  was alternating with white, more 
than regained the loss in the second month. Some ha ve lost again in the holidays, but 
those who stayed here in the vacation mostly contin ued to put on weight largely. 
"1. In the first month, under mixed rice  17 lb. were lost and 55 lb. gained  in the whole 
hostel (school section). 
"2. In the second month, under  brown rice, only 5 lb. were lost and 100 lb. were gained.  
"These figures should convince all save the most su perstitious believers in the devitalized 
and demineralized "Nellore" rice. It is noteworthy also  that those who on their own wish 
have been allowed to have this tasteless insipid va riety have themselves after a few days 
returned to the healthy and appetizing brown rice,  and that its popularity even among 
the college students is growing daily. One day in O ctober when the supply ran short, there 
was even talk of a strike  among our seniors against the substitution of whit e rice." 
The teacher who conducted these experiments is Mr. Duncan Greenless who 
takes a keen interest in diet reform. The carefulne ss with which the 
experiments have been made and the results recorded  is commendable and I 
hope other hostels and boarding houses will follow this example. 
M. D. 
Harijan,  28-12-1935 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 142   
15. UNPOLISHED v. POLISHED RICE 
[Evidence for unpolished as against polished rice g oes on accumulating. The Poet the other 
day raised the voice of humanity against the ravage s wrought by rice mills and milled rice. 
Prof. Basu, Professor of Physiology of the Presiden cy College, Calcutta, sums up the case 
for unpolished rice under the following points, and  even shows that unpolished rice is a 
good equivalent of wheat. - Ed.] 
a) The pericarp which is rich in protein and vitamin B , a substance which 
confers immunity, especially to the digestive tract  against bacterial 
infection, is nearly absent in milled rice, althoug h it is present in  Dhenki-
hulled rice. 
b) I have been able to show by Van Slyke's micro- meth od that the proteins 
are decomposed much more readily in milled rice tha n in  Dhenki- hulled 
rice, when both are stored in warm and humid atmosp here (vide 
Proceedings of the Indian Science Congress, 1935). 
This is probably one of the reasons why Beri-Beri b reaks out in an epidemic 
form either during or after the rains. 
c) Large intake of milled rice causes an incidence of premature births and an 
increase in infant mortality  (Annual Review of Biochemistry,  1934). This 
has been found due to absence of vitamin B. 
d) The absence of vitamin B probably interferes with t he combustion of 
starch in milled rice.  (Annual Review of Biochemistry,  1934). 
I may further point out in this connection that peo ple who argue in favour of 
wheat (or  atta ) either do not know or ignore: 
1) That whereas atta contains 11 per cent protein, and  rice (reddish variety) 
contains 8 or even 8.5 per cent protein, the biolog ical value of protein, of 
rice is 88 per cent (according to Robertson) or 94 per cent (according to 
Dr. K. R Bose of Dacca). But that of wheat is only 40 per cent (the 
biological value of protein of milk being taken as 100 per cent). 
Accordingly, for protein supply to our body rice is  to be preferred to 
wheat. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 143  2) That rice starch contains a small amount of phospho rus, an essential 
ingredient of our body, but wheat starch does not. 
3) That rice is regarded as an excellent fuel for our body (vide  Annual Review 
of Biochemistry,  1935) and is, therefore, particularly useful for l abourers. 
It may be contended that wheat can be taken in larg er amounts than rice 
without unduly loading our stomach. But the necessi ty of taking large amounts 
of rice for the supply of protein disappers, if we take sufficient amount of  dal  
which is very rich in protein (vaiying from 18 to 2 57). Further, rice can be taken 
in various forms, such as parched rice  (chura),  boiled rice, fried rice  (muri  or as 
garuchakli). 
I may mention one great disadvantage of rice, as an  article of food, viz., it is an 
acid food, but this defect can be corrected if it i s taken with sags (green 
vegetables) or citrous fruits which are regarded as  alkaline foods. 
PROF. BASU 
Harijan,  15-2-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 144   
16. SAVING CEREALS 
In view of the present cereal shortage in the count ry, certain experiments on 
diet were tried in Maganwadi. The following results  which have been tested at 
Maganwadi will be helpful to save cereal consumptio n to some extent. 
Rationing authorities in certain places are distrib uting atta  instead of cereals 
and as the cereals employed are of lower quality th ere is a suggestion of adding 
calcium salt to the  atta  to make it more nutritious. We would suggest an 
addition to the  atta  of 15 per cent of cleaned groundnut cake. This wil l have 
many advantages: 
1) There will be an outright saving of 15 per cent in cereals. 
2) The protein content of the  atta  will be practically doubled. 
3) There will be no increase in the cost; if anything it may scale down the 
cost. 
4) The ground-nut cake is very rich in vitamin B compl ex particularly in 
vitamin B 1. 
There is no danger of the cake powder getting ranci d as in the proportion in 
which it will be present in the atta,  the anti-oxident property of the  atta  will 
be effective to check any hydrolysis. 
Only good fresh seeds should be taken, cleaned, by hand-picking and passed in 
bullock-driven  ghani  presses. The extraction of oil being by cold proce ss no 
nutritious ingredients of the ground-nut are lost. The oil is pressed out leaving 
only about 10 to 11 per cent in the cake. The cakes  are broken into small 
pieces and dried in the sun. The cake so treated wi ll remain quite fresh for at 
least one week and retain its flavour. They get bon e hard and can be cracked 
to a fine meal in a pestle and mortar. This meal ca n be fed in the hand  chakki  
to pulverize and bring it to  atta  consistency. 
The 15 per cent of its addition will mean in the no rmal diet a daily consumption 
of less than 1½ chhataks.  There is no difficulty in making the preparations of 
the  atta.  It retains all the good points of the whole cereal  atta  plus a special Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 145  nutty flavour which makes food all the more tasty. This flavour may be very 
negligible when only 15 per cent of ground-nut-oilc ake  atta  is added and only 
on a larger addition can the taste be fully appreci ated. 
The cake contains over 50 per cent of high grade pr otein. 
Scientific experiments elsewhere have also establis hed high grade digestibility 
coefficient of ground-nut protein. It ranks with th e microbial protein of yeast 
and closely approximates animal protein as found in  milk, eggs and mutton. 
After many experiments we have come to the conclusi on that 1 to 2  chhataks  of 
ground-nut oil-cake can be easily digested and take n along with cereals making 
the preparation more palatable. The cake bits are s oaked in water and in two 
hours or so they disintegrate forming a uniform pas te. This paste can be mixed 
with  atta  and made into  chapatis.  The proportion of 1:5 is quite good. The 
paste adds to the flavour of the  dal  or vegetable, if cooked along with these. It 
is very tasty when used in the preparation of  dalia  or porridge with cereals half 
and half or even without that.  
Such use of ground-nut cake will release some of th e cereal needed and will be 
a very good health-giving food. 
Sweet Potatoes:  Sweet potatoes are rich in starch and can form a g ood 
substitute for cereals. These should be cooked over  steam. If cooked with 
water, almost all the water should be allowed to ev aporate, for, otherwise 
much of the mineral salts will get dissolved in the  water and would have to be 
discarded with the water. 
Sweet potatoes can be taken mixed with vegetables, milk, curds or in any other 
convenient form. If at any of the meals, cereals ar e to be totally substituted by 
{his, a little more of sweet potatoes should be tak en on the weight of the usual 
consumption quantity of cereal. 
D. K. GUPTA 
Harijan,  6-4-1947 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 146   
17. USEFUL SUGGESTION 
The method now in vogue of first grinding grain int o flour and then making  
chapatis  or bread out of the flour is wasteful. The defects  of the method are as 
follows: 
In the process of grinding in mills at a high speed , the properties of protein, 
starch, cellulose and mineral salts are altered whi le the fat content is lost, as 
in the process the flour gets hot. In the preparati on of dough of workable 
consistency, the flour absorbs only half the quanti ty of water to its own weight, 
with the result that starch does not swell and in t urn makes the food only 
partly nutritive due to insufficient proportion of water. In the East, the dough 
is rolled into shapes called  chapatis  and puris  which can either be cooked or 
baked, but are fried with ghee or oils, and in so d oing only a skin forms on both 
the sides. In the West, the dough is mixed with yea st for the preparation of 
spongy bread, but this too is neither fully nutriti ve nor hygienic as claimed, as 
the vitamins together with other constituents of fo od value are destroyed by 
the alcoholic fermentation due to the action of the  yeast. Hence, the food 
prepared with this age-old process is neither taste ful nor hygienic, nor fully 
nutritive nor easily digestible, and even for parti al digestion needs a large 
quantity of digestive fluids, like bile, gastric ju ice and pancreatic juice. That a 
sick person cannot be fed with this food is a popul ar recognition of this fact. 
Even biscuits cannot be said to be better. Again, n ot being easily digestible, it 
causes constipation, the cause of all disease. Besi des, before the preparation of 
dough, the flour is sieved to remove bran, which me ans a loss. The flour being 
liable to easy attack by microscopic germs, it cann ot be stored for a long time 
and considerable loss occurs in transport and use, all of which make its use 
uneconomical. 
All these defects can now be surmounted with the pr ocess developed after 
extensive experiments conducted with a view to incr easing the nutritive value 
of cereals, particularly wheat,  bajri  and  jower,  so that the food made out of 
these cereals can impart immense health. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 147  According to this new process, a known quantity of wheat with about three and 
a half times water by volume, i.e. one pot of wheat  and three and a half pots 
of water, or 1 lb. of wheat and 4 lb. of water, is hydrated by gradual boiling, 
with or without the addition of a tea- spoonful of sugar or jaggery under low 
heat, keeping the lid on if an ordinary pot is used . Prior to heating, if wheat is 
steeped in water for about 12 to 18 hours, fuel wil l be saved. In case a pressure 
cooker is employed, the ratio of wheat and water sh ould be one to one and 
three- quarter by weight. The proportion of water t o be used varies according 
to the quality of wheat. In so cooking or boiling, about 2 lb. of water is 
removed by evaporation and starch, bran and other c onstituents swell by 
absorbing water, and wheat becomes meaty. In this m anner cooking or boiling 
should be continued till only a little water is lef t, which too will be absorbed by 
the wheat when it cools. Heating should neither be continued till water is 
completely evaporated for then hydration will not b e sufficient, nor should the 
water from the pot be thrown out, for if removed it  means a loss of soluble 
constituents of wheat. When wheat is cooked complet ely, which can be seen 
either from its swollen state or by pressing betwee n the fingers to determine 
the softness, a little salt may be mixed with it to  impart taste. 
Wheat so cooked should then be masticated or ground  to a paste, which can be 
accomplished with the aid of mincers, or by grindin g on a  masala  stone, or 
pressing with two wooden pieces. With the use of pr essure cooker, wheat inside 
will be digested to a pulpy dough of workable consi stency. The paste so made 
can be made into shapes like  puries, chapatis  and biscuits by the known 
method, and fried with known fats or oils, for cons umption. 
In pjaces like Bombay where at times grain cannot b e had but only flour, one 
may first make a dough of the flour as usual when m aking  chapatis,  put the 
dough in a piece of cloth and hang it over a pot of  boiling water till the dough 
gets completely cooked with the steam. Chapatis  should then be made out of 
the cooked dough, following the usual process. 
The advantage of this new food is that by it about fifty-five per cent wheat is 
saved — forty per cent by the absorption of about o ne and three quarter times Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 148  water, ten per cent by retaining bran, and five per  cent by elimination of 
wastages. This means that a month's provision will last for two months. 
Actually, with this process, the volume of wheat in creases to two and a half 
times, i.e. one pot on cooking becomes two and a ha lf pots. This means that 
from a quantity of flour required to make four chapatis  with the old process, 
ten  chapatis  can be made from the same weight of wheat with thi s process, 
without altering the thickness and size. 
Besides, the food is more tasteful, hygienic, and n utritive and easily digestible 
as the known and unknown constituents of food value  are retained and evenly 
distributed. As such, its consumption will add a ma rked amount of weight. 
Moreover, being easily digestible, it can be fed ev en to sick persons. Also, the 
process will facilitate storage of wheat,  bajri, jowar  and like grains for a longer 
time without decay, and will save wastage in transp ort of flour. Moreover, it 
will dispense with flour mills. 
Above all, this method will mean food for all. The adoption of this activated 
food in India will save every year about 8 to 12 mi llion tons of wheat costing 
approximately Rs. 300 to 450 crores at the rate of Rs. 360 per ton and a similar 
quantity of valuable  bajri  and  jowar.  As such it will eliminate the present 
scarcity of cereals and will make the future bright  for our famished people. 
M. A. CHADRAY 
Harijan,  14-7-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 149   
18. WHITE v. BROWN SUGAR 
A correspondent writing to the  British Medical Journal says: 
"Lest it should be thought that there is no satisfa ctory answer to the very pertinent 
questions about sugar asked by "A.F.S." in the  Journal  of November 17th (p. 928), may I be 
permitted to try my hand at a brief exposition of t he situation? The substances intended 
for man's consumption - the proteins, carbohydrates , fats, vitamins, salts and catalysts are 
in Nature associated with each other and with other  substances in such a way as to render 
them readily acceptable to the human economy.Jf, in  his presumptuous ignorance, man 
tampers with these substances by cooking them, conc entrating them, and refining them 
he may retain the main proximate principle, but he deprives it of the associates which 
render it tolerable to the human digestive organs, ff, for example, he concentrates a bison 
into a beaker he may get the major portion of the p rotein, but he will get very little else, 
save perchance a stomach-ache. That is an extreme c ase. That of sugar is almost as 
extreme though not quite. Pure sugar (C 12 H22 O11) is a very irritating substance, as may be 
seen from the eczema which is so apt to trouble the  hands and arms of grocers who handle 
it. In its natural state as in the cane or in fruit , sugar is associated with various substances 
which dilute and mitigate" the irritant properties of the pure chemical. The reason why 
brown soft sugar is more digestible than the white is that the brown is much less refined 
than the white; the browner it is the cruder and th e more digestible." 
M. D. 
Harijan,  15-2-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 150   
19. THE HAVOC OF SUGAR 
As regards the havoc wrought by sugar let me quote Dr. Plimner, Professor of 
Chemistry in the University of London : "Barker's a nd Hoffman's statistics show 
that cancer and diabetes are increasing all over th e world, and at the same 
time there has been a corresponding increase in the  consumption of white 
cereals and of sugar. Such a diet, with its shortag e of vitamin B, is known to be 
responsible for the preliminary troubles which may culminate in cancer or 
diabetes. Yet we put up sugar factories in this cou ntry, assisted by the 
Government! We ought to eat the whole sugar-cane or  the whole beet, or 
sweet fruits, but not the extracted sugar. We need the residues which are 
discarded.... If whole-meal flour were substituted for white flour and the 
amount of sugar reduced, there would be no shortage  of vitamin B in the diet 
of the people as a whole.... Sugar in its concentra ted form is not a natural 
food.... Sugar forms no part of the diet of the Ind ian hill tribe of the State of 
Hunza whom Dr. McCarrison describes as living on na tural foods and having the 
perfection of health and physique." 
When Dr. Aykroyd says that "sugar is almost all car bohydrates," he distinguishes 
it from jaggery which is rich in vitamin B, and 3.6  per cent protein, .06 per 
cent fat, .65 per cent mineral matter, .05 per cent  calcium, .38 per cent 
phosphorus, 11.40 per cent mgs. of iron, and theref ore to be always preferred 
to sugar which contains none of these necessary ing redients. 
M. D. 
Harijan,  19-6-1937 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 151   
20. BAD TEETH AND REFINED CARBOHYDRATES 
[The following note is sent by a medical friend. - Ed.] 
It has been observed in the past that the incidence  of dental caries in the West 
has increased in proportion to the increase in the consumption of sugar, 
candies, chocolates, etc. Sugar was regarded as the  arch-enemy of teeth, the 
decay being set down to the fermentation caused by the presence of sugar in 
the mouth. Later on the deficiency of vitamin D cam e to be regarded as a 
contributive factor in the causation of dental cari es. Lack of this vitamin leads 
to disturbance of calcium phosphorus metabolism in the body, and thus to 
deficient calcification of bones, teeth, etc. Moreo ver when vitamin D is 
deficient in diet various cereals have a decalcifyi ng influence on teeth in 
different degrees, oats being the worst and rice an d wheat being the least 
harmful in this respect. Recent research has, howev er, shown that it is not the 
excessive use of carbohydrates themselves nor the d eficiency of vitamin D 
alone that is responsible for the production of den tal caries. The use of refined 
carbohydrates, which is one of the features of the "spread of civilization', is an 
important factor. It has been experimentally proved  that crude carbohydrates 
contain a 'protective agent' which checks the proce ss of dental decay. This 
protective agent is lost in the process of refining . 
The British Medical Journal,  dated February 19 last, gives an account of the 
experiments of Osborne and his co-workers on the ba sis of which they have 
come to this conclusion. 
Undecayed normal teeth were obtained from patients who had been advised 
extraction for various causes. These were immersed in various substances which 
had been held in the mouth for two minutes and well  mixed with saliva; control 
being a mixture of saline and saliva. In one case t he substance used was crude 
cane sugar juice, in another refined sucrose. In st ill others whole wheatmeal 
and white flour, whole mealie meal and highly refin ed mealie meal (60-70 per 
cent), and whole mealie meal and 90 per cent of ext raction mealie meal, were 
respectively compared. It was found in each case th at the teeth in refined Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 152  material decayed more than those in unrefined and i n unrefined more than 
those in saline and saliva. 
The diet of the African Bantu was also inquired int o, to find out how civilization 
brings decay to Bantu teeth. It was found that dent al caries was associated 
with machine-ground mealie meal, white bread and re fined sugar. This further 
supports the conclusion arrived at from the above e xperiments that crude cane 
sugar and wheat are associated with some 'protectiv e agent' which inhibits the 
process of dental decay and which is destroyed in t he process of refining. 
Thanks to the importance attached to the cleaning o f the teeth the first thing 
in the morning and after every meal that has been h anded down to us from the 
earliest times, and to the use of foodstuffs in the ir unrefined and natural form, 
the incidence of bad teeth is much less in India th an among the people in the 
West. This splendid heritage of ours, however, is l ikely to be seriously 
imperiled, judging from the rate at which sugar and  flour mills are multiplying 
in this country, unless the evil is checked in time . 
Harijan , 30-7-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 153   
21. POTENTIALITIES OF PALM JAGGERY  
Chemical Analysis 
Ingredient  Kind of Jaggeries 
sucrose or   (1) Sugar-cane 71 p.c. 
(2) Date 57.57 p.c. 
Cane sugar   (3) Cocoanut 85 p.c. 
(4) Palmyra 83.8 p.c. 
This shows that the jaggery made from the palm juic es is akin to sugar-cane 
jaggery. 
Comparison of Date-Palm and Cane Jaggery  
Ingredients Jaggery  
  Cane  Date Palm  
  P.C.  P.C.  
1.  Moisture  6.86  4.59  
2.  Cane sugar  71.0  57.57  
3.  Glucose  15.72  16.0  
4.  Ash at 550° C  0.858  2.443  
5.  (Non -saccharine)  5.542  19.397  
 Organic Matter    
6.  Calciun  0.329  0.1707  
7.  Potassium  0.3032  1.104  
8.  Sodium  0.1  0.24  
9.  Magnesium  0.058  0.098  
Sjt. I. S. Amin, Chief Chemist of the Alembic Chemi cal Works of Baroda, says 
the following in his criticism of the foregoing com parative analysis made by 
him: Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 154  "The date palm  gur  compares favourably with the best known Kolhapur s ugar-
cane  gur.  The percentage of Ash, i.e. minerals in case of da te palm  gur  is 
greater than that of sugar-cane  gur.  In spite of high percentage of minerals in 
date palm  gur,  it will not be felt too saltish in food preparatio ns. Some sugar-
cane  gur  prepared in Charotar (Baroda State) is found to co ntain a very high 
percentage of minerals on account of the high conte nts of salts in irrigation 
water from wells. Higher mineral contents in gur  should not be a cause of 
prejudice against it. Potassium in the  gur  is fairly good. Potassium intake by 
human beings is important as it functions actively in the metabolisms of cell 
control and cell growth. Toddy (sweet)  gur is superior to sugar-cane  gur  on 
account of its containing vitamins B and B 1, as these vitamins are associated 
with the yeast cells and which are sufficiently pre sent in toddy (sweet). It is 
possible to maintain the activity of Vitamin B and B,, at a higher degree if rapid 
concentration in suitable shallow pans by skilful h and stirring is carried out at 
low heat." 
GAJANAN NAIK 
Harijan,  21-8-1937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 155   
22. NIRA - A NUTRITIOUS BEVERAGE 
Nira, the sweet unfermented fresh juice, either of cocoanut, date, palmyra or 
sago palm, has been a popular beverage in some part s of our country since 
times immemorial. On account of ignorance of its nu tritive value the people 
have not yet realized its dietetic importance. On t he contrary some of them 
belonging to the literate class, believing hearsay,  consider nira to be a 
deleterious drink. Others having curious conception s about intoxicating drinks 
dislike it and would not help to popularize it as a  national drink. They confuse 
it with toddy which is decidedly intoxicating. They  little realize that nira 
benefits the addict and the abstainer alike. The fr esh juice of the sugar-cane is 
a fashionable drink all over the countiy. But sugar -cane juice can become 
fermented like nira. A comparison of nira with suga r-cane juice from a nutritive 
point of view will help to remove misapprehensions about nira. No less an 
authority than the Director of Nutrition Research L aboratory, Indian Research 
Fund Association, (Coonoor S.I.), has made the foll owing analysis of the two 
beverages:  
Components   Nira Juice  Sugar -cane  
1. Moisture  per cent  84.72  75.9  
2. Protein  ’’  0.10  1.4  
3. Fat  ’’  0.17  0.6  
4. Mineral Matter  ’’  0.66  0.3  
5. Fibre  ’’  - - 
6. Carbohydrates  ’’  14.35  21.8  
From the analysis of the minerals the proportion of  the following important 
mineral salts has been determined: 
Salts   Nira  Sugar -cane  
1. Calcium  per cent  0.149  Nil  
2. Phosphorus  ’’  0.011  ’’  
3. Iron  ’’  0.26  ’’  
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 156   
Medicinal Uses of Nira  
In the  Indian Materia Medica  (By Shri K. M. Nadkarni), the following informatio n 
is given about the nira of each kind of palm beside s its valuable use as a raw 
material for gwr-making. 
Cocoanut Nira:  "The unfermented juice taken twice or thrice weekl y during 
pregnancy is said to have marked effect on the colo ur of the infant : it is said 
to be born of a fair complexion; i.e. if of dark pa rents, comparatively fair; if of 
lighter coloured parents, the offspring generally a ssumes European 
complexion." (P. 231) 
Date Palm:  "The fresh juice is a cooling beverage." (Page 662 ). 
Palmyra:  "The palmyra juice is diuretic, cooling, stimulant  and antiphlogistic 
when fresh." 
"The fresh saccharine juice obtained by excision of  the spadix early in the 
morning is cooling, also acts as a laxative taken r egularly for several mornings; 
it is useful for inflammatory affections and dropsy ; also in gastric catarrh and 
to check hiccup; as diuretic it is useful in gonorr hoea." 
Sago "The juice is internally nutritious and aphrod isiac; also laxative." 
GAJANAN NAIK 
Harijan,  7-1-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 157   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION III: SOYA BEANS AND GROUND-NUTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 158   
23. WARNING AGAINST SOYA BEANS 
A friend uttered a warning which has considerable s ignificance. He said: "I am 
quite in favour of the reforms you suggest. You may  put as much emphasis as 
you like on the importance of vitamins in our diet.  But please don't let in 
enemies unawares. Thus, for instance, one of the th ings much boomed about 
nowadays is soya beans. I agree that they are rich in proteins. But is it certain 
that our  mung, udad, massoor, chola, peas,  and such other legumes are very 
inferior to this exotic from China and Japan? I hav e an- impression that all 
these should be almost equal in value to the now fa mous soya bean which 
seems to belong to the same botanical order. And ev en assuming that the soya 
bean is richer in protein, why should we not be sat isfied with our indigenous 
beans? You, perhaps, do not see my difficulty. You agree that for articles of 
diet and clothing no country should be dependent on  any other. Our country 
was completely self-contained in both these half a century or more ago. 
Foreign cloth now floods our market, and foreign wh eat and foreign flour and 
foreign milk-powder and foreign butter now threaten  our independence in the 
matter of foodstuffs. Cannot we do without this stu ff which may ultimately cost 
us dear?" 
"I quite agree. But we have begun to grow soya bean s in various parts of the 
country, and there is no reason why we should not b e able to produce all the 
beans we need." 
"I know, I know. What we regard as successful exper iments are being made.  The 
Punjab Agricultural Reports summarizes results of the experiments carried out 
on Punjab experimental farms, and they are encourag ing. The produce of what 
is described as Pusa white and Punjab yellow and ot her varieties ranged from 9 
to 12 maunds an acre, and the report says that soya  beans may easily be tried 
as a substitute for cotton. I am certainly in favou r of these experiments. But I 
want you to realize that these experiments are made  on farms where they have 
hardly any regard to expenditure. I have no doubt t hat foreign countries can 
produce these beans much cheaper than we can, and j ust as foreign countries Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 159  have beaten us in the export trade of ground-nuts, which is now seriously 
threatened, I should not be surprised if, after soy a beans became the fashion in 
our country, our market were glutted with foreign s oya beans. I would, 
therefore, utter this note of warning for what it m ay be be worth." 
Our friend needs no assurance that the warning will  be heeded, and that not 
until the soya bean has been found a practical prop osition for our average 
farmer, working with his normal implements and reso urces, will it be rec-
ommended by us for general acceptance. 
M. D. 
Harijan , 24-8-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 160   
24. SOYA BEANS 
There are places where it is impossible to procure unadulterated ghee. It was 
partly with a view to getting rid of this eternal p roblem of getting good ghee 
that Gandhiji has been casting about for a substitu te for milk and ghee. The 
high protein and fat content of soya beans and thei r procurability on the 
premises, combined with the successful experiment o f Sjt. Narhar Bhave, 
encouraged Gandhiji to start the experiment in Maga nwadi last week. Oil and 
ghee and part of the wheat ration was cut out of th e dietary of those who 
joined the experiment and sub stituted by a soya be an ration equal in dietetic 
value. It is difficult yet to say anything about th e results of the experiments, 
but one might safely say that it is no longer the b ugbear that it once used to be 
because of the unpleasant taste of soya bean milk. We soak the beans for a few 
hours and steam-cook them and serve them whole. The  taste is similar to that 
of the bean known as  val  in Gujarat and Maharashtra and sometimes similar t o 
that of cooked ground-nut. As it swells to more tha n twice its size it is difficult 
to consume it as much as you do other beans and it requires a good deal of 
mastication. Let the reader also know that we have grown soya beans on our 
own ground plenty enough for our experiments. 
Whatever the result, conservatives may note certain  recent facts in the history 
of soya beans. The  Far Eastern Survey  for September 11 says that the United 
States has increased its soya bean acreage this yea r from 847,000 to over a 
million acres and its gathered beans will probably amount to 18 million bushels. 
"It may be assumed," says the paper, "that the grow ing interest in the soya bean 
and its products in the United States will be such as to increase both domestic 
production and consumption. With a steadily increas ing acreage, the demand 
for seed will continue. The crop is used largely fo r feed and fodder; the oil is 
increasingly important in industry in paints, soaps , linoleum and so on. Although 
for a long time in the Orient thj oil has been used  in cooking and the meal has 
been ust d some extent as a food, the soya bean is only beginnii "o figure in the 
American diet. An impressive number of foods - flou r and flour products, candy, Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 161  milks, oils, meat and margarine — in which it is us ed suggests a steady increase 
in its dietary use because of its high protein, fat  and vitamin contents." 
Harijan,  19-10-1935 
M. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 162   
25. SOYA BEAN RECIPES 
[A friend who is now in America sends the following  recipes. — Ed.] 
I have received many recipes from the Bureau of Hom e Economics, Washington, 
D.C., using fresh garden soya bean as well as their  products. I have not yet 
been able to prepare all of them for myself owing t o the scarcity of place here 
but they are worth trying and I like them. I, there fore, give some useful recipes 
here which I would tiy to prepare myself as soon as  I find a little kitchen for 
me. In case fresh garden soya beans are not availab le, the dried soya beans can 
be used after soaking them in water overnight. 
1. Scalloped Green Soya beans : 3 cups green soya beans (or dried soaked soya 
bean), water, 3 cups fresh milk, 6 tablespoons butt er or ghee, 6 tablespoons 
wheat flour, one teaspoon salt, pepper to taste, on e cup buttered bread 
crumbs. 
Steam or boil the beans until tender. Heat the milk  and thicken with the 
combined ghee and flour. Add this to the beans with  the seasonings. Place in a 
greased baking dish, cover with the bread crumbs, a nd bake until the mixture is 
heated through and the crumbs are brown. Tomatoes s erved with this dish 
make a good combination. 
2. Soya bean Salad :  One cup cooked soya beans '/., cup diced celeiy or  Mooli 
ki Gandar,  '/, cup diced cottage cheese, V 2 cup diced carrots; 1 teaspoon finely 
minced onions, ½ cup freshly prepared tomato juice.  Chill thoroughly and serve 
on crisp lettuce or cabbage. 
3. Salted Soya beans : (I have done this at a friend's house and I found t hem 
very tasteful.) Wash and soak the beans overnight, then drain and spread them 
till they become dry. Fry a small amount at a time in deep butter or ghee (I 
prepared in butter.) at 350° F. for 8 to 10 minutes . Drain on absorbent paper 
and sprinkle with salt while still warm. Here I use d the same variety 'Easy- 
cook'. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 163  4. Soya bean Vegetable Soup :  (I took this soup at one of the Cafetarias in 
Washington, D.C.) cup chopped celery (we can use sp inach), 4 teaspoons 
chopped onions, 3 cups water, 2 cups fresh tomatoes , one tablespoon salt, 
pepper to taste, 2 tablespoons wheat flour. Cook th e celery or spinach and 
onion in water for about 15 minutes. Add the tomato es, the soya bean pulp and 
the seasonings. Mix the flour with a little cold wa ter, stir into the mixture until 
thickened and boil for 5 minutes longer. 
5. Soya bean Sprouts :  (I am enjoying them on every other day with my lun ch.) 
Soya bean sprouts may be used either raw or cooked in salads. I am informed by 
a Chinese friend living next door here that soya be ans are used to a very 
considerable extent for this purpose by the Chinese , as soya bean sprouts are 
larger and firmer than those of most other legumes.  In China soya bean sprouts 
are said to be used as a home winter vegetable, for  the dried soya beans are 
sprouted easily in a short time under proper condit ions of heat and moisture. 
Under the proper guidance of my neighbour friend I prepared soya bean sprouts 
in my little room here, and from ten days after tha t I am now enjoying these 
sprouts every next day as a part of my delicious lu nch. The soya beans can be 
sprouted in a flower pot, or any container which ha s holes in it for drainage and 
which can be covered in case of strong sunlight or snow. The container should 
be large enough, for as the beans  sprout they swell to at least six times their 
original bulk.  Soak them overnight and next day put them in the c ontainer, 
cover, and leave them in a warn place. I place mine  (a flower pot wide enough 
to contain about two dozen sprouts) close to the st eam-heater in my room, and 
in the window when it is sunshine. The beans must b e moistened at least twice 
a day during the sprouting period which will be 6 t o 10 days. But fully grown 
sprouts will take nearly 15 to 20 days. I have alwa ys been impatient to eat 
them early. There can be another method of sproutin g these beans which can 
be tried. They should be spread one layer thick on a wet cloth and then should 
be covered with a heavy wet dark- coloured cloth wh ich should be kept damp 
by frequent sprinkling. Dr. W. J. Morse of the Bure au of Plant Industry of the 
U.S. Deptt. of Agriculture gives the following comp osition of the soya bean 
sprouts: Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 164   per cent   per cent  
Water  67.00  Nitrogenous Materials  14.73  
Fat  5.75  Carbohydrates  4.04  
Mineral Salts  3.40  0.26  ’’  
Dr. Kellogg in one of his books on dietetics says t hat soya bean sprouts are 
specially useful in the winter season because of th eir richness in vitamins. 
"They have been much used," says the doctor, "in co mbating beri-beri and other 
deficiency disorders." 
Soya bean Flour  : Soya bean flour is made by grinding either the w hole bean, 
preferably yellow seeded varieties, or the press-ca ke after the oil has been 
removed from the beans. The U.S. Department of Agri culture informs me that 
in invalid and infant dietetics soya bean flour has  been used for many years in 
the United States, although as yet it is not a comm on commercial product. 
Extensive tests of the Bureau of Home Economics, Wa shington, D.C. show that 
the soya bean flour can be successfully used in mak ing of bread, muffins, 
biscuits, crackers and gens. About one-fourth soya bean flour and three-fourths 
wheat flour is the proper proportion. "This additio n of soya bean flour," says the 
Scientific Food and Nutrition Division of United St ates, "gives a more nutritious 
article of food with a rich nut-like flavour." When  a special food of low starch 
content is desired, as for diabetic persons, a larg er proportion of soya bean 
flour is used with some form of gluten substituted for the wheat flour. The 
report of the Farmers' Bulletin 1917 of the U.S. Ag ricultural Department is that 
on account of its high food value, as well as the p alatable products made from 
it, soya bean flour is finding increasing favour as  a foodstuff in North America 
and Europe. 
Soya bean Sauce:  "Soy or shoyu sauce is a dark- brown liquid prepar ed from a 
mixture of cooked and ground soya beans, roasted an d pulverized wheat (barley 
is sometimes used), salt, and water. This mass is i noculated with a culture 
known as rice ferment (ASPERGILLUS ORIYZAE) and lef t from 6 to 18 months in 
vats or casks to ferment. Soy sauce is largely used  by Oriental people in Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 165  cooking, as a relish or condiment to increase the f lavour and palatability of the 
diet, and as an aid in the assimilation of food."  (Soy Bean Utilization,  page 5) 
One factory in the United States manufactures soy s auce from domestic-grown 
beans and has found a large commercial outlet throu ghout the country. Those 
who have used this soy sauce say that in odour and taste this sauce suggests a 
good quality of meat extract. 
Soya bean Milk  : Dr. E.  J. Kingsley of the U.S. Food Nutrition Division wri tes 
that soya bean milk, although not equal to cow's or  goat's milk in food value, 
may be used as a beverage or in any recipe that cal ls for milk. Where there are 
few dairy animals, soya bean milk is an important f ood for children and 
practically the only substitute for milk. It is sai d that in France and England 
soya milk is quite extensively in use. In America a ttempts are being made by 
some food specialists to manufacture soya milk powd er on commercial scale. In 
one of the circulars recently issued by the Bureau of Home Economics, it is 
announced that soya bean milk contains most of the same food substances as 
that of the cow's milk but only one- sixth as much calcium, less fat, and no 
lactose (milk sugar). Its protein, though more "eff icient" than any other 
vegetable protein, is less in quantity and not equa l in quality to the proteins in 
milk of animal origin. Soya bean contains more wate r, and therefore less solids 
than cow's milk. Soya bean milk, according to Adolf  and Kiang, has the 
following percentage composition: 
 Protein 4.22  Fat 1.87 
Salts 0.40  Water 93.51 
The composition of the milk will vary, of course, w ith the amount of water used 
in its preparation. From the above composition it i s clear that it has no sugar 
and is very poor in salts, containing only half the  amount of salts found in cow's 
milk. 
Yellow seeded varieties of soya bean are the best t o use for making soya bean 
milk and there are two methods of making this milk that I have noted here: Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 166  1. Wash the soya bean and soak overnight. Remove th e skins and grind the 
beans very fine. Put the ground beans in a cheese c loth bag, in a bowl of 
lukewarm water, using three quarts of water to each  pound of dried beans. 
Work thoroughly with the hands for 5 to 10 minutes.  Wring the bag of pulp until 
dry. This milky emulsion thus obtained should be bo iled on a low fire for 30 
minutes, stirring frequently to prevent scorching. Add sugar and salt to taste. 
Keep in cold place. 
2. Wash the soya beans. Let them dry thoroughly, cr ack them, then grind them 
fine. To each pound of beans add 3 quarts of water,  and soak for two hours. 
Then boil for 20 minutes, stirring constantly, then  strain through a cloth. Add 
sugar and salt to taste. Keep in a cold place. 
After separating the liquid from the solid material , the residue is still very rich 
in nutritive substances and can be dried and used f or cattle food or made into 
flour for human food. 
Soya bean Cheese : (TO FU): This cheese-like preparation of soya bean milk I 
found in Chinese and Japanese restaurants here. It is called TO FU. The method 
of its preparation is as follows : 
Prepare soya milk as described above. When it is bo iled add magnesium or 
lactic acid or one-half per cent solution of citric  acid in proportion to one-fifth 
of the volume of milk, stirring all the time. This milky emulsion soon becomes a 
greyish white curd which should be strained through  a cloth to let out the 
yellowish water liquid. Then dip the cloth in cold water several times to wash 
away the excess acid. Drain for about an hour and p ress out the remaining 
liquid. Season with salt and store in a cold place until firm enough to cut. TO 
FU is used in soups and salads and in other great v arieties of Japanese and 
Chinese cookeiy. This TO FU is considered to be a v aluable thing for the 
diabetics. Adolf and Kiang give the following perce ntage composition of TO FU: 
Protein 10.22 Fat 3.66 Salts 1.09 Extract 4.13 Wate r 80.90 
Soya bean Oil :  In addition to their food value, soya beans contai n a valuable 
oil which is utilized to a very considerable extent  in North America. In Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 167  Manchuria, it is said, the soya bean is largely gro wn for oil and meal and is 
always relied upon by the Manchurian fanner as a ca sh crop. There are 
different processes or methods that can be used in the manufacture of oil from 
the soya bean. Here in America, I have heard that t he oil is extracted from the 
ground beans by some chemical solvent such as benzo l, naptha or ether. But I 
should think that the same methods of oil extractin g that are used for cotton-
seeds and linseed will do in extracting the oil fro m the soya beans too. Soya 
bean oil belongs to the group of drying oils in Ame rica. It can be tried as a 
substitute for either linseed or cotton seed oil, s pecially in soap- making. One 
of the Farmer's Bulletins published by the Departme nt of Agriculture here 
writes that in the manufacture of soft soap, soya b ean oil serves as an almost 
complete substitute for linseed oil, but unless it is hydro- genated it can but 
partially replace cotton seed oil in the manufactur e of hard soaps. Here in 
North America paint manufacturers are using soya be an oil as a substitute for 
part of the linseed oil in certain kinds of paints.  It is said that one of the 
principal uses of soya bean oil in China is food. O ther trade uses of soya bean 
oil, in America, are in the manufacture of varnish,  printing ink, paints, candles, 
water-proof goods, and for lighting, lubricating an d rubber substitutes. 
Soya bean Cake :  Soya bean cake, after processing the beans for oil , is 
considered here in the Agriculture Department to be  a most valuable product 
and has the widest usefulness. It is said that in E uropean countries and in North 
America soya bean cake is used almost entirely for feeding purposes. It is 
considered to be highly concentrated and nutritious  and is relished by all kinds 
of livestock. In China, I am told, it is used very extensively for fertilizing 
purposes and is also recognized as a valuable feed for working animals and for 
fattening stock. Like cotton-seed cake, soya bean c ake contains some phospho-
rus and potash, a large portion of which is availab le, but its principal value in 
fertilizers is as a source of nitrogen. I give belo w the composition of the soya 
bean cake with reference to fertilizing constituent s and a comparison with 
cotton-seed cake. This analysis has been furnished by the Bureau of Chemistry 
and Soils of U.S.A. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 168  Constituents (per cent) 
Product Nitrogen Ammonia Phosphoric Potash 
   acid 
Soya bean (seed) 6.51 7.90 1.36 1.82 
Soya bean cake  7.72  9.37 1.36 1.82 
Soya bean cake*  7.18  8.72  2.37 2.92 
Cotton-seed cake  6.79  8.24  2.88 1.77 
Harijan,  28-12-1935 & 4-1-1936 
 
* This analysis is of the Solvent Process Cake. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 169   
26. A SOYA BEAN BOOK 
A fair amount of literature has sprung up on the cu ltivation, properties and use 
of the soya bean, and Shri F. S. Kale, Food Survey Officer of the Baroda State, 
has written an exhaustive book on the soya bean + which is a kind of 
compendium on the subject of its cultivation and us e. 
The readers of  Harijan  know very well by now that the soya bean is the ri chest 
of all beans in proteins and fat and fat-soluble vi tamins, and also know 
something of the experiments we made with the bean here in Maganwadi. 
Perhaps we were little fitted to pronounce upon the  dietetic value of the bean, 
for in spite of our claim to do manual labour we ar e in no sense of the word 
manual labourers, and the bean is pre-eminently of use for those who labour 
hard with their hands and feet and those of our poo r who cannot afford milk 
and ghee. A bean rich in proteins and fat is hardly  the food for those with 
sedentary habits, but it is an effective article to  supplement the defective 
dietaries of India, and added in proper proportion to wheat-flour it is good for 
all. Unfortunately, we in India, neither Government  nor public bodies, have 
made anything like experiments worth the name and h ave to fall back on 
results obtained in foreign lands. Sjt. Kale says t hat there is a Soya Bean 
Research Institute at Moscow and that as part of th e 'Five Year Plan', Russia has 
set aside vast tracts of land for its cultivation. "An exhibition of Soya bean 
food," says Sjt. Kale, "was held where 300 varietie s of soya bean dishes were 
prepared including cake, pastry, salads, biscuits, chocolates, toffee, tea, 
coffee, cutlet, meat substitutes, soup, etc. It was  served to the representatives 
of trade union factories, engineers, Soviet Press, and the Red Army. The food 
was unanimously pronounced to be excellent." "Studi es," he adds, "made by 
Osborne at Barbara's Hospital show that after a mea l of soya bean the alkalinity 
of the blood is increased." Soya bean food neutrali zes the acidity in the blood. 
It is very important from the medical point of view  as the normal alkaline state 
is the state of highest health and physiological fu nctioning while the acid state 
is a pathological condition. Protein from meat incr eases the amount of uric acid Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 170  in the system and thus creates rheumatism, kidney t roubles and gout. The 
protein from soya bean on the other hand neutralize s uric acid and does not 
produce any disease. It is said that gout is unknow n in China. "It was found at 
the laboratories of Dr. Sherman, Professor of Food Chemistry at Columbia 
University, that the proteins of the meat and fish as well as eggs and grains are 
acid- producing while those of the soya bean are al kalizing in their effects." 
This would point to the value of the soya bean as a n effective substitute for 
meat food. 
The chapter on the cultivation of the soya bean is of great practical value, 
inasmuch as it is based on experiments made by the only State in India - the 
Baroda State — on a considerable scale. It can be s own in any season and is a 
summer as well as a winter crop, care being taken t o sow it after monsoon 
where rainfall is excessive, and to sow it in the m onsoon where the rainfall is 
from 30 to 50 inches. The author describes in detai l experiences of individual 
cultivators in Baroda and C.P., which should be of great help to intending 
cultivators of the bean. It is regarded as a useful  agent for improving the soil, 
as it transfers the nitrogen taken from the air to the soil and makes it rich and 
fertile, and as a livestock feed it is supposed to be of great value. Says Sjt. 
Kale: "Soya bean hay is very nutritious as a livest ock feed on account of its high 
content of digestible nitrogen. The comparative fee ding tests carried on in 
America with clover, alphafa, cowpea and lucern sho w the superiority of soya 
bean fodder to all other in point of production of milk and butter. It has been 
our experience that cows give more milk and put on more weight when fed on 
soya bean hay. It has been found at the Baroda agri cultural experimental 
station that the bullocks showed great strength and  agility and put on more 
weight when they were fed on soya bean hay. 
As an article of diet I have already spoken about i t. There are two or three 
things which are worth noting as of general interes t. There is no doubt about 
the very high protein-value of the soya bean, and i t is, therefore, a very 
valuable article of diet for those who do hard manu al labour. But we are apt to 
exaggerate this value. One has to take into conside ration the biological value of 
its protein in comparison to that of the proteins o f other articles of food. Thus Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 171  the biological value of the soya bean protein accor ding to Dr. K. P. Basu is 56 
(taking the value of milk protein as 100), that of fish protein is 98 and meat 
protein is 105 and according to Dr. Aykroyd that of  the soya bean protein is 64, 
of egg 94, of whole milk 84 and of rice 65. Dr. Ayk royd is definitely of opinion 
that "soya bean protein, when fed as the sole sourc e of protein in the diet, is 
definitely inferior in biological value to milk and  egg proteins, but human diet 
usually contains a variety of protein derived from different foods and there is 
evidence that soya bean protein can efficiently sup plement cereal proteins. On 
the practical side my own opinion is that soya bean  is a valuable food, when 
used in comparatively small quantities to supplemen t the largely cereal diets in 
India." Sjt. Kale, who is also a food expert, empha sizes the value of the bean as 
a supplement to wheat flour (15 to 20 per cent only  to be added), as it is 
particularly rich in fat, mineral salts and vitamin s. General Sir Robert 
McCarrison advocates "the use of 'soya bean milk' f or infants and young 
children, who cannot obtain a sufficiency of mother 's or cow's or other milk", 
and Sjt. Kale gives the photograph of his own baby who was fed on soya bean 
milk, with great success, for nearly two months. Bu t for an authoritative 
pronouncement experiments carried on over an extens ive area and for a suffi-
cient period are necessary'- What Sjt. Kale says ab out the capacity of soya bean 
flour to improve the quality of our chapati  or  roti  seems to be highly likely: 
"Soya flour will enhance the nutritive quality of I ndian  rot is.  Less ghee or oil 
will be required, as there is 20 per cent of fat in  soya flour. The palatibility of  
roti  will be much better than the ordinary  roti. The texture and the colour of  
roti  will improve. The keeping qualities of  roti  will improve, and it will last for 
a longer time without being spoiled. By adding soya  flour 15 to 25 per cent to 
our ordinary  roti  it will not only improve in nutritive quality, but  it will also 
improve in digestibility. There will also be a savi ng of oil and ghee on account 
of the sufficient fatty content in soya flour. It w ill keep  roti  or  chapati  soft." 
M. D. 
Harijan,  19-9-1936 
 
+ The Soya Bean : Its Value in Dietetics, Cultivatio n and Use:  By F. S. Kale. To be had of : (1) New 
Book Co., Kitab Mahal, 192, Hornby Road, Bombay. (2) I. P. Parekh, 192, Hornby Road, Bombay. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 172   
27. THE UTILITY OF THE GROUND-NUT 
The following is the essence of Dr. A.T.W. Simeons'  long article on the ground-
nut. 
He opines that the low stamina of our people is pri marily due to lack of 
protein, vitamins and salts in our diet. During the  Bengal famine it was proved 
that the life of the victim of starvation depended more on administering 
protein than on starch. He maintains that if more p rotein could be provided, 
the net result on the national nutritional value wo uld be infinitely better than 
of more cereals. Ground-nut flour contains over 50 per cent protein and is 
richer in it than any other known vegetable substan ce and very edible. An acre 
of ground-nuts can produce many times the quantity of protein than an acre of 
wheat, millet or rice. And yet we are not making fu ll use of it. 45 per cent of 
the ground-nut crop is taken for the production of oil. "What happens to the 
remaining 55 per cent? If we can eat whole nuts, wh y cannot we eat them 
minus the oil? The economist answers, 'because we n eed the oil cake for 
feeding our cattle and for manuring our sugar-cane and rice fields.' "Dr. 
Simeons argues that to use an edible protein for th is purpose is criminal waste 
when we have inedible substances like dung, night-s oil or guano to enrich our 
fields. "If we fertilize a sugar-cane field with gr ound-nut cake, every grain of 
protein we plough into the earth is lost; because s ugar contains no protein at 
all — not to mention the loss of 10 per cent of res idual oil in the cake, the 
vitamins and salts.... We feed oil cake to our milk ing cattle. The milk output 
increases and milk is an excellent food, but if we feed a cow 10 lb. of nut 
protein, it is doubtful if this will produce even 1 ½. lb. of milk protein. Is it 
worth it when we can achieve about the same result with cottonseed and other 
inedible products?" 
Dr. Simeons quotes Prof. B. G. S. Acharya who, afte r controlled rat feeding 
experiments, has shown that groundnut protein was f ound to have a high 
biological value. Experiments, he says, have also e stablished the high di-
gestibility coefficient of ground-nut protein. "It ranks with the microbial protein Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 173  of yeast and closely approximates animal protein as  found in milk, eggs and 
mutton." 
"Clean ground-nut oilcake contains over 50 per cent  of high grade protein, 13 
per cent more than mutton, so that with every ton o f oilcake that is ploughed 
into the field, we are using the nutritional value of a flock of 50 sheep or 
50,000 eggs or 15,000 seers of milk in protein alon e." 
Besides protein the ground-nut contains fat, starch  and minerals so that with 
the addition of a little extra starch and vitamin C , it is a complete food in 
itself. The most important vitamin deficiency in In dia is of the B complex which 
has a profound effect on the health and longevity o f the people. The ground-
nut is very rich in vitamin B complex, particularly  in vitamin B,, Nicotinic acid 
and riboflavin, which are the most important factor s. Mr. Kincaid, a missionary 
worker in a remote village of Kolhapur, testified t hat the children of his school 
have thrived on a cake made of clean hand-picked gr ound-nut. The villagers 
have overcome their prejudices and use it as a dail y addition of 1/2-1/5 portion 
to their usual cereals. Diabetics particularly have  been thankful for the 
increased bread ration it enables them to enjoy. Ch ildren enjoy bread made 
from flour mixed with ground-nut flour, many adults  prefer it with a little salt. 
Ground-nut flour can also be used for pastry and sw eetmeats. 
The controlled price of commercial ground-nut is Rs . 75 per ton. Edible ground-
nut will be more costly. But Dr. Simeons opines tha t even if the price is higher 
than the commercial product, it will still be well below the cost of the common 
cereals. 
From the manufacturer's point of view too, the swit chover to edible cake will 
not dislocate either the oil or the ground-nut mark et. 
"India is estimated to produce about 1½ million ton s of ground-nut. Thus 7 lakhs 
of tons of the finest food can be made available fr om this crop." The protein 
value would be equivalent to 3500 crores of eggs or  1000 crores of seers of milk 
or 350 lakhs of sheep. The annual loss of starch, f at, minerals and vitamins is in 
addition and all due to the wrong use of this valua ble nut. 
A. K. 
Harijan,  30-6-1946 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 174   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION IV : FRUIT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 175   
28. THE MERITS OF  AMLA  
Vitamin C or ascorbic acid, the vitamin which preve nts scurvy, is found in fresh 
fruits and vegetables. Among vegetables, the green leafy varieties are the best 
sources. When pulses and cereal grains are allowed to sprout this vitamin C is 
formed in the grain and in the growing green sprout s.  Amla  (Indian gooseberry) 
grows abundantly in all Indian forests and is obtai nable in almost unlimited 
quantities from January to April. The fresh juice c ontains nearly twenty times 
as much vitamin C as orange juice, and a single fru it is equivalent in vitamin C 
content to one or two oranges. It is possible to pr eserve  Amla  without losing 
much of the vitamin, for unlike other fresh fruits or vegetables it contains 
substances which practically protect the vitamin fr om destruction on heating 
and- drying.  Amla  is included as an ingredient in many Ayurvedic med icines and 
tonics. It was found to be a most effective cure fo r scurvy in 1940 in the Hissar 
famine area. The above useful information is gleane d from The Indian Medical 
Gazette  of March 1942. 
A. K. 
Harijan,  12-4-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 176   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION V : MILK  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 177   
29. SKIMMED MILK AND BUTTERMILK 
[I had addressed a number of questions to Dr. Aykro yd, Director of Nutrition Research, 
Coonoor, and to Sjt. Satis Chandra Dasgupta, on the  advantages and disadvantages of 
skimmed milk and about making it popular. Both of t hem have kindly favoured me with 
their considered opinions which will speak for them selves.- M. D.] 
1. 
Coonoor, the 18th May, 1937 
Dear Mr. Desai, 
I am sending under separate cover two copies of Hea lth Bulletin No. 23,  The 
Nutritive Value of Indian Foods and the Planning of  Satisfactory Diets , with a 
reprint of a scientific paper about skimmed milk, e tc. 
You ask a number of questions about the nutritive v alue of separated milk and 
buttermilk. Separated or skimmed milk is of high nu tritive value, since it 
contains all the valuable elements present in whole  milk except fat and vitamin 
A. Whole milk of good quality is to be preferred to  separated milk because it 
contains vitamin A, but there is no question that t he regular consumption of 
separated milk very greatly improves the health and  development of Indian 
children fed on "typical' Indian diets based largel y on rice or millet, containing 
no milk or eggs, and very small quantities of veget ables. An important 
advantage of skimmed milk, of course, is that it is  cheaper than fresh whole 
milk. 
We have used imported dried skimmed milk in a numbe r of experiments. 
Children receiving 1 oz. of dried skimmed milk powd er daily for 3-4 months 
showed greater increases in height and weight than children on a precisely 
similar diet without milk. The general condition of  the milk-fed children 
showed remarkable improvement. The milk was given i n liquid form, roughly 8 
times its weight of water being added to the milk p owder to 'reconstruct' liquid 
milk. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 178  There can be no doubt that liquid separated milk wo uld produce the same 
effect as dried powder, which is after all only the  former reduced to powder by 
a mechanical process. Such milk should on no accoun t be allowed to go to 
waste. Only a little organization is required to ar range for its distribution to 
school children, etc. 
With regard to taste, we have found no difficulty w hatever in persuading 
children to drink reconstructed skimmed milk, or, i n another experiment now in 
progress, liquid separated milk. They seem to like it. I cannot agree that fresh 
separated milk has a bitter taste. I would suggest that any objection to the 
taste of such milk might be overcome by the additio n of a little sugar. It could 
also be consumed mixed with cereals, in the form of  pudding or porridge. 
The transport of liquid separated milk is attended with the same diffculties as 
the transport of whole milk. Milk is a perishable a rticle of food. Boiling or 
pasteurization to some degree extend the period dur ing which milk remains fit 
for consumption. The only way to preserve milk is t o turn it into cheese, or to 
condense, evaporate or powder it. The 'khoa' of Nor thern India, used in the 
making of sweetmeats, is an evaporated milk product  which seems to keep for 
some time. 
The distribution of liquid separated milk would hav e to be undertaken in the 
same way as that of liquid whole milk - i.e. on a d aily basis. Boiling before 
distribution would cause no serious loss in nutriti ve value. 
'Buttermilk' is a term which has several meanings i n India. 'Buttermilk' made 
from curds — i.e., soured milk from which a good pr oportion of the fat has been 
removed - has roughly the same nutritive value as s eparated milk, provided no 
water is added. If, as often happens, large quantit ies of water are added to 
'buttermilk' of this nature, the resulting product is still called 'buttermilk' but of 
course its food value has been greatly lowered. A t hird form of 'buttermilk' is 
the liquid which separates out when cream is churne d into butter. This type of 
"buttermilk' is of relatively low nutritive value, since most of the valuable 
elements remain in the original milk from which the  cream was obtained. It Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 179  should, however, not be waited, since it has some f ood value and is better than 
no milk at all. 
One important fact should be borne in mind. Separat ed or skimmed milk is not 
suited to form the sole food of infants, it must be  supplemented by some food 
substance rich in vitamin A - e.g. cod-liver oil. I t may, however, be used with 
advantage to supplement the diets of young children  past infancy when such 
diets are largely based on cereals and contain few vegetables and no animal 
protein. Separated milk in such circumstances is mu ch better than no milk at 
all. Our own experiments have demonstrated its valu e as a food for older 
children. It would also be a very useful addition t o the diet of expectant and 
nursing mothers. 
I have no objection to your publishing this letter in the Harijan. 
Yours sincerely, 
W. R. AYKROYD 
 
2 
Buttermilk contains all the ingredients of whole mi lk except butter and vitamin 
A. If I were to valuate boiled milk in which vitami n C is destroyed, I would put 
the following values on the ingredients: 
a) Butter and vitamin A    8 annas 
b) Proteids    5  ”  
c) Milk, sugar and mineral salts and vitamin B  3  ” 
If, therefore, whole milk is valued at 16 annas, bu ttermilk which contains items 
B and C should be valued at 8 annas. As a matter of  fact it is sold 
proportionately for much less and is therefore a ch eap but valuable article of 
diet for poorer people who cannot obtain whole milk . Where butter is produced 
on a manufacturing scale by separating cream from m ilk, the buttermilk is 
sometimes a drag on the manufacturer. Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 180  1. Dahi. Buttermilk can be made into dahi and sold locally. There is a limited 
sale for such dahi where large quantities of milk a re handled. Where there are 
cheap means of communication such dahi is transport ed to distant places also. 
2. Chhana. By souring buttermilk with sour dahi  or acid substances like citric 
acid or alum the proteins are precipitated. This is  chhana . Chhana  is also 
obtained by acidifying whole milk. But then that chhana  brings down the fats 
with it also. Chhana  from buttermilk is inferior to that from whole mil k and 
sells cheaper. Manufacture of chhana  is one of the common commercial uses of 
buttermilk. It can be carried longer distances than  dahi  but fetches less value. 
The sugar and mineral substances ‘C’  are left in the water after separation of 
chhana . Chhana  is, therefore, less nutritious than buttermilk- dahi' and has only 
5 annas value as against 8 annas of buttermilk- dahi . 
3. Casein. Buttermilk will yield casein which is an other form of  chhana.  If there 
is no demand for  chhana or  dahi,  casein can be made from buttermilk. 
4. Condensed Milk. Buttermilk can be best populariz ed by being condensed and 
sold as condensed skimmed milk. Tons of 'Cowshed' b rand skimmed condensed 
milk are imported. As I found by experiment, conden sed milk can be made in 
cottages. There are difficulties to be overcome in proper packing, but they are 
not insurmountable. 
Buttermilk is a dangerous substance if it or its pr oducts are passed off as whole 
milk. Dishonest persons separate some cream from mi lk and sell the partially 
separated milk as whole milk or as whole-milk- dahi  or whole-milk- chhana.  The  
dahi  or  chhana  of towns is frequently made from milk from which c ream has 
been separated partially. 
5. Chhach. Chhach  is to buttermilk as dahi is to whole milk. When bu tter is 
taken out of whole-milk- dahi  chhach  is left. When butter or cream is taken out 
of milk, and the buttermilk is converted into dahi , it is equivalent to chhach . 
The appearances of such dahi , and chhach  are different but the substances are 
same. If buttermilk- dahi  is churned, it at once takes the appearance of and  
becomes indistinguishable from and identical with chhach . Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 181  For making milk-powder from whole milk or buttermil k special vacuum and 
steam heating machinery are to be used. Milk-powder  cannot be made in 
cottages. 
S. C. DASGUPTA 
Harijan , 29-5-1937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 182   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION VI : GHEE AND OIL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 183   
30. EDIBLE OILS 
The most common edible oils of India are: 1. coconu ts, 2. sesame  (til),  3. 
mustard, 4. ground-nut, and 5. linseed. 
In this article I shall briefly discuss the food va lues of these oils in comparison 
with those of animal fats, as well as their compara tive food values. 
Animal Fats and Vegetable Oils  
Both these classes of substances can be put under t he common name fat. Fats 
are fuel foods, and in this respect vegetable oils are as good as animal fats; 
that is, weight for weight vegetable fats supply th e same amount of energy as 
animal fats (e.g., ghee). 
As for digestibility, the vegetable fats are well a ssimilated in the human 
system. 
But animal fats are superior to vegetable fats in o ne important respect, that is, 
with regard to their vitamin contents. Vegetable oi ls contain very little or no 
fat soluble vitamin (A or D), whereas butter contai ns a fair quantity of those 
vitamins. Fish liver oils like halibut oil and cod- liver oil are very good sources of 
those vitamins. It must be mentioned here that ghee  cannot be placed in the 
same category with butter. Ghee in this respect is inferior to butter and 
contains little or no vitamin depending on its meth od of preparation. The very 
inferior vitamin content of vegetable oils is more than counterbalanced by its 
cheapness. Very few people in India can afford to t ake butter. But no one need 
worry about it. There are cheaper sources of these vitamins. 
In a sunny country like India vitamin D is easily a vailable. Human skin contains 
ergosterol which on exposure to sunlight is convert ed into vitamin D. Vegetable 
oils on irradiation or exposure to sunlight also gi ve rise to vitamin D as they 
contain ergosterol.* So rubbing the body with veget able oils and subsequent 
exposure to sunlight is the cheapest and best way o f getting vitamin D. It is an 
ancient custom in Bengal to rub the whole body of i nfants with mustard oil and Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 184  then expose them to sunlight in the morning for som e time, which is highly 
beneficial. 
It is doubtful whether there is vitamin A at all in  the vegetable world. But they 
contain carotene which is converted into vitamin A in the human as well as 
other animal systems. Raw carrots and spinach are e xcellent sources of 
carotene. Raw cabbage, yellow corn, peas and tomato es are good sources. 
Sweet pumpkin, which is produced in large quantitie s in Bengal and which the 
poor villagers of Bengal take in fair amount, conta ins carotene. Other good 
sources are ripe mangoes and papayas. Poor people n eed not, therefore, rush 
to butter for vitamin A. 
So considering the comparative prices of butter and  ghee and vegetable oils I 
have no hesitation to say that for poor men vegetab le oils are a fair substitute.  
 
Comparative Food Values  
The fat contents of cocoanut, sesame, ground-nut, m ustard and linseed oils are 
practically the same. 98-99 per cent of them is fat . And all these fats supply 
the same amount of energy to the body. I have alrea dy said that all these oils 
are well assimilated in the human system, so the qu estion of digestibility is not 
of much importance. Habit is a great factor in this . A Bengali would not like the 
smell of linseed oil at all. He would rather go wit hout any oil than take linseed 
oil. Whereas those who are not accustomed to mustar d oil would find it rather 
irritating to the stomach on account of its sulphur -containing substance. But 
when one can accustom himself to any of these oils there is no difficulty of 
digestion, and fat values of all of them are practi cally identical. 
But there is one point to be considered, i.e., the non- fatty portion of these 
oils. They have not been thoroughly investigated fr om the nutritive point of 
view. Modern researches on vitamins have shown the importance of minute 
traces of substance in our diet. So it would be no surprise if one day scientists 
discover something in any one of those oils to decl are its superiority over 
others. I am only hinting at the unknown possibilit ies which have up-till now not 
been brought to light. Minute traces of metallic co mpounds of manganese, Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 185  nickel, cobalt and other rarer metals may have grea t biological values which 
are still unknown to us. Ash of the linseed oil con tains .0006 per cent 
manganese. 
In the present state of our knowledge we can only s ay that all these oils are 
more or less equally good and ore may take any one of them he finds cheap and 
suitable to his taste. 
In conclusion 1 should like to say one word about t he hydrogenated oils like 
cocogem, etc. They are known as vegetable ghee. The se hydrogenated oils are 
inferior to the natural oils in point of digestibil ity. And whatever little vitamin 
they may contain is also lost during hydrogenation.  I am, therefore, definitely 
of opinion that hydrogenated oils should never be t aken specially as they are 
constlier than common vegetable oils. It would amou nt to buying inferior stuff 
at greater cost. 
P. C. GHOSH 
Harijan,  14-9-1935 
 
* Exposure 'should be given in shallow flat dishes to have maximum surface exposed to 
sunlight ensuring maximum conversion to vitamin. Bu t this best be done if the body is 
rubbed with oil and exposed to sunlight. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 186   
31. BLINDNESS AT A PRICE 
We had already written about the evil effects of vanaspati  ghee. Sir S. S. 
Sokhey, Director of the Haffkine Institute, Bombay,  states that experiments 
conducted in the Haffkine Institute on the nutritiv e values of hydrogenated oil 
show that - 
1) the consumption of hydrogenated oils resulted in in ferior growth; 
2) their consumption interfered with the absorption of  calcium in the body; 
and 
3) their consumption resulted in a change in the fat c omposition of the body. 
Recently, in the Council of State, Dr. Rajendrapras ad stated that the Research 
Institute at Izzatnagar had reported that the use o f  vanaspati  was bad for 
health and affected the eyesight. Experiments condu cted on rats show that the 
third generation of them become blind. In the light  of these scientific 
experiments one would have thought that any Governm ent with the welfare of 
the people in their mind would have banned  vanaspati  out of the country and 
locked up the  vanaspati  manufacturers as anti-social beings. But India is 
tolerant even to the extent of hugging its evil-doe rs. 
We understand that the Government is contemplating provision for the 
detection of adulteration of ghee with vanaspati  by adding 5 per cent basic oil 
and colouring it. We fear that this will be absolut ely of no use.  Vanaspati is 
generally made of ground-nut oil or cotton-seed oil . The addition of these oils 
in a small proportion will be of no avail for detec tion. Scientists are of opinion 
that at least 10 per cent of sesame oil  (til  oil) is the least amount that can be 
effective, and no other oils would be useful. Besid es the colouring can be 
removed at a very small cost. One wonders why there  should be the need for all 
this circumventing of the issue. 
It is clear that the expenditures incurred by these  manufacturers are of no avail 
to the nation as a whole. They add nothing to the e xisting fat of the country. If 
anything, they decrease their assimilability by hyd rogenation and to the extent Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 187  they are destructive of the fat stock of the land. The fresh oils that are 
produced at comparatively low rates are acquired by  these factories and at a 
cost which is often double the original cost; they destroy the natural food 
values and make the nation subject to various defic iency diseases, and for this 
disservice the nation has to pay in the utilization  of its man-power, capital and 
human effort. We are amazed at our action when we s it down calmly and think 
over the pros and cons in regard to this question. 
In so far as adulteration of dairy ghee is the main  objective of this industry it is 
a direct hit on the dairy industry. In a country wh ich is largely vegetarian, 
reduction of ghee consumption, however caused, will  undermine the health of 
the people. The argument that Western nations use m argarine will not hold in 
our country. Margarine is used like butter over sli ces of bread and in a 
temperate climate the hydrogenation needs to be car ried out to a very little 
extent. In our country such a treatment will still leave the product in a liquid 
state. Besides Europeans obtain animals fats from v arious other sources as they 
are meat eaters and their cooking is  done mainly with lard (animal fat). Hence, 
any comparison with other countries is fallacious. 
India's is a cow-centred economy. We need cows for the plough, for transport, 
for carriage and for yielding milk. Hence, any meas ure that adversely affects 
the maintenance of the cow will also adversely affe ct our national economy. A 
correct view of the affairs in the proper perspecti ve would make  vanaspati  
production equivalent to cow slaughter, and we hope  at least those who 
venerate the cow will look at this aspect of the qu estion conscientiously and 
refrain from an industry which is based on pure ava rice, ignoring all 
considerations of national welfare. 
From the economic point of view the  vanaspati  mills in so far as they enter the 
market for vegetable oils tend to put up the prices  of ordinary oils. So the 
poorer consumers of vegetable oil have to pay a hig her price for the only source 
of fat that is available to them. The well-to-do cl asses who use this 
hydrogenated oil pay a still higher price for mater ials which may prove even 
harmful to them and perhaps obtaining nothing in re turn even by way of fat if Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 188  the digestibility is impaired by hydrogenation. Apa rt from the raising of the 
price of oils even under controlled rates, because of the advent of capitalists in 
the market, the tendency is towards black-marketing , which again has an 
injurious effect on the budget of the poorer consum ers. 
We are amazed at the recommendation of the Advisory  Planning Board which 
has suggested the raising of the target of producti on of this article from 82,000 
tons in 1941 to 400,000 in 1950. Are we thinking of  industries as a means of 
making wealth for a few, or should our industries b e the means of supplying the 
needed articles to satisfy human needs? Are there n o moral considerations to 
guide us in this matter? Is our industrial policy t o be devoid of all humanity? If 
so, we are heading for the jungle. We trust that no  time will be lost in calling a 
halt as far as this industry is concerned. 
J. C. KUMARAPPA 
Harijan,  6-4-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 189   
32.  NAKALI  GHEE 
Our articles on  vanaspati  ghee brought in a sheaf of letters - of approbatio n 
from the public and opprobrium from the manufacture rs - naturally. A valued 
friend has coined  nakali  (imitation) ghee as the name for this product and we 
hope this will receive legal sanction as margarine (the word means imitation or  
nakali  butter) has in Europe. An alternative name can be  devitalized vegetable 
oil.  
The burden of the battle cry of the manufacturers i s stated below with our 
reactions. 
One of the "scientific" minions of the manufacturer s writes: 
"If one compares  vanaspati  with cow's ghee, then it is definitely inferior in  its  food value.  
However, when  vanaspati  is compared with the oil from which it is made, th en it is 
definitely a better food article because (1) it has  a more palatable taste, and (2) it has 
better keeping qualities." 
This statement is typical of the half truths and su ppression of facts on which 
the manufacturers' case is built up. In dealing wit h ghee they admit the 
inferiority of vanaspati  in "food value" meaning thereby nutritive value. 
While dealing with the oil, the comparison is not o n the nutritive value but is 
shifted to its keeping qualities and taste only, wh ile to the reader "better food 
article" will convey the idea of nutrition. 
Again the comparison is with cotton seed oil or gro und-nut oil and not with 
cocoanut,  til  or mustard oils which are the commonly used edible  oils. 
Further the comparison is between the mill pressed oil and not with the cold 
pressed  ghani  oil. These statements are evidently calculated to mislead the 
unwary reader. 
The manufacturers have launched out on a widespread , expensive advertising 
programme, by which they hope to confuse the public . They compare  vanaspati  
to margarine. This comparison is not valid. While  vanaspati  is prepared from 
mill-pressed cotton seed or ground-nut oil, margari ne is not necessarily Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 190  prepared from such inferior hydrogenated vegetable oils. The history of its 
manufacture dates back before hydrogenated oils cam e to be known. Generally 
it is made from softer animal fats or from a mixtur e of animal fats and 
vegetable oils churned with milk and chilled with i ce to give it an appearance 
of a milk product. Because this animal-fat-based ma rgarine is used widely in 
Europe and America and "eminent research workers ag ree unanimously that it is 
both wholesome and nutritious," it does not follow by any stretch of imagina-
tion that  vanaspati  manufactured from hot processed inferior vegetable  oils is 
also equally nutritious. Why not push the same illo gical argument one step 
further and say, "because ghee is nutritious theref ore  vanaspati  ghee is also 
nutritious"? 
They proceed to compare the price of  vanaspati  with the price of dairy ghee 
and claim that it is one-third. A true comparison w ill be with the price of mill-
pressed ground-nut oil. It would then be seen to be  about fifty per cent more 
expensive. We are entitled to ask what additional o r proportionate benefit have 
the manufacturers conferred to impose this heavy ta x on the unsuspecting 
public? 
One would think that these manufacturers are liable  to be prosecuted for such 
misleading advertisements under the Defence (sale o f goods) Regulations and 
by the consumers for damages. 
In Great Britain cold-pressed olive oil is held in high esteem. In any case cold-
pressed oils are better than mill oils. We should h ave expected the  vanaspati  
manufacturers to prove their claims of superiority over cold-pressed cocoanut,  
til  or mustard oil. Then alone they will have a leg to  stand on. If at any time 
cold pressed oil goes rancid it is not the process that is at fault but the care-
lessness of the oilmen. 
The manufacturers claim that they are meeting the " tremendous shortage in 
fats in the country". Have they increased the fat c ontent in any way? All they 
have done is to transform good existing material in to a bad and expensive 
product which will "taste better and keep better". Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 191  There are two ways of meeting this shortage: One is  by increasing milk 
production and the other is to increase the product ion of cold-pressed oils both 
by stopping export of edible oil seeds and increasi ng the cultivation of oil 
seeds. 
The Chairman of the  Vanaspati  Manufacturers Association of India in his letter 
refers to the apprehension that traces of nickel fo und in  vanaspati  may "prove 
poisonous in the long run" and assures us that: 
"they would do no harm as it has been found that hu man beings can absorb and excrete 
relatively large quantities of nickel without any i ll effects resulting therefrom,'" and that 
vegetables which people consume "such as carrots, o nions, tomatoes, lettuce, etc. contain 
much large quantities of nickel than is ever likely  to be found in  vanaspati."  
He seems to be innocent of the fact that the nickel  in the vegetables is in 
combination while that in  vanaspati  is definitely foreign matter. This will make 
a world of difference in the capacity of the human body to deal with such 
matter. The one may be excreted while the other may  act as a poison. 
Again the Chairman makes light of "Col. Sokhey's sp eculations" based on "two-
month old experiments on rats". We are not here to put up a defence on behalf 
of Sir S. S. Sokhey. He is quite capable of taking care of himself. But when the 
Chairman goes on to state that "to condemn  vanaspati  on inconclusive 
evidence, while the case is officially  sub judice  is to do a disservice to the 
country in general and to an important food industr y in particular," and calls 
upon us "to withhold criticism until the Expert Com mittee publishes its 
findings," we feel he is applying the safety valve in the wrong place. If 1 am 
walking through the jungle with a child and the chi ld is picking wild berries to 
eat and two villagers passing by express differing opinions on the poisonousness 
of the berries, would I suggest that the child shou ld go on eating the berries 
while the question of their poisonous nature is sub judice?  The prudent course 
will be to stop the child eating the berries pendin g satisfactory proof that the 
berries are wholesome. Similarly, if the Chairman f eels the matter is  sub judice  
we submit that the proper course for the manufactur ers, on whom the onus of 
proof would lie, is to immediately stop producing  vanaspati  until conclusive Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 192  evidence that it is not harmful is forthcoming. We trust this reasonable course 
will now be adopted by the vanaspati  manufacturers without a legal injunction. 
J. C. KUMARAPPA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 193   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION VII : TEA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 194   
33. ANOTHER RISING MENACE 
In the rural areas milk is already in short supply.  If we sincerely desire the 
welfare of the people, our attempt should be to fin d out ways and means of 
increasing the supply. No doubt the cities are depe ndent on the villages for the 
milk. If an organization can be brought into being whereby the cities can run 
their own dairies in selected rural areas and be in dependent of the existing 
supply from the villages, that in itself will allev iate the distress in the rural 
areas. Of course, alongside of this programme we mu st have the long range 
programme of increasing the milk productivity of th e cow by selective cattle-
breeding. 
Wherever people are in distress we always find some body willing to take 
advantage of this distress. There are people willin g to rifle the pockets of dead 
soldiers. Thus the distress of somebody presents an  opportunity to someone 
else to take advantage of. At the present time the short supply of milk has 
provided a golden opportunity for the Indian Tea Ma rket Expansion Board to 
carry on its destructive work. Mr. M. H. Miles, its  Commissioner for India, is 
anxious to push forward to the villages and create the tea habit in the villages. 
This would imply, that by tanning the insides of th e villagers and satisfying 
their hunger by decreasing the digestibility, we ca n automatically lessen their 
demand for milk! This is a real menace to the healt h of rural India. In a 
vegetarian country the animal protein from milk is an essential constituent of 
the diet. Any habit which is calculated to decrease  this is harmful to the 
villages and is anti-social. 
Papers carry advertisement "drink tea for stamina",  which being lying 
propaganda must be stopped by the Government taking  necessary steps to 
control the advertisements. Indian consumption of t ea in 1928-29 was 48.8 
million pounds and it has risen in 1945-46 to 130 m illion pounds. This is an 
increase of about 266 p.c. and yet they are carryin g on a compaign of 
increasing tea consumption still further. Whatever may be said for tea for the 
well-to-do who are overfed, it is difficult to supp ort the cause for tea in Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 195  villages. The work of the Indian Tea Market Expansi on Board, therefore, is a 
menace to the rural areas which are already starvin g and suffering from mal-
nutrition. We trust the popular governments will do  what lies in their power to 
prevent any irreparable damage being done by the fo rmation of habits which 
will be injurious to the growth and strength of the  village people. 
J. C. KUMARAPPA 
Harijan,  26-1-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 196   
NON-ENGLISH WORDS WITH MEANINGS 
Ahimsa:  non-violence  
Amla:  the Indian gooseberry 
Amti:  a liquid dish of vegetable and pulse, a kind of so up 
Arhar:  a kind of pulse 
Aryan:  of the Indo-European stock 
Atta:  flour 
Bhakari:  thick hard bread 
Brahmachari:  one observing continence  
Brahmacharya:  continence  
Chakki:  a grinding stone 
Chamar:  leather-worker, classed as 'untouchable' 
Chapati:  flat unleavened bread 
Chatni:  a paste of cocoanut kernel, chillies, tamarind, sa lt, etc. ground on a 
stone —  
Chhatak: 2  ounces (oz.)  
Chula:  an Indian stove 
Dahi:  curds  
Dal:  pulse  
Dalia:  porridge  
Dasyu:  an outcaste 
Dhenki:  a wooden contrivance for pounding rice  
Dudhi:  a white pumpkin  
Ghani:  an oil-press  Diet and Diet Reform 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 197  Gur:  jaggery 
Hakim:  a Muslim physician  
Himsa:  violence  
Kadai:  a frying pan  
Khoa:  dried milk 
Masala:  condiments  
Nakli ghee:  imitation ghee 
Neem:  the Indian margosa tree  
Roti: flat unleavened bread  
Ragi:  an Indian millet 
Sadavrata: a religious daily distribution of food to mendicant s, a place where it 
is done  
Tava:  an iron pan for baking cakes  
Til:  sesamum  
Vaid:  a Hindu physician  
Vanaspati:  hydrogenated oil, vegetable ghee 
 
 