 
Discourses on the Gita 
 
 
 
By : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Translated into the Gujarati by : Valji Govindji De sai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
  Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M. K. Gandhi 
Harijan, 29-4-'33, p. 2 
 
 
 
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE 
Gandhiji's Gujarati translation of the Gita was pub lished on March 12, 1930, the 
never-to-be-forgotten day on which he marched to Da ndi from Sabarmati. A 
member of the Ashram who read it found it very diff icult to understand and 
complained about it to Gandhiji who was then in Yer avda prison. Thereupon he 
wrote a series of letters to the Ashram in which he  devoted one letter to each 
chapter of the Gita, dealing with Chapter XII in th e first letter written on 
November 4, 1930. These letters are here translated  into English. 
V G. D. 
St 2016, Pausha vadi 3 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
CHAPTER XII 
I propose today to give the substance of Chapter XI I which deals with devotion 
(bhakti). Whenever there is a wedding in the Ashram, we as k the couple to 
learn by heart and ponder over this chapter as one of the five sacrifices they 
have to offer. Knowledge and action in the absence of devotion are dry as dust 
and are likely to make us confirmed bond-slaves. Le t us therefore commence 
this study of the Gita with a heart full of devotio n. 
Arjuna asks the Lord, 'Some devotees adore a person al ( sakara ) God while 
others worship the Absolute (nirakara ). Which of these two courses is better?' 
The Lord replies, 'Those who fix their minds on Me (as the One Life in all) with 
perfect faith and are absorbed in Me are My devotee s indeed. But those who 
worship the Absolute and restrain and subdue their senses, are equiminded 
towards all living beings and serve them without lo oking on some as of a 
superior and others as of an inferior grade—they al so will come to Me. Neither 
of these two classes of devotees is superior to the  other. But a full realization 
of the Absolute is almost impossible for an embodie d being. The Absolute is 
devoid of all attributes and thus difficult for men  even to imagine. Therefore 
they are all worshippers of a personal God, whether  they are aware of it or not. 
'Do you therefore place your mind in Me (the person al God in the universal 
form) and offer Me your all. If this is not possibl e, try to restrain the 
aberrations of the mind; that is to say, by observi ng the  yamas and  niyamas, 
and with the help of pranayama  and yogic exercises, obtain control over the 
mind. If even this is beyond your capacity, perform  all actions for My sake, so 
that your delusion will be destroyed, and you will be imbued with the spirit of 
detachment and devotion. If you cannot do even this , renounce the fruits of 
action, that is, cease to have a desire for the fru its of action, and do the task 
which is allotted to you. A man can never have any say as regards the fruit of 
his action, as the nature of the fruit is determine d by a number of independent 
factors. Be you therefore a mere instrument in My h ands. I have thus described Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  four methods, none of which is superior to the othe rs. You may adopt any one 
of the four you like. It may seem as if the path of  knowledge (hearing the 
doctrine, pondering over it, etc.) is easier to tak e than that of  yamas, niyamas, 
pranayama, asanas , etc., meditation in worship is easier still and t he 
renunciation of the fruit the easiest of all. But t he same method is not equally 
well suited for all. And some seekers have to adopt  all the four methods, which 
are inter-connected. You must become a devotee one way or other; you may 
take any path that leads to this destination. 
'Let me tell you what the true devotee is like. He does not hate or bear ill-will 
to any living creature. He looks on all with love a nd compassion. He is free from 
the delusion of "I" and "Mine". He reduces himself to zero. Pleasure and pain are 
equally acceptable to him. He forgives the wrong-do er even as he expects to be 
forgiven himself. He is always contented with his l ot, and is unshakable in his 
resolve. He dedicates his intellect and mind and al l to Me. He never molests his 
fellow-creatures; these are therefore never afraid of him. He does not allow 
himself to become perturbed by the world. He is fre e from exultation, sorrow, 
anger, fear and the like. He seeks nothing for hims elf. He is pure and skilful in 
action. He renounces every undertaking. 
Although he is firm in his resolve, he is indiffere nt as regards the success or 
failure of his action; that is to say, he is not an xious about its result. He is alike 
to friend and foe. Honour and insult are the same t o him. He is silent and 
content with what comes. He moves freely as if he w ere alone. He has a steady 
mind at all times and places. A devotee who behaves  like this in faith is dear to 
me.' 
Q. The devotee 'renounces all undertakings'. What d oes this mean? 
A. The devotee will not draw up schemes of future e xpansion. For example, if a 
merchant who deals in cloth now has any plans of se lling firewood as well in 
the future, or if he, having one shop only, thinks of opening five more shops, 
that would be  arambha (undertaking) on his part, and the devotee will hav e 
none of it. This principle is applicable to service  of the nation as well. For 
instance a worker in the khadi department today wil l not take up cow-keeping Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  tomorrow, agriculture the day after and medical aid  on the fourth day. He will 
do his best in whatever has come to him. When I am free from egoism, nothing 
remains for me to do. 
सूतरने तांतणे मने हरजीए बांधी । 
जेम ताणे तेमनी रे, मने लागी कटारी ᮧेमनी । 
‘The Lord has bound me with a cotton thread; I am H is, no matter where He 
leads me. I have been stabbed with the dagger of lo ve.' A devotee's every 
activity is planned by God. It comes to him as in t he natural course of things. 
He therefore rests content with, 'this, that or any thing else’ ( येन क े निचत्।).  This 
is the meaning of 'renouncing all undertakings'. Th e devotee does not cease to 
work; indeed he is nothing if not a worker. He only  ceases to think needless 
thoughts about his work. It is these that he has to  renounce. 
इदम᳒ मया ल᭣धं इमं ᮧा᭡᭭ये मनोरथम् । गीता १६-१३ ।  
‘This has been acquired by me today; that purpose I  shall gain tomorrow.’ – this 
is the opposite of ‘renouncing undertakings’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6   
CHAPTER I 
When the Pandavas and the Kauravas gathered togethe r on the battlefield of 
Kurukshetra (the field of Kuru) with their armies, Duryodhana, the king of the 
Kauravas, approached Drona (his teacher in the scie nce of war) and named the 
leading warriors on either side. As a signal for th e battle to begin, conch-shell 
horns were sounded on both the sides and Shri Krish na who was Arjuna's 
charioteer drove his chariot into a place between t he two armies. The scene 
which greeted Arjuna's eyes unnerved him, and he sa id to Shri Krishna, 'How 
can I attack these in battle? I might fight readily  enough if I had to fight with 
strangers, but these are my kinsmen. The Kauravas a nd the Pandavas are first 
cousins. We were brought up together. Drona is our teacher as well as the 
Kauravas. Bhishma is a revered elder for both. How can I fight with him? It is 
true that the Kauravas are criminals and doers of e vil deeds. They have 
wronged the Pandavas and deprived them of their lan ds. They have insulted the 
saintly Draupadi. But what shall I gain by killing them? They are fools indeed. 
But shall I also be equally foolish? I have some li ttle knowledge. I can 
discriminate between right and wrong. I thus see th at it is a sin to fight with 
relatives. Never mind if they have taken wrongful p ossession of the Pandavas' 
share in the kingdom. Never mind even if they kill us. But how dare we raise 
our hand against them? O Krishna, I will not fight with my kith and kin.' 
With these words, Arjuna sank down on the seat of t he chariot, being 
overwhelmed by grief. 
Here ends the first Chapter which is entitled 'the sorrow of Arjuna'. All of us 
should feel pain even as Arjuna did. No acquisition  of knowledge is possible 
unless there is in us a sense of something lacking and a desire to know the 
truth. If a man is not curious even to know what is  wrong and what is right, 
what is the use of religion for him? The battlefiel d of Kurukshetra only provides 
the occasion for the dialogue between Arjuna and Kr ishna. The real Kurukshetra 
is the human heart, which is also a  dharmakshetra  (the field of righteousness) 
if we look upon it as the abode of God and invite H im to take hold of it. Some Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  battle or other is fought on this battlefield from day to day. Most of these 
battles arise from the distinction between 'mine' a nd 'thine', between kinsmen 
and strangers. Therefore, as we shall find later on , the Lord tells Arjuna that 
attraction  (raga) and repulsion ( dvesha ) lie at the root of sin. When I look upon 
a person or thing as 'mine', raga  takes hold of my mind; and when I look upon 
him as a stranger, aversion or hatred enters the mi nd. Therefore we must 
forget the distinction between 'mine' and 'thine'. That is to say, we must give up 
our likes and dislikes. This is the teaching of the  Gita and all other scriptures. 
To say this is one thing; to practise it is quite a nother. The Gita is there to 
teach us how to practise it. We will try to underst and the method it 
recommends. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
CHAPTER II 
When Arjuna had picked himself a little bit, the Lo rd rebuked him and said, 
'How is it that this delusion has come to you? It i s unworthy of a warrior like 
you.' But even then Arjuna stuck to his first posit ion, refused to fight and said, 
'If in order to get it, I have to slay elders and o ther relations, I do not want not 
only a kingdom on this earth but even the delights of paradise. My mind gropes 
in darkness. I do not know where my duty lies. I pu t myself into your hands. 
Please guide me.' 
Finding that Arjuna was bewildered and aspired afte r knowledge, Krishna had 
pity on him and proceeded to explain things to him:  'Your sorrow is for nothing, 
and you utter words about wisdom without understand ing. You have evidently 
forgotten the distinction between the body and the embodied soul. The soul 
never dies; but the body passes through childhood, youth and age and perishes 
in the end. The body is born but the soul is birthl ess and unchanging. It ever 
was, is now and will be there for all time to come.  For whom then do you 
grieve? Your grief arises from a delusion. You look  upon these Kauravas as your 
own, but you are aware that their bodies will come to an end. And as for the 
souls which inhabit these bodies, no one can destro y them. The soul cannot be 
wounded by weapons, burned by fire, dried by the wi nd or drowned in water. 
Then again, consider this from the standpoint of yo ur duty as a warrior with an 
army under his command. If you refuse to fight this  righteous war, the 
consequences will be the very reverse of what you e xpect and you will become 
an object of ridicule. You have always enjoyed the reputation of being a brave 
man. But if now you withdraw from the battle you wi ll be supposed to have 
been driven from it by fear. If it were part of you r duty to flee in the face of 
danger, disgrace would not matter, but if you retir e from battle now, you will 
have failed to discharge your duty, and people will  be justified in condemning 
your flight. 
'Thus far, I have tried to reason out things, draw a distinction between the body 
and the soul and remind you of your duty, as a warr ior. But let me now explain Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  Karmayoga (the method of action). A practitioner of  Karmayoga never comes to 
harm. It has nothing to do with chopping logic. It is something to be translated 
into action and experience. An ounce of practice is  more profitable than tons of 
argumentation. And this practice too must not be vi tiated by speculation about 
its fruit. Literalists perform Vedic rites directed  to the acquisition of material 
rewards. If one rite does not yield the expected fr uit, they have recourse to 
another, and being disappointed once more, they tak e up a third. And thus they 
suffer from utter mental confusion. As a matter of fact, it is up to us to do our 
duty without wasting a single thought on the fruits  of our action. To fight is the 
duty you have to discharge at present. Gain or loss , defeat or victory, is not in 
your power. Why should you carry the needless burde n of thinking about them 
and be like the dog who walks under a cart and imag ines that it is being drawn 
by himself and not by the bullocks? Defeat and vict ory, heat and cold, pleasure 
and pain come to a man in turn and he must put up w ith them. Without 
worrying about the fruit of action, a man must devo te himself to the 
performance of his duty with an evenness of temper.  This is yoga, or skill in 
action. The success of an act lies in performing it , and not in its result, 
whatever it is. Therefore be calm and do your duty clear of consequences.' 
On hearing all this Arjuna said, 'The course of con duct you have mapped for me 
seems to be beyond my capacity. Not to worry about defeat or victory, not to 
waste a thought on the result,—how can one attain s uch an evenness of temper 
and steadfastness in spirit? How does a man with su ch attainments behave, and 
how are we to recognize him?' 
The Lord replied, 'O king, one who renounces all th e cravings which torment 
the heart and derives his contentment from within h imself is said to be a 
sthitaprajna  or  samadhistha  (one stable in spirit). He is unruffled in adversi ty, 
and he does not hanker after happiness. Pleasure an d pain are felt through the 
five senses. Therefore this wise man draws his sens es away from sense objects 
even as a tortoise draws in his limbs. The tortoise  withdraws into his shell when 
he apprehends danger. But in the case of human bein gs sense objects are ready 
to attack the senses at all times; therefore their senses must always be drawn Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  in, and they should be ever ready to fight against sense objects. This is the real 
battle. Some people resort to self- mortification a nd fasting as weapons of 
defence against sense objects. These measures have their limited use. The 
senses do not make for sense objects so long as a m an is fasting, but fasting 
alone does not destroy his relish for them. On the other hand that relish may be 
heightened when the fast is broken, and a man can g et rid of it only with the 
grace of God. The senses are so powerful that they drag a man behind them by 
force if he is not on his guard. Therefore a man mu st always keep them under 
control. This end he can achieve only if he turns h is eyes inward, realizes God 
Who resides in his heart and devoted to Him. One wh o thus looks upon Me as 
His goal and surrenders his all to Me, keeping his senses in control, is a yogi 
stable in spirit. On the other hand if a man is not  master of his senses, he is 
always musing on the objects of sense and conceives  an attachment for them, 
so that he can hardly think of anything else. From this attachment arises 
desire; and when the desire is thwarted he gets ang ry. Anger drives him nearly 
mad. He cannot understand what he is about. He thus  loses his memory, 
behaves in a disorderly manner and comes to an igno ble end. When a man's 
senses rove at will, he is like a rudderless ship w hich is at the mercy of the gale 
and is broken to pieces on the rocks. Men should th erefore abandon all desires 
and restrain their senses, so that these do not ind ulge in undesirable activity. 
The eyes then will look straight and that too only at holy objects; the ears will 
listen to hymns in praise of God or to cries of dis tress; hands and feet will be 
engaged in service. Indeed all the organs of sense and of action will be 
employed in helping a man to do his duty and making  him a fit recipient of the 
grace of God. And once the grace of God has descend ed upon him, all his 
sorrows are at an end. As snow melts in the sunshin e, all pain vanishes when 
the grace of God shines upon him and he is said to be stable in spirit. But if a 
man is not stable-minded, how can he think good tho ughts ? Without good 
thoughts there is no peace, and without peace there  is no happiness. Where a 
stable-minded man sees things clear as daylight, th e unstable man distracted 
by the turmoil of the world is as good as blind. On  the other hand what is pure 
in the eyes of the worldly wise looks unclean to an d repels the stable-minded Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  man. Rivers continuously flow into the sea, but the  sea remains unmoved; in 
the same way all sense objects come to the yogi, bu t he always remains calm 
like the sea. Thus one who abandons all desires, is  free from pride and 
selfishness and behaves as one apart, finds peace. This is the condition of a 
perfect man of God, and he who is established there in even at the final hour is 
saved (lit set free,  mukta).' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
CHAPTER III 
When Krishna had thus set forth the marks of identi fication for a  sthitaprajna  
person, Arjuna received the impression that one had  only to sit quiet in order 
to attain such a state, as Krishna had not made the  slightest reference to any 
need for action on his part. He therefore asked Kri shna, 'It seems as if you hold 
that knowledge is superior to action. If so, why ar e you urging me to this 
terrible deed and thus confusing my mind? Please te ll me clearly where my 
welfare lies.' 
Krishna replied: 'O sinless Arjuna, since the begin ning of time seekers have 
taken one or the other of two different paths. In o ne of these the pride of 
place is given to knowledge and in the other it is given to action. But you will 
find that freedom from action cannot be attained wi thout action, that wisdom 
never comes to a man simply on account of his havin g ceased to act. Man does 
not become perfect merely by renouncing everything.  Don't you see that every 
one of us is doing something or other all the time?  Our very nature impels us to 
action. Such being the law of nature, one who sits with folded hands but lets 
his mind dwell on the objects of sense is a fool an d may even be called a 
hypocrite. Rather than indulge in such senseless in activity, is it not better that 
a man should control the senses, overcome his likes  and dislikes, and engage 
himself in some activity or other without fuss and in a spirit of detachment? Do 
your allotted duty, restraining the organs of sense , for that is better than 
inaction. An idler will only meet his end the soone r for his idleness. But while 
acting, remember that action leads to bondage unles s it is performed in a spirit 
of sacrifice. Sacrifice ( yajna) means exerting oneself for the benefit of others, 
in a word, service. And where service is rendered f or service's sake, there is no 
room for attachment, likes and dislikes. Perform su ch a sacrifice; render such 
service. When Brahma created, the universe, He crea ted sacrifice along with it, 
as it were, and said to mankind, "Go forth into the  world; serve one another 
and prosper. Look upon all creatures as gods. Serve  and propitiate those gods 
so that being pleased they will be gracious to you and fulfill your wishes Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  unasked." Therefore understand that whoever enjoys the fruits of the earth, 
without serving the people and without having first  given them their share, is a 
thief. And he who enjoys them after having given al l creatures their share is 
entitled to such enjoyment and is thus freed from s in. On the other hand, those 
who labour only for themselves are sinners and eat the fruit of sin. It is a law of 
nature that creatures are sustained by food, food p roduction depends on the 
rains, and the rains descend on the earth on accoun t of  yajna, that is to say, 
the labour of all creatures. There is no rain where  there are no creatures, and 
it does rain where they are there. All live by labo ur; none can remain idle and 
live, and if this is true of the lower forms of lif e, it is still more applicable to 
man. Action takes its origin from Brahma and Brahma  from the imperishable  
brahma ; therefore the imperishable  brahma  is present in all kinds of sacrifice 
or service. And whoever breaks this chain of mutual  service is a sinner and he 
lives in vain. 
'When a man enjoys peace of mind and contentment, i t may be said that there 
is nothing left for him to do. He does not stand to  gain by action or by inaction. 
He has no personal interests to serve; and yet he m ust not cease to offer 
sacrifice. Therefore do your duty from day to day w ithout entertaining likes and 
dislikes and in a spirit of detachment. He who acts  in such a spirit enjoys the 
beatific vision. Then again if even a selfless king  like Janaka reached perfection 
all the while working for the good of the people, h ow can you behave in a way 
different from his? Whatever a good and great man d oes, common people 
imitate. Take My own 'case for instance. I have not hing to gain by action, and 
yet ceaselessly do I pour myself in action. 
Hence it is that people too go on working more or l ess. But what would happen 
if I ceased to work? The world would collapse if th e sun, the moon and the stars 
ceased to move. And it is I who set them in motion and regulate their activity. 
But there is a difference between My attitude and t he attitude of the common 
man. I act in the spirit of perfect detachment whil e he harbours attachment 
and works in his own interest. If a wise man like y ou ceased to act, others too 
would do the same and their minds would be unsettle d. Therefore do your duty Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  without attachment, so that others might not cease to work and might 
gradually learn to work without attachment. Man is bound to work in obedience 
to and in conformity with his own nature. Only a fo ol thinks that he himself is 
the doer. To breathe is a part of man's nature; whe n an insect settles upon the 
eye, the eyelid moves of its own accord. And nobody  says, "I take in the air" or 
"I move the eyelid." In the same manner why should not all human actions be 
performed in accordance with the qualities of natur e? Why should there be any 
egoism about it? In order that a man may be able th us to act naturally and 
without attachment, the best thing for him to do is  to dedicate all his actions 
to Me and perform them without egoism as a mere ins trument in My hands. 
When a man thus gets over selfishness, all his acti ons are natural and free from 
taint and he escapes many a trouble. Actions then h ave no binding force for 
him. Action being natural, it is sheer egoism to ou trage nature and to claim to 
be inactive. The victim of such egoism will externa lly appear not to act, but his 
mind is always active in scheming. This is worse th an external activity and has 
all the greater binding force. 
'As a matter of fact the senses feel attraction and  aversion for their respective 
objects. For instance, the ears like to hear some t hings and do not like to hear 
other things. The nose likes to smell the rose, and  does not like to smell dirt. 
This is also true of the other organs of sense. The refore what man has to do is 
not to submit to these two robbers, namely, attract ion and repulsion. If one 
wishes to escape their attentions, he must not go a bout in search of action. He 
must not hanker after this today, that tomorrow and  the other thing the day 
after. But he should hold himself ready to render f or the sake of God such 
service as falls to his share. Thus he will cultiva te within himself the feeling 
that whatever he does is in fact an act of God and not his own, and his egoism 
will be a thing of the past. This is svadharma (one 's own duty). One must stick 
to svadharma, for it is the best for himself at any  rate. Paradharma (another's 
duty) may appear to be better, but even so it shoul d be looked upon as 
dangerous. Moksha (salvation) lies in embracing dea th while doing one's own 
duty.' Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  When Krishna said that action performed by one who is free from likes and 
dislikes is sacrifice, Arjuna asked, 'What is it th at makes a man commit sin? 
Very often it seems as if he were driven to sin by some outsider against his own 
will.' 
Krishna replied: 'The slave drivers in this case ar e Kama (desire) and Krodha 
(anger). These are like blood brothers. If desire i s not satisfied, anger is the 
inevitable consequence. One who is the slave of des ire and anger is said to be 
inspired by  rajoguna  (the quality of passion), which is man's greatest enemy 
and against which he has to fight day in, day out. As dust hides a mirror, smoke 
suffocates a fire and the womb covers the embryo, e ven so anger deprives 
knowledge of its lustre and suffocates it. And desi re is insatiable like fire, and 
taking possession of man's senses, mind and intelle ct, knocks him down. 
Therefore first control your senses, and then conqu er the mind. When you have 
done this, the intellect also will obey your orders . For though among the 
senses, the mind and the intellect, the mind is gre ater than the senses and the 
intellect is greater than the mind, the soul is the  greatest of all. Man has no 
idea of his own strength or soul force, and tends t o believe that the senses, the 
mind and the intellect are not amenable to his cont rol. But when once he has 
gained confidence in soul force, everything else be comes easy as a matter of 
course. And desire, anger and their countless hosts  hold no terror for him who 
has mastered the senses, the mind and the intellige nce.' 
I call this chapter the key to an understanding of the Gita, and the gist of it is 
that life is given us for service and not for enjoy ment. We have therefore to 
impart a sacrificial character to our lives. Intell ectual assent to this proposition 
is only the first step, but such assent and conduct  in terms of that assent are 
bound to rid our heart of its impurities in course of time. But what is real 
service? In order to obtain the right answer to thi s question, restraint of the 
senses is essential, as it gives us a clearer and c learer vision of the God of 
truth. Service rendered with selfish motives ceases  to be sacrifice. Hence the 
urgent need for the spirit of detachment. When this  is understood, all manner 
of controversies lose their meaning for us. 'Did Kr ishna really ask Arjuna to kill Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  his relatives? Could such killing ever be a part of  one's duty?' Questions like 
these are set at rest for ever. When detachment gov erns our actions, even the 
weapon raised in order to strike an enemy down fall s out of our hand. But a 
mere presence of detachment serves no useful purpos e. If only we persevere in 
our effort, detachment may come to us, perhaps the very first day, or may be 
only after a thousand years. We must not worry over  the time this takes, for 
the effort carries within itself the seeds of succe ss. We must however be on our 
guard and make sure that it is a genuine effort, an d that there is no self- 
deception. And this is certainly possible for us al l. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
CHAPTER IV 
The Lord says to Arjuna: 
'The yoga of selfless action which I commend to you  is an ancient truth; I am 
not propounding any new doctrine. I have declared i t to you, as you are my 
devoted friend, in order to heal the conflict in yo ur mind. Whenever goodness 
weakens and evil grows from strength to strength, I  incarnate Myself and 
protect the good and destroy the wicked. Those who are aware of this power 
(maya ) of Mine are confident that evil is bound to go un der. I am always by the 
good man's side. He never strays from the strait an d narrow path and comes to 
Me at last, for he meditates on Me and hides himsel f in Me and thus is delivered 
from passion and anger and is purified by austerity  and wisdom. As a man sows, 
so he reaps. None can escape from the operation of the laws I have made. I 
established the four  uarnas (classes, not castes) by the different distribution  of 
qualities and actions. However I am not their autho r, for t do not desire the 
fruits of action and have nothing to do with the me rit or demerit arising 
therefrom. This divine  maya  (course of action) is worth knowing. All Activitie s 
prevalent in the world are subject to divine Ws, an d yet God is not defiled by 
them. Therefore He is and also is not their author.  And a man who does 
likewise and acts in a spirit of detachment without  being defiled by actions and 
by the yearning for their fruit is sure to be saved . In action he sees inaction and 
he understands at once what is wrong action. Wrong actions are all those that 
are inspired by desire and cannot be performed in t he absence of desire, such 
for instance as theft, adultery and the like. These  simply cannot be done in a 
spirit of detachment. Therefore those who do the du ty that lies nearest without 
desire and scheming for the fruit of the action may  be said to have burnt up 
their actions in the fire of wisdom (jnana). A man who has thus abandoned the 
attachment to the fruit of action is always content ed, always independent. He 
has his mind under control. He gives up all his pos sessions. And his activity is 
natural like the bodily functions of a healthy indi vidual. He is free from any 
pride or even consciousness that he is acting on hi s own. He has the realization Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  that he is a mere instrument of the divine will. Wh at does it matter whether he 
meets with success or with failure? He is neither e lated by the one, nor 
unnerved by the other. All his work is done as a sa crifice  (yajna ), that is to say, 
as service to the world. He meditates upon God in a ll his actions and in the end 
comes to Him. 
'There are many forms of sacrifice, the root of whi ch lies in purity and service, 
such as, for instance, control of the senses, chari ty and  pranayama  (breath 
control) practised with a view to self-purification . Knowledge of these can be 
acquired from a wise teacher ( guru) through humility, earnestness and service. 
If anybody indulges in various activities which he thinks are  yajna, without any 
understanding of what  yajna  is, he will only do harm to himself and to the 
world. It is therefore necessary that all actions s hould be performed 
intelligently. This wisdom  (jnana) is not mere book learning. In it there is no 
room for doubt. It begins with faith and ends in ex perience. It enables a man to 
see all beings in himself and to see himself in God  so that everything appears to 
him to be actually informed by God. Such wisdom eff ects the salvation of the 
worse of sinners. It releases the seeker from the b ondage of action, so that he 
is not affected by its results. There is nothing el se in the world so holy as this 
wisdom. Therefore try to obtain it with a heart ful l of faith in God and with the 
senses under control, so that you will enjoy perfec t peace of mind.' 
The third, the fourth and the following fifth chapt er should be read together, 
as they explain to us what the yoga of selfless act ion  (anasakti) is and what are 
the means of practising it. If these three chapters  are properly understood, the 
reader will have less difficulty in tackling what f ollows. The remaining chapters 
deal in detail with the ways and means of achieving  anasakti. We should study 
the Gita from this point of view, and if we pursue this study, we shall find 
without much trouble a solution of the problems whi ch confront us from day to 
day. This calls for daily practice. Let everybody t ry it. If for instance he is 
angry, let him remember the verse dealing with ange r and subdue that enemy. 
Supposing we heartily dislike somebody, or are impa tient or gluttonous or in 
doubt as to whether we should do or should not do s omething or other, all Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  these difficulties can be solved with the help of M other Gita if we have faith in 
it and give it constant study. Our daily recitation  of the Gita as well as this 
series of letters is a means to this end. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
CHAPTER V 
Arjuna said, 'You speak highly of wisdom, so that I  am inclined to think that 
action is unnecessary. But then you also praise act ion, thus making me feel that 
unselfish performance of action is the thing to do.  My mind will be at peace 
only if you tell me definitely which of the two is better.' 
The Lord replied, ' Sannyasa  means wisdom and Karmayoga  means selfless 
action. Both of them are good, but if I had to choo se between the two, I should 
say that yoga or selfless action is better. The man  who does not hate any one or 
anything, does not long for anything and is free fr om the pairs of opposites such 
as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, is a  sannyasi (wise man, lit. one who 
renounces the world), no matter whether he is or is  not a performer of action. 
He easily casts off the chain that binds him. Only the ignorant speak of wisdom 
and action as different, not the learned. The fruit  of both is the same; both 
lead to an identical goal. Therefore He who sees th em as one sees truly. The 
man of pure wisdom achieves his object by merely wi lling it, and has no need 
to perform an outward act When the city of Mithila was on fire, others were 
bound to rush to it and fight the fire. But King Ja naka contributed to this fight 
by his mental determination only, for his servants were ready to obey his 
commands. If he had run about with a water pot to q uench the fire, he would 
only have done harm; others would have stared at hi m and failed to perform 
their own duty, or at the most would have rushed he re and there with a view to 
the King's safety. But it is not given to every one  of us to become a Janaka at 
once. It is indeed a very difficult task to reach a  Janaka-like state. Only one in 
a million can reach it as the fruit of service exte nding over many lives, and it is 
not a bed of roses either. As a man goes on perform ing selfless action, his 
thought grows from strength to strength and he less  and less resorts to external 
action. But he is hardly conscious of this change, and he has not this change in 
view either. He is devoted only to service, with th e result that his power of 
rendering service increases to such an extent that he hardly seems to rest from 
service. And finally his service is limited to thou ght alone, just as an object in Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  extraordinary motion seems to be at rest. It is obv iously improper to say that 
such a man does nothing. But this lofty state can, as a rule, be only imagined, 
and not experienced. Hence my preference for  karmayoga. Millions derive the 
fruit of  sannyasa  (wisdom, lit. renunciation) from selfless action a lone. They 
would fall between two stools if they tried their h and at  sannyasa. If they take 
to  sannyasa, it is very likely that they will become hypocrites , and as they have 
ceased to perform action, they are lost altogether.  But a man who has purified 
himself by means of selfless action, who has his mi nd and his senses under 
control and who has identified himself with all bei ngs, loving them as himself,—
such a man stands apart from action although he is acting all the time, and is 
not bound by it. He talks, he walks, he takes part in normal human activity, but 
his activity seems to be merely a function of his o rgans of sense, and he himself 
seems to be doing nothing. The bodily functions of a physically healthy person 
are natural and spontaneous. His stomach for instan ce functions independently 
of him; he has not to bother about its functioning.  Similarly a spiritually healthy 
person, though acting through his body, is not tain ted by it and may be said to 
be doing nothing. Therefore a man should dedicate a ll his actions to Brahma 
(God) and perform them on His behalf, so that in sp ite of his activity he does 
not earn either merit or demerit and is untouched b y either like a lotus leaf 
which is untouched by water. Therefore a yogi (man of selfless action), 
performing action with the body, mind and understan ding in a spirit of 
detachment and without egotism, purifies himself an d enters into peace. The 
a-yogi, on the other hand, being attached to the fr uit of action, is a prisoner 
bound by his own desires. The yogi lives blissfully  in the city with nine gates 
that is his body, having renounced all actions by h is mind, and realized that he 
himself is not doing or getting done anything at al l. The man with a purified 
soul does not commit sin, nor does he do any merito rious deed. He who acts in 
a spirit of detachment, having destroyed his egotis m and renounced the fruit of 
action, becomes a mere machine moving at the will a nd pleasure of the Master 
Mechanic or an instrument in the hands of God. The question, therefore, of his 
earning merit or demerit does not arise. On the oth er hand, the ignorant man is 
always counting his merit and demerit, and sinking deeper and deeper into the Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  pit, so that in the end the only thing he has earne d is demerit. But as regards 
the man who destroys his own ignorance by wisdom fr om day to day, his 
spontaneous actions grow purer and purer, and appea r perfect and meritorious 
in the world's eyes. He sees all things equal. He i s equiminded towards a 
learned and humble Brahma (God)-knowing Brahmin, a cow, an elephant, a dog 
and a degraded human being who is worse than a beas t. That is to say, he 
serves them all with equal devotion. He does not ho nour any one of them or 
treat another with contempt. The man of selfless ac tion holds himself to be the 
world's debtor, and he repays what he owes to every one else and does him full 
justice. Here on earth he takes the creation captiv e and is filled with the spirit 
of the Supreme. He is not elated if anybody does so mething pleasant; nor is he 
pained if foul abuse is poured upon him. The man at tached to the world seeks 
happiness from outside himself. On the other hand h e who acts in a spirit of 
selfless detachment discovers the spring of eternal  peace in himself having 
withdrawn his mind from external objects. All sensu al pleasures are a source of 
pain. One should resist the rush of desire, anger a nd the like. The selfless yogi 
is constantly engaged in doing good to all creature s. His mind is free from 
doubt. He is not of the world though he is in the w orld. He turns his eyes 
inward by means of  pranayama  (control of breath) etc. and conquers desire, 
fear and anger. He knows Me alone to be the supreme  Lord of all, the Friend 
and the recipient of sacrificial offerings, and ent ers into My peace.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
CHAPTER VI 
The Lord said: 'The man who does his duty without a ny selfish desire for fruit 
may be called a sannyasi as well as a yogi. But he who abstains from action 
altogether is only an idler. The root of the matter  is that one should not allow 
his mind to flit from one object of desire to anoth er and from that to a third. 
He who would practise yoga, i.e., evenness of tempe r (samatvam),  cannot but 
perform action. The man who has achieved such evenn ess of temper will be 
serene, because his mere thoughts are charged with the strength of action. A 
yogi is one who is not attached to the objects of s ense or to action and whose 
mind has ceased to roam restlessly. 
'A man can be saved or lost by himself alone. 
Therefore he becomes his own friend or his own enem y, as the case may be. To 
one who has subdued his mind his soul is a friend; while the soul is an enemy 
for him who has failed to achieve self-control. The  test for self- control is that 
heat and cold, pleasure and pain, honour and dishon our do not disturb one's 
inner serenity. He is a yogi who is a man of knowle dge as well as experience, 
who is unwavering and master of his senses and to w hom gold, stone and earth 
seem all alike. He regards with an equal eye friend  and foe, sinner and saint. 
With a view to attaining this state a man should st abilize his mind, divest it of 
all sensual desires, and meditate in solitude on th e Supreme Soul. It is not 
enough to practise yogic  asanas (postures), etc. In order to achieve evenness of 
temper, one must scrupulously keep the major observ ances ( vratas) such as 
brahmacharya  (chastity) and the like. A man who thus takes his place on a firm 
seat, keeps the observances and concentrates his mi nd on God enters into 
perfect peace. 
'This equanimity is not for one who overeats or mer ely fasts, nor for one who is 
too much addicted to sleep or to vigils. Its seeker  has to keep a sense of 
proportion in all his actions such as eating and dr inking, sleeping and keeping 
awake. To overeat one day and fast the next day, to  oversleep for a day and 
keep a vigil the next, to work hard for a day and p ass the next in idleness is no Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  characteristic of a yogi. The yogi is stable- minde d at all times, and is without 
effort free from all desires. He is like an unflick ering lamp burning in a windless 
place. He is not tossed to and fro by dramatic even ts on the world-stage or by 
his own brain waves. Such mental poise can be acqui red by slow but steady 
effort. The mind is fickle and restless, but it sho uld be gradually stabilized, for 
one can have peace of mind only when he is firm of understanding. In order 
thus to stabilize the mind, he should constantly fi x it on the soul. He will then 
see all beings in himself and himself in all beings , for he will see Me in all 
beings and all beings in Me. He who is absorbed in Me, and sees Me everywhere 
ceases to be himself, so that he is at all times at tuned to Me irrespective of 
what he is doing, and is incapable of sin.' 
Yoga thus described seemed to Arjuna to be a tall o rder, and he exclaimed, 
'How is one to achieve such equanimity? The human m ind is restless like a 
monkey, and as difficult to control as the wind. Ho w is it to be curbed?' 
The Lord replied, 'You are right. But if a man earn estly sets about conquering 
attachment and aversion, yoga will not be difficult  for him to practise. But it 
should be clear to you that it is not for one who c annot control his mind.' 
Then Arjuna posed another question, 'Supposing a ma n has faith, but is lax in 
his effort and is thus unsuccessful in perfecting h imself, what happens to him? 
Is he destroyed like a broken cloud in the sky?' 
The Lord said, 'Such a man of faith is never lost, for no one who takes the right 
path ever comes to an evil end. After death he live s for a time in some celestial 
world according to his merit and is then reborn on the earth into a holy family. 
But such a birth is difficult to obtain. He then re gains the mental impressions 
developed in his former lives, and struggling harde r for perfection, reaches the 
supreme goal. Thus making an assiduous effort some attain equanimity soon, 
while others do so after a number of lives in accor dance with the measure of 
their faith and endeavour. This evenness of temper is superior to asceticism, to 
knowledge and to sacred rites, for these latter are  after all only means to the 
end of equanimity. Do you therefore become even- mi nded and a yogi. And Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  even among yogis hold him to be the best who dedica tes his all to Me and 
worships Me alone in full faith.' 
Pranayama  (control of breath) and  asanas (yogic postures) are referred to 
appreciatively in this chapter, but we should remem ber that at the same time 
the Lord has stressed the need for  brahmacharya,  i.e., keeping the observances 
calculated to take us nearer and nearer to God. It should be clearly understood 
that the mere practice of  asanas and the like can never take us to the goal of 
even-mindedness.  Asanas and  pranayama  may be of some slight help in 
steadying the mind and making it single-purposed, p rovided that they are 
practised to that end. Otherwise they are no better  than other methods of 
physical training. They are very useful indeed as p hysical exercise and I believe 
that this type of exercise is good for the soul, an d may be performed from a 
bodily standpoint.. But I have observed that these practices do only harm when 
indulged in for the acquisition of supernormal powe rs ( siddhi) and the 
performance of miracles. This chapter should be stu died as a summary of the 
teaching in the preceding three chapters. It cheers  us up in our spiritual 
struggle. We should never be down-hearted and give up the endeavour to reach 
evenness of temper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26   
CHAPTER VII 
The Lord said: 'O king, I will tell you how a man w ho devotes his whole mind to 
Me, takes refuge in Me and practises  karmayoga  can have perfect knowledge of 
Me free from the shadow of a doubt. I will declare to you this knowledge based 
on experience, which having been known, nothing mor e here remains to be 
known. Hardly one from among thousands strives to a cquire this knowledge, 
and perhaps one only of these strivers makes a succ ess of it. 
'Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect an d egoism—this is the eightfold 
composition of My  prakriti (nature). This is the lower nature; the other is 
higher nature, that is, life. This world is born of  these two natures, that is to 
say, from the coming together of body and soul. The refore I am the cause of 
the origin and destruction of all things. As pearls  are strung on a thread, even 
so is the world held together by Me. Thus I am the taste in the waters, the light 
in the sun and the moon, the syllable "Om" in the V edas, the sound in ether, 
the spirit of enterprise in men, the sweet smell in  the earth, the brightness in 
fire, the life in all that lives, the austerity of ascetics, the intelligence of the 
intelligent, the pure strength of the strong, and t he craving of all beings which 
does not run counter to righteousness. In short you  should understand that all 
that belongs to the states of *sattva, *rajas and * tamas proceeds from Me, and 
depends upon Me alone. People deluded by these thre e qualities ( gunas) do not 
recognize Me Who am imperishable. My Maya made of t hese qualities is hard to 
overcome. But these who take refuge in Me pass beyo nd this Maya, that is, the 
three gunas. Foolish evil-doers cannot think of coming to Me ev en in their 
dreams. Being steeped in illusion, they roam in dar kness and do not acquire 
knowledge. But the doers of good deeds worship Me. Some of them do so in 
order to obtain relief in their distress; others se ek for knowledge of Me. A third 
group are inspired by a desire to get something for  themselves while others 
worship Me with understanding, thinking it to be th eir duty. Worship of Me 
means service of My creation. This service is rende red by some because of their 
misery, by others in order to gain some advantage, by a third group out of Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  curiosity as regards the outcome of such activity a nd by a fourth group who 
know what they are about and for whom service of ot hers is something that 
they cannot do without. These last are My wise devo tees, dearer to Me than all 
the rest of them. Or rather they know Me best and a re nearest to Me. Their 
wisdom is the fruit of a quest extending over a num ber of lives, and when they 
have acquired this wisdom, they see nothing in the world except Me, Vasudeva. 
But those who are smitten by a variety of desires r esort to other deities. I 
alone, however, am the giver of rewards commensurat e with the devotion of 
each. The achievement too of these devotees of limi ted understanding is 
limited, but they rest content with it. These men i n their ignorance imagine 
that they know Me through the senses.. They do not realize that My 
imperishable and supreme form is beyond the reach o f the senses and cannot 
be grasped with the hands, the ears, the nose, the eyes. Thus the ignorant do 
not recognize Me though I am the creator of all thi ngs. This is my  yogamaya  
(creative power). Pleasure and pain are the necessa ry consequence of likes and 
dislikes and keep mankind under the influence of de lusion. But those who have 
freed themselves from delusion and purified their t houghts and actions hold 
firmly to their vows and offer Me constant worship.  They know Me in the form 
of perfect Brahma (the Absolute) as well as of indi vidual selfs embodied as 
various kinds of creatures ( adhyatma), and My creative action  (karma). Those 
who thus know Me as the One who governs the materia l ( adhibhuta) and the 
divine ( adhidaiva ) aspects and the sacrifices (adhiyajna ) and have attained 
evenness of temper are released from the bondage of  birth and death after 
they have died. For having acquired the knowledge o f reality their mind ceases 
to dwell on trivialities and seeing the whole unive rse to be filled with the spirit 
of God, they are absorbed in Him.' 
 
* harmony, passion, sloth; or rhythm, activity, ine rtia. 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
CHAPTER VIII 
Arjuna asked, 'You spoke of Brahma (the Absolute), adhyatma, karma, 
adhibhuta, adhidaiva  and  adhiyajna, but I do not understand the meaning of all 
these words. Again you say that at the hour of deat h you are revealed to those 
who know you as  adhibhuta, etc. and have attained evenness of temper. Please 
explain all this to me.' 
The Lord replied, ' Brahma  is the imperishable Supreme aspect of God, and  
adhyatma  is the individual soul living in the body of all b eings as the doer and 
the enjoyer. Karma is the process through which all  beings come into existence, 
or in other words, the process of creation.  Adhibhuta  is Myself as the 
perishable body, and  adhiyajna  is the individual soul purified through sacrifice.  
Thus whether as the body or as the foolish soul or as the purified soul or as 
Brahma, it is I who am everywhere. And never doubt this that he who meditates 
on Me in all these aspects at the hour of death, fo rgets himself, is careful of 
nothing and desirous of nothing will be united with  Me. Whatever a man 
constantly dwells on in his mind and remembers at t he time of death is realized 
by him. Therefore at all times you should remember Me and set your mind and 
heart upon Me and you will surely come to Me. You m ay say that it is hard thus 
to stabilize the mind. But you take it from Me that  one can become single-
minded by daily practice and constant endeavour, fo r as I told you just now, all 
embodied beings are in the essence Myself in variou s forms. For this he should 
prepare himself from the very first so that his min d does not go astray at the 
time of death, but is steeped in devotion, keeps th e life force  (prana ) steady, 
and thinks only of Me as the omniscient, the ancien t, the ruler, the subtle 
supporter of all and dispeller of ignorance like th e sun which drives darkness 
away. 
'This supreme state is known to the Vedas as akshara  (the Imperishable) Brahma 
and is reached by sages who have freed themselves f rom likes and dislikes. All 
who desire to reach it observe  brahmacharya,  i.e., keep body, mind and speech 
under control and give up all objects of sense in t hese three ways. Men and Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  women who die, having controlled the senses and utt ering the sacred syllable 
Om and remembering Me as they depart, reach the sup reme state. Their mind 
is never distracted by other thoughts, and when the y have thus come to Me, 
they are not reborn into this painful condition. To  come to Me is the only means 
of breaking the vicious circle of birth and death. 
'Men measure time by the human span of a hundred ye ars, and during that 
period do thousands of questionable deeds. But time  is infinite. A thousand 
yugas (ages) make up the day of Brahma; compared wi th it a human day or 
even a hundred years of human life are as nothing. What is the use of counting 
such infinitesimal measures of time? Human life is as only a moment in the 
infinite cycle of time. It is up to us therefore to  think of God alone to the 
exclusion of all else. How can we afford to run aft er momentary pleasures? 
Creation and dissolution have gone on unceasingly d uring Brahma's day and 
night and will do so in future too. 
'Brahma who creates and dissolves beings is only an  aspect of Me. He is the 
unmanifested which cannot be perceived by the sense s. Beyond this 
unmanifested there is yet another unmanifested aspe ct of Mine of which I have 
spoken to you. He who reaches it is not reborn, for  there is no day or night so 
far as this is concerned. This is a calm and immova ble aspect, which can be 
realized only by single-minded devotion. It support s and pervades the whole 
universe. 
'It is said that one who dies in the bright half of  the month during Uttarayana 
(the northward movement of the sun from January to July) comes to Me if he is 
mindful of Me at last, and that he' who dies in the  dark half of the month during 
Dakshinayana (the southward movement from July to J anuary) is reborn into 
the world. Uttarayana and the bright fortnight here  may be interpreted to 
mean the path of selfless service; and Dakshinayana  and the dark half of month 
mean selfishness. The path of service is the path o f wisdom, and the path of 
selfishness is the path of ignorance. He who treads  the path of wisdom is 
released from the bondage of birth and death while he who takes the path of 
ignorance becomes a bond-slave. After having realiz ed the difference between Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  the two, who would be so foolish as to prefer to wa lk in the way of ignorance? 
All men should learn to discriminate between the pa ths, renounce all fruits of 
merit, act in a spirit of detachment and discharge their duty with all their heart 
and soul, and thus endeavour to reach the supreme s tate described by Me.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31   
CHAPTER IX 
Having described the lofty state of a yogi in the l ast verse of the preceding 
chapter, the Lord how naturally proceeds to sing th e glory of  bhakti (devotion). 
For the yogi in terms of the Gita is neither a dry- as-dust man of knowledge, nor 
a devotee carried away by his own enthusiasm, but a  selfless performer of 
action imbued with the spirit of wisdom as well as devotion. So the Lord said, 
'As you are free from hatred, I shall now tell you the secret of wisdom, a 
knowledge of which will contribute to your welfare.  This is the holy knowledge 
above all other and is easy to translate into actio n. Those who have no faith in 
it fail to find Me. Men cannot perceive My unmanife sted form by their senses, 
yet it pervades the universe. It supports the unive rse; the universe does not 
support it. Again in a sense it may be said that al l these beings are not in Me 
and I am not in them. Although I am the source of a ll beings and their 
sustainer, they are not in Me and I am not in them;  for in ignorance they do not 
know Me and are not devoted to Me. Know this to be my divine mystery. 
'But though it seems as if I am not in these beings , I am like the air moving 
everywhere. All creatures pass into My nature at th e end of a cycle and are 
reborn at the beginning of creation. These acts are  Mine, but they do not bind 
Me, for I act in a spirit of detachment and am indi fferent as to the fruit they 
bear. These events happen as such is My nature. But  people do not recognize 
Me in such a guise and deny My existence altogether . They entertain vain 
aspirations, perform vain actions and are full of i gnorance, so that they can be 
said to partake of the nature of demons. But those who abide in the divine 
nature know and worship Me as the imperishable crea tor. They are firm in their 
determination. They are always striving for virtue,  praising Me, and meditating 
on Me. Others again believe Me to be one or to be m any. There are countless 
attributes of Me; therefore those who believe Me to  be many think of different 
attributes as so many different faces of Mine. But one and all, they are My 
devotees. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  'I am the intention to offer a sacrifice, I the sac rifice itself, I the offering made 
to the spirits of the fathers, I the herb, I the sa cred verse  (mantra), I the 
oblation, I the fire to which it is offered. I am t he father of this world, I the 
mother, the supporter and the grandsire, the object  of knowledge, the syllable 
Om, 1Rigveda, 1Samaveda and 1Yajurveda. I am the end of the pilgrim's path, 
the sustainer, the lord, the witness. I am the shel ter, the lover, the origin, the 
dissolution, heat and cold, being and nonbeing. Tho se who perform the rites 
mentioned in the Vedas do so in order to gain their  fruit. They may thus attain 
the world of heaven, but they have to return to the  world of mortals and to 
die. But if a man meditates upon Me with an undistr acted mind and worships 
Me alone, I bear all his burdens, supply all his ne eds and protect his 
possessions. Some others who worship other deities with faith in their hearts 
are victims of ignorance, but they are really worsh ipping Me for I. am the lord 
of all sacrifices. However they do not know Me in M y comprehensive nature and 
therefore are unable to reach the supreme state. Wo rshippers of the gods go to 
the world of the gods, the ancestor worshippers to the world of the fathers and 
those who worship the spirits go to the spirits, wh ile those who worship Me with 
the right approach come to Me. I accept the offerin g of love made by seekers, 
even if it be only a leaf or a flower. 
Therefore whatever you do, do it only as an offerin g to Me, so that your 
responsibility for the good and evil results will c ease altogether. As you will 
have renounced all the fruits of action, there will  be no more births and deaths 
for you. I am the same to all beings, none is hatef ul or dear to Me. But those 
who worship Me with devotion are in Me, and I am in  them. This is not partiality 
but only the natural consequence of their devotion.  Devotion indeed works 
wonders. He who worships Me in utter devotion becom es a saint even if he has 
been a sinner. As darkness vanishes before the sun,  a man abandons his evil 
ways as soon as he comes to Me. Therefore know for certain that My devotee 
shall not perish. He becomes a man of religion and enters into My peace. Those 
who are born in the so-called lower castes and illi terate women, 2vaishyas and 
2shudras who take refuge in Me come to Me. It goes w ithout saying, that so do 
Brahmins and Kshatriyas who lead a holy life. Every  devotee enjoys the fruit of Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  his devotion. Therefore you who have been born in t his unsubstantial world 
should worship Me and work out your salvation. Fix your mind on Me, be 
devoted to Me, offer your sacrifices for My sake, p rostrate yourself before Me. 
And if you are intent on Me and reduce yourself to zero by attuning yourself to 
Me, you are sure to come to Me.' 
Note: We learn from this chapter that devotion (bhakti) means attachment 
(asakti) to God. This is the royal road to the cultivation  of a selfless spirit. 
Therefore we are told at the very beginning that de votion is the sovereign yoga 
and is easy to practise. It is easy to practise if it takes hold of our heart, but 
hard going if it does not. Hence it has been descri bed as something for which 
we have to offer our life itself as the price. But he who has plunged into it 
enjoys perfect bliss though it scares the mere spec tator. Sudhanva was laughing 
as he lay in the boiling oil while the bystanders w ere seized with terror and 
anxiety. The 'untouchable' Nanda is said to have da nced as he was tried by the 
ordeal of fire. We need not bother whether or not t hese are true stories. But 
the fact is that a man reaches such a state of calm ness and imperturbability 
when he is absorbed in something or other. He forge ts himself. But who would 
set his heart on anything except God? 'Do not prefe r the bitter nimba to sugar-
cane or the glowworm to the sun and the moon.' The ninth chapter thus shows 
that renunciation of the fruit of action is impossi ble without devotion ( bhakti). 
Its last verse sums up the whole chapter and in a w ord means, 'Seeking nothing, 
give yourself utterly to Me.' 
 
1 The three oldest sacred books of the Hindus (tray i). 
2 The third and the fourth classes of ancient Hindu  society, meaning, 'farmers and 
merchants' and 'servants', respectively. Brahmins ( priests) and Kshatriyas (soldiers) 
constitute the first and the second classes. 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
CHAPTER X 
The Lord said, 'Hear once more what I say with a vi ew to the welfare of 
devotees. Even gods and great sages do not know my beginning, for the very 
simple reason that I am without beginning myself an d am the origin of the 
universe including gods and sages. The wise man who  knows Me to be unborn 
and without beginning is liberated from all sins, f or when he realizes Me as such 
and himself as My child or as part and parcel of Me , he overcomes the human 
liability to sin. Ignorance of one's real nature is  the root of sin. 
'As all beings derive from Me, so do the various na tures distributed to them, 
such as for instance forgiveness, truth, joy and so rrow, birth and death, fear 
and fearlessness. Those who know all these to be My  glorious manifestations 
easily become evenminded, as they cease to be egoti stic. Their heart is fixed 
on Me. They dedicate their all to Me. I am the only  subject of their 
conversation. They glorify Me and live in happiness  and contentment. To these 
loving worshippers always aware of Me I grant the p ower of understanding, by 
means of which they come to Me.' 
Arjuna then praised the Lord, 'You are the supreme Brahma, the highest abode, 
and the Lord. You yourself say that sages worship y ou as the First of the Gods, 
the Birthless, the All-pervading. O Lord, O Father,  no one knows your real 
nature; it is known to you alone. Now please tell m e your glorious 
manifestations, and explain to me how I may recogni ze you by meditation.' 
The Lord replied, 'There is no end to My divine man ifestations, but I shall name 
the chief of these only. I am the  atman  (soul) dwelling in the heart of all 
beings. I am the beginning, the middle and the end of them all. Of the Adityas I 
am Vishnu. Among the lights I am the light-giving s un. Of the Maruts (wind-
gods) I am Marichi. Among the stars T am the moon. Of the Vedas I am the 
Samaveda. Of the gods I am Indra. Of the sense-orga ns I am the mind. Of beings 
I am consciousness. Of the Rudras I am Shankara (Sh iva). Of the Yakshas and 
Rakshasas I am K ubera. Of the Daityas (demons) I a m Prahlada. Of beasts I am 
the lion. Of birds I am the eagle. Indeed I am even  the gambling of thi cheats. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  Whatever, good or evil, happens in this world happe ns only by My permission. 
Realizing these men should give up their pride and steer clear of evil, for I am 
the dispenser of the fruits of their good and bad d eeds. You should realize that 
only a single fraction of Mine sustains the entire universe.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  CHAPTER XI 
Arjuna, asking the Lord for a favour, said, 'O Supr eme Lord, by teaching me the 
truth about the soul, you have dispelled my ignoran ce. You are All, the Creator 
and the Destroyer, being Imperishable yourself. If possible, please let me have 
a vision of your divine Form.' 
The Lord said, 'There are thousands of my divine fo rms in various colours. The 
*Adityas, the *Vasus and the *Rudras—all are unifie d in My body, as well as all 
things, animate and inanimate. But you cannot see t his form with those fleshly 
eyes. Therefore I give you divine sight with which to see Me.' 
Sanjaya said to Dhritarashtra, 'O king, speaking th us to Arjuna, the Lord 
revealed to him His marvellous form which defies de scription. We see a single 
sun in the sky every day, but supposing a thousand suns were blazing in the sky, 
the glory of what Arjuna saw was more dazzling than  their accumulated light. 
The ornaments and the weapons of that Form were sim ilarly divine. Arjuna's 
hair then stood erect. And he spoke, shaking all ov er. 
Arjuna said, 'O God, I see everything and everybody  within your body. Brahma 
and Shiva are there, and so are the sages and the h oly serpents. I see you with 
countless arms and faces, and find no beginning, mi ddle or end. You shine like 
a mass of insufferable light, and blaze like fire. You are the ultimate 
foundation of the universe, the Ancient of Days, an d the guardian of eternal 
law. Wherever I look, I see parts of your body. The  sun and the moon are your 
eyes as it were. You pervade heaven and earth. Your  splendour burns up the 
universe. This world is seized with awe. The gods, the sages, and the siddhas—
all are standing with clasped hands and sing your p raise. On seeing this 
stupendous form and brilliance I lose my nerve. My patience and peace are. 
gone. O God, have mercy on me. I see these people r ush into your mouth 
frightful with tusks as moths fly into a flame and you crush them to powder. 
Who are you with such an awful form? I cannot under stand your ways.' 
The Lord said, T am Time, the destroyer of worlds. You may or may not fight, 
but the warriors on both the sides are bound to per ish. You are only an 
instrument of the divine will.' Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  Arjuna said, 'O God, home of all the world, you are  the Imperishable, being and 
non-being and what is beyond either of them. You ar e the First of the gods, the 
Ancient of Days; you are the refuge of the world. Y ou are the one thing which is 
to be known. You are Vayu (wind), Yama (the God of death and judgment), 
Agni (fire) and Prajapati (the Creator). Hail to yo u a thousand times. Now 
please show me your original form again.' 
The Lord then said, 'I showed My world-wide form to  you, because I love you. 
You have seen today something the vision of which c annot be won by Vedic or 
any other studies, rituals, alms or austerities. Do  not be bewildered because 
you have seen it. Cast away fear, be clam and see M y familiar form. That shape 
of mine which you have seen is hard to see even for  the gods and can be seen 
only by pure devotion. Whoever works for Me, makes Me his supreme good, 
becomes My devotee, frees himself from attachment a nd loves all beings, 
comes to Me.' 
I have deliberately cut this as well as the last ch apter short. This one is full of 
poetry and therefore should be read frequently eith er in the original or in 
translation, so that we may be imbued with the spir it of devotion. Whether we 
are or not thus imbued can be found by applying the  acid test mentioned in the 
last verse. Devotion is impossible in the absence o f total self- surrender and all-
embracing love. Self-surrender and a sense of solid arity with all living beings 
become easy of attainment if we meditate on God as world-destroying time 
into whose gaping mouths the universe rushes to its  doom. This fate is bound to 
overtake us too all of a sudden, whether we wish fo r it or not. Thus all 
distinctions of small and big, high and low, man an d woman, men and the lower 
animals disappear. Seeing that we are all a mere mo rsel in the mouth of God as 
the Destroyer, we should become humble and reduce o urselves to zero and 
cultivate friendship with everyone else. If we do t his, we shall cease to be 
afraid of this terrible Form of God. On other hand it will give us peace of mind. 
 
* Various classes of Hindu gods. Trans. 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
CHAPTER XIII 
The Lord said: 'Kshetra (the Field) is another name  for the human body and 
Kshetrajna means one who knows the Field. Understan d Me as the Knower of 
the Field in all bodies. Real knowledge means discr imination between the Field 
and the knower of the Field. The five great element s, namely, earth, water, 
fire, air and ether, individuality ( ahamkara ), intellect, the unmanifest, the ten 
senses,* mind, the five sense objects, desire and h atred, pleasure and pain,  
sanghata (the power of combination inherent in the constitue nts of the body), 
consciousness and cohesion,—these constitute the Fi eld with its modifications. 
Knowledge of these is essential, as they have to be  renounced. Wisdom is the 
foundation on which such renunciation can be based.  Wisdom here means and 
includes humility, unpretentiousness, non-violence,  forgiveness, rectitude, 
service of the teacher, purity, steadfastness, self -restraint, indifference to 
sense objects, absence of egoism, insight into the evil of birth, death, old age, 
disease and pain, detachment from wife and children , hearth and home, friends 
and relations, equimindedness to good and bad fortu ne, whole-hearted 
devotion to God, love of solitude, dislike for the enjoyment of sensual 
pleasures in company with others, thirst for knowle dge of the soul, and at last 
the beatific vision. And the reverse of this is ign orance. Now let me tell you 
something about that which has to be known with a v iew to salvation. That is 
beginningless supreme Brahma. Brahma is beginningle ss because it is unborn 
and was there when there was nothing. It is neither  sat  (existent) nor  asat  
(non-existent) but beyond them both. But from anoth er standpoint it can be 
called  sat, because it is eternal. Human beings cannot recogniz e it as such; 
therefore it is said to be beyond even  sat. It pervades the whole universe. It 
may be said to have a thousand hands and feet, and though it seems to have 
hands and feet, it is devoid of the organs of sense  for it does not need these 
organs. Sense organs are transitory while Brahma is  eternal. And although being 
all-pervasive and all-sustaining, it may be said to  be enjoying the qualities  
(gunas), it is free from them. Where there are  gunas, there is change ( vikara ), Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  but Brahma is changeless. It may be said to be outs ide all beings, because it is 
out for those who do not know it. And it is within all beings as it is all-
pervading. Similarly it is both moving and unmoving . It is subtle and hence 
imperceptible. It is distant as well as near. It is  undivided in the sense that it is 
imperishable though name ( nama) and form ( rupa) perish, but it also seems to 
be divided as we say that it is within all creature s. It creates, preserves and 
destroys. It is the light of lights beyond darkness , and the end of all knowledge. 
Brahma which is planted in every heart is jneya, the one thing worth knowing. 
All knowledge is a means to the end of being united  with it. 
'God and His  maya  (nature) are both without beginning. Modifications  ( vikaras) 
are born of  maya  and these give rise to various kinds of action  {karma). On 
account of  maya, the soul experiences pleasure and pain and the fru it of merit  
{punya ) and demerit  {papa). He who, having realized this, does his duty in a 
spirit of detachment is not born again in spite of his activity, for he beholds the 
face of God in all faces, and seeing that not a lea f moves but by the divine will 
he is free from egotism, understands that he is sep arate from the body and that 
the soul, though living in the body, remains by mea ns of knowledge unaffected 
like the omnipresent ether.' 
 
* The five organs of perception, viz. hearing, touc h, sight, taste and smell, and the five 
organs of action, viz., tongue, feet, hands and the  organs of evacuation and reproduction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40   
CHAPTER XIV 
The Lord said, 'Once more I will teach you that sup reme wisdom which enabled 
sages to reach the highest perfection. People who f ind that wisdom and do 
their duty accordingly are delivered from the cycle  of births and deaths. O 
Arjuna, know Me to be the father and mother of all beings. The three  gunas 
born of nature, viz.,  sattva  (goodness),  rajas (passion) and  tamas (ignorance) 
bind the soul down. They may be described respectiv ely as the highest, the 
middling and the lowest. Of these  sattva  is pure and unsullied and gives light; it 
is therefore the source of happiness.  Rajas arises from attachment and craving 
and makes a man indulge in all manner of activities .  Tamas is rooted in 
ignorance and delusion and makes one negligent and indolent. In short sattva  
makes for happiness,  rajas for restlessness and tamas for sloth. Sometimes  
sattva  prevails, overpowering rajas and  tamas; at other times  rajas prevails, 
overpowering  sattva  and  tamas; at still other times  tamas prevails, 
overpowering  sattva  and  rajas. When the light of wisdom shines through all the 
activities of the body it may be known that  sattva  is increasing. Where greed, 
bustle, unrest and competition are observed,  rajas is the ruler. And the 
predominance of  tamas is characterized by ignorance, sloth and delusion.  If  
sattva  prevails in a man's life, he is born in the sinles s worlds of the great sages 
after death. If  rajas dominates his life, he is born among those who are  
attached to action. And if  tamas is the ruling principle, he returns to the womb 
of the senseless. The fruit of  sattvika  action is purity, while the fruit of  rajas is 
pain and the fruit of  tamas is ignorance. A  sattvika  man rises to the higher 
regions; a  rajasa person remains in this world, while a  tamasa  individual sinks 
to the underworld. When a man perceives no doer of action other than these 
qualities and knows Me who am beyond them he enters  into My nature. When 
the dweller in the body has overcome the three qual ities from which all bodies 
arise, he is freed from birth and death, old age an d pain and drinks the nectar 
of eternal life.' Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  On hearing that one who transcends the qualities ma kes such great progress on 
the pilgrim's path, Arjuna asked, 'What are the mar ks of such perfection? How 
does such a perfect being conduct himself? And how does he cross over the 
qualities?' 
The Lord replied, 'A man is said to have risen abov e the qualities when he is not 
angry if the light and knowledge of  sattva  or the activity and bustle of  rajas or 
the delusion and ignorance of  tamas are there and is not wishful if they are 
not. He sits like one who is unconcerned and is not  disturbed by the qualities. 
He stands apart unmoved, being aware that they are the doers of all actions. 
He is even-minded to pleasure and pain as well as t o a lump of earth, a stone 
and gold. The pleasant and the unpleasant are alike  to him. He is unaffected by 
either praise or blame. He is the same in honour an d evil fame. He is alike to 
friend and foe. And he has abandoned all undertakin gs. 
'Do not think that this is a goal you can never rea ch and that therefore you 
need not exert yourself. What I have described is t he state of a perfect man. 
The way to it is to serve Me with single-minded dev otion. From the third 
chapter onwards I have pointed out that a man canno t so much as even breathe 
without action (karma), from which no human being can ever hope to escape.  
He who would transcend the qualities should dedicat e all his actions to Me, and 
cease to desire their fruits. If he does this, his actions will not be an 
impediment to his progress, for I am Brahma, immort al life, the eternal law and 
joy for ever. 
'When a man reduces himself to zero, he sees Me alo ne everywhere. He is  guna-
atita  (one who has crossed over the qualities).' 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42   
CHAPTER XV 
The Lord said, 'This world is like an  ashvattha (sacred fig) tree with roots above 
and branches below and with the Vedic hymns as its leaves. And he who knows 
it knows the Vedas. The branches of this cosmic tre e nourished by the qualities 
'shoot to heaven and sink to earth' (Sir Edwin Arno ld). Sense objects are its 
sprouts. It is these things of the senses which bin d the soul with the bonds of  
karma  in the world of men. 
'The real nature of this tree cannot be known here,  nor its beginning, nor end, 
nor foundation. 
'This strongly rooted cosmic tree should be cut dow n with the weapon of non-
co-operation, so that the soul may rise to a higher  world from which there is no 
return to the world of mortals. With this end in vi ew a man should engage 
himself in the constant worship of the Ancient of D ays, from whom all this 
activity (the cosmic process) seems to flow. The wi se man who is free from 
pride and delusion, victorious over the vice of att achment and devoted to the 
Supreme Soul, who is free from cravings and to whom  pleasure and pain are 
alike,—that wise man reaches the state which is bey ond all change, and which 
does not need to be illumined by the sun, the moon or fire. That is My supreme 
abode. 
'An eternal part of Myself transformed into the ind ividual soul in this world 
draws to itself the senses including the mind which  reside in matter. When the 
soul enters the body or leaves it, it takes these s enses with it even as the wind 
carries fragrance from its places. It enjoys sense objects with the help of the 
ear, the eye, the senses of touch and taste, the no se and the mind. The 
ignorant cannot recognize it as it goes or stays or  enjoys itself under the 
influence of the qualities, but the sages see it wi th the eye of wisdom. Striving- 
yogis see it living in their own bodies, but those who have not achieved 
evenness of temper cannot see it even if they try. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  'The light of the sun that illumines all the world,  that which is in the moon and 
in fire,—know that all that light is Mine. Permeati ng the soil I sustain all living 
beings. I become the sap-producing moon and feed th e plants. Becoming the 
fire of life in the bodies of all living creatures and being united with the life 
breaths, I digest the four kinds of food. I abide i n all hearts. From Me are 
memory and wisdom as well as their absence. I am th at which is to be known by 
all the Vedas. So also I am the author of Vedanta a nd the knower of the Vedas. 
'There may be said to be two kinds of personalities  in this world, namely  kshara  
(the perishable) and  a- kshara  (the imperishable). The perishable is all beings; 
and the imperishable is I who inspire them, and am the same forever. But 
beyond either is the highest spirit who is called t he Supreme Soul, and who, 
pervading all, sustains the three worlds. This too is I. I therefore transcend the 
perishable and even the imperishable, and am known in the world as well as in 
the Vedas as the supreme reality. The wise man who recognises Me as such 
knows all that need be known, and serves Me with hi s whole being. 
'O sinless Arjuna, I have told you this most secret  teaching. By knowing this a 
man becomes truly wise and reaches the shores of sa lvation.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44   
CHAPTER XVI 
The Lord said, T will now point out the distinction  between the divine and the 
demoniacal natures. Among the signs of the divine a re fearlessness, purity of 
heart, wisdom, evenness of temper, self-control, al msgiving, sacrifice, study of 
the scriptures, austerity, straightforwardness, non -violence, truth, freedom 
from anger, renunciation, peacefulness, not speakin g evil of others, compassion 
to all living beings, absence of greed, gentleness,  modesty, absence of 
fickleness, vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity,  internal as well as external, 
freedom from malice and pride. 
'Among the signs of the demoniacal are hypocrisy, a rrogance, conceit, anger, 
cruelty and ignorance. 
'The divine nature leads to liberation while the de moniacal leads to bondage. O 
Arjuna, you are born with the endowments of the div ine nature. 
'I will say something more about the demoniacal nat ure, so that people may 
easily give it up. Men of such a nature do not know  what to do and what to 
refrain from doing. There is no purity or truth in them, so that they do not 
observe the rules of good conduct. 
'They hold that the world is unreal, without basis or ruler. For them sex is all 
the world so that they think of nothing except enjo yment of the objects of 
sense. 
'They do horrible deeds. They are dull-witted. They  hold fast to their wicked 
thoughts and all their activity is directed only to  the destruction of the world. 
Their desires are insatiable. They are full of hypo crisy, pride and arrogance. 
They are thus plagued by innumerable cares. They wa nt fresh sensual pleasures 
every day. They are "ensnared in nooses of a hundre d idle hopes" (Arnold), and 
by unlawful means amass wealth in order to gratify their desires. 
"I got this today; I will get that tomorrow. I kill ed this one enemy today; I will 
also kill others. I am a man of might. I have great  possessions. Who is my equal 
? With a view to fame I will sacrifice to the gods,  give alms and make merry." Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  They say this to themselves with a chuckle, and bei ng caught in the net of 
delusion, go to hell at last. 
'Men with such a nature, given over to pride, speak  ill of others and thus hate 
God who dwells in all hearts. They are therefore fr equently born in the wombs 
of degraded parents. 
'There are three gates to hell, leading to the ruin  of the soul : lust, anger and 
greed. Therefore we should renounce them all. Turni ng aside from them, men 
go by the strait and narrow path and reach the high est state. 
'He who disregards the scriptures composed of etern al principles and gives 
himself up to pleasure cannot attain happiness or p eace characteristic of the 
right way. 
'Therefore in deciding what you must do and what yo u must not do, you should 
acquire the knowledge of fundamental and immutable principles from wise men 
and think and act accordingly.' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46   
CHAPTER XVII 
Arjuna asked, 'What happens to those who serve in f aith, neglecting the 
prevailing code of conduct?' 
The Lord replied, 'There are three kinds of faith, characterized by  sattva, rajas  
or  tamas as the case may be. As is a man's faith, so is he.  
'Sattvika  men worship the gods;  rajasa  men worship demigods and demons; and  
tamasa  men worship the spirits of the dead. 
'The nature of a man's faith cannot be ascertained Offhand. In order to assess it 
correctly one must know the precise nature of his f ood, austerity, sacrifice and 
alms-giving. 
'Foods which make for long life and increase the vi tal force, energy, strength 
and health are said to be sattvika. Rajasa  foods are violently bitter, sour, hot 
or pungent and give rise to disease and aches and p ains. And cooked food which 
is stale or gives out a bad smell and the leavings of others are said to be  
tamasa. 
'The sacrifice which is offered as a matter of duty  without expecting a reward 
and with mental concentration is said to be  sattvika. A rajasa  sacrifice is that 
in which a reward is desired and which is offered f or outward show. And a  
tamasa  sacrifice is one in which scriptural rules are dis obeyed, no eatables or 
alms are given away and no hymns are chanted. 
'Honouring the saintly, purity,  brahmacharya  and non-violence constitute 
austerity of the body. Truthful, pleasant and benef icial speech as well as a 
study of the scriptures is austerity of the speech.  And cheerfulness, gentleness, 
silence, self-control and purity of motive— these a re called the austerity of the 
mind. Such austerity of the mind, body and speech a s is practised without 
desire of fruit by men with an evenness of temper i s said to be  sattvika. 
Austerity practised for ostentation and with a view  to gaining honour is said to 
be  rajasa. And austerity done by obstinate fools with self-to rture or with the 
object of hurting others is said to be  tamasa. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  'A gift "made in due place, due time and to a fit r ecipient" without expecting a 
reward and with a feeling that it is right for. a m an to give is said to be  
sattvika. A gift made grudgingly with a view to getting somet hing in return is 
regarded as  rajasa. And the gift which is given in a contemptuous spir it, and 
without honour done to the recipient and without co nsidering the proper time 
and place for it is said to be  tamas. 
'Brahma is designated in the Vedas as  Om tat sat. Therefore men of faith 
pronounce the sacred syllable Om  when they commence any rite of sacrifice, 
alms giving or austerity. This single syllable stan ds for Brahma.  Tat  means  that, 
And  sat  means  satya, beneficent. That is to say, God is one, He alone is , He 
alone is truth and the benefactor of the world. He who offers a sacrifice, makes 
gifts or practices austerity with a realization of this truth and in a spirit of 
dedication is a man of  sattvika  faith. And he is free from blame if he knowingly 
or unknowingly does something different from the co rrect procedure in the 
spirit of dedication. But acts undertaken in the ab sence of such a spirit are said 
to be performed without faith and therefore are  asat  (unreal).' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48   
CHAPTER XVIII 
Even after he had pondered over the teaching in all  the previous chapters, 
there was still a doubt in Arjuna's mind. So he sai d, 'The  sannyasa  of the Gita 
seems to be different from renunciation as currentl y understood. Are  sannyasa  
and  tyaga  really different?' 
While resolving Arjuna's doubt in answer to this qu estion, the Lord summarized 
the Gita doctrine in a concise manner: 'Some action s are motivated by desire. 
Various activities are indulged in by men with a vi ew to fulfil various desires. 
These are called  kamya  actions. Then again there are certain necessary an d 
natural actions such as -breathing, eating, drinkin g, lying down, sitting, etc., 
with a view' to keep the body a fit instrument of s ervice. And thirdly there are 
actions done with a view to serve others. Giving up  kamya  actions is  Sannyasa , 
and renunciation of fruits of all actions is tyaga  as recommended to you all 
along. 
'Some people maintain that there is evil, no matter  how little, in all actions 
whatever. Even so, a man must not give up actions d one with a view to  yajna  
(sacrifice), that is to say, the service of others.  Alms-giving and austerity are 
included in  yajna. But even while serving others, a man should act in  a spirit of 
detachment. Otherwise his activity is likely to be mixed up with evil. 
'Renunciation owing to ignorance of duties that mus t be done is said to be 
inspired by  tamas. Giving up any action merely because it involves ph ysical 
suffering is said to be  rajasa. But service rendered to others because of a 
feeling that it must be done and without the desire  for the fruits is real  
sattvika tyaga.  In this tyaga  therefore there is no giving up of all actions, bu t 
only of the fruit of duties that must be. done, and  of course of other, that is,  
kamya  actions. When a wise man acts in such a selfless s pirit, all his doubts are 
dispelled, his motives are pure and he has no thoug ht of personal comfort and 
discomfort. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  'He who does not abandon the fruits of action must enjoy or put up with the 
natural consequences of his own acts, and is thus a  bond-slave forever. But he 
who gives up the fruits of action achieves freedom.  
'And why should a man feel attachment for action? I t is idle for anybody to 
imagine that he himself is a doer. There are five c auses for the accomplishment 
of all actions, namely, this body, the doer, the va rious instruments, efforts, 
and last but by no means the least, providence. 
'Realizing this, a man should give up pride. He who  does something without 
egoism may be said to be not doing it in spite of h is doing it, for he is not bound 
by his action. Of a humble man who has reduced hims elf to zero it may be said 
that he does not kill though he kills. This does no t mean that the man in spite 
of his humility may kill, and yet be unaffected by the killing. For no occasion 
can arise for such a man to indulge in violence. 
'There are three things that inspire action: knowle dge, the object of knowledge 
and the knower. And there are three constituents of  action: the organ, the 
deed and the doer. The thing to be done is the obje ct of knowledge; the 
method of doing it is knowledge and he who knows it  is the knower. After he 
has thus received an impulse to action, he performs  an action in which the 
senses serve as instruments. Thought is thus transl ated into action. 
"That by which a man is able 
To see one changeless Life in all the lives" 
(Edvin Arnold) 
and to realize the essential unity that underlies a ll diversities is  sattvika  
knowledge. In  rajasa  knowledge one holds that there are different souls  in 
different creatures, while in  tamasa  knowledge a man does not know a thing 
and imagines that everything is mixed up without rh yme and reason. 
'Similarly there are three kinds of action. Action in which there are no likes and 
dislikes and no desire for personal gains is  sattvika. That in which there are a 
desire for enjoyment, egoism and restlessness is  rajasa action. And  tamasa  Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  action is one in which no thought at all is given t o personal capacity and 
consequential injury or violence and which is under taken through delusion. 
'So also there are three classes of doers. A  sattvika doer is free from 
attachment and egoism and yet firm and enterprising  and is neither elated by 
success nor worried by failure. A  rajasa  doer is impassioned, greedy and 
violent, "slave by turns of sorrow and of joy" (Edwin Arnold)  and of course 
desires to obtain the fruit of his actions. And a  tamasa  doer is unsystematic, 
procrastinating, obstinate, malicious and indolent;  in short, without an iota of 
self-culture. 
'Intellect, firmness and happiness also are said to  be of three kinds. 
'The  sattvika  intellect is able properly to distinguish between action and non-
action, 
"What must be done, and what must not be done, What  should be feared, and 
what should not be feared, 
What binds and what emancipates the soul." 
(Edwin Arnold) 
The  rajasa  intellect tries to draw these distinctions but gen erally fails to do so 
correctly, while the  tamasa intellect "looks upon wrong as right and sees all 
things contrariwise of truth."  (Edwin Arnold) 
'Firmness is the power of taking up something and s ticking to it through thick 
and thin. It is more or less inherent in all things ; otherwise the world could not 
subsist for a single moment. Firmness is  sattvika  when there is a constantly 
maintained balance between the activities of the mi nd, the vital airs  [pranas) 
and the senses. The firmness by which a man holds f ast to duty, pleasure and 
wealth from attachment and with a view to personal advantage is  rajasa. And 
firmness is  tamasa, "wherewith the fool 
Cleaves to his sloth, his sorrow and his fears, His  vanity and despair." 
(Edwin Arnold) Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  'Sattvika  happiness is the "pleasure that endures, Banishing  pain for aye, bitter 
at first As poison to the soul, but afterwards Swee t as the taste of Amrit." 
(Edwin Arnold)  
It arises from true self-knowledge. 'Rajasa  happiness arises from sensual 
enjoyment. 
"... Sweet As Amrit is its first taste, but its las t Bitter as poison." 
(Edwin Arnold) 
And  tamasa  happiness is that 
"... which springs From sloth and sleep and oolishn ess." 
(Edwin Arnold)  
This threefold classification is thus applicable to  all things. The duties of the 
four  varnas (classes in ancient Hindu society) are fixed by re ason of the 
dominance or recession of the qualities planted in each. 
'A Brahmin's conduct is characterized by calmness, self-discipline, austerity, 
purity, forgiveness, uprightness, wisdom, experienc e and faith in God. The 
characteristics of a Kshatriya are velour, splendou r, firmness, resourcefulness, 
not flying from battle, open-handedness and leaders hip. A Vaishya's task is "to 
till the ground, tend cattle, venture trade"  (Edwin Arnold),  and service is the 
Shudra's work. This is not to say that a member of any one of these classes may 
not be endowed with qualities characteristic of oth er classes or is not entitled 
to cultivate them in himself. But qualities and wor k as mentioned above serve 
as signs for the recognition of a man's  varna. If the qualities and tasks of each 
caste are recognized, there is no undesirable compe tition or feeling of hatred 
among them. There is no question here of high and l ow. But if each does his 
duty selflessly according to his nature, he will re ach perfection. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  Therefore one's own duty, though it appears to be v alueless, is better than the 
duty of another which seems to be easy. A man may r emain free from sin when 
he performs the task naturally allotted to him, as he is then free from selfish 
desires; the very wish to do something else arises from selfishness. For the 
rest, all actions are clouded by defects as fire by  smoke. But the natural duty is 
done without desire for its fruit, and thus loses i ts binding force. 
'The calm yogi who has been sanctified by thus perf orming his own duty, who 
has his mind under control, who has given up the fi ve sense objects, who has 4 
overcome likes and dislikes, who lives in solitude,  i. e., whose eyes are turned 
inward, who achieves mastery of his mind, body and speech by abstemiousness, 
who is ever conscious of the living presence of God , and who has given up 
pride, desire, anger, acquisitiveness and the like— that yogi is fit to be united 
with Brahma. He is equiminded towards all men. He n either rejoices nor 
indulges in grief. Such a devotee has true knowledg e of God and is absorbed in 
Him. Thus taking refuge in Me, he gains the eternal  place. 
'Therefore dedicate your all to Me, regard Me as th e supreme object of your 
love, and with discrimination, fix your mind on Me.  As you do this, you will 
overcome all difficulties. But if out of egoism you  do not listen to Me, you will 
perish. The one thing needful is that abandoning al l conflicting views; you 
should come to Me alone for shelter, and thus be fr eed from sin. 
'Do not tell this truth to anyone who is not a devo tee, austere in life, and 
hating Me, does not wish to listen. But one who com municates this great secret 
to My devotees will surely come to Me in virtue of his devotion.' 
After having thus reported to Dhritarashtra the dia logue between Arjuna and 
Krishna, Sanjaya said, 
'Where there is Krishna, the prince of yoga, and Ar juna with his bow and 
arrows, there are prosperity, victory, happiness an d fundamental morality.' Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  Krishna to whom the epithet 'prince of yoga' has he re been applied means pure 
knowledge based on spiritual experience, and by ref erring to Arjuna as an 
archer it is suggested that where there is action i n accordance with such 
knowledge, the doer obtains every wish that is not contrary to lofty morals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54   
TRANSLATOR'S NOTES 
CHAPTER XII 
'Whenever I meet anyone who knows the Gita by heart , he or she commands my 
respect.... I would, however, like the reciters to realize that the mere 
recitation is not an end in itself. It should be an  aid to the contemplation and 
assimilation of the meaning and the message of the Gita. By patience even a 
parrot can be taught to recite it by heart. But he would be no wiser for the 
recitation. The reciter of the Gita should be what its author expects him to 
be —a yogi in its broad sense. It demands from its vota ries balance in every 
thought, word and deed and a perfect correspondence  between the three. He 
whose speech and action do not accord with his thou ghts is a humbug or a 
hypocrite.' (M. K. Gandhi:  Hindu Dharma,  Navajivan, 1950, pp. 170-1) 
'Devotion is not mere lip-worship; it is a wrestlin g with death.... 
'[It] is no soft-hearted effusiveness. It certainly  is not blind faith. [It] has the 
least to do with externals. A devotee may use, if h e likes, rosaries and 
forehead marks or make offerings, but these things are no test of his 
devotion.... 
'The popular notion of [devotion | is soft-heartedn ess, telling beads and the 
like and disdaining to do even a loving service les t, the telling of beads might 
be interrupted. This [devotee] therefore leaves the  rosary only for eating, 
drinking and the like, never for grinding corn or n ursing patients. 
'But the Gita says, "no one has attained his goal w ithout action...." ' (ibid., pp. 
160-1, paragraphs 9, 10, 13). 
In Vrindavan Shri Krishna Prem saw a  vaishnava  dying of typhoid. All round, 
coming and going were  vaishnauas with rosaries in their hands, but there was Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  no one to give him even a glass of water. 'What can  be the value of such 
worship as this?' he asked. See his  The Search for Truth,  p. 26. 
CHAPTER I 
'I regard Duryodhana and his party as the baser imp ulses in man, and Arjuna 
and his party as the higher impulses. The field of battle is our own body. An 
eternal battle is going on between the two camps... . Krishna is the Dweller 
within, ever whispering in a pure heart. Like the w atch the heart needs the 
winding of purity; or else the Dweller ceases to sp eak.' (ibid., p. 156). 
CHAPTER II 
'English friends made me read the Gita....They plac ed before me Sir Edwin 
Arnold's magnificent rendering of the Gita. I devou red the contents from cover 
to cover and was entranced by it. The last nineteen  verses of the second 
chapter have since been inscribed on the tablet of my heart. They contain for 
riie all knowledge. The truths they preach are the "eternal verities.". . . 
'Those verses are the key to the interpretation of the Gita' (ibid., p. 152). 
'The Message of the Gita is to be found in the seco nd chapter where Krishna 
speaks of the balanced state of mind, of mental equ ipoise. In nineteen verses 
at the close he explains how this state can be achi eved. It can be achieved, he 
tells us, after killing all your passions. It is no t possible to kill your brother 
after having killed all your passions.' (ibid., p. 179). 
'I have endeavoured to show that its message consis ts in the performance of 
one's duty with detachment. The theme of the Gita i s contained in the second 
chapter and the way to carry out the message is to be found in the third 
chapter. This is not to say that the other chapters  have less merit. Indeed 
every one of them has a merit of its own. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  'I hope that those who take part in the... celebrat ion [of Gita -jayanti] will 
approach it in the proper spirit and with a fixed i ntention to live up to the 
message of the noble song.' (ibid., p. 182). 
A fittingly anonymous article in  The Times of November 17, 1956 will serve as a 
fine commentary on the Gita doctrine: 
'In the collect for tomorrow (the twenty-fifth Sund ay after Trinity) prayer is 
offered that those who "bring forth the fruit of go od works" may be "rewarded 
by God". There seems to be a conflict between moral ity and religion at this 
point. For while the former is emphatic that good a ctions must be done without 
the thought of reward and makes its motto "duty for  duty's sake", the latter 
insists that God makes a distinction between good a nd evil, so that one meets 
with his approval while the other is condemned, and  uses to express this the 
common language of reward and punishment. 
'Did not Jesus himself ask, "What shall it profit a  man if he gain the whole world 
and lose his own soul?" Yet his life is clear evide nce that the only service of God 
he valued was one that is free from any taint of se lf-interest. His fidelity was 
unshaken even when it "became clear that it would l ead him to abandonment 
by his friends and death at the hands of his enemie s. The cross is a reminder 
that devotion to God and love to man, if they are r ewarded at all, must find 
their reward elsewhere than in popular approval or material advantage. 
'What then are the rewards of which the collect spe aks? The answer is to be 
found in the words: "Blessed are the pure in heart,  for they shall see God." The 
reward of service is not something attached to the service to make it 
worthwhile; it is of the same order as the service itself. Inner dedication to 
God leads to admission into his fellowship and deep er knowledge of his will: 
the love of God makes possible ah ever closer liken ess to him. The vision of 
God, the enrichment of one's whole being, the joy o f co-operation with him in 
the enterprises of his kingdom—these are the reward s that God bestows on his 
servants. Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  'Yet that is not all. While it is true that the pri mary rewards to the life of the 
spirit are in the realm of the spirit, it is also t rue that character and 
uprightness may bring substantial advantages at a l ower level. There have been 
cases in which public opinion has rallied to a lead er just because he was known 
to be entirely honest and disinterested, giving him  power and office that it 
would not entrust to a meaner person. To be scrupul ously fair and absolutely 
reliable in business may bring advantages that do n ot fall to the lot of those 
who think only in terms of immediate profit. 
'Not, of course, that action is to be for such gain s. The maxim that "honesty is 
the best policy" is a dangerous one. He who chooses  honesty for the returns it 
yields may be tempted to abandon it when circumstan ces arise in which it looks 
likely to be unprofitable. The paradox is that a vi rtue such as honesty leads to 
esteem and success when it is practised for its own  sake, without any thought 
either of esteem or of success. Religion and morali ty are alike injured by any 
appeal to self-interest; the reward God gives is th e vision of himself, and this is 
for those only who serve him without thought of wha t will be lost and what will 
be gained thereby. 
'Perhaps this paradox that the rewards of God's ser vice are for those only who 
serve him with no thought of reward lies behind the  saying of Jesus that he who 
would save his life will lose it while he who is pr epared to lose it will find that 
he has in fact preserved it. God receives into the choicest company of his 
servants those who follow truth and right simply be cause they are truth and 
right, and do not ask what the outcome of their fid elity will be. In the great 
words of Ignatius Loyola, they labour and do not as k for any reward save that of 
knowing that they do God's will.' 
 
 
 Discourses on the Gita 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58   
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
M. K. Gandhi :  The Gospel of Selfless Action (Navajivan). 
Edwin Arnold :  The Song Celestial  (Kitabistan). 
Annie Besant :  The Bhagavad-gita  (Natesan). 
Swami Prabhavanand and Christopher Isherwood : The Song of God : Bhagavad-
gita  (Mentor Books). 
S. Radhakrishnan :  The Bhagavadgita  (George Allen and Unwin). 
Shri Krishna Prem:  The Yoga of the Bhagavadgita (Watkins). 
R. C. Zaehner :  At Sundty Times  (Faber and Faber). 
 
 
 
 