 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETHICAL RELIGION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By 
M.K.Gandhi  
Introduction  
Hypocrisy has nowadays increased in the world. What ever a man's religion, he 
thinks of only its outward form and fails in his re al duty. In our crazy pursuit of 
wealth, we seldom think of the harm we cause, or ar e likely to cause, to others. 
Women in Europe do not hesitate in the least to wea r soft [kid] gloves even though 
these are made by killing young and tender animals.  It is known the world over 
how Mr. Rockefeller, said to be the richest man in the world, violated many rules of 
morality in amassing his fortune. It is because suc h conditions prevail around them 
that many people in Europe and America have turned against religion. They argue 
that, if any religion worth the name existed in the  world, the inordinate wickedness 
that is rampant all round would not be there. This is a mistaken view. As it is 
common for a workman to quarrel with his tools and not try to look for his own 
faults, so instead of thinking of the wickedness in  themselves, men brand religion 
itself as humbug and go on acting and living as the y please.  
Observing this trend and fearing that, if all relig ions are destroyed, a great 
calamity may befall the world and people may forsak e the moral path altogether, 
many Americans and European have come forward to tr y, in a variety of ways, to 
bring the people back to that path.  
A Society (The Society for Ethical Culture, Chicago .) has been founded which has 
shown, after an investigation of all religions, tha t not only do all of them teach 
morality but they are based for the most part on et hical principles; that it is one's 
duty to obey the laws of ethics whether or not one professes a religion; and that 
men who would not obey them could do no good either  to themselves or to others, 
in this world or the next. The object of these soci eties is to influence those who 
have been led to look down upon all religions becau se of the prevailing hypocrisy. 
They find out the fundamentals of all religions, di scuss and write about the ethical 
principles common to them and live up to them. This  creed they call Ethical 
Religion. It is not among the aim of these societie s to criticize any religion. Men 
professing all religions can, and do, join these so cieties. The advantage of such 
societies is that members adhere to their own faith  more strictly and pay greater 
attention to its moral teaching. They firmly believ e that man ought to abide by the 
laws of morality and that if he does not, it will m ean an end to all order in the 
world and ultimate destruction.  Mr. Salter, a learned American, has published a boo k on the subject, which is 
excellent. Though is does not deal with any religio n as such, it contains teachings 
of universal application. We shall publish the subs tance of these teachings every 
week. All that needs to be said about the author is  that he practices whatever he 
advises others to do. We would only appeal to the r eader to try to live up to those 
moral precepts that appeal to him. Then only may we  regard our efforts as having 
been fruitful.  Beginning  
It is the moral nature of man by which he rises to good and noble thoughts. The 
different sciences show us the world as it is. Ethi cs tells us what it ought to be. It 
enables man to know how he should act. Man has two windows to his mind : 
through one he can see his own self as it is; throu gh the other, he can see what he 
ought to be. It is our task to analyse and explore the body, the brain and the mind 
of man separately; but if we stop here, we derive n o benefit despite our scientific 
knowledge. It is necessary to know about the evil e ffects of injustice, wickedness, 
vanity and the like, and the disaster they spell wh ere the three are found together. 
And mere knowledge is not enough, it should be foll owed by appropriate action. An 
ethical idea is like an architect's plan. The plan shows how the building should be 
constructed; but is becomes useless if the building  is not raised accordingly. 
Similarly, an ethical idea is useless so long as it  is not followed by suitable action. 
There are many who memorize moral precepts and prea ch sermons, but they 
neither practise them nor do they mean to do so. Th ere are some who believe that 
moral principles are not intended to be practiced i n this world; they are meant for 
the other world- the world which lies beyond death.  A great thinker has said, " If 
you wish to attain perfection, you must begin from this very day to live according 
to the laws of morality at any cost." We need not b e scared away by such 
thoughts; on the contrary we should be glad to live  up to them, considering our 
responsibility in the matter. "Certainly, cousin," said the gallant Earl of Pembroke, 
on coming up to the Earl of Derby before Aubercoche  and finding the battle already 
won, "you have neither been courteous nor behaved h onorably to fight my 
enemies without waiting for me". Only when there is  such readiness to accept 
moral responsibility will men tread the path of vir tue.  
God is omnipotent, He is perfect. There are no limi ts to His mercy, to His goodness 
and to His justice. If this is so, how can we, His bond salves, stray at all from the 
moral path? It is no fault of the ethical principle s if one following them should fail. 
However, those committing a breach of morality have  only themselves to blame.  
In the path of morality there is no such things as reward for moral behaviour. If a 
man does some good deed, he does not do it to win a pplause, he does it because 
he must. For him doing good is but a higher kind of  food, if one may compare food 
and goodness. And if someone should give him an opp ortunity to do a good deed, 
he would feel grateful just as a starving man would  be grateful to the giver of food 
and bless him.  This ethical religion, of which we have spoken, doe s not mean the cultivation of 
gentlemanliness. It does mean that we should become  a little more diligent, a little 
better educated, a little cleaner and neater, etc. All this is no doubt included in it, 
but it touches only the fringe of ethical religion.  Many more things have to be done 
by man if he would walk along this path; and he has  to do them as a matter of 
duty, knowing them to be a part of his nature, not for gaining any worldly benefit.  Ideal Morality  
The current views of morality are not of a very hig h order. Some believe that 
morality is not something quite essential. Other th inks that there is no relation 
between religion and morality. But an examination o f the world's religions shows 
that, without morality, religion cannot subsist. Tr ue morality covers religion for the 
most part. Anyone who observes the laws of morality  for their own sake and not 
for any selfish end can be regarded as religious. T here are men in Russia who 
dedicate their lives to the good of their country. Such men are truly moral. A man 
like Jeremy Bentham, who discovered many good princ iples for English legislation, 
tried very hard to spread education among the Engli sh and took a prominent part 
in improving the condition of prisoner, may be rega rded as truly moral.  
Besides, it is a rule of ideal morality that it is not enough to follow the trodden 
path. We ought to follow the path which we know to be true, whether it is familiar 
or unfamiliar to us. In other words, when we know a  particular path to be the right 
one, we should set out on it without fear. We can p rogress only if we observe the 
laws of morality in this way. That is why true mora lity true civilization and true 
progress are always to be found together.  
If we examine our desires, we shall see that we do not wish for what we have 
already. We always value more that which we do not have. But desires are of two 
kinds; one is the pursuit of mere self-interest. To  attempt to fulfill this kind of 
desire is immoral. The other impels us constantly t o improve ourselves and to do 
good to others. We should never become overweening with any amount of good 
that we may do. It is not for us to evaluate it, bu t rather should we have perpetual 
longing to become better and do more good. True mor ality consists in our effort to 
realize such longing.  
If we have no home or no family of our own, that is  nothing to be ashamed of. But 
if we have a home and abuse it, or own a business a nd practice fraud, we stray 
from the path of morality. Morality consist in doin g what we ought to do. We can 
prove the need of morality through a few illustrati ons. Destruction has been the lot 
of peoples or families in which the seeds of immora lity, such as disunity and 
untruth, were found. To take an example from trade and business, we do not come 
across a single person who will say that truth shou ld not be followed. The effect of 
justice and goodness is not felt from outside; thes e qualities in here in us. Four 
hundred years ago, much injustice and untruth preva iled in Europe, so that people 
could not rest in peace even for a moment. The caus e of this state of affairs was that people has no morality. If we take out the ess ence of all moral laws, we shall 
find that the attempt to do good to mankind is the highest morality. If we open the 
treasure-house of morality with this key, we shall find in it all the other principles.  
At the end of these articles, we print select poems  bearing on morality from 
Gujarati or Urdu poets in the hope that all our rea ders will benefit from them and 
will also commit them to memory.  What Is Moral Action?  
When can it be said that a particular action is mor al? In asking this question, the 
intention is not to contrast moral with immoral act ions, but to consider many of 
our everyday actions against which nothing can be s aid from the conventional 
standpoint and which some regard as moral. Most of our action are probably non-
moral; they do not necessarily involve morality. Fo r the most part we act according 
to the prevailing on conventions. Such conventional  behaviour is often necessary. 
If no such rules are observed, anarchy would be the  result, and society-social 
intercourse would come to an end. Still the mere ob servance of custom and usage 
cannot properly be called morality.  
A moral act must be our own act; it must spring fro m our own will. If we act 
mechanically, there is no moral content in our act.  Such action would be moral, if 
we think it proper to act like a machine and do so.  For in doing so, we use our 
discrimination. We should bear in mind the distinct ion between acting mechanically 
and acting intentionally. It may be a moral of a ki ng to pardon a culprit. But the 
messenger bearing the order of pardon plays only a mechanical part in the king's 
moral act. But if the messenger were to bear the ki ng's order, considering it to be 
his duty, his action would be a moral one. How can a man understand morality 
who does not use his own intelligence and power of thought, but let himself be 
swept along like a log of wood by a current? Someti mes a man defies convention 
and acts on his own with a view to [doing] absolute  good. Such a great hero was 
Wendell Phillips 1. Addressing an assembly of people, he once said," Till you learn to 
form your own opinions and express them, I do not c are much what you think of 
me." Thus when we all care only for what our consci ence says, then alone can we 
be regarded to have stepped on to the moral road. W e shall not reach this stage, 
as long as we do not believe-and experience the bel ief-that God within us, the God 
of all, is the ever present witness to all our acts .  
It is not enough that an act done by us is in itsel f good; it should have been done 
with the moral or otherwise depends upon the intent ion of the doer. Two men may 
have done exactly the same thing; but the act of on e may be moral, and that of 
the other contrary. Take, for instance, a man who o ut of great pity feeds the poor 
and another who does the same, but with the motive of winning prestige or with 
some such selfish end. Though the action is the sam e, the act of the one is moral 
and that of the other non-moral. The reader here ou ght to remember the distinction between the two words, non-moral and im moral. It may be that we do 
not always see good results flowing from a moral ac t.  
1 (1811-84); American orator, social reformer and a bolitionist.  
While thinking of morality, all that we need to see  is that the act is good and is 
done with a good intention. The result of an action  is not within our control. God 
alone is the giver of fruit. Historians have called  Emperor Alexander "great". 
Wherever he went [in the course of his conquests,] he took the Greek language 
and Greek culture, arts and manners, and today we e njoy the benefits of Greek 
civilization. But the intention of Alexander behind  all this was only conquest and 
renown. Who can therefore say that his actions were  moral? It was all right that he 
was termed "great", but moral he cannot be called.  
These reflection prove that it is not enough for a moral act to have been done with 
a good intention. The result of an action is not wi thin our compulsion. There is no 
morality whatever in my act, if I rise early out of  the fear that, if I am late for my 
office, I may lose my situation. Similarly there is  no morality in my living a simple 
and unpretentious life if I have not the means to l ive otherwise. But plain, simple 
living would be moral if, though wealthy, I think o f all the want and misery in the 
world about me -and feel that I ought to live a pla in, simple life and not one of 
ease and luxury. Likewise it is only selfish, and n ot moral, of an employer to 
sympathize with his employees or to pay them higher  wages lest they leave him. It 
would be moral if the employer wished well of them and treated them kindly 
realizing how we owed his prosperity to them. This means that for an act to be 
moral it has to be free from fear and compulsion. W hen the peasants rose in revolt 
and with bloodshot eyes went to King Richard II of England demanding their rights, 
he granted them the rights under his own seal and s ignature. But when the danger 
was over, he forced them to surrender the letters. It would be a mistake for 
anyone to say that King Richard's first act was mor al and the second immoral. For 
his first act was done only out of fear and had not  an iota of morality about it.  
Just as a moral action should be free from fear or compulsion so should there be 
no self-interest behind it. This is not to say that  actions prompted by self-interest 
are all worthless, but only that to call them moral  would detract from the [dignity 
of the] moral idea. That honesty cannot long endure  which is practiced in the belief 
that it is the best policy. As Shakespeare says, lo ve born out of the profit motive is 
no love. 1  
1 "Love is not love,  When it is mingled with respects that stand  
Aloof from the entire point."  
2 "Then why, O blessed Jesus Christ,  
Shall I not love thee well?  
Not for the sake of winning heaven,  
Or of escaping hell;  
Not with the hope of gaining aught,  
Not seeking a reward-  
But as thyself hast loved me,  
O everlasting Lord!"  
Just as an action prompted by the motive of materia l gain here on earth is non-
moral. That action is moral which is done only for the sake of doing good. A great 
Christian, St. Franscis Xavier, passionately prayed  that his mind might always 
remain pure. 1 For him devotion to God was not for enjoying a hig her seat after 
death. He prayed because it was man's duty to pray.  The great saint Theresa 
wished to have a torch in her right hand and a vess el of water in her left, so that 
with the one she might burn the glories of heaven a nd with the other extinguish 
the fires of hell, and men might learn to serve God  from love alone-without fear 
from hell and without temptation of heavenly bliss.  To preserve morality thus 
demands a brave man prepared to face even death. It  is cowardice to be true to 
friends and to break faith with enemies. Those who do good out of fear and 
haltingly have no moral virtue. Henry Clay, known f or his kindliness, sacrifice his 
convictions to his ambition. Daniel Webster 2, for all his great intellect and his 
sense of the heroic and the sublime, once sold his intellectual integrity for a price. 
By a single mean act he wiped out all his good deed s. This shows how difficult it is 
to judge the morality of a man's action because we cannot penetrate the depths of 
his mind. We have also the answer to the question r aised at the outset in this 
chapter: what is a moral action? Incidentally, we a lso saw which kind of men could 
live up that morality. 1.(1782-1852); American stat esman and lawyer; his 
"biographers insist that he was never personally di shonest"- Encyclopedia 
Britannica  
2. Here follows a poem from Kavyadohan, an antholog y of Gujarati verse, but it is 
not reproduced in this book.  Is There A Higher Law?  
We constantly pronounce judgments upon the value of  actions. Some actions 
satisfy us and others do not. Whether a certain act  is good or bad does not depend 
upon whether it is beneficial or harmful to us. In judging it, we adopt quite a 
different standard. We have in our minds certain id eas and on the basis of those 
we judge the acts of others. Whether any wrong done  by one to another affects us 
or not, we do feel it to be wrong. Sometimes, we ha ve a sympathy for the wrong-
doer; but despite that sympathy, we feel no hesitat ion at all in pronouncing his act 
to be wrong. It may be that at times our judgment i s found to be mistaken. We 
cannot always fathom a man's motives, and may thus judge him wrongly. 
Nevertheless, we find no difficulty in judging an a ct in so far as the intention is 
known. Even if our personal interests are sometimes  served by wrong actions, we 
do feel inwardly that they are wrong.  
Thus it is established that the rightness or wrongn ess of an acts does not depend 
upon a man's self-interest. Nor does it depends upo n his wishes. There is a 
difference between morality and sympathy. Out of sy mpathy for the child we wish 
to give it a certain thing, but if the thing is har mful to the child, we hold it immoral 
to give it. It is doubtless good to show sympathy b ut, unrestricted by moral 
considerations, in turns into poison.  
We see also that moral laws are immutable. Opinions  change, but not morality. 
When our eyes are open, we see the sun; when they a re closed, it is not seen. The 
change here has been in our sense of sight, not in the fact of the sun's existence. 
The same hold true of moral laws. It is probable th at in a state of ignorance we do 
not know what is moral; but once the eye of knowled ge is opened, there is no 
difficulty in knowing it. Men rarely care to see si ngle-mindedly the right or wrong 
of things; often prompted by personal consideration s, they mistakenly describe the 
immoral as moral. The time is yet to come when men,  freeing themselves from 
self-regarding considerations, will concentrate the ir attention on the ideas of 
morality alone. Moral culture is still in its mere infancy; it is as science was before 
the birth of a Bacon or a Darwin. Men were eager to  know what the truth was. 
Instead of inquiring into morality, they have been hitherto engaged in discovering 
laws of nature -the laws of the earth's motion, etc . Where do we find the 
disinterested students of morality, patient and pai nstaking, who, setting aside his 
earlier superstitious notions, devotes his life to seeking only the ideal good? When 
men become as eager to explore the world of moral i deas as they are now to explore the realms of nature, we shall be able to b ring together the various 
conceptions of morality. It is unlikely that, on id eas of morality, there will be the 
same divergence of opinion as exists among men on m atters of science. However, 
we may not for a time arrive at unanimity of opinio n regarding moral laws. This 
does not, however, mean that it is impossible to di stinguish between right and 
wrong.  
We thus see that, independent of and apart from men 's wishes and opinions, there 
is something like a moral standard which we may cal l moral law. If there are laws 
of the State, why may not there be a moral law too?  It does not matter if that law 
is not committed to writing by man, and indeed it n eed not be. If we grant or hold 
that the moral law exists, it is incumbent on us to  obey it, just as we ought to obey 
the laws of business and remain poor? Or if I disob ey the laws of the State and 
incur the ruler's displeasure?" But it will never d o-either for me or anyone else-to 
say, "What does it matter whether I tell a lie or t ell the truth?"  
There is thus a great difference between moral laws  and temporal laws. For 
morality dwells in our hearts. Even a man practicin g immorality would admit that 
he has been immoral. A wrong can never become a rig ht. Even where a people is 
vile, though men may not observe the moral law, the y would make a pretence of 
doing so; they thus are obliged to admit that moral  laws ought to be observed. 
Such is the greatness of morality. It cares not cus tom nor for public opinion. To a 
moral man, public opinion or custom is binding only  so long as it is in harmony 
with the moral law.  
Where does this moral law come from? This law is no t laid down by the State, for 
different laws are found in different States. Many men were opposed to the 
morality which Socrates observed in his day. Even s o the world admits that the 
morality he observed has remained, and shall remain , morality for ever. Robert 
Browning says, 'If ever Satan proclaimed the law of  hatred and untruth in the 
world, even then justice, goodness and truth will c ontinue to be divine.' (...justice, 
good, and truth were still Divine, if, by some demo n's will, Hatred and wrong had 
been proclaimed Law through the worlds, and right m isnamed. Christmas Eve, 
XVII.) One may conclude from this that the moral la w is supreme and divine.  
Such a law no people or individual can violate to t he end of time. As has been said, 
even as the dangerous storm ultimately passes, immo ral men must meet their 
destruction. (As the whirlwind passeth, so is the w icked no more; but the righteous 
is an everlasting foundation. Proverbs, X. 25.)  No sooner did the cup of sin in Assyria and Babylon  become full than it broke. 
When Rome trod the path of immorality, none of her great men could save her. 
The ancient Greeks were an accomplished people, sti ll all their art and philosophy 
could not continue in their immorality for long. Th e French Revolution was but and 
insurrection against immorality. The same was the c ase with America. The good 
Wendell Phillips used to say that immorality even i f enthroned will not endure. This 
mysterious moral law brings prosperity to the man w ho observes it: it sustains the 
family that obey it, and the community which lives by it ever flourishes. Freedom, 
peace and happiness are the lot of the nation that lets itself be ruled by this 
highest law.  Morality As A Religion  
The subject of this chapter may strike one as stran ge. The common idea is that 
morality and religion are distinct things; still th is chapter seeks to consider 
morality as a religion. Some readers may think the writer guilty of confusion. That 
reproach may come from two sides from those who reg ard religion as more than 
morality, and from others who thinks that, where th ere is morality, there is no 
need for religion. Yet the author's intention is to  show their close relationship. The 
societies spreading ethical religion or religious e thics believe in religion through 
morality.  
The common idea, it may be admitted, is that there may be morality without 
religion and religion without morality. One comes a cross many men of immoral 
conduct who claim to be religious in spite of the s inful acts they commit. On the 
other hand, there are moral men like the late Mr. B radlaugh, who are proud to call 
themselves atheists and would run away from the nam e of religion. Those who 
hold either of these views are mistaken. Those who hold the first view are not only 
mistaken, but also dangerous as they practice immor ality under the guise of 
religion. In this chapter, therefore, we shall show  that, considered intellectually 
and scientifically, religion and morality are unite d and should be so united.  
Morality was in the beginning simply the customary conduct of a community, 
settled ways of acting that men living together nat urally fell into. By a natural 
process the good customs tended to survive and the bad ones to die out, since, if 
the bad ones did not die out, they would weaken the  community and lead to its 
extinction. Even today we see this process at work.  It is neither morality nor 
religion if people observe good customs more or les s unthinkingly. However, most 
of what passes for morality in the world today cons ists, as pointed out above, of 
good customs.  
Moreover, men often have a merely superficial idea of religion. Sometimes men 
believe in religion only as a means to ward off dan gers that threaten them. It 
would be a mistake to dignify actions as religious where they are performed out of 
a love that spring from fear.  
But at long last a time does when men begin to trea d the path of morality 
consciously, deliberately with a determined will, r egardless of gain or loss, of life or 
death, without turning to look back, ready to sacri fice been permeated with true 
morality.  How can such morality subsist except with the suppo rt of religion? One tells 
oneself, "If by doing a little harm to another, I c an secure my personal interest, 
why should I not do that little harm?" The profit d erived from doing harm is no 
profit, but a positive loss [to the doer]. How shal l this unpalatable does go down 
one's throat? Ostensibly in Germany's interest, Bis marck perpetrated dreadful 
deeds. Where then was his education? Where did thos e maxims of morality 
disappear which, at other times, he used to mouth b efore schoolchildren? 
Obviously, a reply to all these questions can be gi ven. The reason why he could not 
keep up his morality in the face of these difficult ies was that hismorality was not 
grounded in religion. So long as the seed of morali ty is not watered by religion, it 
cannot sprout. Without water it withers and ultimat ely perishes. Thus it will be 
seen that true or ideal morality ought to include t rue religion. To put the same 
thought differently, morality cannot be observed wi thout religion. That is to say, 
morality should be observed as a religion.  
Furthermore, it is seen that the rules of morality,  laid down in the world's great 
religions, are largely the same. The founders of th e religions have also explained 
that morality is the basis of religion. If a founda tion is removed, the superstructure 
falls to the ground; similarly if morality is destr oyed, religion which is built on it 
comes crashing down.  
The author adds that there is nothing wrong in call ing morality a religion. Dr. Coit 
in his prayer says, "I shall have no other God exce pt righteousness," On reflection, 
we shall realize that God will not help us and answ er our impassioned prayer for 
help, if we utter His name, while having a dagger c oncealed under our arm. Let us 
take two men, one who believes in the existence of God, yet breaks all His 
commandments; and another who, though not acknowled ging God by name, 
worships Him through his deeds and obeys His laws, recognizing in the divine laws, 
their Maker. Which of the two men shall we call a m an of religion and morality? 
Without a moment's thought, one would emphatically reply that the second man 
alone is to be considered religious and moral.  Religious Morality Or Moral Religion  
Gandhiji wrote the following prefatory note to this  Chapter under the caption of 
"Darwin's Views on Ethics".  
[Before summarizing this Chapter, it is necessary t o give an account first of Darwin 
himself. Darwin was a great Englishman of the last century who made great 
scientific discoveries. His memory and his power of  observation were amazing. He 
has written some books which deserve to be read and  pondered. With a mass of 
evidence and arguments, he has shown how man came i nto being; how he has 
evolved from a particular kind of monkey. After a l arge number of experiments and 
much sifting of evidence, he realized that there wa s not much difference between 
the anatomy of man and that of the ape. Whether thi s conclusion is correct or not 
has not much to do with ethics. Besides this, Darwi n has also shown how ideas of 
morality affect mankind. And as many scholars have faith in Darwin's writings, our 
author has dealt with his views in Chapter VI]  
It is noble voluntarily to do what is good and righ t. The true sign of man's nobility 
is the fact that, instead of being driven about lik e a cloud before the wind, he 
stands firm and can do, and in fact does, what he d eems proper.  
Nevertheless, we ought to know the direction in whi ch our environment disposes 
our instincts. We know that we are not in every way  masters of our own life; there 
are conditions outside of us to which we have adjus t ourselves. For instance, in a 
country where Himalayan cold prevails, we have to p ut on adequate clothing, 
whether we like it or not, in order to keep the bod y warm. That is, we have to act 
with prudence.  
The question now arises: Does the influence of envi ronment lead us to be moral? 
Or can it be that the forces that surround us are i ndifferent to morality?  
At this point it becomes necessary to consider Darw in's views. Though Darwin did 
not write as a moral philosopher, he has shown how close the connection is 
between morality and environment. Those who think t hat morality is unimportant 
and that physical strength and mental capacity are the only things that matter 
should read Darwin. According to him, there is an i nstinct of self-preservation in 
men as in other creatures. He also says that those who survive the struggle for 
existence may be regarded as successful, that is, t hose who are unfit to tend to 
extinction, but that the issue of the struggle does  not depend on mere physical 
force.  Comparing man with the bear or the buffalo, we find  that, in physical strength, the 
bear and the buffalo are superior to him; in a tuss le he will surely be worsted. 
Nonetheless he is their superior by virtue of his i ntelligence. Similarly we can 
compare with the largest numbers or with the hardie st soldiers that wins, but the 
side with the ablest generals and the best strategy , though its soldiers may be 
fewer or less hardly. In these examples we see the superiority of intelligence.  
But Darwin shows further that moral strength is eve n superior to physical and 
intellectual strength; and we can see in various wa ys that a man who has moral 
qualities lasts longer than one who is devoid of th em. Some hold that Darwin 
taught that strength is enough; that is, those who are physically strong ultimately 
survive. Superficial thinkers may believe that mora lity is of no use. But this is not 
Darwin's view at all. We find from the evidence of the early history of man that 
races without morality have completely disappeared.  The people of Sodom and 
Gomorrah were extremely immoral and they are now th erefore completely extinct. 
We can see even today how races without morality ar e steadily declining.  
Let us now take some simple illustrations and see h ow at least common morality is 
necessary for sustaining the human race. A peaceful  disposition is one element of 
morality. At first sight it may appear that people with a violent disposition rise in 
life; but a little reflection will show that, when the sword of violence falls, it may be 
on one's own neck. Freedom from bad habits forms an other element of morality. 
Statistics have proved that, at the age of thirty, intemperate persons in England 
are not likely to live beyond another thirteen or f ourteen years, while the 
teetotaller's expectation of life is seventy years.  Yet another element of morality is 
chastity. Darwin has no children, or if they have a ny, they are weak. The profligate 
become feeble of mind, and in course of time look l ike idiots.  
If we consider the morals of various communities, w e find the same state of 
affairs. Among the Andaman islanders the husband lo oks after his wife only until 
their child is weaned and begins to move about, and  he then abandons her. That 
is, they do not have the quality of altruism, and u tter selfishness prevails. The 
result is that the race is gradually dying out. Dar win shows that the altruistic 
instinct is present, to some extent, even in animal s: timid birds display strength in 
defending their young. This shows that, if there ha d been no selflessness among 
animals, we should have in the world scarcely any l ife other than grass and 
poisonous flora. The main distinction between man a nd other animals is that man 
is more selfless than the animals. He has sacrifice d his life for others in proportion to his strength, that is, for his offspring, for hi s family, his community and his 
country.  
Darwin clearly shows that moral strength is supreme . The ancient Greeks had 
greater intelligence than the Europeans of today, b ut when the former gave up 
morality, their intelligence became their enemy, an d no trace of them remains 
today. Nations are sustained neither by wealth nor by armies, but by righteousness 
alone. it is the duty of man to bear this truth in mind and practice altruism, which 
is the highest form of morality.  Social Ideal  
It is sometimes said that all morality involves soc ial relations. This is well said; for 
instance, if the judge has a proper sense of justic e, men who go to court obtain 
satisfaction. Similarly love, kindness, generosity and other qualities can be 
manifested only in relation to others. The force of  loyalty can be demonstrated only 
in our relations with one another. Of patriotism, n othing need be said. Truly 
speaking, there is no aspect of morality the benefi t of which accrues to the 
practitioner alone. Sometimes it is said that truth fulness and other virtues have 
nothing to do with the other person and are entirel y personal. But we must admit 
that by telling the truth we prevent harm to anothe r we do him an injury.  
In the same way, when a man disapproves of certain laws or customs and 
withdraws from society, even then his acts affect s ociety. Such a man lives in a 
world of ideals. He does not worry that the world o f his ideals is not yet born. From 
him the mere thought that the prevailing standard i s not good enough is sufficient 
to impel him to resist it. He will constantly try t o change other people's way of life 
to his own. This is how prophets have caused the wo rld's wheels to change their 
course.  
So long as man remains selfish and does not care fo r the happiness of others, he is 
no better than an animal and perhaps worse. His sup eriority to the animal is seen 
only when we find him caring for his family. He is still more human, that is, much 
higher than the animal, when he extends his concept  of the family to include his 
country or community as well. He climbs still highe r in the scale when he comes to 
regard the human race as his family. A man is an an imal or imperfect [as a human 
being] to the extent that he falls behind in his se rvice to humanity. If I feel my 
wife's injury or that of my community, yet have no sympathy for anyone outside 
the circle, it is clear that I do not have any feel ing for humanity as such; but I 
have, simply out of selfishness or a sense of discr imination, a certain feeling for my 
wife, my children or the community which I hold as my own.  
That is to say, we have neither practiced nor known  ethical religion so long as we 
do not feel sympathy for every human being. Now we know that the higher 
morality must be comprehensive; it must embrace all  men. Considering our 
relation to mankind, every man has a claim over us,  as it our duty always to serve 
him. We should act on the assumption that we have n o claim on others. He is 
merely ignorant who would here argue that the man a cting in this manner will be trampled in the world's scramble. For it is a unive rsal experience that God always 
saves the man who whole-heartedly devotes himself t he service of others.  
According to this moral standard all men are equal.  This is not to be interpreted to 
mean equality of position and function for all. It only means that, if I hold a high 
place, I also have the ability to shoulder its duti es and responsibilities. I should not 
therefore lose my head and believe that men with sm aller responsibilities are my 
inferiors. Equality depends on the state of our min d, and until our mind reaches 
that state that state, we shall remain backward.  
According to this moral standard no nation can rule  another for selfish ends. It is 
immoral of the American people to reduce the aborig ines to an inferior status and 
run the government. A civilized race coming into co ntact with a savage one owes it 
to the latter to raise it to its own level. The sam e standard rules that the king is 
the servant and not the master of his people and th at officers are not there to 
enjoy power but to make the people happy. If the pe ople in a democratic State are 
selfish, that State comes to no good.  
Moreover, according to this law, the stronger membe rs of a State or community 
have to protect, not oppress, the weaker ones. Unde r such a government there can 
be no starvation; nor can there be happy while we s ee our neighbors languishing in 
misery. The man following this high moral standard will never amass wealth. He 
who would be moral need not be scared away by the t hought that few follow this 
ideal morality; for he is master of his morality, n ot of its results. He will be 
considered guilty if he does not practice morality;  but nobody will find fault with 
him if his immoral behaviour has no consequence for  society.  Personal Morality  
'I am responsible for this,' or 'This is my duty': this is a moving and wonderful 
thought. A mysterious, resounding voice seems to sa y, 'To thee, individually, O 
man, is given this task. Whether defeat or victory,  both belong to thee. Thou art 
what no one else in the world is, for nowhere has n ature created two similar 
objects. Thou hast a duty which no one else in the world can do, and if thou dost 
no do it that loss will stand debited to thee in th e world's balance-sheet.'  
'What is that duty I owe to myself?'  
Someone may quote the verse :  
Call not man God for man is not God  
Yet man is not distinct from God's glory  
and answer, 'My duty is to rest secure in the belie f than I am a ray of God's light.' 
Another may answer that the duty is to have sympath y and fraternal regard for 
others. A third may answer that it is to revere par ents, care for one's wife and 
children, and acquit oneself well with brother, sis ter or friend. Alongside of all 
these virtues, it is also a part of my duty to resp ect myself even as I respect 
others. As long as I do not understand myself, how shall I understand others? And 
how shall I respect one whom I do not know? Many ho lds the view that the 
obligation of proper conduct arises [only] in relat ion to others and that, in the 
absence of contact with others, one may do just as one pleases. He who holds this 
views does not know what he says. In this world non e can, with impunity, act as 
he pleases.  
Let us now see what our duty is to ourselves. Let u s take, first, our private habits 
which are unknown to all but ourselves. We are resp onsible for them since they 
affect our character; but this is not all. We are r esponsible for then also because 
they affect others. Every person ought to control h is own impulses, and keep his 
soul as well as body clean. 'Tell me,' says a great  man, 'what a man's private 
habits are and I shall tell you what he is or will be.' We should therefore control all 
our appetites, so that we do not drink or eat to ex cess. Else we shall lose our 
strength and our good name. Worldly success never c omes to him who does not 
abstain from sensual pleasures and does not thus sa ve his body, mind, intellect 
and soul.  
Arguing along these lines and keeping one's instinc ts pure, one should further 
consider how to put them to use. One ought to have a fixed aim in life. If we do 
not discover our life's purposes, and keep steadily  to the course, we shall be swept along like a rudderless ship on the high seas; we s hall falter on the [moral] path. 
Man's highest duty in life is to serve mankind and take his share in bettering its 
condition. This is true worship-true prayer. He is a godly man who does God's 
work. Hypocrites and cheats going about invoking Go d's name are legion. Because 
a parrot utter the name of God, no one would call i t godly. Contribution to an ideal 
order of human life is something everyone can aim a t. With this aim in view the 
mother may legitimately rear her child, the lawyer may pursue his profession, the 
merchant may carry on his business or trade and the  working man may labour. A 
person with that fixed aim would never deviate from  the path of morality, for if he 
did, he could not fulfill his aim of uplifting mank ind.  
Let us consider the matter in some detail. We ought  constantly to examine 
whether our way of life tends to improve human life  or to worsen it. Thus the 
merchant should ask himself whether, in transacting  a business, he is cheating 
himself or another. The lawyer and the physician, a cting according to this 
standard, will give more thought to their client or  patient than to their fees. The 
mother in rearing her child would proceed very caut iously lest she should spoil the 
child out of misguided by these considerations and do his duty. The result of all 
this would be that, if the worker fulfils his funct ion in conformity with the moral 
ideal, he would be deemed better and higher than th e wealthy merchant, physician 
or lawyer who lives without any discipline. The wor ker would be the true coin and 
those selfish men, even though more intelligent or wealthy, would be counterfeit. 
This further shows that any man, whatever his place  in life, has the power to fulfill 
this aim. A man's value depends upon his way of lif e, not his status. One's way of 
life is not to be judged by one's visible outward a ctions, but by one's inner 
leanings. For instance, if of two men, one gives a dollar to a poor person to rid 
himself of his presence and the other half a dollar  but with love and out of 
compassion for the man, obviously, the one who gave  half a dollar is truly moral, 
while the other who gave a dollar, the sinner.  
To sum up, he alone is religious, he alone is happy  and he alone is wealthy, who is 
sincere in himself, bears no malice, exploit no one  and always acts with a pure 
mind. Such men alone can serve mankind. How can a d amp matchstick kindle a 
log of wood? How can a man who does not practice mo rality teach it to another? 
How can a sinking man save another from drowning? T he man who lives a moral 
life never raises the question as to how to serve t he world, for he is never in 
doubt. Matthew Arnold says of a friend :  I saw him sensitive in frame,  
I knew his spirits low,  
And wished him health, success, and fame  
I do not wish it now.  
For these are all their own reward,  
And leave no good behind :  
They try us-oftenest make us hard,  
Less modest, pure, and kind.  
Time was when Arnold wishes his friend health, succ ess and fame. But he did not 
so wish now, because his friend's happiness or mise ry did not depend on their 
presence or absence; he therefore only wished that his morality might ever 
endure. Emerson says, "Adversity is the prosperity of the great." Both the money 
and the fame belonging to the base are a misery to them and to the world.  Seven Deadly Sins of Intolerance 
Recalling Gandhiji’s memorable summary of seven dea dly sins, the following is a 
summary in similar style of a brief reflection on i ntolerance given at the 
Trivandrum conference on a Gandhian Alternative to a World Without Terrorism 
and War in February 2002.  
1. Intolerance is a personal failure to accept reality  
2. Intolerance is a failure of intelligence  
3. Intolerance is an error of judgment about Ultimate Truth  
4. Intolerance is an error which breeds psychological disorder  
5. Intolerance is an error which breeds social disorde r  
6. Intolerance is an error which breeds political diso rder  
7. Intolerance is a pragmatic failure: it doesn’t work  
If these characterizations of intolerance are accur ate, it follows that intolerance in 
the name of religion is a deep betrayal and pervers ion of authentic religion. In 
short, intolerance is unacceptable and is a sign of  weakness and not of strength.  
Intolerance is a personal failure to accept reality   
Intolerance is a failure or refusal to accept reali ty. No matter how hard you may 
try to live in your own little world there always r emain those persons who live 
outside your world. You may call them outsiders. Yo u may call them infidels for not 
accepting your view of the world. You may try to pe rsuade them to accept your 
views and your way of life. Sometimes you may even try to force them to become 
like you but they resist even to their death. They do so because reality is made up 
of many different individuals having many different  experiences and different 
viewpoints. Nothing will change this, not even your  intolerance.  
Tolerance accepts reality. Intolerance rejects real ity. Tolerance is strong. 
Intolerance in weak. Tolerance is strong because it  has total confidence in its 
conviction that there is nothing so safe as truth n or so persuasive as honesty. A 
person of a strong conviction is not afraid of diff erences. The truth is secure amidst 
all the differences in thinking and behaving. Gandh i said there are as many 
different religions as there are individuals. If yo u are convinced of the truth of your 
religion and your way of life there is nothing to f ear. Live and let live can be your 
motto. And your best witness to your faith will be your accepting reality and your 
respecting its many differences.  Intolerance is failure of intelligence 
Intolerance is a failure of intelligence. It acts u pon conclusions without 
acknowledging the process which produced the conclu sions. The Truth taught by 
the various religions of the world are conclusions.  They have been arrived at and 
transmitted through human experience. The intoleran t person neglects the process 
and proclaims his or her view as the only Truth. Bu t in reality all Truths are 
products of inductive reasoning. You may start at t he beginning of the process or 
at the end but the process is universal. If you sta rt with the conclusion you use a 
deductive approach and may claim your Truth as beyo nd reasoning and thus a 
revelation. The claim of the intolerant person may,  of course, be true but 
intelligence sees a problem. The Truth proclaimed b y the intolerant person is only 
one of many such claims which differ among themselv es. What does one do in this 
case? To say there is only one Truth-claim is to de ny reality. It is unintelligent to 
do so.  
Intolerance is an error of judgment about Ultimate Truth Intolerance is a 
deadly sin because it is an error of judgment about  Ultimate Truth. The Ultimate 
Truth is beyond the ability of any individual or in stitutional religion to comprehend. 
The wise person accepts this. The intolerant person  does not. The intolerant person 
declares his particular way of thinking and acting as superior to all others. In 
effect, the intolerant person is insulting the God he says he is defending. This is a 
truly deadly sin because it poisons every aspect of  life.  
The wise person is tolerant of different understand ings of God. Accepting the 
reality of an Ultimate Truth beyond our comprehensi on, the tolerant person lives in 
the world of relative truths. Mahatma Gandhi’s word s on this matter are helpful. He 
wrote:  
As a matter of fact, we are all thinking of the unt hinkable, describing the 
indescribable, seeking to know the Unknown, and tha t is why our speech falters, is 
inadequate and even often contradictory. That is wh y the Vedas describe Brahman 
as ‘not this, not this.’ But if He or It is not thi s, He or It is.  
The tolerant person not only accepts the diversitie s of understanding but welcomes 
them as a prisoner in the dark welcomes a window to  the light. M. P. Mathai notes 
that for Gandhi what Radhakrishnan called “The bewi ldering polytheism of the 
masses and the uncompromising monotheism of the cla sses” were expressions of 
the same urge to realize the same power, God, at di fferent levels.  Intolerance is an error which breeds psychological disor der Intolerance 
breeds psychological disorder. An intolerant person  intentionally closes his mind. 
Thus he loses the stimulation, challenges, and bene fits gained from interacting 
with persons holding differing views. Intolerance l eads to a hardening of the 
psychological arteries which need the lifeblood of diversity.  
The intolerant person ignores what has been called the law of the forgotten 
breakthrough. This refers to the fact that religiou s movements begin with a 
founder who breaks through the accepted ways of thi nking and behaving. But 
eventually the movement which the founder inspired becomes rigid and 
institutionalized itself. The intolerant person is often focused on matters which are 
far from the spiritual centre of the original found er’s example and teachings. He 
desires that every person conform to his way of thi nking and acting. Intolerance is 
not a sign of the strength of one’s conviction but rather it is a sign of weakness of 
personal character.  
Intolerance is an error which breeds social disorder  
Intolerance is a deadly sin because it breeds socia l disorder. Every day in every 
community around the world there are countless repo rts of tragedies caused by 
acts of intolerance. Violence is seen as a major pr oblem but what is it that 
provokes the violence? Intolerance. An intolerant h usband unable to tolerate the 
slightest deviation from his authority over his wif e or his children. Intolerance 
between individuals from different castes. Intolera nce culminating in communal 
violence. If you examine closely the social problem s throughout the world, you will 
find at their roots the presence of intolerance.  
Intolerance is an error which breeds political disorder Intolerance is an error 
of thought and action which breeds political disord er. The inability of political 
parties and of heads of government to tolerate alte rnative views lies at the root of 
tyrannical regimes. It is at the heart of corruptio n, abuse of power, and untold 
human suffering. A dramatic occurrence like the des truction of the World Trade 
Center is only one of an endless number of tragedie s caused by the truly deadly sin 
of intolerance.  
Intolerance is a pragmatic error; it does not work Intolerance is a failure 
because it does not work. Intolerance breeds resent ment. It breeds opposition. If 
there is anything certain in life, it is that intol erance ultimately fails. Human history 
is a record of failed attempts of political and rel igious tyrants to establish their own systems as absolute authority for everyone. The mos t effective way to achieve 
respect and authority is the way of tolerance.  
If these characterizations of intolerance are accur ate, it follows that intolerance in 
the name of religion is a deep betrayal and pervers ion of the noblest teachings of 
religion. In short, intolerance is unacceptable in any form and is a sign of weakness 
and not of strength. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/dodecastar4   /dodecastar4   /dodecastar4   /dodecastar4  
 
 