 
From Yeravda Mandir 
(Ashram Observances) 
 
 
By: M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Translated from Gujarati by : Valji Govindji Desai 
 
 
 
 
First Published: December 1932 
 
 
 
 
 
Rs. 5/-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
 
PREFACE 
During my incarceration in 1930 in the Yeravda Cent ral Prison, I wrote weekly 
letters to the Satyagraha Ashram, containing a curs ory examination of the 
principal Ashram observances. As the Ashram influen ce had already traveled 
beyond its geographical limits, copies of the lette rs were multiplied for 
distribution. They were written in Gujarati. There was a demand for translation 
into Hindi or other Indian languages, and also into  English. Shri Valji Desai gave 
a fairly full translation in English. But seeing me  in possession of comparative 
leisure during the recurrent incarceration, he has sent me his translation for 
revision. I have gone through it carefully, and tou ched up several passages to 
bring out my meaning more to my liking. I need hard ly add, that if I was 
writing anew for the English reader, perhaps I shou ld write a wholly new thing. 
But that would be going beyond my commission. And p erhaps it is as well, that 
even the English reader has the trend of my thought  as expressed to the 
inmates of the Ashram, and in the year 1930. I have  therefore taken the least 
liberty with the original argument.  
Yeravda Central Prison 
M. K. Gandhi 
6th March, 1932 From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
TO THE READE R 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What 
I am concerned with is my readiness to obey the cal l of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and therefore, when anybody finds  any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would 
do well to choose the later of the two on the same subject.  
Harijan, 29V4V33.p. 2 
M. K. GANDHI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
01. T RUTH 
I deal with Truth first of all, as the Satyagraha A shram owes its very existence 
to the pursuit and the attempted practice of Truth.  
The word Satya (Truth) is derived from Sat, which m eans 'being'. Nothing is or 
exists in reality except Truth. That is why Sat or Truth is perhaps the most 
important name of God. In fact it is more correct t o say that Truth is God, than 
to say that God is Truth. But as we cannot do witho ut a ruler or a general, 
such names of God as 'King of Kings' or 'The Almigh ty' are and will remain 
generally current. On deeper thinking, however, it will be realized, that Sat 
or Satya is the only correct and fully significant name for God.  
And where there is Truth, there also is knowledge w hich is true. Where there is 
no Truth, there can be no true knowledge. That is w hy the word Chit or 
knowledge is associated with the name of God. And w here there is true 
knowledge, there is always bliss (Ananda). Their so rrow has no place. And even 
as Truth is eternal, so is the bliss derived from i t. Hence we know God as SatV
chitVananda, one who combines in Himself Truth, Kno wledge and Bliss.  
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification fo r our existence. All our 
activities should be centered in Truth. Truth shoul d be the very breath of our 
life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's progres s is reached, all other rules of 
correct living will come without effort, and obedie nce to them will be 
instinctive. But without Truth it is impossible to observe any principles or rules 
in life.  
Generally speaking, observation of the law of Truth  is understood merely to 
mean that we must speak the truth. But we in the As hram should understand 
the word Satya or Truth.  
In a much wider sense. There should be Truth in tho ught, Truth in speech, and 
Truth in action. To the man who has realized this T ruth in its fullness, nothing 
else remains to be known, because all knowledge is necessarily included in it. 
What is not included in it is not Truth, and so not  true knowledge; and there From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  can be no inward peace without true knowledge. If w e once learn how to 
apply this neverVfailing test of Truth, we will at once be able to find out what 
is worth doing, what is worth seeing, what is worth  reading.  
But how is one to realize this Truth, which may be likened to the 
philosopher's stone or the cow of plenty? By single Vminded devotion (abhyasa) 
and indifference to all other interests in life (va iragya) —replies the 
Bhagavadgita. In spite, however, of such devotion, what may appear as truth 
to one person will often appear as untruth to anoth er person. But that need 
not worry the seeker. Where there is honest effort,  it will be realized that 
what appear to be different truths are like the cou ntless and apparently 
different leaves of the same tree. Does not God Him self appear to different 
individuals in different aspects? Yet we know that He is one. But Truth is the 
right designation of God. Hence there is nothing wr ong in every man following 
Truth according to his lights. Indeed it is his dut y to do so. Then if there is a 
mistake on the part of any one so following Truth, it will be automatically set 
right. For the quest of Truth involves tapas—selfVs uffering, sometimes even 
unto death. There can be no place in it for even a trace of selfVinterest. In 
such selfless search for Truth nobody can lose his bearings  
for long. Directly he takes to the wrong path he st umbles, and is thus 
redirected to the right path. Therefore the pursuit  of Truth is true bhakti 
(devotion). It is the path that leads to God. There  is no place in it for 
cowardice, no place for defeat. It is the talisman by which death itself becomes 
the portal to life eternal.  
In this connection it would be well to ponder over the lives and examples of 
Harishchandra, Prahlad, Ramachandra, Imam Hasan and  Imam Husain, the 
Christian saints, etc. How beautiful it would be, i f all of us, young and old, 
men and women, devoted ourselves wholly to Truth in  all that we might do in 
our waking hours, whether working, eating, drinking  or playing, till 
dissolution of the body makes us one with Truth? Go d as Truth has been for me 
a treasure beyond price: may He be so to every one of us.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6   
02. AHIMSA OR LOVE 
We saw last week how the path of Truth is as narrow  as it is straight. Even 
so is that of ahimsa. It is like balancing oneself on the edge of a sword. By 
concentration an acrobat can walk on a rope. But th e concentration required 
to tread the path of Truth and ahimsa is far greate r. The slightest inattention 
brings one tumbling to the ground. One can realize Truth and ahimsa only by 
ceaseless striving.  
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect Trut h so long as we are imprisoned 
in this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in o ur imagination. We cannot, 
through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body,  see face to face Truth 
which is eternal. That is why in the last resort we  must depend on faith.  
It appears that the impossibility of full realizati on of Truth in this mortal body 
led some ancient seeker after Truth to the apprecia tion of ahimsa. The 
question which confronted him was: "Shall I bear wi th those who create 
difficulties for me, or shall I destroy them?" The seeker realized that he who 
went on destroying others did not make headway but simply stayed where 
he was, while the man who suffered those who create d difficulties marched 
ahead, and at times even took the others with him. The first act of destruction 
taught him that the Truth which was the object of h is quest was not outside 
himself but within. Hence the more he took to viole nce, the more he receded 
from Truth. For in fighting the imagined enemy with out, he neglected the 
enemy within.  
We punish thieves, because we think they harass us.  They may leave us alone; 
but they will only transfer their attentions to ano ther victim. This other 
victim however is also a human being, ourselves in a different form, and so 
we are caught in a vicious circle. The trouble from  thieves continues to 
increase, as they think it is their business to ste al. In the end we see that it is 
better to endure the thieves than to punish them. T he forbearance may even 
bring them to their senses. By enduring them we rea lize that thieves are not 
different from ourselves, they are our brethren, ou r friends, and may not be From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  punished. But whilst we may bear with the thieves, we may not endure the 
infliction. That would only induce cowardice. So we  realize a further duty. 
Since we regard the thieves as our kith and kin, th ey must be made to realize 
the kinship. And so we must take pains to devise wa ys and means of winning 
them over. This is the path of ahimsa. It may entai l continuous suffering and 
the cultivating of endless patience. Given these tw o conditions, the thief is 
bound in the end to turn away from his evil ways. T hus step by step we learn 
how to make friends with all the world; we realize the greatness of God—of 
Truth. Our peace of mind increases in spite of suff ering; we become braver 
and more enterprising; we understand more clearly t he difference between 
what is everlasting and what is not; we learn how t o distinguish between what 
is our duty and what is not. Our pride melts away, and we become humble. 
Our worldly attachments diminish, and the evil with in us diminishes from day 
to day.  
Ahimsa is not the crude thing it has been made to a ppear. Not to hurt any 
living thing is no doubt a part of ahimsa. But it i s its least expression. The 
principle of ahimsa is hurt by every evil thought, by undue haste, by lying, by 
hatred, by wishing ill to anybody. It is also viola ted by our holding on to what 
the world needs. But the world needs even what we e at day by day. In the 
place where we stand there are millions of microVor ganisms to whom the place 
belongs, and who are hurt by our presence there. Wh at should we do then? 
Should we commit suicide? Even that is no solution,  if we believe, as we do, 
that so long as the spirit is attached to the flesh , on every destruction of the 
body it weaves for itself another. The body will ce ase to be only when we give 
up all attachment to it. This freedom from all atta chment is the realization of 
God as Truth. Such realization cannot be attained i n a hurry. The body does 
not belong to us. While it lasts, we must use it as  a trust handed over to our 
charge. Treating in this way the things of the fles h, we may one day expect 
to become free from the burden of the body. Realizi ng the limitations of the 
flesh, we must strive day by day towards the ideal with what strength we have 
in us. From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  It is perhaps clear from the forgoing, that without  ahimsa it is not possible to 
seek and find Truth. Ahimsa and Truth are so intert wined that it is practically 
impossible to disentangle and separate them. They a re like the two sides of a 
coin, or rather of a smooth unstamped metallic disc . Who can say, which is the 
obverse, and which is the reverse? Nevertheless Ahi msa is the means; Truth is 
the end. Means to be means must always be within ou r reach, and so ahimsa is 
our supreme duty. If we take care of the means, we are bound to reach the 
end sooner or later. When once we have grasped this  point, final victory is 
beyond question. Whatever difficulties we encounter , whatever apparent 
reverses we sustain, we may not give up the quest f or Truth which alone is, 
being God Himself.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
03. BRAHMACHARYA OR CHASTITY 
The third among our observances is brahmacharya. As  a matter of fact all 
observances are deducible from Truth, and are meant  to subserve it. The man, 
who is wedded to Truth and worships Truth alone, pr oves unfaithful to her, if 
he applies his talents to anything else. How then c an he minister to the senses? 
A man, whose activities are wholly consecrated to t he realization of Truth, 
which requires utter selfishness, can have no time for the selfish purpose of 
begetting children and running a household. Realiza tion of Truth through selfV
gratification should, after what has been said befo re, appear a contradiction in 
terms.  
If we look at it from the standpoint of ahimsa (non Vviolence), we find that the 
fulfillment of ahimsa is impossible without utter s elflessness. Ahimsa means 
Universal Love. If a man gives his love to one woma n, or a woman to one man, 
what is there left for all the world besides? It si mply means, "We two first, and 
the devil take all the rest of them." As a faithful  wife must be prepared to 
sacrifice her all for the sake of her husband, and a faithful husband for the 
sake of his wife, it is clear that such persons can not rise to the height of 
Universal Love, or look upon all mankind as kith an d kin. For they have created 
a boundary wall round their love. The larger their family, the farther are they 
from Universal Love. Hence one who would obey the l aw of ahimsa cannot 
marry, not to speak of gratification outside the ma rital bond.  
Then what about people who are already married? Wil l they never be able to 
realize Truth? Can they never offer up their all at  the altar of humanity? 
There is a way out for them. They can behave as if they were not married. 
Those who have enjoyed this happy condition will be  able to bear me out. 
Many have to my knowledge successfully tried the ex periment. If the 
married couple can think of each other as brother a nd sister, they are freed 
for universal service. The very thought that all th e women in the world are his 
sisters, mothers or daughters will at once ennoble a man and snap his chains. 
The husband and wife do not lose anything here, but  only add to their From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  resources and even to their family. Their love beco mes free from the impurity 
of lust and so grows stronger. With the disappearan ce of this impurity, they 
can serve each other better, and the occasions for quarrelling become fewer. 
There are more occasions for quarrelling where the love is selfish and bounded.  
If the foregoing argument is appreciated, a conside ration of the physical 
benefits of chastity becomes a matter of secondary importance. How foolish 
it is intentionally to dissipate vital energy in se nsual enjoyment! It is a grave 
misuse to fritter away for physical gratification t hat which is given to man and 
woman for the full development of their bodily and mental powers. Such 
misuse is the root cause of many a disease.  
Brahmacharya, like all other observances, must be o bserved in thought, word 
and deed. We are told in the Gita, and experience w ill corroborate the 
statement, that the foolish man, who appears to con trol his body, but is 
nursing evil thoughts in his mind, makes a vain eff ort. It may be harmful to 
suppress the body, if the mind is at the same time allowed to go astray. Where 
the mind wanders, the body must follow sooner or la ter. 
It is necessary here to appreciate a distinction. I t is one thing to allow the 
mind to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different thing altogether if it strays 
among them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be o urs in the end, if we nonV
cooperate with the mind in its evil wanderings.  
We experience every moment of our lives, that often  while the body is subject 
to our control, the mind is not. This physical cont rol should never be 
relaxed, and in addition we must put forth a consta nt endeavour to bring the 
mind under control. We can do nothing more, nothing  less. If we give way to 
the mind, the body and the mind will pull different  ways, and we shall be 
false to ourselves. Body and mind may be said to go  together, so long as we 
continue to resist the approach of every evil thoug ht. 
The observence of brahmacharya has been believed to  be very difficult, 
almost impossible. In trying to find a reason for t his belief, we see that the 
term brahmacharya has been taken in a narrow sense.  Mere control of animal 
passion has been thought to be tantamount to observ ing brahmacharya. I feel, From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  that this conception is incomplete and wrong. Brahm acharya means control of 
all the organs of sense. He who attempts to control  only one organ, and 
allows all the others free play, is bound to find h is effort futile. To hear 
suggestive stories with the ears, to see suggestive  sights with the eyes, to 
taste simulating food with the tongue, to touch exc iting things with the 
hands, and then at the same time to expect to contr ol the only remaining 
organ is like putting one's hands in the fire, and expecting to escape being 
burnt. He therefore who is resolved to control the one must be likewise 
determined to control the rest. I have always felt,  that much harm has been 
done by the narrow definition of brahmacharya. If w e practise simultaneous 
selfVcontrol in all directions, the attempt will be  scientific and possible of 
success. Perhaps the palate is the chief sinner. Th at is why in the Ashram we 
have assigned to control of the palate a separate p lace among our observances.  
Let us remember the root meaning of brahmacharya. C harya means course of 
conduct; brahmacharya conduct adapted to the search  of Brahma, i.e., Truth. 
From this etymological meaning arises the special m eaning, viz. control of all 
the senses. We must entirely forget the incomplete definition which restricts 
itself to the sexual aspect only.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
04. CONTROL OF THE PALATE 
Control of the palate is very closely connected wit h the observance of 
brahmacharya. I have found from experience that the  observance of celibacy 
becomes comparatively easy, if one acquires mastery  over the palate. This 
does not figure among the observances of timeV hono ured recognition. Could it 
be because even great sages found it difficult to a chieve? In the Satyagraha 
Ashram we have elevated it to the rank of an indepe ndent observance, and 
must therefore consider it by itself.  
Food has to be taken as we take medicine, that is, without thinking whether it 
is palatable or otherwise, and only in quantities l imited to the needs of the 
body. Just as medicine taken in too small a dose do es not take effect or the 
full effect, and as too large a does injures the sy stem, so it is with food. It is 
therefore a breach of this observance to take anyth ing just for its pleasant 
taste. It is equally a breach to take too much of w hat one finds to one's 
taste. From this it follows, that to put salt in on e's food, in order to increase 
or modify its flavour or in order to cure its insip idity, is a breach of the 
observance. But the addition is not a breach, if it  is considered necessary for 
health to have a certain proportion of salt with fo od. Of course it would be 
sheer hypocrisy to add salt or any other thing to o ur food, deluding ourselves 
that it is necessary for the system if as a matter of fact it is not.  
Developing along these lines we find we have to giv e up many things that 
we have been enjoying, as they are not needed for n utrition. And one who 
thus gives up a multitude of eatables will acquire selfVcontrol in the natural 
course of things. This subject has received such sc ant attention, that choice of 
food with this observance in view is a very difficu lt matter.  
Parents, out of false affection, give their childre n a variety of foods, ruin their 
constitution, and create in them artificial tastes.  When they grow up, they 
have diseased bodies and perverted tastes. The evil  consequences of this early 
indulgence dog us at every step; we waste much mone y and fall an easy prey 
to the medicine man.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  Most of us, instead of keeping the organs of sense under control, become 
their slaves. An experienced physician once observe d that he had never seen a 
healthy man. The body is injured every time that on e overVeats, and the injury 
can be partially repaired only by fasting.  
No one need take fright at my observations, or give  up the effort in despair. 
The taking of a vow does not mean, that we are able  to observe it completely 
from the very beginning; it does mean constant and honest effort in thought, 
word and deed with a view to its fulfillment. We mu st not practise selfV
deception by resorting to some makeVbelieve. To deg rade or cheapen an ideal 
for our convenience is to practise untruth and to l ower ourselves. To 
understand an ideal and then to make a herculean ef fort to reach it, no 
matter how difficult it is,—this is purushartha, ma nly endeavour. One who at 
all times fulfils the key observances in their perf ection has nothing else left 
for him to do in this world; he is bhagavan, perfec t man, he is a yogi. We 
humble seekers can but put forth a slow but steady effort, which is sure to win 
divine grace for us in God's good time, and all art ificial tastes will then 
disappear with the realization of the Highest.  
We must not be thinking of food all the twentyVfour  hours of the day. The only 
thing needful is perpetual vigilance, which will he lp us to find out very soon 
when we eat for selfVindulgence, and when in order only to sustain the body. 
This being discovered, we must resolutely set our f aces against mere 
indulgence. A common kitchen where this principle i s observed is very 
helpful, as it relieves us from the necessity of th inking out the menu for 
each day, and provides us with acceptable food of w hich we may take only a 
limited quantity with contented and thankful mind. The authorities of a 
common kitchen lighten our burden and serve as watc hdogs of our observance. 
They will not pamper us, they will cook only such f ood as helps us to keep the 
body a fit instrument for service. In an ideal stat e the sun should be our only 
cook. But I know that we are far, far away from tha t happy state.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
05. NON-STEALING 
We now come to the observance of NonVstealing. Like  the last two this is also 
implicit in Truth. Love may be deduced from Truth, or may be paired with 
Truth. Truth and Love are one and the same thing, I  am partial to Truth 
however. In the final analysis there can only be a single reality. The highest 
Truth stands by itself. Truth is the end, Love a me ans thereto. We know what 
is Love or nonVviolence, although we find it diffic ult to follow the law of Love. 
But as for Truth we know only a fraction of it. Per fect knowledge of Truth is 
difficult of attainment for man even like the perfe ct practice of nonVviolence.  
It is impossible that a person should steal, and si multaneously claim to know 
Truth or cherish Love. Yet every one of us is consc iously or unconsciously more 
or less guilty of theft. We may steal not only what  belongs to others, but 
also what belongs to ourselves, as is done, for ins tance, by a father who 
eats something secretly, keeping his children in th e dark about it. The 
Ashram kitchen stores are our common property, but one who secretly 
removes a single crystal of sugar from it stamps hi mself a thief. It is theft to 
take anything belonging to another without his perm ission, even if it be with his 
knowledge. It is equally theft to take something in  the belief that it is nobody's 
property. Things found on the roadside belong to th e ruler or the local 
authority. Anything found near the Ashram must be h anded over to the 
secretary, who in his turn will pass it on to the p olice if it is not Ashram 
property.  
Thus far it is pretty smooth sailing. But the obser vance of NonVstealing 
goes very much farther. It is theft to take somethi ng from another even with 
his permission if we have no real need of it. We sh ould not receive any single 
thing that we do not need. Theft of this descriptio n generally has food for its 
object. It is theft for me to take any fruit that I  do not need, or to take it in 
a larger quantity than is necessary. We are not alw ays aware of our real needs, 
and most of us improperly multiply our wants, and t hus unconsciously make 
thieves of ourselves. If we devote some thought to the subject, we shall find From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  that we can get rid of quite a number of our wants.  One who follows the 
observance of NonVstealing will bring about a progr essive reduction of his 
own wants. Much of the distressing poverty in this world has arisen out of 
breaches of the principle of NonVstealing.  
Theft, thus far considered, may be termed external or physical theft. There is 
besides another kind of theft subtler and far more degrading to the human 
spirit. It is theft mentally to desire acquisition of anything belonging to others, 
or to cast a greedy eye on it. One who takes no foo d, physically speaking, is 
generally said to be fasting, but he is guilty of t heft as well as a breach of his 
fast, if he gives himself up to a mental contemplat ion of pleasure, when he 
sees others taking their meals. He is similarly gui lty, if during his fast he is 
continually planning the varied menu he will have a fter breaking the fast.  
One, who observes the principle of NonVstealing, wi ll refuse to bother himself 
about things to be acquired in the future. This evi l anxiety for the future will 
be found at the root of many a theft. Today we only  desire possession of a 
thing; tomorrow we shall begin to adopt measures, s traight if possible, crooked 
when thought necessary, to acquire its possession.  
Ideas may be stolen no less than material things. O ne who egoistically claims 
to have originated some good idea, which really spe aking, did not originate 
with him, is guilty of a theft of ideas. Many learn ed men have committed 
such theft in the course of world history, and plag iarism is by no means 
uncommon even today. Supposing, for instance, that I see a new type of 
spinning wheel in Andhra, and manufacture a similar  wheel in the Ashram, 
passing it off as my own invention, I practice untr uth, and am clearly guilty of 
stealing another's invention.  
One who takes up the observance of NonVstealing has  therefore to be 
humble, thoughtful, vigilant and in habits simple.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16   
06. NON-POSSESSION OR POVERTY 
NonVpossession is allied to NonVstealing. A thing n ot originally stolen must 
nevertheless be classified as stolen property, if w e possess it without needing 
it. Possession implies provision for the future. A seeker after Truth, a follower 
of the law of Love cannot hold anything against tom orrow. God never stores for 
the morrow; He never creates more than what is stri ctly needed for the 
moment. If therefore we repose faith in His provide nce, we should rest assured, 
that He will give us every day our daily bread, mea ning everything that we 
require. Saints and devotees, who have lived in suc h faith, have always 
derived a justification for it from their experienc e. Our ignorance or 
negligence of the Divine Law, which gives to man fr om day to day his daily 
bread and no more, has given rise to inequalities w ith all the miseries 
attendant upon them. The rich have a superfluous st ore of things which they 
do not need, and which are therefore neglected and wasted; while millions are 
starved to death for want of sustenance. If each re tained possession only of 
what he needed, no one would be in want, and all wo uld live in contentment. 
As it is, the rich are discontented no less than th e poor. The poor man would 
fain become a millionaire, and the millionaire a mu ltiVmillionaire. The rich 
should take the initiative in dispossession with a view to a universal diffusion 
of the spirit of contentment. If only they keep the ir own property within 
moderate limits, the starving will be easily fed, a nd will learn the lesson of 
contentment along with the rich. Perfect fulfillmen t of the ideal of NonV 
possession requires that man should, like the birds , have no roof over his 
head, no clothing and no stock of food for the morr ow. He will indeed need his 
daily bread, but it will be God's business, and not  his, to provide it. Only the 
fewest possible, if any at all, can reach this idea l. We ordinary seekers may 
not be repelled by the seeming impossibility. But w e must keep the ideal 
constantly in view, and in the light thereof, criti cally examine our possessions, 
and try to reduce them. Civilization, in the real s ense of the term, consists not 
in the multiplication, but in the deliberate and vo luntary reduction of wants. 
This alone promotes real happiness and contentment,  and increase the From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  capacity for service. Judging by this criterion, we  find, that in the Ashram we 
possess many things, the necessity for which cannot  be proved, and we thus 
tempt our neighbours to thieve.  
From the standpoint of pure Truth, the body too is a possession. It has been 
truly said, that desire for enjoyment creates bodie s for the soul. When this 
desire vanishes, there remains no further need for the body, and man is free 
from the vicious cycle of births and deaths. The so ul is omniVpresent; why 
should she care to be confined within the cageVlike  body, or do evil and even 
kill for the sake of that cage? We thus arrive at t he ideal of total renunciation, 
and learn to use the body for the purpose of servic e so long as it exists, so 
much so that service, and not bread, becomes with u s the staff of life. We eat 
and drink, sleep and wake, for service alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us 
real happiness, and the beatific vision in the full ness of time. Let us all examine 
ourselves from this standpoint.  
We should remember, that NonVpossession is a princi ple applicable to 
thoughts, as well as to things. A man who fills his  brain with useless 
knowledge violates that inestimable principle. Thou ghts, which turn us away 
from God, or do not  turn us towards Him, constitute impediments in our way. 
In this connection we may consider the definition o f knowledge contained in 
the 13th chapter of the Gita. We are there told, th at humility (amanitvam) 
etc, constitute knowledge, and all the rest is igno rance. If this is true,— and 
there is no doubt that it is true, much that we hug  today as knowledge is 
ignorance pure and simple, and therefore only does us harm, instead of 
conferring any benefit. It makes the mind wander, a nd even reduces it to a 
vacuity, and discontent flourishes in endless ramif ications of evil. Needless to 
say, this is not a plea for inertia. Every moment o f our life should be filled 
with mental or physical activity, but that activity  should be sattvika, tending to 
Truth. One who has consecrated his life to service cannot be idle for a single 
moment. But we have to learn to distinguish between  good activity and evil 
activity. This discernment goes naturally with a si ngleVminded devotion to 
service.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
07. F EARLESSNESS 
Every reader of the Gita knows, that fearlessness h eads the list of the Divine 
Attributes enumerated in the 16th chapter. Whether this is merely due to the 
exigencies of metre, or whether the pride of place has been deliberately 
yielded to fearlessness, is more than I can say. In  my opinion, however, 
fearlessness richly deserves the first rank assigne d to it. For it is indispensable 
for the growth of the other noble qualities. How ca n one seek Truth, or 
cherish Love, without fearlessness ? As Pritam says , 'the path of Hari (the Lord) 
is the path of the brave, not of cowards.' Hari her e means Truth, and the 
brave are those armed with fearlessness, not with t he sword, the rifle and the 
like. These are taken up only by those who are poss essed by fear.  
Fearlessness connotes freedom from all external fea r,—fear of disease, 
bodily injury, and death, of dispossession, of losi ng one's nearest and 
dearest, of losing reputation or giving offence, an d so on. One who overcomes 
the fear of death does not surmount all other fears , as is commonly but 
erroneously supposed. Some of us do not fear death,  but flee from the minor 
ills of life. Some are ready to die themselves, but  cannot bear their loved ones 
being taken away from them. Some misers will put up  with all this, will part 
even with their lives, but not their property; othe rs will do any number of 
black deeds in order to uphold their supposed prest ige. Some will swerve from 
the straight and narrow path, which lies clear befo re them, simply because 
they are afraid of incurring the world's odium. The  seeker after Truth must 
conquer all these fears. He should be ready to sacr ifice his all in the quest of 
Truth, even as Harishchandra did. The story of Hari shchandra may be only a 
parable; but every seeker will bear witness to its truth from his personal 
experience, and therefore that story is as precious  as any historical fact.  
Perfect fearlessness can be attained only by him wh o has realized the 
Supreme, as it implies freedom from delusions. One can always progress 
towards this goal by determined and constant endeav our, and by cultivating 
selfVconfidence.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  As I have stated at the very outset, we must give u p all external fears. But the 
internal foes we must always fear. We are rightly a fraid of animal passion, 
anger, and the like. External fears cease of their own accord, when once we 
have conquered these traitors within the camp. All such fears revolve round 
the body as the centre, and will therefore disappea r, as soon as we get rid of 
attachment for the body. We thus find, that all ext ernal fear is the baseless 
fabric of our own vision. Fear has no place in our hearts, when we have 
shaken off attachment for wealth, for family and fo r the body. 'Enjoy* the 
things of the earth by renouncing them' is a noble precept. Wealth, family and 
body will be there, just the same; we have only to change our attitude 
towards them. All these are not ours, but God's. No thing whatever in this world 
is ours. Even we ourselves are His. Why then should  we entertain any fears? 
The Upanishad therefore directs us 'to give up atta chment for things, while we 
enjoy them.' That is to say, we must be interested in them, not as proprietors, 
but only as trustees. He, on whose behalf we hold t hem, will give us the 
strength and the weapons requisite for defending th em against all usurpers. 
When we thus cease to be masters, and reduce oursel ves to the rank of 
servants, humbler than  the  very  dust  under  our  feet, all  fears   will  roll 
away  like  mists; we shall attain ineffable  peace, and see Satyanarayan 
(the  God of Truth)  face to face.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
08. REMOVAL OF UNTOUCHABILITY 
This too is a new observance, like control of the p alate, and may even appear 
a little strange. But it is of vital importance. Un touchability means pollution by 
the touch of certain persons by reason of their bir th in a particular state or 
family. In the words of Akha, it is an excrescence.  In the guise of religion, it is 
always in the way, and corrupts religion.  
None can be born untouchable, as all are sparks of one and the same Fire. It is 
wrong to treat certain human beings as untouchables  from birth. It is also 
wrong to entertain false scruples about touching, a  dead body, which should 
be an object of pity and respect. It is only out of  considerations of health, 
that we bathe after handling a dead body, or after an application of oil, or a 
shave. A man who does not bathe in such cases may b e looked upon as dirty, 
but surely not as a sinner. A mother may be 'untouc hable' so long as she 
has not bathed, or washed her hands and feet, after  cleaning up her child's 
mess, but if a child happened to touch her, it woul d not be polluted by the 
touch.  
But Bhangis, Dhedhs, Chamars and the like are conte mptuously looked down 
upon as untouchables from birth. They may bathe for  years with any amount 
of soap, dress well and wear the marks of Vaishnava s, read the Gita every day 
and follow a learned profession, and yet they remai n untouchables. This is 
rank irreligion fit only to be destroyed. By treati ng removal of untouchability 
as an Ashram observance, we assert our belief, that  untouchability is not only 
not a part and parcel of Hinduism, but a plague, wh ich it is the bounden duty 
of every Hindu to combat. Every Hindu, therefore, w ho considers it a sin, 
should atone for it by fraternizing with untouchabl es, associating with them in 
a spirit of love and service, deeming himself purif ied by such acts, redressing 
their grievances, helping them patiently to overcom e ignorance and other evils 
due to the slavery of ages, and inspiring other Hin dus to do likewise.  
When one visualizes the removal of untouchability f rom this spiritual 
standpoint, its material and political results sink  into insignificance, and we From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  befriend the soVcalled untouchables, regardless of such results. Seekers after 
Truth will never waste a thought on the material co nsequences of their 
quest, which is not a matter of policy with them, b ut something interwoven 
with the very texture of their lives.  
When we have realized the supreme importance of thi s observance, we shall 
discover, that the evil it seeks to combat is not r estricted in its operation to 
the suppressed classes. Evil, no bigger than a must ard seed in the first 
instance, soon assumes gigantic proportions, and in  the long run destroys that 
upon which it settles. Thus this evil has now assai led all departments of life. 
We have hardly enough time even to look after ourse lves, thanks to the never 
ending ablutions, and exclusive preparation of food  necessitated by false 
notions of untouchability. While pretending to pray  to God, we offer worship 
not to God, but to ourselves.  
This observance, therefore, is not fulfilled, merel y by making friends with 
'untouchables', but by loving all life as our own s elves. Removal of 
untouchability means love for, and service of, the whole world, and thus 
merges into ahimsa. Removal of untouchability spell s the breaking down of 
barriers between man and man, and between the vario us orders of Being. 
We find such barriers erected everywhere in the wor ld, but here we have 
been mainly concerned with  the untouchability which has received  
religious sanction  in India, and reduced  lakhs and crores of human  beings 
to a state  bordering  on slavery.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22   
09. B READ-LABOUR 
The law, that to live man must work, first came hom e to me upon reading 
Tolstoy's writing on Bread labour. But even before that I had begun to pay 
homage to it after reading Ruskin's Unto This Last.  The divine law, that man 
must earn his bread by labouring with his own hands , was first stressed by a 
Russian writer named T. M. Bondaref. Tolstoy advert ised it and gave it wider 
publicity. In my view, the same principle has been set forth in the third 
chapter of the Gita where we are told, that he who eats without offering 
sacrifice eats stolen food. Sacrifice here can only  mean Bread labour.  
Reason too leads us to an identical conclusion. How  can a man, who does not 
do body labour, have the right to eat? 'In the swea t of thy brow shalt thou eat 
thy bread,' says the Bible. A millionaire cannot ca rry on for long, and will soon 
get tired of his life, if he rolls in his bed all d ay long, and is even helped to his 
food. He therefore induces hunger by exercise, and helps himself to the food 
he eats. If everyone, whether rich or poor, has thu s to take exercise in some 
shape or form, why should it not assume the form of  productive, i.e, Bread 
labour ? No one asks the cultivator to take breathi ng exercise or to work his 
muscles. And more than nine tenths of humanity live s by tilling the soil. How 
much happier, healthier and more peaceful would the  world become, if the 
remaining tenth followed the example of the overwhe lming majority, at least 
to the extent of labouring enough for their food ! And many hardships, 
connected with agriculture, would be easily redress ed, if such people took a 
hand in it. Again invidious distinctions of rank wo uld be abolished, when 
everyone without exception acknowledged the obligat ion of Bread labour. It is 
common to all the varnas. There is a worldwide conf lict between capital and 
labour, and the poor envy the rich. If all worked f or their bread distinctions 
of rank would be obliterated; the rich would still be there, but they would 
deem themselves only trustees of their property and  would use it mainly in the 
public interest.  
Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one who wou ld observe NonVviolence, From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  worship Truth, and make the observance of brahmacha rya a natural act. This 
labour can truly be related to agriculture alone. B ut at present at any rate, 
everybody is not in a position to take to it. A per son can therefore spin or 
weave, or take up carpentry or smithery, instead of  tilling the soil, always 
regarding agriculture however to be the ideal. Ever yone must be his own 
scavenger. Evacuation is as necessary as eating; an d the best thing would be 
for everyone to dispose of his own waste. If this i s impossible, each family 
should see to its own scavenging. I have felt for y ears, that there must be 
something radically wrong, where scavenging has bee n made the concern of a 
separate class in society. We have no historical re cord of the man, who 
first assigned the lowest status to this essential sanitary service. Whoever he 
was, he by no means did us a good. We should, from our very childhood, have 
the idea impressed upon our minds that we are all s cavengers, and the easiest 
way of doing so is, for everyone who has realized t his, to commence Bread 
labour as a scavenger. Scavenging, thus intelligent ly taken up, will help one to 
a true appreciation of the equality of man.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24   
10. TOLERANCE, I.E. EQUALITY OF RELIGIONS - I 
I do not like the word tolerance, but could not thi nk of a better one. 
Tolerance may imply a gratuitous assumption of the inferiority of other faiths 
to one's own, whereas ahimsa teaches us to entertai n the same respect for 
the religious faiths of others as we accord to our own, thus admitting the 
imperfection of the latter. This admission will be readily made by a seeker of 
Truth, who follows the law of Love. If we had attai ned the full vision of Truth, 
we would no longer be mere seekers, but would have become one with God, for 
Truth is God. But being only seekers, we prosecute our quest, and are 
conscious of our imperfection. And if we are imperf ect ourselves, religion 
as conceived by us must also be imperfect. We have not realized religion in its 
perfection, even as we have not realized God. Relig ion of our conception, 
being thus imperfect, is always subject to a proces s of evolution and reV
interpretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God , is possible only 
because of such evolution. And if all faiths outlin ed by men are imperfect, 
the question of comparative merit does not arise. A ll faiths constitute a 
revelation of Truth, but all are imperfect and liab le to error. Reverence for 
other faiths need not blind us to their faults. We must be keenly alive to the 
defects of our faith also, yet not leave it on that  account, but try to overcome 
those defects. Looking at all religions with an equ al eye, we would not only 
not hesitate, but would think it our duty, to blend  into our faith every 
acceptable feature of other faiths.  
The question then arises: Why should there be so ma ny different faiths ? The 
Soul is one, but the bodies which she animates are many. We cannot reduce 
the number of bodies; yet we recognize the unity of  the Soul. Even as a tree 
has a single trunk, but many branches and leaves, s o is there one true and 
perfect Religion, but it becomes many, as it passes  through the human 
medium. The one Religion is beyond all speech. Impe rfect men put it into 
such language as they can command, and their words are interpreted by other 
men equally imperfect. Whose interpretation is to b e held to be the right one? From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  Everybody is right from his own standpoint, but it is not impossible that 
everybody is wrong. Hence the necessity for toleran ce, which does not mean 
indifference towards one's own faith, but a more in telligent and purer love 
for it. Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which  is as far from fanaticism as the 
north pole from the south. True knowledge of religi on breaks down the 
barriers between faith and faith. Cultivation of to lerance for other faiths will 
impart to us a truer understanding of our own.  
Tolerance obviously does not disturb the distinctio n between right and wrong, 
or good and evil. The reference here throughout is naturally to the principal 
faiths of the world. They are all based on common f undamentals. They have 
all produced great saints.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26   
11. TOLERANCE, I.E. EQUALITY OF RELIGIONS - II 
I would linger yet a while on tolerance. My meaning  will perhaps become 
clearer, if I describe here some of my experiences.  In Phoenix we had our 
daily prayers in the same way as in Sabarmati, and Musalmans as well as 
Christians attended them along with Hindus. The lat e Sheth Rustomji and his 
children too frequented the prayer meetings. Rustom ji Sheth very much 
liked the Gujarati bhajan, 'Mane valun,' 'Dear, dea r to me is the name of 
Rama.' If my memory serves me right, Maganlal or Ka shi was once leading us in 
singing this hymn, when Rustomji Sheth exclaimed jo yously, 'Say the name of 
Hormazd instead of name of Rama.' His suggestion wa s readily taken up, and 
after that whenever the Sheth was present, and some times even when he was 
not, we put in the name of Hormazd in place of Rama . The late Husain, son of 
Daud Sheth, often stayed at the Phoenix Ashram, and  enthusiastically joined 
our prayers. To the accompaniment of an organ, he u sed to sing in a very 
sweet voice the song 'Hai bahare bagh,' 'The garden  of this world has only a 
momentary bloom.' He taught us all this song, which  we also sang at prayers. 
Its inclusion in our Bhajanavali is a tribute to tr uthVloving Husain's memory. I 
have never met a young man who practised Truth more  devotedly than 
Husain. Joseph Royeppen often came to Phoenix. He i s a Christian, and his 
favorite hymn was 'Vaishnava jana', 'He is a Vaishn ava (servant of the Lord), 
who succours people in distress.' He loved music, a nd once sang this hymn, 
saying 'Christian' in place of Vaishnava. The other s accepted his reading with 
alacrity, and I observed that this filled Joseph's heart with joy.  
When I was turning over the pages of the sacred boo ks of different faiths for 
my own satisfaction, I became sufficiently familiar  for my purpose with 
Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Judaism and Hi nduism. In reading these 
texts, I can say, that I was equiminded towards all  these faiths, although 
perhaps I was not then conscious of it. Refreshing my memory of those days, I 
do not find I ever had the slightest desire to crit icize any of those religions 
merely because they were not my own, but read each sacred book in a spirit of From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  reverence, and found the same fundamental morality in each. Some things I 
did not understand then, and do not understand even  now, but experience has 
taught me, that it is a mistake hastily to imagine,  that anything that we 
cannot understand is necessarily wrong. Some things  which I did not 
understand first have since become as clear as dayl ight. Equimindedness helps 
us to solve many difficulties and even when we crit icize anything, we express 
ourselves with a humility and a courtesy, which lea ve no sting behind them.  
The acceptance of the doctrine of Equality of Relig ions does not abolish the 
distinction between religion and irreligion. We do not propose to cultivate 
toleration for irreligion. That being so, some peop le might object, that there 
would be no room left for equimindedness, if everyo ne took his own decision 
as to what was religion and what was irreligion. If  we follow the law of Love, 
we shall not bear any hatred towards the irreligiou s brother. On the contrary, 
we shall love him, and therefore either we shall br ing him to see the error of 
his ways, or he will point out our error, or each w ill tolerate the other's 
difference of opinion. If the other party does not observe the law of Love, he 
may be violent to us. If however we cherish real lo ve for him, it will 
overcome his bitterness in the end. All obstacles  in our path  will vanish , 
if only  we observe the  golden  rule,  that  we must  not  be impatient 
with  those  whom  we may  consider  to  be in error,  but must  be 
prepared, if need be, to suffer in our own person.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
12. H UMILITY 
Humility cannot be an observance by itself. For it does not lend itself so 
being deliberately practised. It is however an indi spensable test of ahimsa. 
In one who has ahimsa in him it becomes part of his  very nature.  
A preliminary draft of the rules and regulations of  the Satyagraha Ashram 
was circulated among friends, including the late Si r Gurudas Banerji. He 
suggested, that humility should be accorded a place  among the observances. 
This suggestion could not then be accepted for the reason that I have just 
mentioned.  
But although humility is not one of the observances , it is certainly as 
essential as, and perhaps, even more essential, tha n any of them. Only it 
has never come to any one by practice. Truth can be  cultivated as well as 
Love. But to cultivate humility is tantamount to cu ltivating hypocrisy. Humility 
must not be here confounded with mere manners or et iquette. One man will 
sometimes prostrate himself before another, althoug h his heart is full of 
bitterness against him. This is not humility, but c unning. A man may chant 
Ramanama, or tell his beads all day long, and move in society like a sage; but 
if he is selfish at heart, he is not meek, but only  hypocritical.  
A humble person is not himself conscious of his hum ility. Truth and the like 
perhaps admit of measurement, but not humility. Inb orn humility can never 
remain hidden, and yet the possessor is unaware of its existence. The story of 
Vasishtha and Vishvamitra furnishes a very good cas e in point. Humility should 
make the possessor realize, that he is as nothing. Directly we imagine 
ourselves to be something, there is egotism. If a m an who keeps observances 
is proud of keeping them, they will lose much, if n ot all of their value. And a 
man who is proud of his virtue often becomes a curs e to society. Society will 
not appreciate it, and he himself will fail to reap  any benefit from it. Only 
a little thought will suffice to convince us, that all creatures are nothing 
more than a mere atom in this universe. Our existen ce as embodied beings 
is purely momentary; what are a hundred years in et ernity? But if we shatter From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  the chains of egotism, and melt into the ocean of h umanity, we share its 
dignity. To feel that we are something is to set up  a barrier between God 
and ourselves; to cease feeling that we are somethi ng is to become one with 
God. A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness of its parent, although, it 
is unconscious of it. But it is dried up, as soon a s it enters upon an existence 
independent of the ocean. We do not exaggerate, whe n we say that life on 
earth is a mere bubble.  
A life of service must be one of humility. He who w ould sacrifice his life for 
others has hardly time to reserve for himself a pla ce in the sun. Inertia must 
not be mistaken for humility, as it has been in Hin duism. True humility means 
most strenuous and constant endeavour entirely dire cted towards the service 
of humanity. God is continuously in action without resting for a single 
moment. If we would serve Him or become one with Hi m, our activity must be 
as unwearied as His. There may be momentary rest in  store for the drop which 
is separated from the ocean, but not for the drop i n the ocean, which knows no 
rest. The same is the case with ourselves. As soon as we become one with the 
ocean in the shape of God, there is no more  rest for us, nor indeed do we 
need rest any longer. Our very sleep is action. For  we sleep with the thought 
of God in our hearts. This restlessness constitutes  true rest. This neverVceasing 
agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. This su preme state of total 
surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the bounds of human 
experience. It has been attained by many dedicated souls, and may be 
attained by ourselves as well. This is the goal whi ch we of the Satyagraha 
Ashram have set before ourselves; all our observanc es and activities are 
calculated to assist us in reaching it. We shall re ach it someday all unawares if 
we have truth in us.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30   
13. IMPORTANCE OF VOWS 
In this series I have dealt cursorily with the impo rtance of vows, but it is 
perhaps necessary to consider at some length their bearing on a godly life. 
There is a powerful school of thinkers, who concede  the propriety of observing 
certain rules, but do not acknowledge the necessity  of vows. They go even so 
far as to suggest, that vows are a sign of weakness , and may even be harmful. 
Again they argue, that if a rule is subsequently di scovered to be 
inconvenient or sinful, to adhere to it after such discovery would be positively 
wrong. They say: it is a good thing to abstain from  liquor, but what harm is 
there in taking it occasionally, say on medical gro unds ? A pledge of total 
abstinence would be a needless handicap; and as wit h liquor, so with other 
things.  
A vow means unflinching determination, and helps us  against temptations. 
Determination is worth nothing, if it bends before discomfort. The universal 
experience of humanity supports the view, that prog ress is impossible without 
inflexible determination. There cannot be a vow to commit a sin; in the case 
of a vow, first thought to be meritorious but later  found to be sinful, there 
arises a clear necessity to give it up. But no one takes, or ought to take, vows 
about dubious matters. Vows can be taken only on po ints of universally 
recognized principles. The possibility of sin in su ch a case is more or less 
imaginary. A devotee of Truth cannot stop to consid er if someone will not be 
injured by his telling the truth, for he believes t hat truth can never do harm. 
So also about total abstinence. The abstainer will either make an exception as 
regards medicine, or will be prepared to risk his l ife in fulfilment of his full 
vow. What does it matter, if we happen to lose our lives through a pledge of 
total abstinence ? There can be no guarantee, that our lives will be prolonged 
by liquor, and even if life is thus prolonged for a  moment it may be ended the 
very next through some other agency. On the other h and, the example of a 
man, who gives up his life rather than his pledge, is likely to wean drunkards 
from liquor, and thus become a great power for good  in the world. Only they From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  can hope some time to see God, who have nobly deter mined to bear witness to 
the faith that is in them, even at the cost of life  itself.  
Taking vows is not a sign of weakness, but of stren gth. To do at any cost 
something that one ought to do constitutes a vow. I t becomes a bulwark of 
strength. A man who says that he will do something 'as far as possible' betrays 
either his pride or his weakness. I have noticed in  my own case, as well as in 
the case of others, that the limitation 'as far as possible' provides a fatal 
loophole. To do something 'as far as possible' is t o succumb to the very first 
temptation. There is no sense in saying, that we wi ll observe truth 'as far as 
possible'. Even as no businessman will look at a no te in which a man promises 
to pay a certain amount on a certain date 'as far a s possible', so will God 
refuse to accept a promissory note drawn by a man, who will observe truth as 
far as possible.  
God is the very image of the vow. God would cease t o be God if He swerved 
from His own laws even by a hair's breadth. The sun  is a great keeper of 
observances; hence the possibility of measuring tim e and publishing almanacs. 
All business depends upon men fulfilling their prom ises. Are such promises less 
necessary in character building or selfVrealization ? We should  therefore never  
doubt   the  necessity  of  vows  for  the  purpose   of  selfVpurification  and  
self realization.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
14. YAJNA  OR SACRIFICE 
We make frequent use of the word yajna. We have rai sed spinning to the 
rank of a daily mahayajna (primary sacrifice). It i s therefore necessary to think 
out the various implications of the term yajna.  
Yajna means an act directed to the welfare of other s, done without desiring 
any return for it, whether of a temporal or spiritu al nature. 'Act' here must be 
taken in its widest sense, and includes thoughts an d word, as well as deed. 
'Others' embraces not only humanity, but all life. Therefore, and also from the 
standpoint of ahimsa, it is not a yajna to sacrific e lower animals even with a 
view to the service of humanity. It does not matter , that animal sacrifice is 
alleged to find a place in the Vedas. It is enough for us, that such sacrifice 
cannot stand the fundamental tests of Truth and Non Vviolence. I readily admit 
my incompetence in Vedic scholarship. But the incom petence, so far as this 
subject is concerned, does not worry me, because ev en if the practice of 
animal sacrifice be proved to have been a feature o f Vedic society, it can 
form no precedent for a votary of ahimsa.  
Again a primary sacrifice must be an act, which con duces the most to the 
welfare of the greatest number in the widest area, and which can be 
performed by the largest number of men and women wi th the least trouble. It 
will not therefore, be a yajna, much less a mahayaj na, to wish or to do ill to 
any one else, even in order to serve a soVcalled hi gher interest. And the 
Gita teaches, and experience testifies, that all ac tion that cannot come under 
the category of yajna promotes bondage.  
The world cannot subsist for a single moment withou t yajna in this sense, and 
therefore the Gita, after having dealt with true wi sdom in the second 
chapter, takes up in the third the means of attaini ng it, and declares in so 
many words, that yajna came with the Creation itsel f. This body therefore has 
been given us, only in order that we may serve all Creation with it. And 
therefore, says the Gita, he who eats without offer ing yajna eats stolen food. 
Every single act of one who would lead a life of pu rity should be in the nature From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  of yajna. Yajna having come to us with our birth, w e are debtors all our 
lives, and thus for ever bound to serve the univers e. And even as a 
bondslave receives food, clothing and so on from th e master whom he serves, 
so should we gratefully accept such gifts as may be  assigned to us by the Lord 
of the universe. What we receive must be called a g ift; for as debtors we are 
entitled to no consideration for the discharge of o ur obligations. Therefore we 
may not blame the Master, if we fail to get it. Our  body is His to be cherished 
or cast away according to His will. This is not a m atter for complaint or even 
pity; on the contrary, it is a natural and even a p leasant and desirable state, if 
only we realize our proper place in God's Scheme. W e do indeed need strong 
faith, if we would experience this supreme bliss. " Do not worry in the least 
about yourself, leave all worry to God,"—this appea rs to be the commandment 
in all religions.  
This need not frighten any one. He who devotes hims elf to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure, and 
will continually grow richer in faith. The path of service can hardly be trodden 
by one, who is not prepared to renounce selfV inter est, and to recognize the 
conditions of his birth. Consciously or unconscious ly every one of  us does render 
some service or other. If we cultivate the habit of doing this service 
deliberately, our desire  for  service  will  steadily  grow  stronger, and  will 
make  not  only  for  our own happiness but that  of the world at large.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
15. MORE ABOUT  YAJNA 
I wrote about yajna last week, but feel like writin g more about it. It will 
perhaps be worthwhile further to consider a princip le which has been created 
along with mankind. Yajna is duty to be performed, or service to be rendered, 
all the twentyVfour hours of the day, and hence a m axim like परोपकाराय सतां 
/glyph874वभूतयः। is inappropriate, if  उपकार has any taste of favour about it. To serve 
without desire is to favour not others, but ourselv es, even as in discharging a 
debt we serve only ourselves, lighten our burden an d fulfill our duty. Again, not 
only the good, but all of us are bound to place our  resources at the disposal of 
humanity. And if such is the law, as evidently it i s, indulgence ceases to hold a 
place in life and gives way to renunciation. The du ty of renunciation 
differentiates mankind from the beast.  
Some object, that life thus understood becomes dull  and devoid of art, and 
leaves no room for the householder. But renunciatio n here does not mean 
abandoning the world and retiring into the forest. The spirit of renunciation 
should rule all the activities of life. A household er does not cease to be one, if 
he regards life as a duty rather than as an indulge nce. A merchant, who 
operates in the sacrificial spirit, will have crore s passing through his hands, but 
he will, if he follows the law, use his abilities f or service. He will therefore not 
cheat or speculate, will lead a simple life, will n ot injure a living soul and will 
lose millions rather than harm anybody. Let no one run away with the idea 
that this type of merchant exists only in my imagin ation. Fortunately for the 
world, it does exist in the West as well as in the East. It is true, such 
merchants may be counted on one's fingers' ends, bu t the type ceases to be 
imaginary, as soon  as  even  one  living  specimen  can  be  found  to  answer 
to  it.  All  of  us  know  of  a philanthropic tai lor in Wadhwan. I know of one 
such barber. Every one of us knows such a weaver. A nd if we go deeply into 
the matter, we shall come across men in every walk of life, who lead 
dedicated lives. No doubt these sacrificers obtain their livelihood by their From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  work. But livelihood is not their objective, but on ly a byVproduct of their 
vocation. Motilal was a tailor at first, and contin ued as tailor afterwards. But 
his spirit was changed, and his work was transmuted  into worship. He began to 
think about the welfare of others, and his life bec ame artistic in the real sense 
of the term. A life of sacrifice is the pinnacle of  art, and is full of true joy. 
Yajna is not yajna if one feels it to be burdensome  or annoying. SelfV
indulgence leads to destruction, and renunciation t o immorality. Joy has no 
independent existence. It depends upon our attitude  to life. One man will 
enjoy theatrical scenery, another ever new scene wh ich unfolds them in the 
sky. Joy, therefore, is a matter of individual and national education. We shall 
delight in things which we have been taught to deli ght in as children. And 
illustrations can be easily cited of different nati onal tastes.  
Again, many sacrificers imagine that they are free to receive from the people 
everything they need, and many things they do not n eed, because they are 
rendering disinterested service. Directly this idea  sways a man, he ceases to be 
a servant, and becomes a tyrant over the people.  
One who would serve will not waste a thought upon h is own comforts, which 
he leaves to be attended to or neglected by his Mas ter on high. He will not 
therefore encumber himself with  everything that comes his way; he will take 
only what he strictly needs and leave the rest. He will be calm, free from 
anger and unruffled in mind even if he finds himsel f inconvenienced. His 
service, like virtue, is its own reward, and he wil l rest content with it.  
Again, one dare not be negligent in service or be b ehindVhand with it. He, who 
thinks that he must be diligent only in his persona l business, and unpaid public 
business may be done in any way and at any time he chooses, has still to 
learn the very rudiments of the science of sacrific e. Voluntary service of 
others demands the best of which one is capable, an d must take precedence 
over service of self. In fact, the pure devotee con secrates himself to the 
service of humanity without any reservation whateve r. From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36   
16. S WADESHI 
Swadeshi is the law of laws enjoined by the present  age. Spiritual laws, like 
Nature's laws, need no enacting; they are selfVacti ng. But through ignorance or 
other causes man often neglects or disobeys them. I t is then that vows are 
needed to steady his course. A man who is by temper ament a vegetarian need 
no vow to strengthen his vegetarianism. For the sig ht of animal food, instead 
of tempting him, would only excite his disgust. The  law of Swadeshi is 
ingrained in the basic nature of man, but it has to day sunk into oblivion. 
Hence the necessity for the vow of Swadeshi. In its  ultimate and spiritual 
sense, Swadeshi stands for the final emancipation o f the soul from her 
earthly bondage. For this earthly tabernacle is not  her natural or permanent 
abode; it is a hindrance in her onward journey; it stands in the way of her 
realizing her oneness with all life. A votary of Sw adeshi, therefore, in his 
striving to identify himself with the entire creati on, seeks to be emancipated 
from the bondage of the physical body.  
If this interpretation of Swadeshi be correct, then  it follows, that its votary 
will, as a first duty, dedicate himself to the serv ice of his immediate 
neighbours. This involves exclusion or even sacrifi ce of the interests of the 
rest, but the exclusion or the sacrifice would be o nly in appearance. Pure 
service of our neighbours can never, from its very nature, result in disservice to 
those who are far away, but rather the contrary. 'A s with the individual, 
so with the universe' is an unfailing principle, wh ich we would do well to lay to 
heart.  
On the other hand, a man who allows himself to be l ured by 'the distant 
scene,' and runs to the ends of the earth for servi ce, is not only foiled in his 
ambition, but also fails in his duty towards his ne ighbours. Take a concrete 
instance. In the particular place where I live, I h ave certain persons as my 
neighbours, some relations and dependants. Naturall y, they all feel, as they 
have a right to, that they have a claim on me, and look to me for help and 
support. Suppose now I leave them all at once, and set out to serve people From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  in a distant place. My decision would throw my litt le world of neighbours 
and dependants out of gear, while my gratuitous kni ghtVerrantry would, 
more likely than not, disturb the atmosphere in the  new place. Thus a 
culpable neglect of my immediate neighbours, and an  unintended disservice to 
the people whom I wish to serve, would be the first  fruits of my violation of 
the principle of Swadeshi.  
It is not difficult to multiply such instances. Tha t is why the Gita says : 'It is 
best to die performing one's own duty or svadharma:  paradharma or another's 
duty is fraught with danger.' Interpreted in terms of one's physical 
environment, this gives us the law of Swadeshi. Wha t the Gita says with 
regard to svadharma equally applies to Swadeshi, fo r Swadeshi is svadharma 
applied to one's immediate environment.  
It is only when the doctrine of Swadeshi is wrongly  understood, that 
mischief results. For instance, it would be a trave sty of the doctrine of 
Swadeshi, if to coddle my family I set about grabbi ng money by all means fair 
or foul. The law of Swadeshi requires no more of me  than to discharge my 
legitimate obligations towards my family by just me ans, and the attempt to 
do so will reveal to me the universal code of conduct.  The practice of Swadeshi 
can never do harm to any one, and if it does, it is  not svadharma but egotism 
that moves me.  
There may arise occasions, when a votary of Swadesh i may be called upon 
to sacrifice his family at the altar of universal s ervice. Such an act of willing 
immolation will then constitute the highest service  rendered to the family. 
'Whosoever saveth his life shall lose it, and whoso ever loseth his life for the 
Lord's sake shall find it' holds good for the famil y group no less than for the 
individual. Take another instance. Supposing there is an outbreak of plague in 
my village, and in trying to serve the victims of t he epidemic, I, my wife, and 
children and all the rest of my family are wiped ou t of existence; then in 
inducing those dearest and nearest to join me, I wi ll not have acted as the 
destroyer of my family, but on the contrary as its truest friend. In Swadeshi 
there is no room for selfishness; or if there is se lfishness in it, it is of the From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  highest type, which is not different form the highe st altruism. Swadeshi in its 
purest form is the acme of universal service.  
It was by following this line of argument, that I h it upon Khadi as the 
necessary and the most important corollary of the p rinciple of Swadeshi in its 
application to society. 'What is the kind of servic e, 'I asked myself, 'that the 
teeming millions of India most need at the present time, that can be easily 
understood and appreciated by all, that is easy to perform and will at the 
same time enable the crores of our semiVstarved cou ntrymen to live?' and the 
reply came, that it is the universalizing of Khadi or the spinningVwheel alone, 
that can fulfill these conditions.  
Let no one suppose, that the practice of Swadeshi t hrough Khadi would harm 
the foreign or Indian millVowners. A thief, who is weaned from his vice, or is 
made to return the property that he has stolen, is not harmed thereby. On the 
contrary, he is the gainer, consciously in the one case, unconsciously in the 
other. Similarly, if all the opium addicts or drunk ards in the world were to 
shake themselves free from their vice, the canteen keepers or the opium 
vendors, who would be deprived of their custom, cou ld not be said to be losers. 
They would be the gainers in the truest sense of th e word. The elimination of 
the wages of sin is never a loss either to the indi vidual concerned or to society; 
it is pure gain.  
It is the greatest delusion to suppose, that the du ty of Swadeshi begins and 
ends with merely spinning some yarn anyhow and wear ing Khadi made from it. 
Khadi is the first indispensable step towards the d ischarge of Swadeshi 
dharma to society. But one often meets men, who wea r Khadi, while in all 
other things they indulge their taste for foreign m anufactures. Such men 
cannot be said to be practising Swadeshi. They are simply following the 
fashion. A votary of Swadeshi will  carefully study  his  environment, and  try  
help his  neighbours wherever possible, by giving p reference to local 
manufactures, even if they are of an inferior grade  or dearer in price than 
things manufactured elsewhere. He will try to remed y their defects, but will 
not because of their defects give them up in favour  of foreign manufactures.  From Yeravda Mandir 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  But even Swadeshi, like any other good thing, can b e ridden to death if it is 
made a fetish. That is a danger which must be guard ed against. To reject 
foreign manufactures merely because they are foreig n, and to go on wasting 
national time and money in the promotion in one's c ountry of manufactures for 
which it is not suited would be criminal folly, and  a negation  of the Swadeshi 
spirit. A true votary of Swadeshi will never harbou r illVwill towards the 
foreigner: he will not be actuated by antagonism to wards anybody on earth. 
Swadeshism is not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrin e of selfless service, that has 
its roots in the purest ahimsa, i.e. Love.  
This note on Swadeshi was not written in Yeravda Ma ndir in 1930 but outside, 
after Gandhiji's release in 1931. He did not write it in jail, as he felt he would 
perhaps be unable to do justice to the subject with out encroaching upon the 
forbidden field of politics. The translation was do ne by Shri Pyarelal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        