 
GANDHIJI 
 
 
Written By: Jugatram Dave 
 
 
 
Translated by: Jyoti Verma 
 
 
 
First Published : October 2012 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 15/- 
 
 
 
Published by: 
Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal – Gandhi Book Centre 
299 Tardeo Road, Nana Chowk, Mumbai 400007 
Tel. +91-22-23872061 Email: info@mkgandhi.org  
Website: www.mkgandhi.org  
 
Printed by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91-79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 E-mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  
Website:  www.navajivantrust.org  
GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 2   
PUBLISHER’S NOTE 
The Gujarat Vidyapeeth has been organising an exam on Gandhi every year on 
the day of Gandhi Jayanti. The book ‘Gandhi Bapu’ b y Kudasia Jaidi is being 
used as a text book in these exams right from the b eginning for the students of 
Std. 5 to 7. 
In addition, it is decided to add as a text book th e other book, ‘Gandhiji’ 
(originally in Gujarati) by Late. Shri. Jugatram Da ve which describes the 
incidents of Gandhiji’s life. 
The first edition of this book was published in 192 9. About four lac copies of 
the same have been sold till now. The English versi on of this book is a special 
edition available at a subsidized price, used for t his exam. 
Five poems, expressing the life and work of Gandhij i are given at the end of 
this book with the thought that it may be useful to  create better understanding 
of Gandhiji’s personality. The students attending t he exam could memorise 
them by heart. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 3   
1. HOME - TOWN?  
Which is Gandhiji's home- town? 
Porbunder will immediately say, "I am! He was born here!" 
The Phoenix and Tolstoy Ashram abroad will say, "Wh y do you forget, it was 
here that he was truly 'born'?" 
Ahmedabad will say, "But he did build his Ashram on  my river banks!" 
Pune will also try to take the credit, "Don't you f orget that he was kept in my 
Yerawada jail." 
The farmers from Bihar would exclaim, "Whatever you  may claim, but he truly 
belonged to us. Do you know how much he liked to wa nder in our indigo fields?" 
At this Punjab will come forward roaring, "Who can deny that my..Jallianwala 
Baug was the one, which kindled the fire within him ?" 
Kolkata would say, "But it was this place from wher e he began his  
non-cooperation movement!" 
Mumbai would retort, "Didn't he choose me to begin Satyagraha?" 
Bardoli will come forward and say, "Will anyone lis ten to me? Didn't he begin his 
fight on my soil?" 
Delhi thinks that Gandhiji belongs to her because h e spent twenty-one days of 
his fast there. Belgaum thinks that it has more rig ht to own Gandhiji than any 
other place. Wasn't Gandhiji honoured with chairman ship at the National  
Convention here? 
Himalaya, the king of mountains, is laughing at thi s. "Who can explain things to 
them? 
Can these innocent people understand what Gandhiji really longed for?" 
Blessed is the tiny place Segaon! No one knew the n ame of this village, situated 
in Central India! It never tried to possess him. Ne ither did it complain nor make 
any demand. Yet Gandhiji favoured it. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 4   
2. CASTE  
Gandhiji was Modh-waniya (Baniya) by caste. But wha t did he himself say about 
it?  
Once government filed a case against him for sediti on. The case was tried in 
Ahmedabad court. 
The judge was sure to ask his name! 
"What is your name?" 
"Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi." 
"Which is your home town?" 
"Satyagraha Ashram, Sabarmati." 
"What is your occupation?" 
"Weaving and farming." 
The judge was astonished with this reply. Even the people there were stunned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 5   
3. PUTLIBAI  
Gandhiji's mother's name was Putlibai. She was a tr ue devotee of God. She 
would not have food until she finished her puja (pr ayer) rituals. She would go 
to the temple regularly. 
She would strictly keep fast on Ekadashi (Eleventh day of the lunar month). 
Having meals only once a day was child's play for h er. 
During the sacred four- month's period (chaturmas) she used to pray devoutly 
and observe all rituals. During this period she use d to be so strict that she 
would take meals only after she saw and prayed the Sun. 
No wonder that the children loved such a religious mother. The children would 
watch for the Sun to shine through the clouds. They  would run in to inform 
their mother the moment they saw the Sun come out o f the clouds. 
"Come, mother, come quickly and see the Sun." Somet imes the Sun would 
disappear before she could come. Then she would hav e to go without food for 
the day. 
But the mother was a rightous devotee and she would  never leave the rituals 
halfway because of illness or any other reason. 
Gandhiji's mother was such a pious and self-respect ing person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 6   
4. BA (KASTURBA)  
Many of you might have seen Bapu but a lot of peopl e have hardly seen 
Kasturba. 
"Ba" never behaved as if she was a very great perso n. She never sat on Bapu's 
seat to meet the people. No! She would be busy doin g something or making 
rotis in the kitchen or preparing a meal for Gandhi ji or else nursing a patient. If 
Gandhiji took ill it was Ba's duty to look after hi m and comfort him by pressing 
his forehead softly. She was seen on such occasions  only. 
She was not a person who would deliver a lecture wh ich Bapu was supposed to 
do.. She used to sit among the ladies and nobody wo uld notice her or else she 
would stay at home and get busy with her work. 
Ba did not try to be 'great' in other's eyes. She l oved only one thing - to follow 
in Bapu's footsteps and care for him. Sita sacrific ed the luxurious life to follow 
Ram during exile. Similarly, Ba also left behind th e comforts of life and started 
living in the Ashram with Bapu. Ba was a truly sacr ed soul. She was an 
embodiment of Sati. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 7   
5. TEST  
Gandhiji must have been in second or third grade an d was trying to learn 
English. 
Once an education officer came to inspect the schoo l and asked the students to 
write five English words each. The class teacher wa s keeping an eye on them. 
His heart was beating rapidly, fearing that the stu dents might make mistakes. If 
it happened so, the teacher was to be blamed. The o fficer would blame the 
teacher for not doing his duty properly. 
Mohandas had miss-spelt the word 'kettle'. The teac her saw it but what could 
he do? Slowly he went to him and tapped on Mohandas ' foot with his shoe. Then 
he signaled him to copy the student sitting next to  him. Mohandas did not know 
how to copy. He would not even dream of cheating. S o he could not understand  
that the teacher was actually asking him to be dish onest and copy from another 
student's paper. 
The teacher scolded him the next day and said, "You  are such a fool! You didn't 
even get the clue!" 
Gandhiji didn't say anything to the teacher but he was sure that it was not a 
good advice to be followed because it was leading t o untruth. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 8   
6. TRUTH  
Gandhiji loved to be truthful since he was a child.  He has written how he 
moved in the company of bad boys for a few days. 
Those boys had a habit of eating snacks at a vender 's shop and smoking. Since 
they could not ask their parents to give money for such a thing, they started 
stealing it from the servants' pockets. 
Mohan would feel suffocated due to this, but when h e saw those friends he 
would be tempted to smoke. 
As the time went by they had piled a lot of debt at  the vender's shop. The shop- 
keeper would demand his money time and again; it wa s a difficult situation. 
They worried about his demanding the money in front  of people or that he 
would come home to take it from their parents. The money stolen from the 
servant's pockets used to be very little and the de bt was big enough. What to 
do now? 
So the group was worried. Gandhiji's elder brother was also there in the group. 
Then he thought of stealing to escape from this sit uation. He said, "I have a 
gold bracelet in my hand. If we take some gold out of it, we would be able to 
pay the debt and nobody would know!" 
This idea made Mohan uneasy but he dared not speak against it. He let them 
cut a piece out of it. The debt was paid but how co uld a truth loving person 
have peace of mind? He thought, "Alas! I have been a part of this theft! Let the 
snacks and the cigarettes go to hell!" 
Again a thought came to his mind, "Oh God! I have e ven deceived my father!" 
Uneasy as he was he could neither eat properly nor do any work! He felt guilty. 
At last he decided to go to his father and confess the misdeed. He thought, "I 
will face his anger and even take the beating if he  does so." 
But he dared not speak to his father. So Gandhiji w rote a letter to him 
confessing everything and asked to be forgiven. He handed it over to his father GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 9  with tearful eyes and trembling hands. His father o vercame with joy on reading 
that letter. He forgave his son's misdeed and embra ced his truth-loving child! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 10   
7. PRAHLAD AND HARISHCHANDRA  
Since his childhood Gandhiji loved the stories of t wo truth-loving people-
Prahlad and Harishchandra. A person who himself was  so truthful was bound to 
love the story of such truthful people. 
King Harishchandra had to face a lot of difficultie s and tolerate grief. He lost 
his kingdom, lost his wealth, had to live in the fo rest and had to sell his wife 
and son too. Ultimately he had to sell himself to t he keeper of the cremation 
ground. He had to go through these hair-raising exp eriences but still he 
remained truthful. 
Gandhiji had seen King Harishchandra's drama in his  childhood and since then 
he always had dreams about Harishchandra. He would weep whenever he 
remembered this story. Later he wrote, "Even today,  reading that drama makes 
me weep." He said that bearing grief like Harishcha ndra and yet remain truthful 
is the real truth! 
Yet Gandhiji loved the story of Prahlad more than t he story of Harishchandra. 
He was a king; he was experienced and learned too! But Pralhad was a small 
child. He dared uttering the name of Rama in spite of the fact that he was born 
in a demon's family. He did not stop chanting the n ame of Ram even after his 
father pushed him down the mountain. He did not sto p chanting the name of 
Ram even after his father drowned him in the river.  He was chained to a 
burning pillar yet he was not scared and did not gi ve up the chanting of Ram's 
name.. 
Gandhiji always worshipped Prahlad's truthfulness a nd set his example in front 
of him, "Prahlad was such a small boy yet he had th e courage to be truthful. 
One does not need the strength of a wrestler or the  army of a king to be 
truthful."                    
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 11   
8.VAISHNAV  
(The Devotee of Lord Vishnu)  
If Gandhiji was ever asked which religion did he fo llow, he would say, 
"Vaishnav!" 
A person who doesn't understand its meaning would b e astonished. Gandhiji 
never went to a temple. Neither did he have Krishna 's idol in his house nor did 
he offer food (56 kinds of sweets know as chhappan bhog) to the God. He did 
not wear the string of tulsi beads and would eat in  the company of anybody 
(without thinking of his caste). 
How could he be a Vaishnav? 
Gandhiji used to say, "I am a Vaishnav by heart. Sa int Narsaiya has defined the 
qualities of a Vaishnav. I know who can be called a  Vaishnav and I am trying to 
become one." 
 
Call him a Vaishnav who feels other's grieves, 
Who helps them through times rough 
Yet pride won't make him tough! 
Who mingles with everyone? 
Yet slanders no one; 
One who keeps his heart pure, 
God has always blessed his mother! 
Call him a Vaishnav… 
 
He has sacrificed all, 
With no grudge at all; 
A woman is a mother in his eye, GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 12  He never tells a lie; 
And for others wealth he is not sly! 
Call him a Vaishnav… 
One who remains free of temptations, 
And also has saintly aspirations; 
Has engraved on his heart Rama's image, 
Is the embodiment of a pilgrimage! 
Call him a Vaishnav… 
 
One who is not at all deceitful, 
And has won his anger and will; 
Narsaiya says, a chance to see such person 
Can set all our generations free of sin! 
Call him a Vaishnav… 
 
[Mingles = To mix with people; Slander = False or m alicious statement about 
someone.   
Grudge = Ill will; Sly = Cunning, deceitful; Tempta tion = Attraction, fascination. 
Aspiration = Strong desire; Engrave = Carve, incise ; Embodiment  = Symbol; 
Deceit = Cheating.] 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 13   
9. THE SPINNING WHEEL  
"Oh God! Let me die when one of my hands is on the handle of the spinning 
wheel and the other is holding a silver!" 
Who would pray like this? 
Gandhiji! Who else could it be? 
He loved the spinning wheel. 
It was his vow to spin daily without fail. Even tho ugh he was very busy, he 
would never avoid spinning yarn. 
He kept his spinning wheel with him even while trav eling. He would start 
spinning as soon as he had spare time. He used to i nsist on spinning during 
illness also. 
He would also take his dearest spinning wheel with him whenever he had to go 
to jail. 
When he was in Yerawada jail he used to spin on a t wo wheeled spinning 
wheel. He thought a lot while spinning and created a 'small and delicate', 'sleek 
and sweet' Yerawada spinning wheel. 
Gandhiji called the wheel a 'Kamdhenu' - a cow that  could fulfill our every wish! 
He said so because spinning yarn could offer clothe s to crores of countrymen, 
as well as food to the hungry. Gandhiji called it a  Kamdhenu because he 
believed that it could even help our countrymen get  independence. The sound 
of the wheel felt like sweet music to him. 
Crores of our countrymen remained hungry even after  hard labour. How can we 
feel one with them? We should also do some hard wor k. So Gandhiji preached 
that each one of us should spin yarn for half an ho ur everyday so as to feel one 
with them. 
Gandhiji had the spinning wheel sketched on our tri -color flag. He announced 
that the nation, which cared for the millions of it s poor countrymen, was a 
truly liberated nation.                                       GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 14   
10. HOW DID GANDHIJI LIVE?  
Do you want to know how Gandhiji lived his life? He  used to get up very early 
each morning. After brushing his teeth he used to p ray and then he would go 
for morning walk while coming back from the walk he  used to visit the ill 
people in the Ashram. 
Afterwards he would go to the kitchen to clean and cut the vegetables, which 
was allotted to him and then he would take breakfas t. 
Then it would be time for the visitors who had an a ppointment or else read the 
letters and reply them. Sometimes he would write ar ticles for 'Navjivan'. 
He used to look after serving at the meal- time, pe rsonally. 
In the afternoons he used to spin yarn regularly. H e had made it a rule to spin 
yarn for at least one hour everyday and make at lea st 160 strands. 
In the evenings he would take meals before sunset a nd then take a walk for a 
few minutes. 
Apart from this he would teach the women or the stu dents or the small children 
in the school, according to the time-table. 
Like this Gandhiji kept himself busy all day long. He slept at 9 O'clock. 
Sometimes there used to be so much work that he had  to keep awake till late 
and finish the work. Yet he would get up at 4 O'clo ck in the morning even if he 
had slept very late. It would never change his rout ine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 15   
11. THE ROUTINE OF A SATYAGRAHI  
Now you have come to know the daily routine of a sa tyagrahi. You won't see a 
single moment being wasted due to laziness. 
What made Gandhiji's routine so special was that he  made a timetable for 
himself. He then used to follow every minute of it.  He would start working on 
the exact time he had decided for it and then finis h it also in the given time. 
He planned and spent his day along with hands of th e clock. 
He would even note down which work was done at what  time and then look at 
the list before going to bed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 16   
12. SILENCE DAY  
Gandhiji observed silence on every Monday. He won't  talk to anybody on that 
day. He would not break this rule for any reason. H e would write down if there 
were a need but won't speak at all. 
He felt very peaceful due to this. There was nothin g to be talked about on that 
day. Also there were no lectures to be delivered. L ikewise, he also did not go 
for a walk on that day. 
The peace gained from the silence-day used to comfo rt him a lot. But how did 
he use that comfort? 
He would never waste the day keeping idle or sleepi ng. He used to finish the 
week's pending work on that day. 
It is worth experiencing the joy of observing silen ce! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 17   
13. CHARACTERISTICS OF GANDHIJI  
Gandhiji had so many characteristics, which we shou ld know. 
He never walked slowly. He would always walk fast a nd with energy. 
He never slumped while sitting. He would always sit  straight and be firm. He 
never wrote sitting at the table; instead he kept t he paper on his lap and 
wrote. 
He used to read whatever he wrote and then only wri te further. He would send 
a post-card only after he had read it again and cor rected the mistakes. 
He was   very much fond of cleanliness and neatness . That is why his clothes 
and other things used to be very clean and tidy. 
He would do everything quite meticulously. 
He would never pose for a photograph. He always had  a lot of work to do. But 
whenever a child came to him he would always play w ith him. 
Gandhiji always laughed  aloud heartily while chatt ing with people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 18   
14. ASHRAM - 1  
In old days Ahmedabad was the capital of Gujarat. G andhiji's Ashram is on the 
banks of Sabarmati river near this city. 
Gandhiji lived in this Ashram with Kasturba and man y other men, women and 
children. 
Many of those people came from Gujarat, Maharashtra , Punjab, Sindh, Madras 
(now Chennai) and Nepal also. There were Indians as  well as foreigners and 
Chinese too. 
All of them wore Khadi and regularly spinned yarn. They used to get up at 4 O' 
clock in the morning and would get together for pra yer. They would also pray in 
the evening. They used to recite Shlokas there. Pan ditji used to teach them 
bhajans. They used to sing those bhajans along with  chanting of Ram naam. 
They also used to recite Gita regularly. Then Gandh iji would deliver a sermon 
after the prayer. 
All the people living in the Ashram used to dine in  the same mess. The food did 
not contain much of masala (seasoning) but it used to be clean and fresh. 
At a fixed time, all of them used to sit together r ecite hymns for peace and 
then take the meal. Many a times, Gandhiji himself would serve them. Harijans 
(the untouchables) also lived in the Ashram along w ith all others. They used to 
work in the kitchen with others and ate there too.  
People in the Ashram used to be very careful about cleanliness. They won't spit 
anywhere, won't throw pieces of paper, won't throw leftover food and won't 
urinate just anywhere. 
The inmates of the Ashram never used the jungle as their toilet. They would 
prepare a small, clean airy room as their toilet an d would cover the faeces with 
soil. They used to clean this toilet themselves. Th e soil was then used as 
manure in their vegetable garden. 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 19   
15. ASHRAM - 2  
There was a student's hostel in the Ashram. Many st udents from the country and 
abroad lived there. Some of them tried to learn spi nning the yarn, comb the 
cotton or weave Khadi cloth on the handloom. Many s tudents used to learn 
making spinning wheel in the carpentry workshop. 
There were both boys and girls in the Ashram. All o f them studied there as well 
as learnt these occupations. 
There was a dormitory for women inmates. They would  gather there and pray. 
They used to study, card the cotton and spin yarn. These women inmates 
managed the kitchen of the Ashram. They used to cle an the grains in the store 
and cook food turn by turn. 
There was also a nursery school for small children but there were no special 
teachers to attend to them. So, the women inmates w orked there also! 
There was a tannery also in the Ashram. The skin of  the dead animals was 
tanned there. They believed that using slaughtered animals' skin was violence. 
So, they used the skin of dead animals to make shoe s and chappals. 
The Ashram inmates worked in the fields also. They had planted trees of fruits 
and plants of different types of cotton. Vegetables  were also grown there. The 
grains and cotton were grown in those fields. 
All the men, women and children took part in all th ese jobs. Turn by turn they 
worked in the kitchen, stored water, cleaned utensi ls, as well as cleaned the 
Ashram, the cow-pen and the toilets. They also work ed in the kitchen garden. 
Just like a beehive, there used to be continuous ac tivity in Gandhiji's Ashram 
from sunrise to sunset. Gandhiji had named it 'Udyo g Mandir' (the temple of 
work) which was quite appropriate. 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 20   
16. THE SERVANT  
The jobs like storing water, cleaning utensils, swe eping, making flour, washing 
clothes, and cleaning toilets are considered low st andard jobs. It's not that 
people don't have time but they think that the lowl y people should do these 
jobs. That is why they have servants to do these th ings. Those people are 
considered having low standard and are treated badl y. 
Gandhiji did not consider any work as low. He had s ame feelings even before he 
started the Ashram. There were many servants in his  home but they were not 
treated like servants. 
When Gandhiji was a child, they had a maid named Ra mbha. Gandhiji 
remembered and respected her like his own mother. R ambha had taught him in 
his childhood that chanting Ram naam could save him  from fear. Gandhiji never 
forgot this advice. 
After he became a Barrister, Gandhiji lived in Mumb ai for some time. He had a 
Brahmin servant who cooked meals for him. He had be en abroad and had a rich 
Western life style. Yet he never treated him as a s ervant. 
When he lived in South Africa, he earned a lot of m oney. There they had so 
many things to do in the house. Yet he and Kasturba  cleaned the toilets, 
washed clothes and did many other things themselves . They had a number of 
servants in the house but they treated them like th eir family members. When 
they came to live in the Ashram, they made it a rul e to do everything 
themselves. They did not hire a servant. People who  want to serve humanity 
don't discriminate between an employer and a servan t. 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 21   
17. GANGA ON THIS BANK AND YAMUNA ON THE OTHER  
Do you know the song of Gokul? 
The Ganga flows on this bank, 
And Yamuna on the other; 
In between lies the lovely village Gokul; 
The lovely village, 
The lovely village, hey, hey! 
Same is the case with Gandhiji's Ashram. The Sabarm ati jail is situated on its 
one side and the Dudheshwar Smashan (funeral ground ) on the other. 
Gandhiji has selected a place fit for satyagrahis. A satyagrahi is neither afraid 
of jail nor does he fear death. Both of them are hi s beloved neighbours! 
Pointing towards jail, Gandhiji used to tell the in mates of the Ashram, "Some 
day we will have to go there and stay. So we would better learn the hardships 
of a prisoner." 
He would point at Dudheshwar and say, "Why be afrai d of going where we 
frequently go for a walk? Always be prepared to sac rifice your life for your 
country!" 
Who would come to live at such a place? Only those people would come there 
who are willing to learn patriotism, who would like  to live with Gandhiji and 
those who would like to lead a pious and active (in dustrious) life! 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 22   
18. THE CHILD WALKING STICK  
A lot of children accompanied Gandhiji when he went  for a walk. They enjoyed 
talking to him. 
Actually they enjoyed something else. Gandhiji need ed support while walking. 
He needed the support of a walking stick. The child ren would hug him by the 
waist and put his hand on their shoulder. 
In this way, Gandhiji would have two live walking s ticks on both the sides and 
they would walk down chitchatting and enjoying the weather. 
Gandhiji called them child-walking sticks. The chil dren would miss it if they 
didn't get the opportunity for many days. 
Don't think that becoming a child walking stick was  an easy job. If you think 
that being old Gandhiji walked slowly, you are wron g. He used to walk rapidly 
and with a lot of energy. If the child walking stic ks were very small, the poor 
things almost had to run with him. 
The enthusiasm would often make the children forget  the time for prayer 
during their walk but Gandhji would never miss it. If it was getting late he 
would start running! Then the child sticks also had  to run with him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 23   
19. THE HISTORY OF COSTUME  
In the beginning Gandhiji used to wear a coat-pant and a hat. Then he started 
wearing a lungi (a wrap around cloth). Later he sta rted wearing a dhoti, a long 
coat and a turban. 
Then he changed to wearing clothes made from Khadi - a khadi shirt, a khadi 
stole and a khadi cap (topi) but later he started w earing only a khadi wrap 
around. 
It would be interesting to know why Gandhiji made s o many changes in his 
dressing habits! 
He went to South Africa when he was young. He pract iced there along with 
other pleaders and barristers. So he too wore weste rn clothes like them. 
But he realised that Indians were treated very badl y there. So he prepared his 
people for satyagraha. 
There were poor Indian labourers in his army. He th ought that if he was going 
to lead them how could he dress up differently from  them and eat good food 
too. A leader like Gandhiji was not going to make d iscrimination like this! 
Then he decided to dress up like his poor brothers.  So he bid good-bye to 
Western coat-pants and started wearing lungi and a shirt. 
When he won the struggle for Indians in South Afric a he thought of serving his 
motherland - India. 
What sort of dress should he wear in his country? 
Being a satyagrahi he was bound to take a decision only after proper inquiry. 
How would he come to his own country wearing any dr ess? He would not like 
this! He decided that he would not wear a suit in h is country. There was 
nothing to bother when he wore a lungi in a foreign  country where people were 
dressed in the same way. But it wouldn't look prope r in his country. 
After much thought he decided that he would board d own the ship wearing the 
traditional costume of his birthplace - Kathiawad. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 24  So, when Gandhiji returned to India, he started wea ring a dhoti, long coat, a 
stole on his shoulder and a white turban as headgea r. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 25   
20. KHADI  
Did Gandhiji have a spinning wheel in the past? Did  anyone know how to spin 
yarn? Did anyone know what was Khadi? 
People came to know about all these things later. B efore that Gandhiji used to 
wear clothes made from cloth woven in the Indian te xtile mill. 
Later, many people learned to weave cloth on the ha ndloom and Gandhiji 
started using that coarse cloth. Although the cloth  was woven on a handloom 
yet the yarn was made in the mill. Therefore, from where to get the hand spun 
yarn, was the question! 
In due course of time he met Gangaben Mujumdar. Gan dhiji got a spinning 
wheel after consultation with her. Many people then  learnt to spin the yarn on 
it and then they started weaving cloth from that ya rn. 
How could Gandhiji use clothes made by the textile mills, after this? He started 
wearing only Khadi clothes then onwards. 
He used to be fully clad with those clothes, at fir st. That is he wore a full-
length dhoti, shirt, a long coat upon it, a khadi t urban on the head and a stole 
on his shoulder. 
Actually he didn't like moving around wearing so ma ny clothes but he did it for 
the sake of culture. But an incident made him think  why should he wear so 
many clothes just in the name of false notions abou t culture? 
The same incident caused the making of Gandhi Topi (an Indian type of cap) 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 26   
21. THE KHADI CAP  
The labourers in the Ahmedabad mill had some disput e with the owners. 
They went on strike. Anusuyaben took it upon hersel f to lead them. If she was 
to lead them, how could Gandhiji stay away from it?  
The movement went on for so many months. Gandhiji w ould visit the labourers 
everyday and advise them. 
The poor labourers were getting unemployed. They ha d nothing to eat yet they 
came to listen to Gandhiji's advice. They firmly ke pt the strike going. 
As the days passed by a strong bond developed betwe en Gandhiji and the 
labourers. Whenever he realised the difference betw een himself and the 
labourers Gandhiji would feel very sorry. He though t, "These poor people don't 
even have rags to cover their bodies. Then why shou ld I have so many clothes? 
The cloth of my turban is long enough to make ten c aps, which would cover ten 
heads. 
Since then he gave up wearing a turban and started using the cap. He also 
made his dhoti short, gave up wearing a long coat a nd contented himself with a 
short shirt. 
When he established equality with those labourers t hen only his truth loving 
soul felt peace. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 27   
22. THE WHITE CAP  
People were amazed when Gandhiji started using the white cap. 
A white cap? Oh! Can there be a white cap? It could  be red, green, yellow or 
black! But could it be white? 
"Hey, look at it! Gandhiji has worn a white cap!" a nd people would laugh at it. 
Some said that it resembled the cap of Kashi's Brah min. 
Was Gandhiji going to worry about people's criticis m? No! He thought that it 
might appear bad to them but the truth is that it s aves a lot of khadi cloth. 
Actually, a black cap can also get dirty just like a white cap only it wouldn't be 
visible. 
Gandhiji said that if we have to colour it for hidi ng the dirt, then why not wash 
it off. A white cap can be washed every day. Why le t it get dirty? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 28   
23. THE WHITE CAP LIVED ON  
The white cap had come into being with a long life!  
Gandhiji was its producer. Since he was so firm a s atyagrahi, would his cap 
disappear just because of criticism? 
It became popular day by day and the critics calmed  down. People got used to 
the white cap and they started liking it. 
The poor people wore it because it was cheap. The p eople fond of cleanliness 
used it because it could be washed daily. 
The poets and artists also praised the white cap an d asked the people to wear 
it. It was really beautiful. Who would wear a black  cap now? 
It became a part of the national uniform for the vo lunteers. The children took 
pride in wearing it because they would look like th e soldiers of mother India. 
So, the popularity of the white cap earned it a nam e- "The Gandhi topi." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 29   
24. THE GANDHI CAP  
Owner: Manager, don't wear Gandhi topi now onwards,  while coming here.  
Servant: Seth (sir), you are giving me orders, whic h can't be obeyed. 
Owner: Whatever you may think, but we wouldn't allo w Gandhi cap here. 
Servant: But I have vowed to wear only khadi clothe s. How am I going to break 
it? 
Owner: I am not asking you to give up wearing khadi , you just get it dyed black. 
Servant: But I like it white only, so I wear it. Wh y do you object to it? 
Owner: If you want to stay on the job you will have  to do what I ask you. You 
look like a volunteer wearing that cap. If people c ome to know that we have 
employed a volunteer it may cause a lot of loss to us. 
Servant: I am unable to understand this. I am doing  my duty honestly. I don't 
know how my wearing a white cap is going to affect you? 
Owner: Listen manager! Don't debate with me. This i s a Gandhi cap; people will 
doubt us. 
Servant: What is there to doubt about? Gandhiji is the most pious person in our 
country. 
Owner: It might be true, but from tomorrow you will  come to work without 
wearing this cap. 
Servant: I won't be able to do so. 
Owner: Then you are free to go. 
Servant: As you wish, sir! 
Owner: Mind well, you will repent afterwards that y ou had to loose the job 
because of that ominous cap. 
Servant: Thank you very much for the advice, sir! B ut I cannot tolerate 
disregard for Gandhiji and my country just for mone y. Good-bye! GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 30  The above dialogues are imaginary. But this happene d very often in  
government departments, business places owned by fo reigners and in some 
native business houses too. That brave servant sacr ificed the job but did not 
stop wearing the Gandhi cap. 
Actually, the cap's price was only four annas (now 25 paisa). But now its price 
crossed all the limits and has become invaluable. 
The first reason of its becoming priceless is that it was launched by Gandhiji.  
Another reason is that it is made from sacred khadi . 
The third one is that it could always be kept clean  and as white as a crane's 
wings. 
The forth reason was that it was beautiful. 
The fifth one could be that it was light, simple an d cheap. 
The next and the sixth reason was that it was honou red as a part of the 
national costume. 
The seventh reason was that it bore the name of Gan dhi. 
Above all, the most valuable thing about it was tha t a lot of patriots sacrificed 
their life for it. 
Who wouldn't feel proud to wear such a priceless ca p? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 31   
25. SHIRT ALONE  
We should be thankful to Gandhiji that now we are a ble to wear the shirt 
alone. 
What about the past? My goodness! You first had to put on a vest, then a shirt 
that was topped up by a jacket and then a coat on t op of it! 
One had to pile up so many garments on oneself and bear the hot climate in the 
noon. One used to boil up like a potato. But who wo uld dare go out without 
wearing all those clothes? 
The dress was considered incomplete if the coat was  not worn! One had to 
wear it even though the heat was unbearable. A pers on was called fully dressed 
only after wearing a coat. 
If the students ever went to the school without wea ring a coat they would not 
be allowed to enter it. They would insist that a ha lf dressed student is not 
allowed to come. 
If you went to the court without wearing a coat the y would not let you in saying 
that an uncivilised person had no business to be th ere. 
The heat would scorch people but who would dare bei ng called uncivilised? 
But satyagrahi Gandhiji dared do so. He started goi ng out wearing only shirt. 
People would laugh at him but Gandhiji would not ca re. He said that wearing a 
coat in such a hot weather is actually uncivilised.  Wearing so many clothes in a 
poor country like us is a grave sin. 
After this people started wearing only shirt. The s tudents were happy. The 
khadi shirt and the cap then became the national co stume. 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 32   
26. THE KNOWLEDGE OF LANGUAGES  
Gandhiji knew so many languages. He learned the lan guages not because he 
wanted to be a scholar but for serving the people. 
As his mother tongue he knew Gujarati. 
In the school he learned English. Later, his stay i n England and South Africa 
helped him master it. 
In South Africa he had to work with the Muslims. So  while serving them he 
learned Urdu also. 
Later, in our country, a large number of labourers from Madras (now Chennai) 
took part in his Satyagraha. So he learned a bit of  South Indian languages too. 
He had traveled all over India to convey his messag e to the people. He had 
come to know the importance of Hindi during it. Peo ple from any state could 
understand his message in Hindi. In the beginning h e could not speak Hindi very 
well but later he learned it properly. 
It wasn't that Gandhiji deliberately tried to learn  these languages. Instead he 
learned them through experience. Still he tried to learn them better whenever 
he had an opportunity. 
Whenever he was sent to jail for long durations he would work hard to learn 
Urdu and Tamil better. 
Gandhiji did not know Marathi very well. In South A frica he once prepared a 
lecture in Marathi with the help of Gokhale and tra nslated it too. Later he 
made remarkable progress during his stay in Yerawad a jail and at Shegaon. 
During childhood he had learned a bit of Sanskrit i n the school. Afterwards he 
learned it better in jail. 
While during his study in England, he acquired esse ntial knowledge of Europe's 
ancient language - Latin and then he also gained wo rking knowledge of French. 
He had mastered his mother- tongue Gujrati. His lan guage wouldn't be showy 
but truthful, straightforward and full of emotions.  GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 33   
27. THE EXPERIMENT WITH NUTRITION  
Gandhiji loved to experiment with nutrition since h is childhood. He did a lot of 
experiments on himself during his lifetime and had risked his life doing so. 
The biggest of his experiments was about milk. He c onsidered using animal milk 
as unreligious and violent. He thought that God has  provided that milk for their 
little ones, which we take forcibly. This should be  considered the biggest sin of 
all. He thought that it was a non-vegetarian nutrit ion. When this thought 
became firm in his mind he decided to give up using  milk. He did not take milk 
for so many years. Once he became seriously ill and  the doctors said that he 
had no choice but to take milk if he had to get bet ter. At last, at Ba's insistence 
he started taking goat's milk. 
After this self-experience Gandhiji accepted the fa ct that human beings cannot 
do without animal milk. He wished that someday a sc ientist would try hard to 
evolve some nutritious thing from plants which woul d be as good as milk. It 
would be a boon to the humankind. 
He did the same experiment with salt too. Later he came to realise that it was 
a necessary element in our meals. He then started u sing it. 
Gandhiji believed that vegetables and fruits are me ant to be the real nutrition 
for human beings. The structure of the human body, the shape of hands and 
feet, the teeth and the stomach, all are made for v egetarian food only. The 
monkeys are nearest animals to the human beings. Th eir eating habits also 
emphasise this belief. 
But how could the poor countrymen get fruits in tho se critical days? So Gandhiji 
tried to find the cheapest substitutes for fruits a nd they were peanuts, dates 
and bananas. Then for many years he used them mainl y in his meals. 
Gandhiji even disapproved the traditional methods o f cooking. He thought that 
there was no need to cook food on fire. He believed  that the Sun ripens the 
fruits and cooking them on fire was like destroying  them. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 34  At this stage he realised that if the grains were s oaked in water it would be 
easy for the womenfolk to cook them. It wood save t he cost and time both. The 
raw water-soaked grains have to be chewed properly and can be consumed in 
less quantity than the cooked food. It could save a  lot for this poor country. 
People polish the rice to make it white and become happy. They also remove 
the husk from the wheat to make fine flour. Actuall y, the bran and the husk are 
most nutritious. Throwing it away is like throwing mango pulp and eating 
itsseed. Gandhiji started using coarse flour when h e realised it. 
As the time passed by Gandhiji's body became very t hin and delicate but he did 
not give up his experiments with the meals. He kept  on doing small experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 35   
28. NATURE CURE  
People get disturbed by the illness and then seek a  doctor to cure it. They 
believe that the doctor will cure them, as if it wa s not their own responsibility. 
We often don't consider that god has given us this priceless machine (our body) 
and we behave as if we don't have any duty towards it. We behave carelessly 
when the illness is cured and get involved in the l uxuries of life. 
Gandhiji's views about this are thought worthy. The  first thing to be  
remembered is that we should not loose patience dur ing illness. One should try 
to cure it in the best possible way, and should not  leave everything to a doctor.  
Secondly, we need to understand that all ailments a re caused due to improper 
and unrestrained habits. So we should be careful ab out it. 
In spite of this if we still get ill; we must under stand that the body machine is 
trying to purify itself of the undue stress we have  burdened upon it. In such a 
case it would be better to let the illness do its j ob rather than taking high doses 
of medicines. This helps the body to cure itself in  a few days. 
Gandhiji preferred nature cure treatment to the med icines whenever he fell ill. 
He would use mud covered cloth strips on the ailing  body part and would sit in 
a tub filled with water up to his waist. He knew th at these treatments cure any 
fever and other diseases. So he usually liked to do  such experiments. 
He did such experiments on himself as well as on hi s beloved relatives and got 
results. 
Gandhiji's nature cure included sunbath and sleep u nder the open sky. 
But the most important part of his treatment was ke eping fast. He had cured so 
many of his followers by encouraging them to keep f ast for long durations. 
Doing simple changes in food habits can cure so man y ailments. People living 
with Gandhiji had experienced it so many times. 
Yet Gandhiji knew and accepted that many dreadful d iseases require treatment 
by an expert doctor or an operation too. He too had  such experience. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 36  He believed that it was not proper to get disturbed  in case of illness. Gandhiji's 
son Ramdas and Kasturba had refused to drink mutton  soup during their illness 
although doctor had recommended it. They said that they would rather die 
than take the soup. This made Gandhiji very happy. He had blessed the 
patients for their bravery. 
The relatives do a lot of things running around a p atient but seldom take care 
of him with love. Gandhiji was very fond of serving  the people. He disliked 
loosing an opportunity to serve a patient even when  there were important 
national tasks on hand. The brothers and sisters wh o were fortunate enough to 
be served and taken care by Gandhiji were not able to forget it ever in their 
lives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 37   
29. SEEING THE PENNILESS  
While traveling around the country Gandhiji once we nt to Orissa state. 
Could its poverty be described in words? Our countr y - India, is one of the poor 
countries in the world and Orissa is the poorest of  all the states in India. There 
are no living people, rather there are skeletons on ly. The famines won't spare 
them. People hardly get to eat both the times. Why to talk about clothing in 
such a condition? 
Gandhiji had heard about those conditions but now h e saw it for himself. 
Gandhiji visited the villages of that poor state. S ome of the villages were 
deserted. The huts were shattered. The people in so me of those huts were 
hungry, thirsty and pale. The women had barely cove red their bodies with rags. 
Even they were not sufficient. They had barely enou gh rags to wrap around 
their waists but nothing to cover the upper part. 
This scene broke him down with sorrow. Oh God! Such  extreme poverty in my 
country? Can't I do anything to abolish it? 
He thought this was what is called poverty! 
Gandhiji had very soft feelings for Orissa compared  to other states. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 38   
30. A SHORT DHOTI  
Gandhiji wanted to abolish the tradition of bonded labour from Champaran. So 
he went to stay there and serve the people. 
Once he went to a village and saw that the womenfol k were quite dirty and 
untidy. Gandhiji asked Kasturba to teach them to ba the everyday and wear 
clean clothes. 
Kasturba went to the women and said, "Ladies! You m ust wash your clothes. 
Don't be lazy!" 
Those untidy ladies kept staring at her. Later, one  of those ladies said, "Ba, 
come to my hut and see for yourself!" 
She took Kasturba into her hut and said, "Ba, look around my hut. Do you see 
any suitcases or almirahs full of clothes? I have o nly this saree I am wearing. 
Tell me Ba, how am I to wash this and what should I  wear then? You ask 
Mahatmaji to give me another saree so that I can wa sh it everyday." 
Gandhiji had seen the poverty in his country but li stening to this incident he 
realised its gravity very deeply. 
How can this poverty be abolished? Was it sufficien t to give that woman a spare 
saree? There were innumerable women like her in the  country! 
So, gaining independence was the only solution! Whi le striving for 
independence Gandhiji always remembered those poor women. 
Gandhiji had begun the movement and it was going on  quite well. A major 
incident happened one day. The government imprisone d his friend Maulana 
Mohmed Ali. 
This grave situation again reminded him of those po or, untidy women. He 
vowed then and there only, "I won't wear a three pi ece costume until I liberate 
my country and my motherland (the womenfolk in the country) get enough 
clothes to clad their bodies. A short dhoti is enou gh for modesty." 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 39   
31. THE COMPARTMENT IS HOME, 
      THE COMPARTMENT IS ASHRAM!  
The Gaikwad King of Baroda had it inscribed on thei r flag - 'The saddle is our 
home, the saddle is our throne!' The Maratha Sardar s used to be very proud that 
their horses were always ready with the saddles on.  
In the same way the third class compartment of trai n had become the home 
and Ashram for Gandhiji. He used to travel along th e country to spread his 
message. He used to travel so much that it was hard  to say where did he spend 
most of his time, in the Ashram or in the railway c ompartment. So, what is 
wrong in calling the railway compartment his home a nd ashram? 
Gandhiji used the compartment just like his home. H e performed all his tasks 
there. There he would spin the yarn, pray in the mo rning and evening, look 
after his correspondence and meet people. 
Gandhiji always traveled in third class compartment . Sometimes he had to 
travel in the upper class due to ill health but he would be very sorry to do so. 
He would think, "The people I want to serve travel in third class and tolerate a 
lot of discomfort. Then why should I enjoy the luxu ry of a higher class?" Such 
thoughts made him uneasy. 
The miserable state of third class compartment in o ur country is well known 
but he would be content to experience the misery wi th other people. He had a 
lot of such opportunities to taste the miseries whe n he was not known as 
Mahatma. Many a times he had to travel standing all  the way and bear the 
jostling too. How could there be any possibility of  sleeping or working? 
In those days the leaders used to maintain a distan ce from the poor, untidy 
countrymen. They felt ashamed of them. They travele d in the upper class just 
like higher officers. A barrister who had come from  South Africa traveling in the 
third class astonished people. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 40  Once Gandhiji had stayed at Gokhale's house in Calc utta (Kolkata). While 
returning Gokhaleji went to see him off. Gandhiji r equested him not to go 
through all that trouble but he did not listen to h im. He said, "If you were 
traveling in the upper class just like others I wou ldn't have come. But since you 
are going in the third class, I must see you off." 
People like Gokhale who appreciated Gandhiji so muc h, were very rare in those 
days. Generally, people would laugh at it. 
Gandhiji got an opportunity to know his poor countr ymen while going through 
the suffering of the third class. Due to this only he could know their nature, 
their habits and so many other things about them. N o other leader in the 
country knew the countrymen so well as Gandhiji did . That is how he became 
the saviour of the country and the people followed him with faith. The people 
were devoted to him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 41   
32. THE JAIL PALACE  
Gandhiji called the jail a palace. Many people are afraid of even mentioning its 
name. The jail means the high walls, the big gates,  the fearsome guards, the 
handcuffs and noisy chains! Besides this a prisoner  had to work on a big hand 
mill, draw water from the well and work on the oil mill too. In spite of this no 
one could escape the stick of the inspector. 
Once imprisoned no one could escape. There was noth ing to see and nothing to 
listen to. 
The thieves used to shake with fear at the mention of jail. But it never seemed 
horrifying to Gandhiji, instead it seemed like a pa lace to him. He had enjoyed 
its hospitality so many times. Similarly he had ope ned its gates for so many 
satyagrahis. 
He would say, "Why to have fear of going to jail wh ile serving your country?" On 
the contrary, it was only a pleasure. 
In fact, you don't have to worry about anything onc e you enter the jail. The 
meal is ready on time, you get clothes to wear, you  even have a room and when 
there is some work to do, a guard is always there f or your safety. In addition, 
after the hard work of the day, one gets a sound sl eep at night. 
Even a king might not enjoy such luxury in his pala ce. He can't enjoy the meals 
properly because of the worries and is unable to sl eep comfortably. 
Gandhiji had been in South African jail too. In Ind ia, he was frequently sent to 
Yerawada and Sabarmati jail. 
The jail employees felt very awkward when they had to imprison him. 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 42   
33. THREE VOWS  
Mohandas came of age. 
Mavji Dave, an old friend and advisor of the family  would say, "Send Mohandas 
to Europe to be a barrister so that he would be abl e to look after his father's 
affairs." 
It was not easy to go abroad. His father had been a  'deewan' (chief manager) 
but did not leave much money behind. They tried to get help from the state 
but in vain. But his elder brother was generous. He  vowed to collect the money 
anyhow. 
But there was another obstacle too. If he goes abro ad, then what about the 
religion? What to answer the people of the caste? 
Mother Putlibai said, "No, no! He will get defiled (polluted) there. He will eat 
flesh, drink alcohol and would behave immorally. It 's better not to send him 
there." 
Then one Sadhu (a saintly man) suggested a solution . He said, "Would it not be 
better if we ask him to take a vow?" 
Mother said, "Yes! I won't object to it then." 
The Sadhu said to Mohandas, "Make three promises to  your mother and vow to 
keep them. Then you will be allowed to go." 
"What promises?" 
"The first would be not to drink alcohol. Secondly,  you promise not to touch 
non-vegetarian food. The last promise would be that  you would treat all other 
women as your mother or sister. Are you willing to take the vows?" 
"Yes, I would be glad to do that!" 
"Mother, I bow at your feet and promise that I won' t eat flesh, won't drink 
alcohol and look upon other women as my mother or s ister!" GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 43  Gandhiji considered these vows of utmost importance  in his life. A vow is a 
symbol of a   person's self-confidence and only it can save a person in case of 
weakness. 
He had this belief right from his childhood. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 44   
34. A COOLIE (LABOURER) BARRISTER  
After becoming a Barrister from Europe he went to S outh Africa to find a job. 
He went there with a Muslim businessman as his serv ant. 
Did anyone know that he was going to earn something  unique from that 
unknown country? 
Right from the moment he set his foot on the soil o f South Africa he had a 
feeling of suffocation. There he found the Indians being insulted all the time. 
Elders and young ones were treated alike. 
A lot of Hindu people had gone there as labourers o r coolies. That is why the 
white people called all of them as labourers. A bus inessman was called a 
labourer businessman. An advocate was called a labo urer advocate and 
Gandhiji was called a labourer barrister. 
Like this the Britishers looked down upon the Hindi  people. They felt insulted in 
keeping contact with the Indians. They would not al low Indians to travel with 
them on trams, railways or in a coach. They were no t allowed to enter the 
cafeterias. They even hated the labourers walking o n the streets. Then how 
could they be invited to a programme? 
The learned and rich Hindi people also had to bear such insult. They thought 
that it was no use in making an issue of this treat ment in a foreign country. 
They decided that they would keep mum about it so a s to earn money and get 
respect in their own country. All of them thought l ike this. 
But Gandhiji could not tolerate this. He too was in sulted there time and again. 
But, instead of pocketing insults silently like oth er Indians residing in South 
Africa, he tried to resist. He was abused, called n ames and pushed also. He 
never retorted or behaved like them but all the sam e, he would not be afraid 
or even surrender. It was unbearable. 
He had come there with a barrister to practice his occupation. So the man took 
Gandhiji to the court in Durban. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 45  Although Gandhiji wore western outfit, he wore the Indian turban on his head. 
When he went to the courtroom to sit with the plead ers he had the turban on 
his head. 
The judge was amazed to look at this new barrister.  He considered Gandhiji's 
wearing a turban as an insult to the court. 
He stared at him for some time and then asked him t o take off the turban. 
Gandhiji could not bear the insult. He thought that  it was better to be 
beheaded than to take the turban off his head. 
He did not remove the turban and left the court. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 46   
35. FORCED TO GET DOWN  
Gandhiji boarded a train to travel from Durban to P ritoria. He had a ticket to 
the first class compartment. 
At home, the people had cautioned him, "Gandhibhai,  this is not India. These 
peple won't let us travel in the first class with t hem." But Gandhiji did not 
listen to them. He thought that being a barrister h e was entitled to it. 
Nothing happened in the beginning. The train reache d Morrisberg station at  
9 O'clock in the night. A British man alighted the train and came to his 
compartment. 
"My goodness! Why is this coolie traveling in the f irst class compartment?"  
He did not utter a word but went down and brought a n officer along with him. 
The officer too kept staring. Nobody dared say anyt hing. At last the officer 
said, "Hey man! Come here. You will have to go to t he last compartment!" 
Gandhiji told him, "I have a ticket to the first cl ass." 
"Don't worry! I am asking you to shift to the last compartment." 
"Listen, I have been given this seat from Durban an d I would travel in this 
compartment only." 
This answer stunned the man. How could a labourer t alk like this to a British 
officer? He ordered, "This is not possible! You wil l have to get down or you will 
be thrown out by the guard!" 
Gandhiji replied firmly, "Well then! Let the guard do it! I won't get down 
myself!" 
The officer got angry and called the guard. The gua rd clutched Gandhiji's hand 
and pushing him down the train threw his baggage to o. 
Gandhiji neither went to another compartment nor di d he touch his baggage. 
The insult vexed him very much. He stood there and the train departed. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 47  He stayed on the platform all night. The weather wa s chilling. He had an 
overcoat in his luggage but he didn't wish to look at it. What if he went to fetch 
it from the baggage and someone insulted him again?  He preferred to shiver all 
night. 
While shivering he had a lot of thoughts. "Why shou ld I continue to travel on 
this train and get insulted again? Should I go back ?" 
"No! How could I leave my job unfinished? It's bett er to return to India than to 
stay here to earn money!" 
"No! I must help my friend in his job. Should I rat her file a case against that 
British officer and the guard?" 
"But what would I achieve? Would it help the Indian s not being called 
'labourers'? 
This thought made him forget the insult. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 48   
36. MISERY OF THE COACH  
Gandhiji had to face yet another difficulty while g oing to Pritoria. In those days 
there was no railway from Charleston to Johanessber g. One had to travel by a 
horse driven coach. 
He got a ticket and was about to get on the coach w hen the coachman stopped 
him saying, "I cannot let you get in. Your ticket w as for yesterday!" 
Thinking that Gandhiji must be new to that place, h e was making an excuse. 
Actually he did not want this black labourer to tra vel in his coach along with 
the Britishers.Gandhiji was not going to listen to him. At last he agreed to let 
Gandhiji travel with him but not inside the coach. He offered him a seat in the 
front near the coachman. 
In spite of this insult Gandhiji accepted the seat offered to him. 
After traveling some distance one of the Britishers  wished to sit near the 
coachman and smoke a cigarette. He wanted to enjoy fresh air too. He took a 
dirty cloth from the coachman and spreading it on t he foothold asked Gandhiji, 
"Hey Swami! You shift there. I want to sit near the  coachman." 
This insult made Gandhiji very angry. The white man  was quite strong. Gandhiji 
was not only weak but lonely too. Yet, how could he  ignore such insult? 
He said, "You asked me to sit here. I ignored the i nsult. Now you want to smoke 
the cigarette and wish me to sit at your feet. I wo uld rather sit inside the coach 
than at your feet." 
Listening to this the white man slapped him and tri ed to pull him down the 
coach. Gandhiji firmly took hold of the iron rod ne ar the seat. He decided that 
he wouldn't let it go even if his wrists got fractu red. 
The white man was abusing and pulling him. Gandhiji  kept silent but held on 
firmly and did not leave the seat. At last, other p assengers interfered. They 
scolded the coachman and freed Gandhiji. 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 49   
37. THE PUSH  
In Pretoria, Gandhiji used to go for a walk every e vening. 
He used to walk along the footpath. President Kruge r's home was there on the 
same road. It was a simple house. The guard only in dicated that the house 
belonged to some officer.  
Gandhiji walked by the same road every day. He used  to walk in front of the 
house daily and the guard would see him doing so. N o one said anything to him.  
One day, the guard might have been changed. Seeing Gandhiji, he thought, 
"Why should this black labourer walk along this foo tpath and that too in front of 
the President's house? He has to be scolded." 
Without saying or asking anything he went to Gandhi ji and pushing him kicked 
him down the footpath. 
Gandhiji was dumbfounded by this attack. He got up and was about to talk to 
the guard when a horse rider came there and said, " Gandhiji, I have seen 
everything. If you want to complain against him, I will bear a witness." 
The horse rider was an Englishman and Gandhiji's fr iend. 
Gandhiji replied, "No brother! It will be of no use ! He is treating me the same 
way he treats my other countrymen." 
The friend said, "No, no! We should teach such peop le a lesson!" 
Gandhiji said, "All Englishmen insult us by calling  labourers! Why should this 
ignorant guard be blamed?" 
Then the Britisher admonished the guard and made hi m say sorry to Gandhiji. 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 50   
38. BACKLASH FROM A FRIEND  
A Pathan named Mir Alam used to live in Africa. He used to make and sell 
mattresses for a livelihood. 
He knew Gandhiji. He respected Gandhiji and sought his advice when needed. 
When Gandhiji started Satyagraha movement in South Africa, he took part in it.  
Once it so happened, that Gandhiji and many other I ndians were sent to jail for 
taking part in this movement. After some time the g overnment and the 
satyagrahis agreed to compromise. There were many w ho did not like this. Mir 
Alam too did not prefer this. He was quite angry wi th Gandhiji. 
There was a very inhuman and insulting rule in that  country. Our people had to 
seek permission of the government to stay there and  had to register their 
fingerprints. They also had to carry them wherever they went. 
Anyone who did not carry those prints was punished.  Such was the law. The 
Indian there had launched satyagraha against this l aw. The compromise offered 
these people an option. It said that, those who wer e willing to have the 
fingerprints registered at their will, could do so;  those who did not want could 
be excused. 
The satyagraha was successful and Gandhiji was rele ased from jail. The other 
satyagrahis were also released. A meeting was calle d to celebrate the success. 
During the meeting Mir Alam stood up and said, "How  can we call it a success? 
In any case we will have to seek the permission to stay!" 
Gandhiji tried to explain, "People who don't wish t o do so would be excused. 
You don't have to go for it." 
"And what about you?" he asked. 
"I will be the first one to do so and I will have t he fingerprints taken" Gandhiji 
said. 
"People have a doubt that you were bribed by the go vernment," he said. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 51  Gandhiji said, "No one will believe it." 
"It's all right but now I take an oath that I will kill the person whoever goes to 
seek the permission." 
Gandhiji said, "I would happily die at the hands of  a friend but in no case I 
would leave the path of truth." 
Three months passed by after this incident. The dat e for seeking the  
permission was fixed. Gandhiji and other leaders de cided to go there ahead of 
others. 
Mir Alam had not forgotten his oath. He thought, "I  will see how does he seek 
the permission!" Then taking a few friends along wi th him he blocked the road. 
The Pathans did not greet Gandhiji when he came the re so he greeted them. 
He asked Mir Alam, "How do you do?" 
"I am fine!" he replied angrily. 
On scheduled time the group started out to seek the  permission. Mir Alam and 
his friends followed them. When the office was at a  short distance, Mir Alam 
came to Gandhiji and asked, "Where are you going?" 
"To register my fingerprints and get the permission . You too can come along if 
you wish. Although you need not have your fingerpri nts registered." 
Gandhiji was about to finish his sentence when some one struck his head with a 
stick. Gandhiji lost consciousness at the very firs t stroke but the Pathans kept 
on beating him. 
The other leaders accompanying Gandhiji tried to sa ve him but they were also 
beatenup by the Pathans. 
The Pathans tried to run away after beating these p eople but the people 
around caught them and handed them over to the poli ce. 
Gandhiji was unconscious when people carried him to  a neighbouring house. 
There they treated him for the wounds. His lips had  ruptured, the teeth were 
shaken and his ribs were aching. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 52  When he regained consciousness, the first thing Gan dhiji asked was, "Where is 
Mir Alam?" 
The people taking care of him asked him to rest and  told that the police had 
caught him and his friends. 
He said, "No, no! I must get them out!" Then he wro te a letter to the senior 
Police officer that he did not wish that his Pathan  friends be punished and 
requested him to release them. 
Accepting this request the police released them. Bu t many Britishers objected 
to it so they had to arrest them again.  Then they were sentenced to six months 
of custody. 
Gandhiji lost his front teeth because of this beati ng. The gap is like an 
adornment to his face, which he received for his tr uthfulness. This gift from a 
friend was received lovingly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 53   
39. MIR ALAM BECAME A DEVOTEE  
The important part of this story begins now. The So uth African government did 
not keep its promise. Hence, Gandhiji started his m ovement again. 
He informed people that the government had deceived  them. So they would 
have to start the Satyagraha again. People had will ingly sought the permission 
to live there. Now they were going to burn the perm issions. Those who were 
willing to take part in the movement, had to send i n their permissions. 
People took up the challenge. Gandhiji received hea ps of permission papers. 
A day was fixed for the bon-fire. A meeting was cal led and the people heaped 
up their permission papers in the center. 
Gandhiji asked the people if they had given their p ermissions willingly. The 
people said 'yes'. He asked to take them back if so meone wished so. But the 
people did not take them back. 
Gandhiji warned them that it was not an easy task a nd they might have to go to 
prison. But the people didn't care and asked him to  burn them. 
Suddenly, a Pathan got up and coming to Gandhiji he  said, "Gandhiji, take my 
papers too and excuse my follies. I could not under stand and follow you. You 
are very brave." 
Gandhiji shook hands with him. The people kept on c lapping loudly and the fire 
was burned. 
Since then Mir Alam became a staunch follower of Ga ndhiji. He served as his 
bodyguard even though Gandhiji did not ask him to d o so. 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 54   
40. A VIOLENT STORM  
Gandhiji stayed in India for a few days and then go t on a ship to return to South 
Africa. This was his second trip to that country. H e had Kasturba and the 
children with him this time. After some days a viol ent storm started in the 
ocean. The passengers suffered from severe nausea. They could not eat at all. 
They were frightened yet happy because Gandhiji was  with them. Gandhiji took 
care of all of them and assured them too that every  thing will be all right. But a 
real storm was awaiting them at Durban. 
The Britishers at Durban had received the news that  Gandhiji was returning to 
South Africa. They thought, "He is coming here agai n? He has defamed us in 
India and in rest of the world. No! He should be se nt back!" 
Some said, "This Gandhi fellow won't let us live pe acefully. He encourages those 
'labourers' to rebel against us. We won't allow him  to step down on this land." 
Another said, "I heard that this time he is bringin g his family along with him. He 
wants to stay here. Let us see how dare he come her e!" 
One of them shouted, "Do you know he is not coming alone. He is bringing two 
ship loads of labourers with him." 
"It's enough! Don't let him come here!" 
"Ask the government to refuse him permission to ent er." 
"If the government won't listen to us, we will thro w him into the ocean." 
The White people had heard a lot of rumors about Ga ndhiji and were very much 
excited. 
Gandhiji had no idea at all about all this when the  boat reached Durban.  
The officers on the dock said, "Go, go away! You ca nnot get down here. Plague 
has broken out in your country. You will have to st ay in quarantine." 
"But no one is ill on this boat!"  
"Don't argue! You will have to stay in quarantine."  GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 55  "For how many days?" 
"For twenty three days." 
Gandhiji was astounded. He could not understand the  officers' behaviour. As 
the time passed he came to know what was happening.  Those stories unfolded 
the mystery of the officers' behaviour. 
Someone would shout at the passengers, "Go, go back  or you will be drowned in 
the sea." 
Someone would threaten the owner of the ship, "Take  your ship back to India or 
you will have to die." 
But none of them paid heed to those threats and sta yed where they were. 
They spent twenty-three days on the ship quite comf ortably. The quarantine 
was over. All of them got down courageously. The Br itishers kept staring at 
them.  
Just then an officer sent a message asking Gandhiji  not to get down during 
daytime or else his life would be in danger. 
A friend asked, "Gandhi! Are you afraid?" 
"No! I am not afraid of anything." 
"It's better then. We will get down during the dayt ime only. I will accompany 
you. We are not thieves to move out in the night!" 
Gandhiji sent away his family in a vehicle and he h imself walked to the town 
with that friend. 
No one noticed them for some time. Then someone rec ognised him. Some 
British children passing from there also noticed hi m. Gandhiji was the only 
person in that country to wear a turban. So he was recognised easily.  
As soon as the children saw him they started shouti ng," Gandhi! Gandhi!" 
"Thrash him! Beat him!" 
"Catch him!" GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 56  At first they kept shouting only. Then they started  throwing stones at him. 
His friend said, "Now we must get away from here. C ome, we will catch a 
rickshaw and go!" 
Gandhiji said, "Catch a rickshaw? I hate going in a  rickshaw pulled by a human 
being!" 
The friend said, "There is no time to think about y our likes and dislikes! We 
must get away before they catch us." 
Unwillingly, Gandhiji was about to get on the ricks haw when the crowd caught 
the rickshaw driver. 
Beware! Dare you get him in your rickshaw! We will break it down and beat you 
as well!" 
The poor Blackman was helpless. 
He shouted "No" in his native language and ran away . 
Gandhiji kept going ahead. A big crowd kept followi ng him. 
A strong, hefty boy from the crowd took the lead an d separated Gandhiji from 
his friend. 
Then they started calling names and throwing stones  at him. One of them 
snatched his turban and threw it, another one slapp ed and kicked him. Now 
Gandhiji was helpless. He was about to faint when h e caught the iron rod of the 
neighboring house. He got the support to stand. The n he went ahead. 
A courageous White woman was passing by from there at this critical time. She 
was the wife of a British Officer. She knew Gandhij i. She ran towards him and 
holding her umbrella on his head kept walking along  with him. Seeing this 
woman the crowd set back, still someone would come and slap him once in a 
while. 
The police arrived there in the mean time. They sca ttered the violent crowd. 
Then they escorted Gandhiji to his friend and the f amous businessman of 
Durban, Rustomji's home. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 57  Although the crowd dispersed at that time, they aga in gathered there in the 
night and started shouting. 
They shouted, "Hand him over to us or we will burn down the house." 
But Rustomji was not afraid of them. 
This time the Durban Police officer acted wisely. H e sent one of his faithful 
subordinates inside the house to ask Gandhiji to di sguise and get away secretly. 
Then he went to the crowd and kept them engaged. 
The officer kept a table in front of Parsi Rustomji 's door. He climbed on the 
table and kept the people busy with his talk. He st arted singing a song… 
Come let us hang Gandhi, 
On a mango tree! 
Come let us hang Gandhi! 
Thus the crowd got busy singing the song. The offic er thought to himself, "Keep 
shouting, kids! But I am holding the door! During a ll this confusion, the 
policeman inside the house was helping Gandhiji wea r the uniform of a 
policeman. Gandhiji disliked doing so, yet he had t o do it. Then both of them 
went to the neighboring warehouse and mixed with th e crowd. No one noticed 
them! 
The people were busy singing the song! 
Come, let us hang Gandhi, 
Come, let us hang Gandhi, 
On a mango tree! 
Come let us hang Gandhi! 
When he learned that Gandhiji had escaped safely, t he officer stopped singing. 
Then he said, "It's enough now! Go home!" 
The people said, "No, bring Gandhi, bring Gandhi he re!" 
The officer smiled and said, "What if your prey has  escaped?" GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 58  "How can he escape? Aren't all of us watching the d oor?" 
"But I am telling you that he has escaped!" 
"No, it's not true! We don't believe this!" 
"If you can't believe this old officer you may chec k the house! If you form a 
committee of a few people, I will allow you to do s o." 
The crowd sent a few people to check it. They confi rmed that Gandhiji had 
escaped from there. Then the officer told the crowd , "You did not listen to your 
police officers so they played a trick with you. We  are public servants and we 
have to do our duty. You may please leave now. The police have won over you." 
The angry crowd now started laughing and then left.  So many days passed by. 
Gandhiji got well. The rioting White men calmed dow n and got busy with their 
work. 
The White men thought that the labourer barrister w on't forget the beating and 
would file a case against them. Then they would be punished. 
The government was also waiting for Gandhiji to fil e a case. But Gandhiji's way 
of thinking was quite different. He had pardoned th ose strange men. 
One day, a senior officer sent for Gandhiji and sai d, "We are very sorry that you 
were hurt. We will catch the guilty and punish them  even if they are the White 
people. The government wants you to identify them."  
Gandhiji replied calmly, "I am obliged for your con cern but I don't have ill 
feelings for anybody." 
"But won't you be able to identify them?" 
"I may identify one or two of them but I don't thin k that they should be blamed. 
"Why, Gandhiji? Those cruel people hurt you!" 
Gandhiji told him straight away, "People like you e ncourage them to do so. You 
are the real culprits. Why should I wish them to be  punished?" 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 59   
41.  THE RESULT OF OUR SINS  
We felt so bad when the White people called us labo urers. 
Can you Imagine what the Harijans might be feeling when we call them Bhangi 
(the scavengers)! 
How badly and often we insult them? We don't touch them; we don't allow them 
to live inside the village. Whenever they have to c ross the village they have to 
keep shouting… 
Keep away, my lords! 
Don't touch us, our lords! 
We are your scavengers, my lords! 
Such extreme insult! 
They would die for want of water but we won't let t hem take it from our wells! 
All the children from the village come to study in the school but their children 
won't be allowed or made to sit at a distance. 
Everybody would be allowed to travel by the train, but as soon as they come, 
people will call out, "There's no seat vacant!" 
All would be allowed to visit the temples but they are banned to do so! 
Is it not miserable? 
They clean our courtyards and our towns and cities.  They weave clothes for us, 
but we don't care at all. What do we pay them for a ll these services? We throw 
the leftover food at them. 
There is no limit to the sins we commit. Why wouldn 't the foreigners look down 
upon us? Gandhiji believed that god is punishing us  for our sins. That is why he 
served Harijans. He used to say that serving them i s not a sin but a noble deed! 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 60   
42. HARIJAN FIRST  
A meeting was called in a town and Gandhiji was goi ng to address it. 
Who wouldn't want to listen to him? The businessmen , the Brahmins, the Patels, 
the Rajputs, the blacksmiths as well as the carpent ers, the Telis and the 
cobblers, all of them started going towards the mee ting place. 
The people from the Bhangi hutments said, "Come, le t us also attend the 
meeting. Our Bapuji is coming. Shouldn't we go to l isten to him? 
They also went there! 
The meeting organizers recognised them, "Oh! They a re the Bhangis! Oh no! Not 
here! Go back! What are you doing here? You have no thing to do with the 
meeting!" 
"Our lords! Please let us stay here! Bapuji belongs  to us also!" 
Then someone had mercy on them and he asked the org anisers to let them stay 
there and arranged a place for them in a corner. "Y ou can sit here but don't 
come and touch anybody!" 
"No my lord, we won't go near anybody!" 
The meeting place was over crowded. As soon as Gand hiji came there people 
called out, " Vande Mataram! (Our respect to the mo ther!) Mahatma Gandhi ki 
jay!" All the people hailed out loudly. 
Gandhiji went to the dais and looked around; he imm ediately spotted the 
Harijans sitting in the corner, away from others. 
He enquired about it, "Why are those people sitting  there?" 
"Mahatmaji they are the Harijans!" 
"Ask them to sit along with others!" 
The organisers got confused. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 61  Gandhiji said, "If you won't allow them to sit with  other people, I will go to 
them." 
And then he went to his beloved Harijans. Some peop le dared go along with 
him. The Harijans were overjoyed to have Gandhiji a mong them. They blessed 
him heartily. "Long live Gandhiji! May our Bapu liv e long!" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 62   
43. HARIJANS IN THE ASHRAM  
When Gandhiji established his Ashram on the banks o f Sabarmati he declared 
that if a deserving Harijan came to him, he would b e allowed to stay there. 
People were doubtful that any Harijan would come th ere. So people didn't pay 
attention to it and kept helping Gandhiji in the es tablishment. They never let 
Gandhiji worry about money. 
After a few days, a Harijan family really came ther e. The husband, wife and 
their child came there. Thakkar Bappa sent them the re. 
Gandhiji thought that God was trying to test him. H e asked the Harijan man if 
he knew the rules of the Ashram. 
"Yes," he said. 
"Would you be able to follow them?" 
"Yes." 
"Then you are welcome! Feel at home here!" 
In this way the Harijan family started living there . They lived there with others. 
They worked with them and ate with them too. 
But all the inmates of the Ashram were not understa nding enough. Many of 
them were disturbed by this incident. So Gandhiji t old them clearly, "I want 
them here! Those who don't want to follow the rules  may leave. Rules won't 
change even if it's my wife or children." 
The news spread out in the town that Gandhiji has a llowed a Harijan to stay in 
the Ashram. 
People thought, "He did what he declared. Why shoul d we help his corrupt 
deeds?" The orthodox businessmen then stopped donat ing money to the 
Ashram. 
Maganlal Gandhi used to look after the management o f the Ashram. He told 
Bapuji, "The store room is empty now. What would we  do next month?" GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 63  Gandhiji assured him, "Have faith in God! When noth ing remains, we will go to 
the Harijan colony and work for earning our livelih ood. But we will still not 
leave the path of truth!" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 64   
44. TWO HISTORICAL MARCHES 
Gandhiji often used to plan a march during his Saty agraha movement. He had 
arranged one such movement in South Africa and anot her one in India, which is 
known as Dandi March. 
When the South African government imposed several t axes on the public, 
Gandhiji asked the thousands of labourers to take p art in his movement. The 
labourers answered his call and leaving the factori es and fields, took part in his 
movement. 
Gandhiji started thinking about doing something, wh ich would make the 
government arrest all of them. 
An idea came to his mind. He thought that he would arrange a long march with 
those thousands of labourers to the Transwall and b reak the rules for the 
permission to stay there. 
He asked them to march with him. He had 2211 people  with him along with 127 
women. The labourers had brought their children and  belongings with them.  
They crossed the boundary to disobey the law. No on e arrested them. They 
spent the night there. The police arrested Gandhiji  alone while all of them 
were sleeping. 
The crowd came to know about this in the morning. N ow they got deeply 
involved in the march. The next day Gandhiji was re leased on bail. His return 
spread a wave of enthusiasm among them. 
Gandhiji was arrested again the next day and then r eleased on bail. He 
returned to his followers. All of them were happy t o have him back.  
The crowd kept marching ahead. Someone's child died  of illness but the march 
went on. 
The march used to halt at some place. Then there wo uld be hustle and bustle 
for erecting the tents, making meals and then clean ing everything. 
The businessmen from those places would lovingly of fer them food. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 65  At last Gandhiji was arrested for the third time. H e was sentenced and then 
sent to jail. 
At the next stop the crowd was detained and then se nt back in two special 
trains. 
Who doesn't know the story of Dandi March? 
Gandhiji decided that he would struggle for total i ndependence. 
He then tried to find out a way to disobey the law,  which would send him to 
jail. Finally he decided on disobeying the law of s alt! 
He then arranged Dandi March for this purpose. He v owed, "I would cross the 
desert, I would die of a dog's death but I would no t return to the Ashram until I 
get Independence for my country!" He took the oath and set out. 
He decided that he would start his march from Sabar mati Ashram. Then he 
would walk through Gujarat state to reach Dandi, at  the far end of it and then 
disobey the law of salt by preparing the salt himse lf. 
He set out for the march with eighty Ashram inmates . They would halt in some 
village or town in the noon and in the night at som e other place on the way. 
There they would have their meals, spin yarn and th en Gandhiji would address 
the people to spread his message about the movement . Thousands of people 
would come to see the march. 
Every day, the people would expect to be arrested, but the government let the 
march reach its destination. At the end of the marc h Gandhiji took bath on the 
beautiful seashore and then prepared salt from the seawater. 
After this incident, people started looting salt ev erywhere in the country. 
The government had planned not to arrest Gandhiji a nd to carry out atrocities 
on the people everywhere in the country. The storie s of their tyranny consisted 
of beating the women with sticks. The news used to disturb Gandhiji. He would 
say, "They should strike my head with a stick. What  should I do so that they 
would do it?" 
At last he decided to rob the salt-pits of Dharasan a but he was arrested on the 
night prior to the march ahead while all others wer e asleep. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 66   
45. NATIONAL FAST  
The motherland had been severely insulted in Punjab . The insult caused pain to 
everyone. The country decided to do Satyagraha. 
The point was how to initiate such a big movement? Calling meetings in the 
villages and towns was not a big task but it would not satisfy Gandhiji.  
People arranged meetings everywhere but Gandhiji ex pected much more than 
that. 
At last, it was decided that the whole country woul d observe a twenty-four 
hour fast on the same day. 
The day was 6th April 1919. Gandhiji's message abou t keeping fast had reached 
everywhere. 
People from one end of the country to  the other, k ept fast. On this day the 
country did not have thirty crore people but a sing le person with thirty crore 
heads and sixty crore hands! 
That day of the national fast became immortal in th e history. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 67   
46. FAST FOR LOVE  
All the students, boys and girls, knew that Gandhij i always taught not to beat 
or hurt anybody. 
Because of this students had no fear of beating in his National (Rashtriya) 
School. If at all some teacher dared to beat a stud ent, he was able to question 
the teacher. 
Gandhiji never used to beat any student if he was a t fault. He would never 
insult him for his mistakes. But very often when th e students committed 
mistakes he himself would keep fast. 
In this way, once he had to keep fast for a week. H e used to say, "How can I be 
angry with them for their mistakes? My fault must h ave been responsible for 
their misdeeds. If I am pure enough, how could the child living with me be 
wrong? If I were a truthful follower of 'Ahimsa', t he child would not be afraid of 
accepting his misdeed." 
This thought always inspired him to keep fast. 
Was there a child who could not be impressed by suc h love? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 68   
47. A BIG FAST  
Gandhiji always tried to keep peace between the Hin dus and the Muslims, but 
they kept fighting. 
He would tell them that we are the children of the same motherland, but the 
fights went on. 
"Think of our ancestors living peacefully together, " yet the fighting would go 
on.  
"Fighting doesn't display anybody's virtues, so be together." But who would think 
of values if they were enjoying the fights? 
"You can't be independent if you don't stay united! " But how could they follow 
this while they were still angry at each other. "Ke ep in mind that your fights 
are going to benefit someone else." 
But how could anyone think clearly if their mind wa s full of anger? 
At last when Gandhiji was tired of all this he decl ared that he would keep fast 
for twenty-one days. 
The place chosen for the fast was Mr. Ansari's hous e in Delhi. Gandhiji would 
happily tolerate the pangs of hunger and Mr. Ansari  would lovingly take care of 
him. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 69   
48. THE INDEPENDENCE  
Dadabhai Navaroji, the grandfather of Hind (India),  uttered the 'mantra' of 
independence for us. 
Lokmanya Tilak spread it among the people. Gandhiji  lit the fire for 
independence and spread it among the households of India. 
The grandfather had read a lot of books. He had lea rned that hunger was the 
most deadly diseases of all.  
Lokmanya Tilak served six years' sentence and found  out that getting  
independence could only satisfy hunger. 
Gandhiji worked hard to teach us many other things.  Such as, "This disease can 
only be cured by independence. We can become indepe ndent only by weaving 
Khadi on our own and by being self sufficient." 
Don't think that only warriors can fight for libert y. A child can also fight for this 
cause. If you wish to fight, get ready and be a par t of it. 
Give up wearing imported clothes. Start wearing Kha di instead. 
Spin yarn everyday for your nation. Don't learn thi ngs, which would teach you 
to be slaves. Instead, learn to be patriots! 
Learn well your mother tongue and the national lang uage. Don't learn English 
only. It would be like getting nourished by stepmot her.  
"Hindustan" is made of thousands of poor, penniless  villages. So, be affectionate 
to them. Go and live with the villagers. Use the th ings produced by them and 
be proud of it. 
Love the Harijan children and let them sit beside y ou in the schools. If we want 
to enjoy freedom, we must get liberated from our ow n traditions. Give them 
'Swaraj' first. 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 70   
49. TO THE BRITISHERS  
Gandhiji wrote a book named 'Hind Swaraj'. He has d escribed in detail his idea 
of independence in this book. The book is written i n the form of conversation 
between the master and the reader. 
The reader asks: "What would you say about Britishe rs?" 
Even we would like to ask the same question! 
Gandhiji, in the role of the master, answers it as follows. It will help us know 
Gandhiji's feelings. 
Master -I will tell them, I do accept that you are the king! I don't want to 
discuss whether you are here at your own will or mi ne. I don't think that it is 
necessary. You may stay in my country I don't mind it. But you will still have to 
obey our orders even though you are our masters pre sently. 
You may keep all our wealth you have carried away t o your country, but you 
won't be allowed to do so in future. 
If you want to stay here as soldiers, you may do so . You won't be allowed to do 
business with us and earn profit. 
The changes you have introduced are not at all usef ul for us. Instead, the 
change we want to bring in will be better for us. I t will be better for you to try 
to understand this. Even if you don't understand th is we will let you stay here. 
But you will have to become and behave like one of us. 
You should not try to harm our religious notions. B eing our masters, it would be 
your duty to give up eating beef and pork for the s ake of Hindus and Muslims. 
We were not able to resist you until now because we  were suppressed. That 
doesn't mean that we were not hurt. We might have b een held up by our 
selfishness or fear, but now we consider it our dut y to remind you of it. 
We insist that the courthouses and the schools you have established here are 
useless to us. We want our own honest courthouses a nd schools. 
Hindi is our national language and not English! You  will have to learn it. This 
way we will be able to deal with you in our own lan guage. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 71  We know that you spend a lot of money on railways a nd the army. We would 
not need to do so. You are afraid of Russia we are not. We will deal with them 
if they come. If you are still here at that time, w e will deal with them 
together.  
We don't need your western fabrics. We will be happ y with the things made in 
our own country. You are trying to help develop Man chester by using us. Now 
you will not be allowed to do so. 
We can be friends if we have the same aim. We don't  wish to humiliate you. 
You have enough armed forces and weaponry. You have  enough naval forces 
too. We will not be able to fight against you with same strength as yours. But if 
you don't agree with us, there cannot be any dealin g between us. You can 
slaughter us if you wish or shoot us. But we won't let you do what we don't like. 
Rather you won't be able to do anything without our  help. 
You might ignore these things due to pride and powe r but it won't help you at 
all. When we will show our strength, you will reali se that your pride is in vain 
and that your laughter a sign of your foolishness. 
We think that you are religious people. Our nation,  our land is a pilgrimage for 
us. It's no use discussing how we came together. St ill, both of us can use this 
relationship in a better way. We don't consider the  Britishers who have come 
here as the true representatives of British people.  Similarly, we, the partly 
Westernised Indians too are not the real representa tives of Indians. If the 
British public comes to know the reality they will also oppose you. The Hindi 
people already keep at a distance from you. 
The changes you are making for our betterment are n ot actually helpful. 
Consult your religious books and you will find that  our demands are proper. So 
you will have to accept them if you want to stay he re.  
If it happens so, we will learn so many things from  you and you too will learn a 
lot of things from us. Both of us can benefit from such give and take. The rest 
of the world can also have its benefits. But this c an happen only if we respect 
and keep our relationship within the religious fram ework!  
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 72   
50. LOVE  
Do we all honestly love Gandhiji? We do because he loved all of us from the 
bottom of his heart. Do you know why no one had fee lings of enmity for 
Gandhiji? 
It is so for the same reason! Gandhiji did not feel  enmity for anyone! 
Although Gandhiji was fighting against the tyranny of the British government, a 
lot of White men loved him. It was because Gandhiji  loved them too and had no 
ill feeling for any one of them. 
Punishing someone angrily for his bad deeds is beha ving like animals. It's only 
human to pardon such deeds and love the person. 
Due to this belief he had no ill feeling for anyone . That is why he had no 
enemy! All of us loved him because he loved us!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 73   
51. NON-VIOLENCE OF GANDHIJI  
What do you mean by non-violence? 
"Don't be violent to anyone; don't hurt anyone!" 
Being angry with someone is also violence. Even suc h violence is not advisable. 
Then only it can be called true non-violence. 
"But if someone hurts us, how can we be non-violent ?" 
That is the test of non-violence in true sense! The n no one will dare hurt us, 
nor make us angry. Even animals remain non-violent in such case! 
"Won't people call us coward if we let others beat us?" 
"Why would they call us cowards? We are not afraid of the beating! We don't 
even run away due to fear and we don't express grie f for being hurt! We don't 
get angry because of love we have for all. Why woul d we be called coward just 
because we don't hurt anyone?" 
"It is rather difficult not to slap anyone even tho ugh one hurts you! Loving such 
person is difficult too! In fact, slapping the pers on in return is very easy!" 
It's true that being non-violent is not so easy! On ly the brave ones can practice 
non-violence; the cowards cannot do so! 
Gandhiji practiced such non-violence and advised us  to do so! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 74   
52. SOUL FORCE  
The rowdy people keep shouting. They say, "This man  didn't salute me! Let us 
kill him!" 
Gandhiji always asked us not to mix with such peopl e or behave like them. He 
also asked us not to be afraid of such people. He a sked us to practice non-
violence. He said that when these people will get t ired of fighting, they would 
learn non-violence from us. 
"Don't be afraid of getting killed by the shouting crowd while you are trying to 
be non-violent. You have fear because you don't kno w the strength of non-
violence. In fact, non-violence can even win the en emy." 
The people, all over the world, don't believe this.  
At some place, they raise an army of thousand men. At another place they raise 
an army of five thousand men. 
The third one has ten lakh men. 
A nation builds hundred fighter planes. Another one  gets a thousand. Yet 
another gets ten thousand fighter planes. 
Those who have less fighter planes cannot sleep pea cefully. They are always 
anxious to get more and more planes. 
The fighter planes cannot be made without money. On e has to pay millions of 
Pounds for them. 
And what is a 'Pound'? 
A 'Pound' is earned by shedding the people's sweat,  by using their energy.  
The weapons of non-violence, which Gandhiji gave us , can earn a 'Pound'. 
Those weapons are Satyagraha, non-cooperation, and tolerance. 
Looking at the tolerant public, the tyrant feels as hamed of himself. See, he is 
loosing his strength! GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 75  Now tell me, which weapon is powerful? The cannon o r the non-violence? Which 
strength is more effective, the strength of the can non or the soul force? 
Gandhiji doesn't preach things he read somewhere. H e has earned this gem of 
non-violence through a lot of hardship. 
Remember, India is hailed throughout the world just  because of 'non-violence'! 
 
 * * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 76   
POEMS  
 
1. HIS NAME IS BAPU  
 
 I love the man called Bapu,  
His heart is ruled by Lord Raghu! 
 
He walks straight wearing a cloak, 
He gathers all with compassion and love! 
 
Every low and high he takes along, 
To Lord Krishna he lets his soul belong! 
 
Lovingly he takes the old and small, 
The strings of his wheel offer food to all! 
 
He bears their sorrows and makes them laugh, 
And recites for them the story of Pralhad! 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 77   
2. OUR COUNTRY  
 
Among all countries of the world, 
Our country is the best! 
 
You may make mistakes though, 
Our country is the best! 
 
We have the mountains graceful, 
Our rivers too are beautiful! 
 
There is always flowers fest,  
Our country is the best! 
 
A variety of birds and animals, 
Dwell here and rest! 
 
Various crops you can test, 
Our country is the best! 
 
A lot of pious women are here, 
And saintly men too; 
 
We have everything that is best, 
Our country is the best! 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 78  We are thankful to the Providence, 
That He let us be born here and rest; 
 
We can always proudly announce, 
That our country is the best! 
 
Fest = Festival.  Providence = God.  Rest = Live.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 79   
3. HYMN OF GANDHI 
 
His life is an endless penance, 
Bapu will live among us forever 
Spinning wheel is his chord of life, 
Let it continue forever in India 
 
In our hearts and in our life, 
Its flame may always remain bright! 
The monster of weakness that makes us lame, 
Be burned off by his soul's pious flame! 
 
May the Sun of truth always shine, 
And burn off disappointment and sin! 
In the flood of his non-violence and love, 
May our nation's miseries dissolve! 
 
He worshipped Ram all his life, 
And chanting his name he took our leave! 
This small man of greatness high, 
Shed his blood and said good-bye! 
 
Penance - Voluntary suffering. 
Strife - Conflict for success. GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 80   
4. GANDHI CAME TO GUJARAT  
 
Now Gandhi has come to Gujarat, hey! 
His weak body looks like a stick, 
But his energy has no match! 
      Now Gandhi … 
He sent his wheel in every home, 
He is spinning independence along with the yarn! 
     Now Gandhi … 
He taught us to be simple,  
And asked to give up tea and alcohol! 
     Now Gandhi… 
People are awaiting this God, 
He might have reached! 
     Now Gandhi … 
He has gratified Life, 
And has gratified his mother too! 
     Now Gandhi … 
People eagerly obey his commands, 
They are hailing India's freedom! 
     Now Gandhi … 
 
 
 GANDHIJI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 81   
5. TAKE SHELTER WITH GANDHI  
 
Take shelter at Gandhi's feet, 
Sing hymns of his virtues. 
He gave up all that was Western, 
And held the spinning wheel! 
He gave up alcohol and liquor, 
Now, you drink milk and buttermilk! 
He gave up meat and fish, 
Now, you eat roti with jaggery! 
Leave aside witches and demons, 
Now, you worship Lord Ram! 
He gave up envy and enmity, 
Now, you love and care for all! 
Deceit and cheating he doesn't like,  
On the path of truth he does strive! 
…Mind, this is the last chance!!! 
 
* * * 
 
 
 
 