 
Gandhi Katha 
 
Written By  : Umashankar Joshi 
 
Translated by : Divya Joshi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by: 
Mumbai Sarvodaya Mandal – Gandhi Book Centre 
299 Nana Chowk – Tardeo Road, 
Mumbai 400 007 
 
 
Printed by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2  THE  CAMPHOR  LAMPS 
(KAPOORNA   DIVA)  
When someone in Bengal requested a message from Gan dhiji, he said four words 
in Bengali: ‘ Amar Jivani Amar Vani ’- My life is my message. That means, he 
wished that his message should be found in his work  and practice, rather than just 
in words. The purpose of presenting incidents of Ga ndhiji’s life here, in the form 
of a ‘ Gandhi Katha’ , is to focus on several scattered incidents of his  life in order 
to introduce ourselves to the manifestation of diff erent levels of greatness of his 
life.  Each of these incidents represents and bring s out various powerful aspects of 
his grand personality. Each incident is a camphor l amp. It would be worth the 
effort if such a lamp provides and creates a specia l vision of the magnificent and 
beautiful life image of Gandhiji, which he generate d and carved out from each 
and every moment of his life, before it extinguishe s. 
 
One may try to arrange these incidents, as those of  fearlessness, truthfulness, 
Ahimsa, and so on, thus arranged together in differ ent groups. But, a single 
incident may cover fearlessness and Ahimsa both. Th at is why they are not divided 
in such groups here. Incidents can also be given in  chronological order. But, then a 
question might be raised in our mind that, why in b etween incidents of few years 
are missing. So such order is again not necessary, because, it is not our purpose 
here to give complete chronology of his life. Hence , they are presented here as 
they were being written and published in ‘Sanskriti ’, in the anniversary year 1969 
of Gandhiji, from January to October. 
 
Gandhiji, in his life was always extremely keen on a scertaining the facts and 
details of any event and happening. Therefore, I ha ve made best of my efforts to 
check out the facts in each and every case. 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  I have used Bapu’s own writings for choosing the in cidents. In addition to that, I 
have used ‘Madevbhai’s Diary’ parts 1-9, the books of Ravjibhai Patel, books of 
Kakasaheb Kalelker and Manuben Gandhi, ‘ Jivannu Paroth ’ by Prabhudas Gandhi, 
‘Reminiscences’ of Ramdas Gandhi, and  ‘Gandhiji an d Rashtriya Pravruti’ by 
Shankarlal Banker. I am grateful to all these autho rs. Thanks are also due to the 
publisher of Gandhiji’s books- the Navajivan Prakas han Mandir and also the other 
publishers of the books by Mahadevbhai and Manuben.  Also, some incidents I have 
received from some individuals. For this, I would l ike to express my special thanks 
to Smt Vijyaben Pancholi, Smt Prabhavati Narayan an d Smt Madalsa Narayan.  
Umashanker Joshi 
Kulpatinivas, 
Gujarat University, 
Ahmedabad- 380 009 
Gandhi anniversary day: 2-10-1969 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  (1)  
Little Mohan was very scared of going alone in the dark. He would imagine 
ghosts coming from one direction, thieves from the other and serpents from the 
third. 
Once, he had to go out alone in the dark. But, how could it be possible? He was 
very timid. Their house maid Rambha, was standing j ust by his side. She told 
Mohan quietly, “Mohan, why are you so scared? Wheth er it is dark or whatever, 
just recite the Rama Nama and go ahead; no one can do any harm to you 
whatsoever. Mohan was soon convinced and he went fo rward. From that very 
moment Mohan not only repeated the Rama Nama all th e time, but it carved out a 
permanent place in his heart. 
Rama Nama made him so fearless that, later he showe d the forty crore Indians 
and also the whole humanity, the way to live fearle ssly. Even at the last moment 
of his life, Rama Nama was there on his lips. 
 
(2)  
Sevagram ashram had just started. Children would co me from nearby villages to 
learn spinning and carding and they earned some mon ey too by the evening. They 
would come in the morning and go back in the evenin g. Once, before going to 
sleep Gandhiji asked Vijya, “What happens about the  afternoon meal for those 
children?” 
Vijya used to go to the well every afternoon, to wa sh a bucket of clothes of Ba, 
Bapu and herself. The children also used to come th ere around the same time at 
the bank of the well for their meal. So, she knew a bout their meals and sometimes 
she would even ask them: What is there for meal tod ay? Children would answer: 
Bhakhari- shak (wheat flour cake and vegetable). Vi jya informed all these to Bapu 
in detail. 
Bapu asked, “Do we have extra butter milk?” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  Vijya answered, “Yes.” 
Bapu immediately said, “Then serve Butter milk to t hose children from 
tomorrow.” 
Vijya accepted this responsibility. 
After three days, Bapu asked Vijya before going to bed: “Vijya, are you giving 
Butter milk to children?” 
Vijya replied, “Bapu, I forgot that. I am sorry.” 
Bapu just hesitated a bit, and then told her with a ffection, “No, You have not 
forgotten. You are not forgetful. You do all my wor k very meticulously. When I go 
for my walk, the sandals are nicely cleaned and arr anged. Stick is also kept in its 
place. Your nature is not of the kind to forget thi ngs. But, shall I tell you? You do 
all my work, and you never forget anything, that is  because I am a ‘Mahatma’, is it 
not? We always tend to do the work of big people pr operly. But, these are small, 
strange children and so we forget their work. But, let me tell you that it does not 
matter if you forget my work.  If you do their work  with extra care and attention, 
that will give me the utmost satisfaction.” 
 
(3)  
A boy was roaming around in Sevagram Ashram. Vijya saw him and asked his 
whereabouts. The boy said, ‘My name is Somo. I have  lived in Sabarmati ashram 
earlier. Now I want to stay here in this ashram.’ 
Vijya took him to Bapu. Bapu recognised him. He was  a Harijan boy. Bapu told 
Vijya to let him stay at the Ashram, and instructed  her to give him some work and 
to look after him. 
Somo had come from the Faizpur Congress session dir ectly, having absolutely 
nothing with him. He was merely wearing a half Pant  and Bandi (jacket): that’s all 
he had. Vijya arranged for his meal and one carpet to sleep. Mother Kasturba 
provided a blanket for a cover. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  It was Sunday. Bapu would observe silence from Sund ay night till the evening of 
Monday. At night, before going to bed, Bapu gesture d with his hand indicating 
height of a small boy and thus asked the details of  Somo. He shook his head, 
moved his eyes, and through bodily gestures wanted to know how he was. Vijya 
detailed Bapu with all the arrangements. She tried to convince Bapu about his well 
being. But Bapu put her hand on her shoulder and su ggested, “let us go there”. He 
would not be satisfied otherwise! He had to verify for himself the comfort of the 
little child, so he would personally go and check. They went and saw that Somo 
was peacefully sleeping in the Verandah, comfortabl y covering himself. Bapu took 
Vijya inside the room and stood near a bundle hangi ng on the wall. He then 
instructed her to take it and open the same, again through his gesture. Then he 
sat down and started searching for something. The b undle contained old and used 
loin-clothes of Bapu. He took a heap of folded clot hes and got up. Then he went to 
Verandah and removed the cover from his face. Somo was fast asleep. Bapu lifted 
his head, placed a pillow of folded clothes below t he head of the child, covered 
him again properly and then he went to sleep. 
Somo was fast asleep. He was under the care and com fort of the Mahatma, who 
had showered his affection in the form of the pillo w. 
 
(4)  
In 1922, Gandhiji was sentenced to six years impris onment by the British 
Government. He told in the court that I am ready fo r the highest possible 
punishment.  What is a crime according to the Gover nment is nothing else but only 
my duty towards humanity. I have just acted accordi ngly. 
The news of Gandhiji’s statement and the penalty he  demanded, reached all 
corners of the country. On hearing the news, a Musl im watchman residing in a 
remote village of Bengal wept. A revolutionary name d Shri Datt, who lived in his 
building, asked the reason of his crying. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  The watchman had the Bengali news paper in his hand , in which the news of 
Gandhiji’s case had appeared. He told Datt that a p erson of my own caste has 
been severely punished. It is six years of jail, he is an old man of 53 years, see this 
paper. 
It was mentioned in the news paper that, Gandhiji d escribed his job as a weaver 
and farmer. The Muslim watchman was a weaver by cas te. He was deeply touched  
therefore, that someone of his own has been punishe d. 
Shri Datt writes in his reminiscences, ‘How do we c all ourselves revolutionary? It 
is only Gandhiji who is a revolutionary in a true s ense and not us. He has become 
one with the whole nation. Gandhiji’s utterance as weaver and farmer must have 
reached throughout the nation. Crores of people mus t have felt as if someone of 
their own has been jailed. Only he, who has establi shed the contact with the 
masses, having identified with them, can free the n ation. I sincerely bow to this 
true revolutionary.’ 
 
(5)  
Once, on observing Bapu without any Kurta, a young pupil asked, “Bapu, why 
are you not wearing any kurta on yourself?” 
Bapu stated, “Where do I have any money for that?” 
To this the pupil asked, “Alright, I will tell my m other to stitch one for you. 
Then, you will wear it, isn’t it?” 
Bapu: “But how many will your mother stitch?” 
Pupil: “How many do you want?  
One….two……three….?” 
Bapu: “Am I just alone? Can I wear it just myself?”  
Pupil: “Of course, you should not wear it alone. Ho w many people you want it 
for? 
Bapu: “Well, I have some forty crore of siblings. W ill your mother stitch for all 
of them? In fact, only thereafter I can take my own  turn.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  The little child was now really puzzled. The Innoce nt kid wanted to offer a cloth 
to Bapu with a deep affection, but Bapu initiated h is tender heart into a universal 
vision, to view the entire world as one family.  
 
(6)  
Despite so many heavy engagements, Bapu used to go for a daily walk without 
fail for an hour in the morning. He even expressed h is dislike, though respectfully, 
towards his political Guru Gopalkrishna Gokhale, wh o did not go for a walk and 
who generally kept an indifferent health. 
When he went out for his walks from the Ashram, man y people often 
accompanied him. If someone would want to meet and specially talk to him, 
Gandhiji would sometimes give an appointment of ear ly morning and while walking 
he would also talk to them. 
Of course, children had always the first right on B apu and he would even 
playfully prank with them. Once, a mischievous chil d asked Bapu, “Bapu can I ask 
one thing?”  Bapu said yes, so he just came forward  and looking at him asked, 
“Does Ahimsa mean not to hurt anybody?” He had aske d the question in a serious 
tone. Bapu said, “Correct.” 
The child soon grabbed the chance and asked: “Then,  when you pinch us on our 
cheeks laughingly, would that be called Himsa (viol ence) or Ahimsa (non-violence)? 
Bapu said: “Wait, you naughty boy! And Bapu caught up with him and pinched 
him hard. Then all children started laughing, and a ll clapped with shouted, “Hey, 
look we irritated Bapu! We peeved Bapu!” 
But, in all that laughter, the one which was heard loudest was that of Bapu. 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  (7)   
Once Gandhiji had lodged in a very rich man‘s house . It was the time for 
evening prayers. Many people had gathered for the s ame.  Now it was time to start 
the prayer. Gandhiji instructed to switch off the l ights. The switch of electric 
lamp was just above the owner of the house, where h e was sitting.  As was his 
habit, the owner called out his servant loudly to d o the job. 
But, what happened then? Gandhiji instantly got up,  switched off the light and 
the prayer then started.  
As usual, there was a question-answer session follo wing the prayer. Someone 
questioned about spinning work. In reply, Gandhiji said referring to Bhagawad Gita 
that, those who do not perform their duty, devoting  their acts to almighty, are 
thieves. 
After the prayer, people dispersed. Somebody pushed  the corner table and a 
decorated vase rolled down and the glass broke into  pieces. 
Oh, but what is this? The landlord himself has reac hed there running, and has 
started picking up and collecting the broken glass.  Where has the habit of calling 
the servant disappeared? What a change in a moment?  
It was the practice of his great guest, which had m ade this magic change 
possible. 
 
(8)  
As soon as the school closed, the little Mohan woul d hurry back home. He was 
always afraid, ‘lest someone should poke fun at me’ . To be at school at the stroke 
of the hour, and to run back home as soon as the sc hool closed-- that was his 
routine. He used to be very shy and avoided talking  to anybody. He had no friends 
at all. 
He always respected his teachers and never tried to  deceive them. Once, there 
was an exam during his high school. Education Inspec tor Giles had come for Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  inspection of the school. He gave the students five  words to write. Mohan 
misspelled the word ‘Kettle’. The teacher warned hi m with the point of his boot. 
But, he would not be warned. It was beyond his imag ination to believe that the 
teacher wanted him to copy the correct word from hi s neighbor’s slate. For, he 
had thought that the teacher was there in fact to s upervise the students against 
copying. 
All the students spelt all five words correctly and  it was only Mohan who proved 
to be stupid. The teacher later tried to explain his  stupidity to him. But, Mohan 
says, ‘It did not affect me the least. I could neve r learn to copy from others.’ 
 
(9)  
 While Gandhiji was on travel, he visited one ashra m school. It was raining and 
so the children got late for school in the morning.  Gandhiji had to proceed 
elsewhere. So, he could spend only a few minutes wi th the children. 
Gandhiji started talking to them, “All of you spin and wear Khadi. But, tell me 
now, how many of you always speak truth only and ne ver tell a lie?” 
Few children raised their hands. Gandhiji then aske d the second question, 
“Well, now how many of you often speak lies?” 
Two children soon raised their hands. 
Then three…… 
Then four……. 
And later, lots of hands and hands were seen. Almos t all hands were up. 
Gandhiji told them, “There is always a hope for the m who know and accept 
that, they frequently lie. But, it is very difficul t for them who believe they never 
lie. I wish success to both.” 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  (10)  
Somebody put forward an autograph book before Gandh iji to get his signature. 
He flapped the pages. At a place Gandhiji saw about  sixteen signatures of the 
great cricketers of the M.C.C. team of the world in  a row. He put down his 
signature in the same row at the end. 
In a way, He too was a great player, right? 
Once, the Nawab of Patoudi, a great cricket player of India at that time, had 
gone to see Gandhiji. Gandhiji told him that, they both would play a cricket match 
and that he had decided to challenge him. 
The Nawab of Patoudi said, “I have one condition. A fter the match is over, you 
permit me to challenge you in politics.” Gandhiji r eadily agreed to that. 
The Nawab then said with a serious face, “See, I am  sure, you will give me a 
solid defeat in cricket. But, all the same, I am fu lly confident that I will give you a 
big defeat in politics.  Gandhiji burst into laught er like a child and patting him on 
back, he said, “Nawab saheb, you have already clean -bolded me right away!” 
 
 
(11)  
Head Master Gimi of Alfred High, Rajkot, had made g ames and gymnastics 
compulsory for upper class students. Earlier, Mohan  disliked it and never took part 
in any games. But, now he had to join in as it was made compulsory for all. 
One day, the Head Master called him, “Why were you absent on Saturday?” 
Mohan told that he had come but there was nobody on  the play ground at that 
time. 
Head Master shouted, “Why did you come late?” 
Mohan clarified that, he had no watch and it was a cloudy day. So, he could not 
know the time. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  It is obvious that, the Head Master would have thou ght that all these are mere 
excuses. He fined Mohan two Annas for this. 
Mohan was deeply pained and told himself, “I am con victed of lying. I am not 
wrong. But how was I to prove my innocence? There w as no way.” 
He cried in deep anguish. 
But, that day the young Mohan resolved that, a man of truth must also not be 
careless. The principle, which Mohan derived that d ay from the play ground, stood 
him in good stead all his life. 
 
(12)  
Gandhiji used to get up early in the morning. He wo uld then wash his face and 
brush his teeth with a datun . He would finish all jobs with only a small jug of  
water. 
Once, observing this, his colleague Mohanlal Pandya  asked, “Bapu, why are you 
so miserly with the use of water, when the whole of  Sabarmati river is flowing just 
next to our Ashram?” 
Gandhiji asked him a question, “Tell me first, do y ou find my face properly 
cleaned?” 
Pandyaji answered, “Yes, it is.” 
Gandhiji: “Then what does it matter? You use jugs a nd jugs of water. But, you 
just wet your hands and apply on your face, while I  wash my face properly with 
water.  So, this amount of water is quite sufficien t for me.” 
Pandyaji: “But, any way the river is full of water. ” 
Gandhiji: “For whom the river water is flowing? Is it only for me?” 
Pandyaji: “It is for all. It is also for us…..” 
Gandhiji: “That is correct. The river water is for all; for the birds, animals, 
insects, and men and not only for me. I can use onl y that quantity, which is 
required by me. But, I have no right to use more th an what is really my need. 
From a collective property, could we take more than  what is needed?” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  (13)  
Once, on seeing a colleague coming with a big chunk  of earth, Gandhiji asked, 
“Why did you bring this?” 
Colleague: “To clean a jug.” 
Gandhiji: “But then why such a big chunk of clay?” 
“It was there, so I brought it.”   
“Are you going to wash it with all? What will you d o with the remaining earth?” 
“Just as it was lying there, so it will stay here.”  
“But, there it was in its own place. Here it will c reate unnecessary garbage. The 
first mistake you then make is that of creating gar bage here and the second is you 
do not cultivate the habit of thinking about how yo u should live your life.” 
The colleague then turned into a deep thought. He r ealised that life of a great 
man is actually the sum of many small details. Gand hiji explained his own 
definition of garbage to him. Even if a log of gold , lying arbitrarily anywhere in the 
house, other than its own place in the treasury, it  is called a garbage. Anything, 
which is not in its own place, is garbage. 
 
(14)  
Little Mohan was always ready in the service of his  mother. His mother, 
Putalibai, was a saintly woman. She would not have her meals without her daily 
prayers. She would have only one meal during the Ch aturmas (the four monsoon 
months). It was easy for her to take the hardest of  the vows, and then to keep 
them without flinching. Even an illness was not all owed to interrupt the 
observance of a vow. To keep two or three fasts in a sequence was nothing to her. 
During one Chaturmas, she vowed not to have food wi thout seeing the Sun. 
Small children would stand outside, staring at the sky, waiting to announce the 
appearance of the sun to mother, so that she could have her food. But, as we Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  know, at times the Sun is hardly seen in the rainy seasons. At its sudden 
appearance, young Mohan would run and rush to annou nce it to her mother. 
She would then run out to see the Sun, but by that time the Sun God would 
again disappear! Mohan, with other children, would be then disappointed. But, his 
mother would say cheerfully, “It does not matter. M ay be it is not in my destiny to 
have food today.” 
She would then return inside cheerfully, to attend to the innumerable rounds of 
her other duties and household chores. 
The ascetic life of a saintly mother left an indeli ble impression on the young 
Mohan’s heart. The first lessons of a religious lif e that he received were from his 
mother. Thus the mother became his first guru in hi s practice of a sincere and 
joyful ascetic life. 
 
(15)  
In South Africa, Bapuji established the Phoenix ashr am and there he also ran a 
school for the children. His effort and purpose beh ind this was to provide true 
education and not the false one, to the children. 
His method of giving marks in examinations was alway s unique. Even though 
they were all students of the same class and the qu estions asked to them were 
also similar, the children who wrote the better ans wer would get less mark, and 
others who wrote not so good ones would get more ma rks. 
Due to this method of Bapuji, children would get qu ite confused. Bapuji would 
explain to them his method and logic in detail and w ould also provide the proper 
understanding: “I do not want to measure that some students are cleverer than 
the others. But, what I really want to know is, how  far each student has improved 
from where he was standing before. If a clever stud ent keeps comparing himself 
with a stupid student and shows off his arrogance, then his intelligence will be 
blunted. He will then put in less effort in his stu dy; and he, who does not progress Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  in study, will ultimately deteriorate for sure. So,  I will give more marks to only 
those who are meticulous and work really hard and w ho improve constantly.” 
Bapuji always kept a watchful eye on a student secu ring more marks to see 
whether he is continuously progressing or not. If h e keeps boasting about securing 
more marks than the other less bright students, the n what good it will make of 
him? All these ideas, he constantly tried to impres s upon them. And the loving 
Bapu was always ready to pat the back of a student who obtained better marks 
next time than before and made a progress. 
What Bapu really wanted to explain was this. We are not in a competition with 
others to show ourselves higher or lower than other s. The main thing is to observe 
how much progress has been made from where we were before. That is true 
education. Bapu explained this idea to all by making  a small, but very important 
change in the education system.  
 
(16)  
In the Phoenix school, the children were asked to wr ite an essay. The subject 
was: ‘Who was the first Satyagrahi?’ 
Some of them thought that, Thumbi Naidu was the fir st satyagrahi, because he 
had played an outstanding role in the struggle of S outh Africa. 
Some other thought: No..No.. the first satyagrahi s hould be Bapuji himself. Yet 
others justified Naranswami as the first satyagrahi , who had died in banishment. 
The essays were checked and returned to the childre n. They also received the 
certificate as ‘okay’. 
But, Bapuji in fact failed them all. They all start ed pondering. Then, who would  
be the first such satyagrahi?  
Then Bapuji told everybody: “The first satyagrahi w as not our Thambi Naidu, 
but the great Bhakta Prahalad.” 
That means in other words, Bapuji was not saying an ything new. He was just 
following the great Satyagrahis, who had been there  before him.   Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  Bapuji always emphasised all his life: “I do not ha ve to say anything new. Satya 
(Truth) and Ahimsa (non-violence) are as old as Him alayas. However, he certainly 
demonstrated them in his own life and in the presen t context of human life, by 
practicing and living Satya and Ahimsa in his own b ehavior and every action. That 
was no doubt remarkably unique and original about h im. 
 
(17)  
Once, on seeing Prabhavati searching for something in the dustbin papers, 
mother Kasturba asked, “Bahen, what are you doing?”  
Prabhavati: “Ba, I am trying to find out a small gr een paper.” 
Ba: “What is this paper about, that you are putting  so much effort to find it? Is 
that about some important writing?” 
Prabhavati: “No, it is just a small green paper to stop the lantern light coming 
directly into the eyes. It is Bapu’s paper. I dropp ed it somewhere while cleaning 
the lantern. I think it could be here, somewhere in  the dust bin, so I am trying to 
find out.” 
Ba straightaway went to Bapu. She had all the right  to fight with him. She soon 
took on Bapuji, saying, “What is this? Why are you troubling the poor little girl 
unnecessarily? She has been searching and searching  for such a small piece of 
paper for quite some time!” 
Bapu:  “It is true that the paper is small. But, th at does not mean that, it was 
useless. It was extremely useful in its own place. W hy should it be thrown away or 
lost? It should be found out and kept back in its p lace. Let her find it. It is a good 
thing only to do that.” 
At last, Prabhavati found the paper and it was agai n put back in its own place. 
That made the whole atmosphere all the more pleasan t and light. 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  (18)  
In the company of a friend, little Mohan and his el der brother fell victim to 
meat-eating. Actually, Mohan did not want to eat me at for the sake of taste or 
fondness. But, he wanted to be physically strong by  eating meat in order to expel 
the British from our country and to be free. 
He was from a staunch Vaishnava family. He ate the meat but, it seemed to him 
the whole night as if a live goat were bleating ins ide him. Still this experiment 
went on for about a year. But not more than half a dozen meat-feasts took place. 
Whenever he had this feast, dinner at home was out of question and he had to 
lie to his mother, “I have no appetite today.” This  lying to his mother was gnawing 
at his heart. Deceiving and lying to father and mot her seemed to him even worse 
than not eating meat. He thought that when they are  no more and I have found my 
freedom, I will then eat meat openly. But until tha t moment arrives I will abstain 
from it. This decision he communicated to his frien d and thus got rid of meat-
eating. 
In another incident, a relative and Mohan became fo nd of smoking. So they 
started collecting stumps of cigarettes and enjoyed  emitting clouds of smoke from 
their mouths. The stumps, however, were not always available, and also they 
could not emit much smoke either. So they began to steal coppers from servant’s 
pocket money in order to buy the Bidi (Indian cigar ettes). 
Somehow they managed for a few weeks on these stole n coppers. In the 
meantime, they heard that the stalks of a certain p lant were porous and could be 
smoked like cigarettes. So they tried that also for  smoking. But they were far from 
being satisfied with all these. It became unbearabl e for them that they should be 
unable to do anything without the elders’ permissio n. At last, in sheer disgust, 
they decided to commit suicide! They heard that Dha tura seeds were an effective 
poison. So, they went to the temple, had a darshan (glimpse) of the God, and then 
looked for a lonely corner. But courage failed them .  The idea of suicide was Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  finally dismissed. They went to the temple to compo se themselves and then 
returned back home. 
Mohan’s devotion towards his father and his insiste nce that he should not 
deceive his father saved him from the evil of theft . His meat-eating brother had 
run into a debt of about twenty-five rupees. How to  pay this debt became really a 
question for them. His brother had on his arm an ar mlet of solid gold. So, a bit of 
gold was clipped out of it and the debt was cleared . 
But this then became more than Mohan could actually  bear and he resolved 
never to steal again. But this was not sufficient. He made up his mind to confess 
his guilt to his father. But he did not dare to spe ak to him. Not that he was afraid 
of his father beating him. But he was afraid of the  pain that he should cause him. 
But he felt that there could not be a cleansing wit hout a clean confession. He 
wrote a note in which, not only did he confess his guilt, but also asked for 
adequate punishment for it. He pleaded his father n ot to punish himself for his 
offence. In the same note Mohan also pledged never to steal in future. 
He was trembling as he handed over the note to his father. He read it through 
and the pearl-drops from his eyes trickled down his  cheeks, wetting the paper. For 
a moment he closed his eyes and then he tore away t he note. He had sat up to 
read it. He again lay down. 
Mohan also cried. In older years, he wrote, “Those pearl-drops of love pierced 
me, cleansed my heart, and washed my sin away. Only  he who has experienced 
such love can know what it is... This was for me, a n object-lesson in Ahimsa…….I 
know that my confession made my father feel absolut ely safe about me and 
increased his affection for me beyond measure.” 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  (19)  
Ba’s health deteriorated. She was earlier saved wit h great difficulty. Once again 
the disease relapsed. When other cures failed, Gand hiji thought of nature cure 
and pleaded Ba to give up salt and pulses. He made her read material on the 
subject and explained also related writings of known  people to support his belief. 
But, Ba was adamant. 
She just spoke out unintentionally, “Even YOU will not give up salt and pulses, if 
you are told to do so.” 
Listening to that Bapu felt bad, but at the same ti me he also felt happy to find 
that this is the right chance and occasion for him to express his love towards her. 
He straight away told, “Alright, I am giving up sal t and pulses from now, for a 
year. Whether you leave it or not is another matter !” 
Ba repented a lot and exclaimed, “Please forgive me.  I just spoke out despite 
knowing your nature. Now I will not eat salt and pu lses. But, you please withdraw 
your statement. It’s a very hard punishment to me!”  
Bapu: “It is very nice if you leave salt and pulses . I am sure you will get   
benefit only by that. But, the pledge once taken, I  cannot change. I will surely get 
the benefit of it and it will also help you to rema in steadfast on your decision.” 
Ba: “You are very stubborn. You do not listen to an ybody.” 
Ba then wept a lot and kept quite. 
But, Bapu found the key to Satyagraha from this inc ident, which took place 
between the husband and wife. It is a device of Sat yagraha to reach out to the 
heart of the other person through love and sacrific e and to help him achieve 
beneficial transformation in life. 
That is why Bapu said about this incident: “I consi der it as one of the sweet 
memories of my life.” 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  (20)             
August 15,1947. It was the day of India’s independe nce. The British power, that 
ruled over the seven seas and whose sun never set, departed from India 
peacefully. The Indians took the reign of power in own hands. 
Where was the Father of the Nation on this historic  day? What was he doing on 
the day of celebration, the one who perhaps contrib uted the most to bring about 
this day? The independence was achieved, but there was still much work to be 
done. There was no communal harmony. He was the fat her of the nation and so he 
stood by his countrymen in their misery. 
Communal riots had broken out in Calcutta. So, he w anted to be there, amongst 
the people. He went and stood right there, in the m iddle of the communal fire. 
Where did he sleep on the night of independence? Be lia Ghat was one of the 
poorest and very dangerous areas of Calcutta. Being  a helper and a ‘Beli’ (saver) 
of the poor, Bapu decided to stay there in a small house. 
Bapu’s bed was made on a wooden plank (pat) and all  others slept on the floor, 
spreading whatever they found handy. 
When Bapu noticed this, he said, “All of you are sl eeping on the floor and I 
sleep on this `Chatra Palang’ (royal bed). How is i t possible? That is not proper; I 
will also sleep on the floor.” 
It was as though the bed was prickling Bapu and the  bed was like a “chhatra 
palang” to him! He was satisfied only when he slept  on the floor with all. 
When the Indians were celebrating freedom in Delhi,  the capital of India, and 
throughout the country, Bapu, the father of the nat ion, sat in a hut like the 
poorest of the poor people. Through his act and his  example, he showed what 
remained to be done. 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  (21)  
After returning from England, young Mohandas had to  struggle to find a source 
of livelihood, because he could not succeed in his law practice. He was good at 
drafting applications. He even increased his effort s. He could get such work in 
abundance, but without any money, and it could not provide a living.  He could 
not stand up and make arguments in the court, which  he found to be difficult. So, 
he was compelled to find some other job. 
He believed that he was good at English and so he c ould be a teacher in some 
school. He was ready to take up a job as an English  teacher for the matric class, so 
that it could at least provide him some income. 
One day, he saw an advertisement in the newspaper s eeking an English teacher 
for an hour daily in some high school. The salary w as Rs. 75. Mohandas applied for 
this post. He was called for a personal meeting. Yo ung barrister was very 
enthusiastic to be a teacher. But when the principa l knew that he was not a B.A., 
he felt sorry and told him to go. The young man tri ed to convince the principal. 
Mohandas: “But, I have passed matriculation examinat ion of London. Latin was 
my second language.” 
Principal: “That is true. But we want a graduate.” 
Thus he was proved ineligible for this post. Despit e his being a Barrister he was 
ready to accept any honest job like a teacher. It w as his humility, simplicity and 
practicality, behind which the seeds of his being a  teacher of the whole humanity 
were laid. 
 
(22)  
When Ba and Bapu were jailed in Aga Khan Palace, th eir colleagues and also the 
jail superintendent Mr Kateli used to play Carrom w ith the 75 years old Ba. 
Everybody would try to make Ba win. Sometimes Bapu would also watch the game 
and would even play his turn. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  They had also planned to play outdoor games to get some exercise. Monsoon 
had started so the jail officer arranged for table- tennis in one of the rooms. They 
all decided to get this game inaugurated by Ba and Bapu. Ba and Bapu both stood 
with rackets in their hands like players. After man y years Bapu would have caught 
the racket in his hands. 
Ba had to take her turn first. 
Bapu told: “Be careful!” 
Ba: “See! Do not cheat!” 
Bapuji:  “I have always been defeated by you, and t o get defeated by you, gives 
me immense pleasure.” 
Everybody burst into laughter. 
Bapu told everybody, “If men admit even some defeat  from women, then the 
double benefit of women’s power can be acquired and  many riddles of our society 
would be solved on its own accord………” 
Then again turning towards Ba he said, “I achieve m any successes only being 
defeated by you. It is because of your company that  I appear honourable.” 
Everybody was delighted to see this couple, who had   
been victorious by admitting defeat to each another . 
 
(23)     
Gandhiji was like a waterfall of work. It was as if  he was like the giant Niagara 
waterfalls.  
But, all the same, he had developed a tremendous ca pacity to take rest during 
his busy schedules. Whenever he felt tired, he coul d immediately go to sleep for a 
few minutes and he would again wake up fresh for fu rther work. 
It was his habit to finish some work even as he sle pt. For example, after having 
his massage, Gandhiji would sleep in a water tub an d Manuben would use this time 
for his shaving. But, Manuben would feel hesitant t hinking that, Bapu hardly finds 
some time to rest and shaving would disturb his sle ep. So, she would stop it.  Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  But, Bapu was very alert in extracting work from oth ers. He explained to 
Manuben, “Even if I am sleeping, you should continu e your work, only then can I 
sleep more and along with that, my work is also don e. But, you have not learnt 
that yet and so I have to suffer the results. I hav e to remain awake to stimulate 
you to continue this work. 
Manuben: “Bapuji, you are amazing! When you are ver y tired, you just rest for 
five, seven minutes and even then you insist me to continue shaving. This is too 
much! Moreover, you say that then only you are able  to sleep without any anxiety. 
What an amazing power to sleep!” 
Bapu: “As far as I can sleep in this manner, I have  no worry. But, the day I lose 
this power, you should understand that my fall is c lose by. In such a situation I 
would know that it is a result of some pretension w ithin myself and the Rama 
nama is not in my heart. But as far as God has best owed this power upon me, I am 
not bothered. So, having faith in God, you should a lso continue your work. He is 
generous to all and never does any harm to anyone. It is only we people who harm 
ourselves and then we blame the God for our deeds.”  
 
(24)  
Deshbandhu Das was in Darjeeling, and was unwell. G andhiji went there to 
inquire after his health. On his return journey, he  had to catch the Dhaka Mail, to 
attend a function at Nawabganj. But, it had so happ ened on the way that, some 
part of the rock had collapsed on the railway track . This created such a situation 
that, Gandhiji might miss the Dhaka Mail. But not t o reach on time was not 
something Gandhiji could ever afford. 
One colleague then suggested going by a special tra in. Gandhiji immediately 
welcomed it, saying, “Just as I am strict in follow ing my timings meticulously with 
the Viceroy, in the same strict manner I should be punctual in keeping the time 
given to the people.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  The special train fare of Rs. 1,140 had to be paid,  but he remained present at 
that particular function on time, amongst his count rymen. 
 
(25)  
When Gandhiji was in Champaran in Bihar, he entrust ed the work of opening 
and running the schools in nearby villages to many volunteers. 
One day he asked Kasturba, “Why not you too start a  school here for the 
children?” 
Kasturba said, “What will I do opening a school her e? Shall I teach them in 
Gujarati? I do not know their language. How can I e ven talk to them?” 
Gandhiji replied, “The very first lesson in childre n’s education is that of 
cleanliness. You just bring together farmers’ child ren. Check their eyes and teeth. 
Give them bath. Inculcate in them the habits of cle anliness. This education is not 
a bit less important. You can begin it from today i tself. And Ba commenced her 
school. 
 
(26)  
A cook, in Yeravada jail, had a pet cat and it had two kittens. Many times, the 
cat would come and sit wrapping itself around Gandh iji’s open and soft legs. Now 
kittens also started coming with their mother. 
Once, the cat came with her kittens. One kitten sta rted playing. It would come 
running to catch the tail of its mother as if it wa s a mouse. It would then catch the 
tail in its mouth.  The cat would pull back its tai l or get angry and even bite. In 
this way their play would go on. At that time Bapu was reading Ruskin’s book. He 
stopped reading to watch this game. 
Gradually, the kittens got mixed with Bapu very well . They would sit in Bapu’s 
lap at a prayer time, would play with everybody and  at meal time they would 
jump around, meowing all the time. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel would just tease the kitte n. He would cover the kitten 
with a semi-dome shaped metallic  net, used for cov ering the food. Being trapped 
the kitten would get puzzled. 
One day the kitten got very scared. It pushed the m etal net with its head and 
took it all the way to the Verandah and then escape d from underneath. 
Everybody was impressed by its wit. But, the kitten  was still in panic.  Bapu felt 
pity on it. 
Then, the kitten went little far and made the prepa ration for a nature call. It 
dug up the land to make a pit and after finishing t he task, again covered the pit 
with the earth. But, then it found that the earth w as not enough, so it went to 
another place. There, the kitten finished that task .  Another kitten helped it to 
cover the pit. 
On seeing the kitten’s keenness for cleanliness, Ba pu said, “Flowers should be 
showered on the kitten from the sky.” 
Even Miraben (Ms.Slade) could not stop herself from  mentioning this in her 
letter about cleanliness education. 
She wrote: “We have two nice kittens here. They lea rn a lesson from their 
mother’s silent practice. Their mother is always pr esent before them all the time. 
The main and important thing is only practice.” 
 
(27)   
Gandhiji and his colleagues Sardar Vallabhbhai Pate l and Mahadev Desai were in 
Yeravada jail. They used to pray at four o’clock in  the morning. Then, it was their 
routine to have lemon and honey water. Boiling wate r was poured on lemon juice 
and honey. Then they had to wait till it got cool. In this duration, they would read 
something. Gandhiji would then cover the hot water with a cloth. 
One day he asked, “Mahadev, do you know why I cover  the water? There are so 
many tiny insects in the air, and they might just f all in the water. The cloth saves 
this happening.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  On hearing this, Vallabhbhai could not stop himself  saying, “This is too much of 
the Ahimsa, we cannot practice it up to this extent! ” 
Gandhiji then replied with a smile, “Well, Ahimsa c annot be practiced, but how 
about cleanliness?” 
 
(28)  
Once, a discussion started in the Yeravada jail, on  how the proverb ‘ Sangharyo 
Sap Pan Kamno ’ (Even a snake in one’s collection can be of use) came into being. 
First, Bapu told a story: “A snake appeared in the house of an old lady. People 
killed the snake. The old woman kept the snake on t he roof of her house instead 
of throwing it away.  At that time, one eagle was f lying in the sky and it had 
brought a pearl necklace from somewhere. It saw the  snake and considering it 
more valuable than the necklace, threw the necklace  on the roof and picked up 
the snake!” Thus the old woman received the pearl n ecklace for storing the 
snake!” 
Then Sardar Patel told another story: A snake appea red at a Bania’s (merchant) 
place. There was no one to kill it. The Bania did n ot dare to kill it,and nobody 
liked to kill the reptile. So, he covered the snake  with a utensil. That night, the 
thieves broke into his house and thinking that, the re must be something valuable 
below the utensil, lifted the same.  The snake imme diately bit them. Thus, they 
received the death for the theft. 
One can say that everybody told a story in their ow n characteristic manner. 
 
(29)  
In Johannesburg, Gandhiji would get up early, offer  his prayers, sometimes 
would grind the wheat, light the stove and place th e kettle to warm the water. 
The toilet buckets of the house were being cleaned in a six to ten feet high 
tank. The water from bathing and cleaning accumulat ed in the tank. Once in a Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  week, a troop of Blacks from the municipality would  come with a big iron tank, 
pulled by two horses, to empty this water tank of t he house. 
After the cleaning work was over, the Blacks would get themselves cleaned and 
in cold days would come shivering to Gandhiji due t o lack of enough woolen 
clothes. 
It was Gandhiji’s routine to pour hot tea, made by him, in their tumblers. 
While enjoying the hot tea, they would express their  thanks and gratitude to 
Gandhiji and at the same time they would raise thei r left hand and say in the Zulu 
language: 
“ ` Kos Baba fezlu’  - ` God is up there in the heaven’, but we get ass urance of 
His presence in this hot tea offered by you.” 
 
(30)  
When the American missionary Dr John Mott visited M ahatma Gandhi at his 
Sevagram Ashram in central India, he asked him, “Wh at have been the most 
creative experiences in your life?” 
Gandhiji replied, “Such experiences are in multitude . But as you put the 
question to me, I recall one experience that changed  the course of my life.” 
Then he related the Meritzburg incident. 
He was a young barrister of twenty-four at that tim e. He was not successful in 
Mumbai as a lawyer. In the meantime, an offer came from Dada Abdulla & Co. to 
help their case in South Africa. So, he went to Dur ban. After a week he was sent 
to Pretoria by Abdulla Sheth. 
A first class ticket was booked for him and he boar ded the train. The train 
reached Maritzburg, the capital of Natal, at about nine in the evening. Another 
white passenger entered the compartment. He hesitat ed on seeing the presence of 
a ‘coloured’ man. He went out and summoned one or t wo railway officials. They 
did not say anything. Then, another official came i n. He ordered barrister Gandhi 
to go to the van compartment. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  “But I have a first class ticket,” said Gandhi. 
“That does not matter. I tell you to go to the van compartment.” 
“I tell you, I was permitted to travel in this comp artment at Durban and I insist 
on going on in it.” 
“No, you won’t,” said the official. “You must leave  this compartment or else I 
shall have to call a police constable to push you o ut.” 
“Yes, you may. I refuse to get out voluntarily,” yo ung  
Gandhi replied with firmness. 
The constable came. He took him by the hand and pus hed him out. He refused 
to go to the other compartment and the train left. 
Gandhi then went and sat in the waiting room, keepi ng his hand bag with him 
and leaving the other luggage where it was. The rai lway authorities had taken 
charge of it. 
It was winter and the winter in the higher region o f South Africa is severely 
cold. His overcoat was in the luggage. But Gandhi d id not dare to ask for it. What 
if he should be insulted again? So, he sat and shiv ered. He began to think of his 
duty. “Should I fight for my rights or go back to I ndia? Or should I go on to Pretoria 
without minding the insults and return to India aft er finishing the case? It would be 
cowardice to run back to India without fulfilling m y obligation. The hardship to 
which I was subjected was superficial, only a sympt om of the deep disease of 
colour prejudice. I should try, if possible, to roo t out the disease and suffer 
hardships in the process.” 
He then decided to take the next available train to Pretoria. 
Gandhiji told to Dr Mott, “Now the creative experien ce comes here. I was afraid 
for my very life. I entered the dark waiting-room. There was a white man in the 
room. I was afraid of him. What was my duty, I aske d myself. Should I go back to 
India, or should I go forward, with God as my helpe r, and face whatever was in 
store for me? I decided to stay and suffer. My acti ve non -violence began from that 
date.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  Jawaharlal Nehru believed that fearlessness was his  greatest virtue. Actually, 
Nehru himself was fearless, so why not would he app reciate it? But, according to 
him, Gandhiji’s fearlessness was so tremendous that  it went on to the people and 
atmosphere around him too and made them less afraid . 
The root of Gandhiji’s fearlessness was in his univ ersal love for all. A man fears 
a man. But, he who feels the presence of no one els e, other than the Almighty 
Rama, will not fear others. On the contrary, a flow  of love will be released from 
his heart towards the others. 
In that cold night, the fear of timid young Gandhi disappeared as his active love 
for humanity took charge of his heart. The wonderfu l qualities of a total sacrifice, 
to suffer for others were born in his heart. No one  was his enemy then and he had 
spite for none. At that very moment the potent weap on of Satyagraha was born. 
 
(31)  
One day, after the evening prayer, a unique convers ation took place between 
Kasturba and Gandhiji in the Phoenix Ashram, regardi ng their household.. The 
South African Government had declared all the marri ages, performed according to 
the Hindu, Muslim or Parsee rites, illegal under a new law. 
Bapu said, “Are you listening? You are not my marri ed wife from today.” 
Ba answered, “How could you talk like this? You kee p finding new notions every 
day!” 
Bapu then said, “I do not say this, General Smuts s ays. According to the new law 
of his Government, our Hindu, Muslim and Parsee mar riages, which are not 
registered according to Christian rites, have becom e illegal, and therefore our 
wives have become mistresses!” 
Ba said, “Did he say so? How could he think that wa y?” 
Gandhiji said, “But, what will you all women do now ?” 
Ba  replied, “What can we do?” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  Gandhiji asked, “Why? You also should fight as we m en fight. You also get ready 
to go to jail for the sake of your reputation.” 
Ba questioned, “How can ladies go to jail?” 
Gandhiji said, “Why not? Whatever happiness and sor row the men suffer, why 
can’t women endure the same? Sitaji went to forest after Rama, Taramati after 
Harishchandra, and Damyanti after Nal. They all suf fered infinite grievances.” 
Ba told with a smile, “You want to send me to the j ail right? Only that is left 
now! But, would the jail food suit me? Would they p ermit me to have fruits?” 
Gandhiji said, “If they don’t, till that time you f ast.” 
Ba said, “The way you showed me is to die.” 
Gandhiji then burst into laughter and said, “If you  die in the jail, I will worship 
you like Jagadamba (Mother Goddess).” 
Kasturba announced her resolution, “Put my name fir st in all the Satyagrahis.” 
And, in fact, Ba was really in the forefront of the  first  
troop of sixteen Satyagrahis. 
The fortunate Ba passed away in Bapu’s lap during t heir imprisonment in the 
Aga khan Palace on February 22, 1944. That was at t he time of the ‘Quit India’ 
movement of 1942. Even Gandhiji, who had cultivated  extreme detachment, wept 
and dropped a couple of tear-pearls at the time of Ba’s passing away.  
 
(32)  
Many men were shot dead during the Satyagraha in So uth Africa. After the 
struggle, the widows of the diseased came to see Ga ndhiji at Seth Parsee 
Rustamji’s place. Gandhiji got up, went to them and  bowed to them.  The ladies 
broke down in front of him. 
Gandhiji tried to console them and said, “Mothers, please do not cry. If your 
husband had died suffering long illnesses, the worl d would not have known 
anything about them. They are really fortunate to b e the victims of firing and they 
died for the sake of the country.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  One lady was inconsolable and was crying holding Ga ndhiji’s leg. Her tears were 
falling down on Gandhiji’s leg. He consoled her wit h broken heart and then said in 
a firm voice with compassion, “Your sorrow is unbea rable for me; and it can 
subside only when even I should die with the bullet s of the Government. This 
plight can end only when my wife also faces the sam e situation as that of yours. 
Gandhiji’s transparent and heartfelt identification  brought them solace. 
 
(33)  
Gandhiji had established the ‘Satyagraha Ashram’ at  the banks of the river 
Sabarmati and he would direct all his activities fr om there. One of the ashram 
workers, who did the shopping for the ashram, was s tealing the money by showing 
incorrect account of two and half annas, instead of  two annas. The fraud came to 
the notice of Gandhiji’s two colleagues and then th e news travelled to Gandhiji. 
Gandhiji called him. First he did not admit, but la ter he confessed. Gandhiji 
was deeply shocked because he was a close colleague  of him since the time of 
Natal in South Africa. 
Gandhiji deeply pondered over the matter. “How can we call this ashram a 
`Satyagraha Ashram’? Some untruth must be hidden wi thin me, which I have not 
been able to remove so far,” he thought. 
He gathered his colleagues. Some, who were away, we re also called. He poured 
out his agony before them. External prestige was of no value to him against the 
truth. It was generally felt that the change in the  name of the ashram from 
‘Satyagraha Ashram’ to ‘Udyog Mandir’ might diminis h it’s prestige in the eyes of 
the world. But, we should refrain from bearing a wr ong title. There were strong 
arguments. 
Ultimately, it was unanimously decided that the pla ce near the bank of the 
river, where the prayer was performed, would be cal led ‘Satyagraha Ashram’, and 
the remaining area would be called ‘Udyog Mandir’ a nd at a later stage, when it 
acquires its eligibility, it can be named again `Sa tyagraha Ashram’. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  (34)  
Gandhiji was travelling in Noakhali to pacify the c ommunal violence. On 
January 30, 1947, exactly a year before his assassin ation, he reached a village 
where the goat milk was unavailable. So, coconut mi lk was given to him as a 
substitute to the goat milk. This caused problem an d he suffered from dysentery 
and was feeling very weak. 
After going to the toilet in the evening, he starte d perspiring a lot and he was 
also frequently yawning. Manuben was with him. She feared that he might become 
unconscious. Therefore, she held him. She wiped awa y the sweat and made him 
sleep with the help of some other person. 
Manuben immediately wrote a detailed letter to Dr. Sushila Nayar. Within a 
short while, Bapu opened his eyes. He told Manuben:  “I did not like your calling 
the other person for a support, but you are still y oung and therefore I forgive you.  
In such a time one should repeat the Rama Nama with  full devotion. Even I was 
repeating the same. Now, do not inform anybody abou t this illness, not even to 
Sushila. Only Rama is my true doctor. As long as He  wishes to derive some work 
from me, He would keep me alive, and otherwise He w ould take me away.” 
Manuben was startled. She tore away the letter. Bap u understood the matter. 
He asked, “Oh, you had already written a letter as well?” 
Manuben said, “Yes.” 
So he again told: “Today God has saved you and me.  
Sushila would have rushed here leaving her work inc omplete in the village and 
therefore, God would have become angry with you and  me.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  (35)  
This incident occurred when Gandhiji was practicing  law in Johannesburg in 
South Africa. The office was three miles from the h ouse. Once, Gandhiji’s 
companion Mr. Polak told Gandhiji’s thirteen year o ld son Manilal to bring a book 
home from the office. Manilal forgot to do so. The news reached Gandhiji. 
Gandhiji went to Manilal and told him softly, but w ith firmness, “The night is 
dark, the path is difficult, coming and going is ab out six miles. Still, because you 
had committed, you have to bring the book from the office for Mr. Polak.” 
On hearing this, Ba and all the other family member s got worried. Questions 
were also raised as to why Bapu should insist in th is manner. 
An office companion, Kalyanjibhai told, “I will bri ng the book or let me go with 
Manilal.” 
Gandhiji accepted the second option. The thirteen y ear old son brought the 
book for Mr. Polak even at that late night. A fathe r, who was tender than a 
flower, but also harder than a rock, meticulously t ook care that his son would 
accomplish the work that he had accepted and promis ed. 
 
(36)   
In Noakhali, Gandhiji was travelling on foot to pac ify the communal violence. 
He would reach from one village to the other the ne xt morning at 7o’clock. Then, 
he would finish some writing and have his bath. He would use no soap for bathing, 
but a rough stone was used; this was given to him b y Miraben many years ago. 
After reaching a particular village, as she was pre paring for Gandhiji’s bath, 
Manuben found that the stone was missing. She infor med Bapu, that it must have 
been left in the weaver’s house where they had stay ed yesterday. Now what was 
to be done? Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  Bapu just pondered for a while, and then said: “You  should yourself go and find 
and get that stone back. You should go alone. Once you will do like this, you will 
not make mistake again.” 
Manuben: “Shall I take some volunteer with me?” 
Bapu questioned: “Why?” 
In Noakhali, all that area was filled with forests of coconut and betel nut trees. 
A stranger would get lost almost certainly. Also, h ow could one go alone through 
such a lonely road? And what one would do, if some hooligans created trouble on 
the way? Many such thoughts quickly passed through little Manu’s mind who was 
hardly fifteen or sixteen at the time. She did not s top to answer the ‘Why’ asked 
by Bapu, and just left in anger. She merely  follow ed the foot marks, which were 
made earlier when they came here and she managed to   reach that village. 
She found even that weaver’s house. There was an ol d lady in the house. She 
had not preserved that valuable stone, but had thro wn it away, considering it as 
some useless stone. Manu searched it out with great  trouble. Her joy knew no 
bounds. 
She had started at half past six in the morning and finally returned at one 
o’clock in the afternoon. The distance was some fif teen miles. She was terribly 
hungry also. Her anger still had not subsided. She went to Bapu straight, threw the 
stone in his lap and broke down. 
Bapu’s affectionate voice was heard: “It was your o rdeal on the pretext of the 
stone. I am happy that you have passed through it. The stone has been my 
companion and friend for last twenty five years. Wh ether I go to the jail or in the 
palace, it has always remained and moved with me. A ny carelessness in the form 
that many such stones will be found, is not good. 
There was a true utterance that came out of today’s  experience, from 
Manuben’s heart: “Bapuji, it was for the first time  today that I recited the Rama 
Nama with a true heart and strong fervour. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  Bapuji told: “I want to make the women fearless. Ac tually speaking, it was not 
only your ordeal, but even mine. 
Perhaps, the real ordeal was that of the God that d ay. Hardly any devotee 
would have put God on such a big trial. Truly, the reputation of the Almighty was 
saved that day. 
 
(37)  
In the Phoenix ashram, everyone, big and small, obse rved food restraints.  No 
spices were used in the food and some even observed  the vow of eating food 
without salt. 
Once, a student found one shilling on his way to th e station and some other 
person found a coin of three penny from a party he attended. Then some day, 
Gandhiji happened to go to Johannesburg for some wo rk. At that time, a class 
teacher ordered Pakoda (fried snacks) for one shill ing, and paintings for three 
pennies, and distributed to all to eat and enjoy. 
When Gandhiji arrived, he came to know about this. He talked to that lady 
teacher. Then he started strolling between the hous e and the press, while talking 
to one student on this matter. Similarly, he also t alked to other students. At last, 
he took his son Devadas with him to talk. 
Ashramites were very anxious and were standing aroun d, waiting for them to 
come back.  After a while news arrived that Bapu sl apped. First, it seemed that he 
would have slapped Devadas. But, later it was clari fied that he had given five slaps 
to himself. 
He ate in the afternoon. But, in the evening he did  not. He gave up even water. 
After the evening prayer, he started talking in a v ery painful voice: “Even the 
water has become like poison to me. It is extremely heart breaking to know that 
even children can deceive their father to such an e xtent. When I could not control 
myself, I have inflicted five slaps on myself. It i s better to beat myself than Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  others. Without that, it will not be realised that,  how this kind of behavior pains 
me. 
Then Bapu told about Devadas’s confession and conso lation of not repeating his 
mistake again. However, he added that the children are still hiding the truth. They 
all tell different things. No one is ready to tell the truth. His life would be totally 
useless, if the lie still persists. Then he announc ed his decision that, he would not 
even have a grain of food or a drop of water unless  the children reveal the truth 
on their own. What is better than to die in the pur suit of truth! And he told 
everybody that, they should celebrate the day, if h is death comes in this manner. 
The next day Bapu had to go out of station. Thirsty and hungry, he walked all 
the way to the station. They all accompanied him si lently. The anxious lady 
teacher finally confessed everything at the station . 
The train arrived. They all requested Bapu: Now, af ter reaching there, please 
go straight to Sheth Rustamji’s place to have a mea l there and only thereafter 
proceed further. 
Bapuji said with peaceful and cheerful mind, “The t ruth has been found and 
that is my food.” 
 
(38)  
In Yeravada jail, prisoners were posted as warders to guard and serve Gandhiji. 
Warder Adan belonged to Somaliland. He was sentence d to ten years of 
imprisonment for abdicating the British army during  the First World War. He had 
been transferred here from the Aden jail. He could read Kuran with difficulty. But, 
he would keep reading the Ayats of Kuran in his spa re time. He became a fan of 
Gandhiji. Gandhiji filed a number of applications f or his release or transfer to the 
Aden jail again, on his behalf. 
One day, he brought a fresh ‘Times’ news paper with  great trouble. How the 
sight of a newspaper was ever possible in the jail?  He happily went to Gandhiji and 
presented the paper to him. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  Gandhiji would observe each and every rule of the j ail religiously. If the rules 
were unjust, he would inform the authority and woul d fight against it. But he 
would never violate the smallest of the small rule of the jail. 
He asked Adan, “Adan, what is this?” 
‘Maharaj, it‘s a newspaper, fresh newspaper. See, I  have brought it for you.’ 
‘I cannot see this newspaper. It is against the law . You take it back.’ 
Adan felt bad. He was disappointed. 
He spoke, “Everybody wants to see the paper. I have  brought it with such a 
great difficulty.” 
Gandhiji explained to him, “I understand everything.  But, it is against the rule. 
That is why I cannot see it. You take it back and b urn it, otherwise I will have to 
report. 
Adan got very confused. He left from there with the  paper. He started thinking. 
He went to Gandhiji’s colleague and said: “Maharaj says, it is against the law. 
Whose laws? The Government is rascal. Why to care f or this Government‘s laws? 
But, Gandhiji is a religious person. He does not li sten to me. You please explain to 
him.” 
The colleague told him, “Gandhiji never listens to such a thing. On the 
contrary, he would get annoyed.” 
Even then, Adan could not convince himself. He agai n went to Gandhiji quietly 
in slow steps, and talked, “You are a great man, yo u are religious person. You are 
not going to see the paper for yourself. But, I hav e been here for quite a long 
time. Please tell me, if there is any news from my country in there?” 
Listening to him Gandhiji smiled. He could see Adan ’s trick to make him read 
the paper anyhow. But, seeing his insistence, Gandh iji did not want to displease 
him, and he then read out the news related to Somal iland’s war and something 
else to him. 
Adan came out and started telling with a childlike giggle, “Look, Gandhiji saw 
the paper. Look, how I persuaded him! Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  Whom shall we praise? The one, who could deviate th e saint from the 
observance of the rule with the force of his love o r the one who subjected himself 
to love and affection, instead of sticking to the r ule rigidly? 
 
 
(39)  
For Gandhiji, only practice was his speech. When so meone in Bengal requested 
a message from Gandhiji, he wrote for them in Benga li that, ‘ Amar jivani amar 
vani’-  My life is my message. 
After he returned to India from South Africa, when Gandhiji went to the jail for 
the first time, he used to get up at four o’clock i n the morning and worked 
throughout the day like a farmer of our country. He  used to do physical labour 
daily for six hours, which included four hours of sp inning and two hours of carding. 
This was in order to identify himself with the mass es who earn their living with the 
sweat of the brow. 
When Shri Shankarlal Banker, a close colleague of G andhiji, was jailed with him, 
Gandhiji immediately set a time-table for his routi ne in the jail and Shankerlal 
also used to spin for two hours. 
Now, it was the time for Banker to get released. In  a way, Bapu had given a 
totally new life to Banker with his own company in the jail. So, Banker was talking 
to Gandhiji regarding the change in his life due to  Gandhiji’s motherly love and 
care. 
Listening to him Gandhiji told him, “If you feel th at you have been benefited in 
your life with my company in the jail, do talk to t he people about the life here in 
the jail when you go out.” 
Banker replied, “Certainly, I will definitely tell this to everybody, and I am sure 
that they will also definitely gain out of it.” 
Gandhiji instantly questioned, “Do you know what pe ople will tell on listening 
to that talk?” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  Banker replied, “I have not thought of it.” 
Gandhiji had very good understanding of human natur e and its weaknesses. He 
knew that our people are indeed expert in putting gr eat people on the shelf, 
instead of actually following them. 
Bapu said, “See, I tell you. They will just say tha t, Gandhiji is the Mahatma. 
Only he can live such a life. How can we follow him ?” 
Banker was now convinced. He said, “That is correct . People do think that way 
and they will exactly say like this.” 
Bapu said: “Then, what will you tell them about it? ” 
Shankarlalbhai said, “I have not given any thought to it, so what can I say?” 
Bapu told him, “If someone tells you like that, the n please tell them that I was 
not born Mahatma. There were many deficiencies in m e and I had been 
endeavouring constantly and carefully to remove the m. Even as a Bania becomes 
rich, collecting even half and half paisa, similarl y, I kept cultivating good virtues 
and today the situation is, people call me a Mahatm a, although, I am still far away 
from that position. So, it’s a highway for everybod y and everyone can progress, if 
one thinks and tries in this direction with faith a nd firmness.” 
 
(40)  
The jail warder Adan was handicapped, with one hand . But, he would join 
Gandhiji in his work of spinning and carding with g reat effort and resoluteness. He 
had become an expert in making slivers and was very enthusiastic about that 
work. 
Gandhiji’s eyes started paining after a few months of spinning and the doctor 
advised him to give rest to his eyes. But, how coul d Gandhiji listen to it? 
Adan was very miserable. He started explaining to Ga ndhiji that now he should 
stop or reduce working. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  After listening to him Gandhiji said, “See, Adan, t he sun rises regularly and 
gives light to the whole world. It never stops work ing. Then why should we leave 
our work?” 
What would poor Adan say? He merely kept quiet, but  he was worried about 
Gandhiji’s health. After some days Gandhiji’s healt h deteriorated and he reduced 
his food. He used to have four pieces of Roti, but now he told Adan to give him 
only two. 
Adan kept staring at Gandhiji, and then quietly sai d, “Maharaj, the Sun God 
does not leave the rule, then how can you also redu ce the Roti?” Gandhiji just 
could not stop laughing, listening to Adan’s argume nt. 
Gandhiji writes, “I will always cherish his love as  one of my most invaluable 
reminiscences.” 
 
(41) 
After his arrival from South Africa, Gandhiji was t ravelling with some of his 
colleagues by train. Of course, they were all trave lling in the third class. On seeing 
the dirty toilet of the third class compartment, Ga ndhiji put forward a proposal 
before his colleagues to clean it. 
But, the water tank in the train was empty and the group had only a jug of 
water to spare. 
Gandhiji picked up a news paper and said: “Let us g o. I will show you how the 
toilet can be cleaned with the help of a paper and only with a jug of water.” 
And then he cleaned the dirt with his hands and gav e a lesson of cleanliness to 
them. 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  (42)  
In the Yeravada jail, Shankarlalbhai Banker, a clos e associate of Gandhiji used 
to wash Gandhiji’s clothes. One day, Gandhiji told him, “You need not wash my 
clothes, I will do that myself.” 
Shankarlalbhai asked, “Is it the case that the clot hes are not washed properly or 
is there any shortcoming?” 
Gandhiji told him with an air of satisfaction, “The y are washed properly. But, I 
think the soap is being consumed excessively. I can  use this amount of soap for 
almost double the number of days.” 
Shankarlalbhai assured him, “I shall now use the so ap economically.” 
He thought that, it is okay if some more soap is co nsumed, but the clothes 
should be clean and bright. Now, he gained an insig ht of the economy Gandhiji 
was thinking about. 
There must be an imaginative power, which must alwa ys work behind an insight 
of economy. 
One morning Gandhiji said, “Shankarlal, Do not ligh t the grate today. There is 
no need to warm up the water.” 
Shankarlalbhai asked, “Why?” 
Gandhiji replied, “We keep a lantern in the room at  night. The idea just clicked 
to my mind that if I keep a jug of water on the lan tern, then by the morning, the 
water will get warmed up. I tried that and the exper iment is successful. The water 
is warm enough for me to drink.” 
Shankarlalbhai felt a bit offended. He said, “Aren’ t you doing this, because you 
think that I have to take trouble to light the grat e early in the morning? I feel that 
I am unable to give you satisfaction from my work.”  
Gandhiji replied, “You were preparing things very w ell. But, it was just an 
experiment that I wanted to try. I wanted to see how  it works if water is being 
warmed on a lantern. That much coal would be saved.  There is nothing to be 
offended about in that.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  (43)  
Gandhiji asked his colleague Shri Shankarlal Banker  in Yeravada jail, “Have you 
read Bhagvad Gita?” 
Shakarlal replied: “I had read it during my student  days. At present I do not 
have much recollection of it.” 
Gandhiji asked the second question, “Have you read it in Sanskrit?” 
Banker answered: “No, the second language for me wa s French. So, I have no 
familiarity with Sanskrit.” 
Gandhiji retorted, “Gita must be read in Sanskrit o nly.  
That much of Sanskrit can be learnt quite easily.” 
Banker said, “It is difficult to learn Sanskrit at this age.” 
Gandhiji undertook the responsibility and said,: “I t is not difficult at all. I can 
teach you.” 
Gandhiji used to consider himself a teacher. There was a driver in South Africa 
and it was possible for him to get a better salary if he could learn English. 
Gandhiji used to walk a few miles there and teach h im English. 
After that, the ‘ Margopdeshika ’ of Bhandarkar was obtained in the jail, and a 
systematic plan of study followed. Gandhiji then ma de Banker finish the whole 
book, devoting one hour of time daily. 
Gandhiji told Banker, “This much knowledge of Sansk rit is enough to be able to 
read Gita.” 
Then, the study of Gita began. While reading it, Ba pu paid a lot of attention to 
pronunciation of ‘rhasva’ and ‘dirgha’ (that is, sh orter and longer matras). Within 
few days, the reading of Gita was completed. 
Bapu told Shankarlal, “Now you should read one chap ter of it daily.” 
But Shankarlalbhai was a man of modern times. 
He said, “Why? now I have understood the whole Gita  by reading it properly 
with you. Then what is the need to read it again da ily?” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  Bapu replied, “This is the kind of book, which is w orth reading daily. You will 
find new truths and meanings from it every day.” 
Shankarlalbhai still looked a bit doubtful. So, Gan dhiji asked him, “How many 
friends do you have?” 
He replied, “I have many friends.” 
Gandhiji further asked, “How many of them are such who can really help you in 
the time of your difficulty?” 
Banker then started thinking deeply and then candid ly answered, “None of them 
are the like. Perhaps, some may help and some may n ot. In the recent times, one 
cannot say anything about friends.” 
Gandhiji then linked his talk with this candid conf ession of Banker and said: “It 
is also the same situation with the books. We may r ead many books, but are they 
going to help us in the time of our difficulty? A b ook which would help us in our 
difficulty is a true book. Gita is one such book.” 
 
 
(44)  
One morning Gandhiji was talking to his colleague, “Today. I could not sleep till 
late night.” 
‘Why?’ 
Gandhiji, “When I went to sleep, after sometime I h eard some sound from the 
fence on the rear side. When I looked there, I saw what looked like a mouth of a 
Serpent.” 
‘The warder sleeps outside. You could have called h im.’ 
Gandhiji replied, “I understand that too. But, if I  had called him, he would have 
called others and they would have killed the serpen t. Instead, I thought that, if 
the serpent comes inside and bites me, let it bite but I will not call the warder. 
But, later, I thought that if it comes inside and b ites me, whatever would have 
happened to me, let it happen. But, suppose it went  out again after biting me and Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  if it was poisonous and bit the warder also, then h e would have also died. So, I 
asked myself, what would be my duty in such a situa tion?  If I don’t tell, warder’s 
life is in danger and if I tell then warder will ki ll it.” 
“Then what happened?” 
Gandhiji said, “I was confused. But, in the meantim e, the moon rose in the sky 
and the brightness of moonlight spread over the fen ce.  I could then see that it 
was not the neck of a serpent, but that of a lizard . Thereafter, I went to sleep.” 
The colleague then asked, what is wrong in killing a poisonous animal like 
snake! 
Gandhiji described to him the details of a conversa tion which he had with 
Shrimad Rajchandra, and what he had told him long a go. Just as we love our own 
life, likewise the animals also love their own. The refore, true Ahimsa suggests 
that, let it happen which is bound to happen to us,  but we should not kill even the 
animals. 
 
(45)  
German architect Hermann Kallenbach got attracted t owards Gandhiji’s 
lifestyle and became his lifelong friend. When Gand hiji was to be released from 
the jail for the second time, Kallenbach bought a b rand new car to receive 
Gandhiji and stood near the jail gate to welcome hi m. 
Gandhiji came out from the jail and met everybody. Then, Kallenbach 
requested Gandhiji to get into the car. 
Gandhiji asked, “Whose car is this?” 
“It’s mine. I have just purchased it and then came here directly.” 
Gandhiji asked, “Why did you purchase it?” 
Kallenbach was discouraged a bit. 
He hesitantly said, “Just to pick you up.” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  Gandhiji right away demanded of his friend, “You mu st immediately put this car 
for auction. Why should you have this kind of attac hment for me? I am not going to 
sit in that. I shall stand here, until you return a fter leaving the car. 
Kallenbach immediately went to put the car at the a uction headquarters. 
Gandhiji and all others who had come to receive him  were standing at the jail 
gate until Kallenbach returned back; after he was b ack, everybody went together 
on foot to the lodge. 
(46)  
Gandhiji was travelling in Orissa to raise funds fo r Khadi work. Once, while he 
was sitting at a meeting, a very old lady came ther e. Her hair was like white 
sliver. She was bent at her back. She fought with t he volunteers and came in to 
see Gandhiji, saying “I wish to have your glimpse.”  She bowed to Gandhiji and 
then she took out an Adadhi (half Anna) from her oti (a knot at the end of her 
cloth), placed it near Gandhiji’s leg and then quie tly went away. 
Gandhiji held it instantly and pushed it into his oti. Sheth Jamanalal Bajaj, who 
was keeping all the accounts, sat by Gandhiji’s sid e. 
He told Gandhiji, “Hand over that Adadhi to me.” 
Gandhiji retorted, “That I cannot give to you.” 
To this Jamanalalji said, “I collect all the cheque s of thousands of the Charkha 
Sangh, and you do not trust me for this Adadhi?” 
Gandhiji replied, “Its value is more than thousands  of rupees. It is not a big 
thing for a man to donate thousand rupees out of la khs of rupees he possesses. 
But, this poor old woman, dressed in tattered cloth es, how generous it was on her 
part! The Adadhi given by her is more than crores.”  
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  (47)  
In Verulam, about eleven miles from the Phoenix Ashr am, a temple of 
Laxminarayan was built from the money donated by a w ell-to-do Indian. Gandhiji 
was invited to inaugurate this temple and he accept ed this invitation due to their 
affection. 
The organisers insisted that all ashramites should also come with Gandhiji. They 
said that railway fare would be provided for all. T hey even assured that they had 
enough funding for all these purposes. 
Gandhiji’s method was always unique and different. He told them with a smile, 
“Well, you can give us the railway fare. However, l et me tell you that we will take 
the railway fare from you, but we will walk down to  reach here. The savings would 
be credited in the account of the organisation. 
Arrangement was made at the station to welcome Gand hiji. So, it was decided 
that Gandhiji alone would catch the train just one stop before the Verulam 
station. 
The temple was inaugurated very well. People’s joy found no boundary. But, it 
was a temple of Laxminarayan and the Laxmi created a  problem for Gandhiji. The 
silver lock and key of the inauguration ceremony wa s presented to Gandhiji and 
along with that, a copy of Bhagvad Gita (a religiou s scripture), framed with a 
golden metal sheet, was also given to him. 
Gandhiji poured out his heart before the public. “T he silver lock and the key 
and the gold framed Gita, which you have given to m e has added to my worry. 
Where would I keep them? In fact, it is as if the d iamond was framed with tin. The 
Gita itself is a shining jewel. How come an inanima te object like gold is going to 
add to its beauty? Now, I cannot keep this Gita wit h me. I will be burdened to take 
care of it, so that it is not stolen by somebody. T he Gita teaches detachment to us 
and you pushed me into an attachment! But, I have n ow become an expert. I will 
find my way out.”  Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  Gandhiji credited the income received from that sil ver and gold in the account 
of the Phoenix ashram and became even lighter than b efore. 
 
(48)  
In 1922, when Gandhiji was in Yeravada jail, the ja il superintendent Major 
Johns felt that the floor of the house where Gandhi ji was accommodated, was low 
and that is why it was rather humid. So, he thought  of shifting Gandhiji to the 
place, where European prisoners were kept. The floo r of that building was high. It 
had a verandah and nice compound with flowers. Majo r Johns put forward 
proposal for a shift, Gandhiji agreed to his propos al and the place was changed. 
In the evening, Gandhiji spoke to his colleague Sha nkerlal Banker, “We should 
go back to our old rooms. We have not done the righ t thing to come here. The 
superintendent has the power to transfer the prison ers, but in my case he may not 
be having such a power. My place would have been de cided by the Government 
and he cannot change it. He has certainly made a mi stake and if the government 
comes to know of this, he would be in trouble. It i s my duty to save him.” 
When this matter was put forward to the superintend ent, he was not convinced 
right away. He stated that as the superintendent, h e had full authority and if the 
Government did not like his work and interfered, he  would resign. 
Gandhiji told him, “You have such an authority as y ou talk about, but that is 
only regarding the general prisoners. That authorit y actually may not be there in 
my case. So, you may move us to our previous place. ” 
Both were adamant on their own belief. At the end G andhiji told him, “I can 
understand your feelings and I also appreciate it. It is better if we only know and 
find out what the Government is willing to do. So, for the time being, you can take 
us back and you should talk to the Home Minister. I f you find our doubt to be 
baseless, then again you can take us back.” 
Major John was happy on such a proposal from Gandhi ji, and he transferred 
them to the old place. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  He then came back after three-four days. He started  thanking Gandhiji for his 
far-sightedness and the kind care that he showed fo r him, and said, “What you 
were saying came out to be true. It has been decide d by the Government to keep 
you in the same place as earlier. If I had kept you  there in the new place without 
consulting the Government, I would have definitely been in trouble. In a way, I am 
also a rigid person and if the Government had viola ted my decision, I would have 
had to resign. I am very grateful to you for your r ight advice.” 
 
(49) 
When Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan was released from jail  in late 1934, Gandhiji 
called him to Wardha to take rest. He came to Wardh a with his children and 
stayed there at Jamanalal Bajaj’s place. They would  all go to Bapu at prayer time. 
Then came Bapu’s birthday.  Bapu told them to stay back for the meal. 
After the meal, Khansaheb’s son Gani told Bapu, “I felt very happy coming here 
today. I thought that today is Bapu’s birthday, so we will get the feasts of various 
dishes like Pulav and Murgi (chicken) and all to ea t. But, see, today also there is 
the same pumpkin as usual; in addition, today only boiled pumpkin is being 
served!” 
Listening to that Gandhiji burst into laughter. 
Then he took Khansaheb aside and said, “See, these are children. We should 
give them the food, what they like. We will get the m meat and eggs.” 
Khansaheb told Bapu, “Bapu, they are just doing it for fun. Wherever we go, 
they eat just the same food whatever our host takes . If you will give them 
something else, even so, they won’t touch it.” 
Just as Khansaheb denied for some other food to be cooked, the children also 
did the same thing. 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  (50)  
Gandhiji was travelling with Khan Abdul Ghaffar Kha n in the villages of Bihar 
after post-partition riots of the country.  
Some Muslim refugees came to Bapu. They said,  
“Gandhiji, what can we do? There is so much violenc e, killing and insecurity all 
around here!” 
Gandhiji told them, “I can teach you only a lesson of bravery. You should go 
back to your respective homes.” 
Terrified, they asked, “How is it possible for us? What is the guarantee of our 
not being massacred?” 
Gandhiji uttered, “What guarantee can I give you? B ut, if any of you have been 
slaughtered, the Hindu will have to pay its price w ith Gandhi’s life. Only that 
much guarantee I can give you.” 
Gandhiji’s words instilled courage in them and they  then returned to their 
respective homes. 
Gandhiji then mentioned this talk that he had with the refugees, in his evening 
prayer. “I have assured the Muslims of this place t hat if any of them has been 
killed, the Hindus of Bihar will have to pay the pr ice with the life of Gandhi.” 
These were not simply plain and empty words from Ga ndhiji’s mouth, which 
were rushing towards the listener’s hearts. In fact , they were full of compassion 
and identification with the listeners. The effect o f the same was to subside the 
hostility, by engulfing their hearts and minds in i ts own flow. 
 
(51) 
After returning from South Africa, Gandhiji had lod ged at his barrister friend 
Jivanlal’s place in Ahmedabad. The thought of estab lishing the Ashram in 
Ahmedabad only was continuously going on in his min d. The form and path of the Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  struggle for the country’s service had not yet clea rly emerged and crystallised in 
his mind. 
One evening, his friend Jivanlal came home and told  him jovially, “Gandhi, your 
fame has started spreading all around!” 
Then he told Gandhiji in detail, “Today, one of my barrister friends met me. He 
was coming, walking through the Ellis Bridge. At th at time two people were 
talking, going little ahead of him. One of them was  our cook. He was telling his 
friend that, someone has come to our place from Sou th Africa. He requires about 
ten or twelve bananas in the breakfast. The whole d ay, he just sits idle. He says 
that he is a barrister. But, he is not doing any wo rk at all. Just see, Gandhi, we 
have now started adding to your fame!” 
And the barrister friend candidly burst into laught er. Gandhiji also joined him. 
But, then Gandhiji suddenly became serious and told : “In a way he is correct, I 
am not doing any job here. But, shall I tell you, w hat am I doing at every moment 
all these days? As some commander constantly thinks , standing in front of the 
antagonist’s castle, that which pebble or stone has  to be removed in order to 
make a hole, so that he can intrude the whole army inside the castle, similarly, I 
am constantly pondering over the same matter that w here to make a hole in the 
strong castle of power of the British Empire.” 
And, after some time, Gandhiji started his Ashram, near Ellis Bridge, in the 
house given by his barrister friend Jivanlal. 
 
(52)  
Gandhi, the man of action, had recently come back f rom South Africa. He had 
started his Ashram in Kocharab in Ahmedabad and had  devoted himself to the 
service of the nation. 
A local barrister came to Gandhiji to get some work  in the service of the nation. 
At that time Gandhiji was busy cleaning the cereal in the kitchen.  Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51  Gandhiji welcomed the barrister guest, spread a car pet on the floor and told, 
“Please sit.” 
The barrister was dressed in coat and pantaloon. He  remained standing and 
spoke, “Well, I have not come here to sit. I want s ome work. I have come to the 
Ashram  
in the hope that you will give me some suitable wor k.” 
Gandhiji said, “It’s a matter of great pleasure.” 
 Saying so, Gandhiji placed a small pile of the cer eal before him and said: 
“Please clean it properly, so that no granules of s tones are left.” 
The barrister was astonished and taken aback. Accor ding to his culture, the 
work of cleaning the cereals was that of servants a nd women.  
He hesitantly said, “Do I have to clean the cereal? ” 
Gandhiji replied, “Yes, at present I have only this  work to offer.” 
The Barrister did not lack wit. He soon understood that, this  leader was of a 
different kind, who does not make any distinction b etween small and big work. He 
just wants to see that all Indians, small or big, a re eager and equipped to do any 
kind of work.  
In the presence of Gandhiji, as the barrister went on cleaning the cereal, at the 
same time he was inspired to move away rigid concep ts and wrong thinking from 
his own life as well. 
 
(53)  
Once, an important session of the executive council of All India Congress 
Committee was going on in the Sabarmati ashram. Sud denly one ashramite came 
running, shouting, “Oh, I am dying! Something is ha ppening in my stomach!” 
Gandhiji soon got up and went to him. He took him a side, made him lie down 
and started curing him, trying to understand what h ad happened. After sometime, 
when he returned to the session of the executive cou ncil, which was made up of Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  eminent leaders, someone jokingly commented, “How B apu pampers such a mad 
person at an important time!” 
Bapu quietly said, “Who else are going to come to m e except the mad? Since he 
came to me, therefore he is my family member. A fam ily member has the first 
right on me here.” 
 
(54)  
Gandhiji was extremely particular about punctuality.  Tilak Maharaj got half an 
hour late at the Godhara Political Conference. On t hat occasion Gandhiji said, 
“Swaraj would come half an hour late.” 
He would take all precautions in advance to stick t o his scheduled. A case was 
prosecuted against him in Champaran. The time was f ixed to reach at 11o’clock. 
The horse cart was arranged for his reaching there.  Gandhiji said that the horse 
cart must come at half past ten. His colleagues sai d  that the  horse cart would 
not take half an hour to reach there. Why should it  be called so early? Gandhiji 
was quick to reply, “If it does not arrive here at 10:30 then what? I should have 
that much of spare time on hand so that I can walk down to court if necessary.” 
He was always extra careful regarding keeping his ti me, and would not allow it 
to be interrupted by some unexpected happening or th e general negligence of our 
people. 
 
(55)  
Gujarati Sahitya Parishad meeting was held under th e Presidentship of Gandhiji 
at the Prembhai hall in Ahmedabad. The hall was ove r crowded. Gandhiji started 
his speech. There was noise ‘Mike!’ ‘Mike!’ from th e audience. 
Gandhiji stated, “Remain silent and hear. It will b e heard. Can you hear me 
now?” Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  One worker, standing at the extreme behind, leaning the wall said, “No, it is 
not heard!” 
Gandhiji, “Then how could you hear this and reply?”  
There was a wave of laughter in the hall. The laugh ter subsided and left behind 
a pleasant silence. 
 
(56)  
Before Independence, Gandhiji visited East-West fro ntier provinces. There he 
was a guest of Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a beloved l eader of the Khudai 
Khidamatgars, who was also known as the ‘Sarhad na Gandhi’, that is, the 
‘Frontier Gandhi’. 
The watchmen, equipped with weapons were settled ne ar the place where 
Gandhiji had to sleep at night. It was only as a sa fety measure. Gandhiji noticed 
this. 
He asked Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, “What is this?” 
“Bapu, this is just to drive away the intruders.” 
How would Gandhiji be satisfied with the answer? He  said, “I do not want these 
watchmen.” 
He told this quietly, but with firmness. There was no scope for further 
arguments. Weapons were taken away from the watchme n. Only then did he 
sleep. 
The news travelled fast throughout the province: Ju st look! How remarkable 
this man is. He has such faith in God that he does not even need or care for 
weapon. 
 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  (57)  
In the summer of 1947, Gandhiji was moving in Bihar  to subside the communal 
violence. From Bihar he went to Delhi. In those day s his food intake was reduced 
considerably. 
One morning, Manuben Gandhi gave a full glass of ma ngo juice at the time of 
meal to Gandhiji. 
Bapu asked, “First check out and tell me. What is t he price of these mangoes?” 
Manuben thought Bapu is simply joking. 
So, she got herself busy with the work of duplicati ng the papers. But, after 
sometime she noticed that Bapu did not have it, so she told him to have the 
mango juice. 
Bapu said, “I thought that you would first ask the price of the mangoes on your 
own. Even though these mangoes have been gifted to us, you should first ask the 
price before offering these to me. That you did not  do. Moreover, even after my 
telling so, you did not check out the price. I have  heard that a single piece of 
mango costs ten annas. I can survive without eating  this fruit. Such costly fruits do 
not increase blood in my body. On the contrary, it reduces my blood. In such a 
time of terrible high prices and distress, you have  given me a full glass of juice of 
four mangoes. That costs two rupees and fifty paisa  per glass. How can I take 
that?” 
In the meantime, two refugee women came with their children to meet 
Gandhiji.  Bapuji soon gave away that mango juice t o these two children to drink, 
in two different bowls. That gave him immense satis faction. 
He then told Manuben, “God is helping me. This is a  graphic example of that 
fact. God sent these children to me and also they a re exactly like the ones I had 
wished. Just look, how generous is the God!” 
 
 
 Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55  (58)  
When Gandhiji went to London to attend the Round Ta ble conference, King 
George V (also called Pancham George in India) had arranged a dinner party for all 
members. 
The viceroy, Sir Samuel Hoare was worried about inv iting Gandhiji. His first 
worry was, would the king meet such a rebel? And th e second was, even if they 
meet, Gandhiji’s dressing won’t look appropriate at  the party. He talked to the 
King. The King first expressed his anger saying, “Wh at? Why should I invite that 
rebel Fakir, who has been responsible for the attac k on my loyal officers?” After 
sometime, he again displayed his dislike for that ` small man with open knees and 
without proper dressing.’ But, finally it was decid ed that, Gandhiji should be 
invited without putting any condition regarding his  dress. 
The viceroy had taken charge of presenting Gandhiji  at the right moment before 
the King, at the dinner party hosted by the latter.  It was not difficult to identify 
Gandhiji from the crowd due to his pure white Khadd ar clothes. He took Gandhiji 
to meet the King and introduced. It was a difficult  moment. It was not possible for 
the King to forget Gandhiji’s rebellion. During the  last whole year, Gandhiji had 
launched a powerful Satyagraha movement in India. 
But, once they started talking, it all went on quit e smoothly. The King was 
sympathetic and Gandhiji’s manners were also unques tionable. But, during their 
conversation, when the King’s eyes once set on Gand hiji’s open knees for a 
moment, his heart started beating rapidly. 
Now, their conversation was gradually proceeding to wards the end. King George 
Pancham was quite aware of his responsibility. At t he time of farewell, he warned 
Gandhiji: “Remember, Mr. Gandhi, I won’t tolerate a ny attack on my empire.” 
The viceroy became very tense. It looked like as if  the war of words would start 
or what? Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  But Gandhiji’s gentleness took the situation under control. He answered, “My 
Majesty, I should not drag myself into a  political  dispute with you after having 
enjoyed the hospitality of my Highness.” 
And they took each other’s leave in a friendly atmo sphere. 
The viceroy was stunned. “How one was a very noble King and the other was the 
great statesman! The men who are above worldliness,  possess the superb worldly 
manners,” he thought. 
 
(59)  
When Gandhiji went to London to attend the Round Ta ble Conference in 1931, 
all his attempts failed to convince the British sta tesmen. Churchill even refused to 
see him. At that time, General Smuts, who was consi dered to be ‘the wisest man 
of the British Empire’, had expressed his good will superbly towards Gandhiji. He 
invited Gandhiji to his place with lot of affection . 
When General Smuts was a ruler of South Africa, Gan dhiji had launched his 
Satyagraha movements against him and made him feel exasperated. Finally he 
acquired justice from him for the Indian community residing in South Africa. 
General Smuts, a staunch opponent of Gandhiji, beca me the best admirer and 
friend of him. 
He took Gandhiji near a cupboard in his house in Lo ndon, and showing him one 
thing, he asked, “What is this? Could you recall an ything?” 
Gnndhiji kept looking at it. It was a pair of shoes . He had himself made that 
pair of shoes and sent it as a gift to General Smut s, when he was his prisoner last 
time in the jail of South Africa. 
When Gandhiji was in the jail in South Africa, the Government’s dealing with 
him was not good, despite his being a barrister and  even when his behaviour was 
extremely polite. In the beginning he was locked up in a very narrow room. Only 
some light came from the ventilator above, that was  all. There was no stool to sit. 
So, he had to stand and read. He did his labour wor k in jail with strict discipline. Gandhi Katha 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  He was made to wear handcuffs while going to other places from the jail and even 
that he tolerated. The toilet was not convenient an d the food was also a problem. 
Gandhiji never even desired to get any extra facilit ies as compared to his fellow 
Indian prisoners. Gradually, he also got some possi ble changes done. 
In the beginning he too found the prison term diffi cult. But, he shed away that 
feeling. He heard his inner voice that, if General Smuts wants him to surrender by 
putting him in such uncomfortable condition, that w as never to happen.   
He had been to jail many times by 1914. When he was  in the jail last time, he 
had prepared a pair of shoes with his on hands. Aft er his release, he sent them as 
a present, through Miss Sonya Shleshin, to his ‘opp onent’ General Smuts. 
General Smuts later writes, “I have worn that pair of shoes during many 
summers, although I always felt that I do not deser ve to put my feet into the shoes 
of such a great man.”  
 
(60)  
In Bihar, a mother had lost her son in the freedom struggle. Bapu went to her 
place, bowed to her and stood before her with folde d hands. Then he started 
saying: “Mother, this is your son, who is standing before you. Just put your hand 
on his head and bless him that he sacrifices his li fe in the service of the nation.” 
Then, it so occurred as if the prayer emerged from the heart of a mother for 
the Mahatma, who was standing before her. 
She said, “Son, be immortal.” 
The wish that Bapu had made from a pure heart indee d came true. The oblation 
of Bapu’s life was also given in the welfare of hum anity. 
The Mother’s — Bharat Mata’s prayer and blessings w ill always be heard for his 
sincere sacrifice: “Beta, Amar Raho!” 
 
*** 