 
Gandhi and Communal 
Problems  
 
 
 
By M. K. Gandhi  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Compiled & Published by:  
 
Centre for Study of Society and Secularism  
Irene Cottage, 2nd floor, 4th Road  
Santacruz (East), Mumbai 400 055 
 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 2 PREFACE  
This is 125th year of Mahatma Gandhi’s birt h. Mahatma’s contribution to promotion of 
communal harmony is most significant in modern India. This contribution is neither merely 
academic nor only as political activist but much more than that he laid down his life for 
his cause. Also, the Mahatma wrote  and spoke profusely on this problem. We can hardly 
think of any individual in modern India who wrote and spoke on this problem as much as 
the Mahatma did. His writings and speeches on this problem run into hundreds of pages. Mahatma wrote and spoke on thi s problem from all possible angles.  
It is possible to differ from him in many respects on this issue, but that is different thing. But we can hardly doubt his sincerity. Even his opponents do not doubt it. Also, he and 
Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad showed convi ncingly that being religious does not mean being 
communal. Both of them were profoundly religious and yet as much secular. Mahatma 
Gandhi and Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad rooted secularism in indigenous religio -cultural 
practices. For them it was not an alien and western concept. Mahatma Gandhi proudly 
described himself as being a sanatani Hindu and yet he remained secular.  
He was always greatly disturbed whenever communal violence broke out. He did not simply show his annoyance by merely verbally condemning it . He rushed to the site of the 
massacre and threw himself into it and tried to pursue the culprits to stop ghastly killings. 
He often undertook fast unto death to bring moral pressure on the killers. Be it Navakhali, 
be it great killings of Calcutta or kil lings in Delhi, the Mahatma rushed to the scene to save 
the situation and did save it.  
One can argue that Gandhiji  great failure was his inability to stop partition of the country. 
Well, he may have his share of this failure but it will be quite unfair to blame only the 
Mahatma for this. The forces leading to partition were too complex and no one individual 
can be blamed for it. The failure had to be shared by entire leadership of the Congress. No single individual could have stopped the partition. If one g ives deep thought to the whole 
question it will not be to difficult to see that blame goes more on those leaders of the Congress who wee quite anxious to come to power and we all that the Mahatma was not in that game. The historians and scholars of partiti on have written enough in this respect and 
we need go into that controversy here.  
The centre for Study of Society and secularism thought that it should bring at a selection Mahatma Gandhi’s writings on Communal problem. We have chosen here what was most relevant in today’s context. We hope these selected writings on communalism and 
communal harmony will be useful to our readers. That will serve our purpose.  
Asghar Ali Engineer , Bombay, 30
th September 1994 
 
 
 
  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 3 CONTENTS  
APPROCH TO COMMUNAL UNITY  
1. Character of C ommunal Unit  
2. Hindu -Muslim Unity  
3. Equal Servant of All  
4. Communalism  
ACHIVEMENT OF COMMUNAL UNITY  
1. Mutual Tolerance  
2. The Unitary Method  
3. Pacts  
4. The Vow of Unity  
5. The Meaning of Unity  
6. Work For Unity  
RELIGIOUS ASPECTS OF THE COMMUNAL PROBLEM  
3. Religion and Communal Uni ty 
4. Temples and Mosques  
5. Music Before Mosques  
6. Cow-Slaughter and Cow Protection 
7. Communal Slogans  
THE CAUSES OF COMMUNAL RIOTS  
1. Specific Causes  
2. Psychology of Fear  
3. Distrust  
4. Tiredness of Non -Violence  
5. Propaganda of Vilification  
6. The Third Party  
SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF COMMUNAL RIOTS  
1. The Goondas and riots  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 4 2. Communal Crime and Truth  
3. Restoration of Peace  
PERSONAL REACTION TO COMMUNAL RIOTS  
1. Religion and Riots  
2. Fasts For Communal Peace  
COMMUNAL RELATIONS IN FREE INDIA  
1. Equality of All 
2. Status of Muslim Minority  
3. Secular State  
4. Religion and Nationalism  
5. Religious Festivals  
6. Synthesis of Culture  
7. Communal Life in Villages  
8. India of My Dreams  
NOTES  
SOURCES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 5 APPROACH TO COMMUNAL UNITY  
1 
CHARACTER OF COMMUNAL UNITY  
Perpetual Enmity?  
MANY BELIEVE That an ingrained and ineradicable animosity exists between Hindus and 
Mohammedans.  
“For over five hundred years the relation between Hindus and Musalmans was that of foes. 
After the advent of British rule, both the Musalmans  and the Hindus were compelled out of 
policy to forget that racial  hatred, and the acrimony of that bitter enmity is now no more. 
But the permanent difference in the constitution of these two races does even now exist. I 
believe the present cordial relation is due to British rule and not to the catholicity of modern Hind uism.”  
I regard this statement as pure superstition. The two races lives at peace among themselves during the Muslim rule. Let it be remembered that many Hindus embraced Islam before the advent of Muslim rule in India. It is my belief that had there been no 
Muslim rule, there would still have been Musalmans in India, even as there would have 
been Christians had there been no British rule. There is nothing to prove that the Hindus and the Musalmans lived at war with one another in the British rule.  
Were the Hindus and Musalmans and Sikhs always at war with one another when there was 
no British rule, there was no English face seen in India? We have chapter and verse given 
to us by Hindu historians and by Musalman historians to say that we were living in 
compar ative peace even then. And the Hindus and Musalmans in the villages are not even 
today quarreling. In those days, they were not known to quarrel at all. The late Maulana 
Mahomed Ali often used to tell me, and he was himself a bit of a historian, “If God” A llah, 
as he called God - “gives me life, I propose to write the history of Musalman rule in India; 
and then I will show, through documents that British people have preserved, that 
Aurangzeb was not so vile as has been painted by the British historian that M oghul rule was 
not so bad as it has been shown to us in British history” and so on. And so have Hindu 
historians written. This quarrel is not old; this quarrel is coeval with the British  advent.  
Voice of Unity  
That was the time when Hindus and Muslims for the time forgot all their differences. The Ali Brothers and I used to go all over the country together like blood brothers. We spoke 
with one voice and delivered the message of Hindu- Muslim unity and Swaraj to the masses. 
We resolved that thereafter we sho uld address our prayers to God alone instead of the 
British Government, and so Satyagraha was born in India. The Ali brothers readily fell in 
with the programme of a national day of fasting and prayer people fasted on the 6
th and 
13th of April. They realiz ed that they were all children of the God, destined to live 
together and die together in thousands and offered prayers in temples, churches and mosques. The climax was reached when in Delhi a monster gathering consisting of both Hindus and Musalmans  was he ld in the Jumma mosque and was addressed by the late Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 6 Swami Shraddhanand. It was a glorious day in India’s history, the memory of which we 
shall always treasure.  
Peaceful Co existence 
My experience of all India tells me that the Hindus and Muslim know how to  live at peace 
among themselves. I decline to believe that people have said goodbye to their senses so as 
to make it impossible to live at peace with each other, as they had done for generations.  
The enmity cannot last for ever. They are brothers and must remain so in spite of 
temporary insanity. But perpetual feud is not and impossibility between communities as it 
is not between two individuals. I hope that this would not happen, for I prophesy that in 
this case they will bury the two religions in India an d will sell their freedom for a mess of 
pottage.  
 
2 
HINDU - MUSLIM UNITY  
A Consummation  
IF THE Hindu and the Muslim communities could be united in one bond of mutual friendship, and if could act towards the other ever as children of the same mother it would  be a consummation devoutly to be wished.  
The union that we want is not a patched up thing but a union of hearts based upon a 
definite recognition of the indubitable proposition that Swaraj for India must be an 
impossible dream without an indissoluble unio n between the Hindus and Muslims of India. 
It must not be a mere truce. It cannot be based upon mutual fear. It must be a partnership between equals, each respecting the religion of the other.  
And Hindu -Muslim unity is nothing if it is not a partnership be tween brave men and 
women.  
Hindu Muslim unity means not unity only between Hindus and Musalmans and between all 
those who believe India to be their home, no matter what faith they belong.  
I am fully aware that we have not yet attained that unity to such an  extent as to bear any 
strain. It is a daily growing plant, as yet in delicate infancy, requiring special care and 
attention.  
Both the Hindus and the Musalmans must learn to stand alone and against the whole 
world, before they become really united. This un ity is not to be between weak parties, 
but between men who are conscious of their strength.  
With me the conviction is as strong as ever that, willy -nilly, the Hindus and the Musalmans 
must be friends one day. No one can say how and when that will happen. T he future is 
entirely in the hands of God. But He has vouchsafed to us the ship of Faith which alone can enable us to cross the ocean of Doubt.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 7 For, I believe with the late Poet Iqbal that the Hindus and the Muslims, who have lived 
together, long under the  shadow of the mighty Himalayas and have drunk the waters of 
the Ganges and Yamuna, have a unique message fro the world.  
Disunity a Phase  
As members of a family, we shall sometimes flight, but we shall always have leaders who 
will compose our differences a nd keep us under check.  
Taking even the Hindu -Muslim disturbances in that light, I do not despair of the future. 
Order must come out of the present chaos. We would expedite the advent of order by 
watching, waiting and praying. If we do so, the evil that ha s come to the surface will 
disappear much quicker than, if, in our haste and impatience, we would disturb the 
surface and thus send the dirt to the bottom again instead of allowing it to throw itself out. 
This, however, is no cause for the slightest despai r. I know that the demon of disunion is 
at his last gasp. A lie has no bottom. Disunion is a lie. Even if it is sheer self -interest, it 
will bring about unity. I had hoped for disinterested unity. But I will welcome a unity 
based even on mutual interest. I t will come when it does come, in away perhaps least 
expected by us. God is the Master Trickster. He knows how to confound us frustrate our 
‘Knavish tricks’. He sends death when one least expects it. He sends life when we see no sign of it. Let us admit ou r object helplessness, let us own that we are utterly defeated. 
Out of the dust of our humility will, I feel sure, be built up an impregnable citadel of 
unity.  
Hindus and Muslims are going more and more away from each other. But this does not 
disturb me. S omehow or other, I feel that the separation is growing only to bring them all 
closer later on.  
The Hindu -Muslim quarrels are, in a way, unknown to us, as a fight for Swaraj. Each party 
is conscious of its impending coming. Each wants to be found ready and fit for Swaraj 
when it comes. The latter consider themselves to be weak in educational and earthly 
equipment. They are now doing what all weak bodies have done hitherto. This fighting therefore, however unfortunate it may be, is a sign of growth. It is lik e the Wars of the 
Roses. Out of it will rise a mighty nation. A better than the bloody way was opened out to 
us in 1920, but we could not assimilate it. But even a bloody way is better than utter 
helplessness and unmanliness.  
We may think are living, but d isunited we are worse than dead. The Hindu thinks that in 
quarreling with the Musalman he is benefiting Hinduism; and the Musalman thinks that in fighting a Hindu he is benefiting Islam. But each is ruining his faith. And the poison has spread among the me mbers of the communities themselves. And no wonder. For one man 
cannot do right in one department of life whilst he is occupied in doing wrong in any other 
department. Life is one indivisible whole.  
It is a matter of shame to me to confess that we are a house divide against itself. We fly 
at each other’s throats in cowardice and fear. The Hindu distrusts the Musalman through 
cowardice and fear, and the Musalman distrusts the Hindu through equal cowardice and Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 8 imaginary fears. Islam throughout history has sto od for matchless bravery and peace it 
can, therefore, be no matter for pride to the Musalmans that they should fear the Hindus. 
Similarly, it can be no matter for pride to the Hindus that they should fear the Musalmans, 
even if they are aided by the Musalm an of the world. Are we so fallen that we should be 
afraid of our own shadows.  
 
3 
EQUAL SERVANT OF ALL 
 
Partiality to Muslims?  
YOU MAY say I am partial to the Musalmans. So be it, though the Musalmans do not admit it. But my religion will not suffer by even an iota, by reason of my partiality. I shall have 
to answer my God and my Maker if I give and one less than his due, But I am sure that He will bless me if He knows that I gave some one more than his due. I ask you to understand me. 
If my hand or heart ha s done anything more than was any one’s due, you should be proud 
of it, rather than deplore it. It should be a matter of pride to you as Hindus to think that 
there was amongst you at least one man Gandhi who was not only just to the Musalmans, but even went out of his way in giving them more than their due. Hinduism is replete with 
instances of tolerance, sacrifice and forgiveness. Think of the sacrifice of the Pandavas, 
think of the forgiveness of Yudhihthira. Should it be a matter of sorrow for you that t here 
is at least one man who has tried to carry out the precept of Hinduism to the latter?  
I would not sell my soul to buy India’s freedom. And if I want Muslim friendship, it is not 
for personal gratification but for India’s sake.  
I consider myself as goo d a Muslim as I am a Hindu and for that matter I regard myself an 
equally good Christian or Parsi. That such a claim will be rejected, and on some occasions was rejected, I know. This however, does not affect my fundamental position.  
The Muslims look upon me as their arch- enemy and the Hindus accuse me of partiality for 
the Muslims. My advice to the Hindus to be honorable and just to the Muslims in the Union 
of India, irrespective of what is done in Pakistan, is also looked upon in that light. I do not 
plead guilty to the charge.  
I am believed to be the arch – enemy of Islam and Indian Muslims. If was at one time 
acclaimed as their greatest friend and suffered the praise, must suffer, too, to be described as an enemy. Truth is known only to God. I am confiden t that in nothing that I 
am doing, saying or thinking, I am their enemy. They are blood -brothers and will remain 
so, though they may disown me ever so much.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 9 The True Religion  
You may be astonished to learn that I continue to receive letters charging me tha t I have 
compromised the interests of the Hindus by acting as a friend of the Muslims. How can I 
convince people by mere words, if the sixty years of my public life have failed to demonstrate that, by trying to befriend the Muslims, I have only proved myse lf a true 
Hindu and have rightly served the Hindus and Hinduism? The essence of true religious teaching is that one should serve and befriend all. I learn this in my mother’s lap. You may refuse to call me a Hindu. I know no defence except a quote a line f rom Iqbal’s famous 
song: majhab nahin sikhata apasmen bair rakhana, meaning, religion does not teach us to 
bear ill -will towards one another. It is easy enough to be friendly to one’s friends. But to 
befriend the one who regard himself as our enemy is the quintessence of true religion. The 
other is mere business.  
I believe in the sovereign rule of the law of love which makes no distinctions.  
I am told that I am a friend of the Muslims and an enemy of Hindus and Sikhs. It is true that I am a friend of the Mu slims, as I am of the Parsis and others. In this respect, I am the 
same today as I have been since the age of twelve. But those who call me an enemy of 
Hindus and Sikhs do not know me. I can be enemy of none, much less of Hindus and Sikhs.  
I claim to be eq ual servant of all.  
 
4 
COMMUNALISM 
WHILST…. I can make room in my mind for various schools of thought, for me there is only 
one way, I have no faith in communalism even as a stage; or perhaps better still, I have no 
fitness for work on that stage.  
It woul d be wrong always to think in communal terms. I know that we may not shut our 
yes to hard facts. But to attribute everything to the communal spirit is a sign of inferiority complex. It may well perpetuate what is yet a temporary distemper in the national l ife. 
Communalism of the virulent type is a recent growth. The lawlessness is a monster with 
many faces. It hurts all, in the end, including those who are primarily responsible for it.  
One Human Family  
The golden way is to be friends with the world and to regard the whole human family like 
members of one family. He who distinguished between one’s own family and another’s miseducates the members of his own and opens the way for discord and irreligion.  
(We have) the example of England, Russia and other countr ies when every family had sent 
as many able- bodied men and women as possible for the defence of their country. This is 
how unity of heart is actually achieved in the world, and I hope what we, in our country, Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 10 will be able to rise above small, selfish consi derations and create that unity without which 
life itself will not be worth living.  
A man whose spirit of sacrifice does not go beyond his own community becomes selfish 
himself and also makes his community selfish. In my opinion, the logical conclusion of self -
sacrifice is that the individual sacrifices himself for the community; the community 
sacrifices itself for the district, the district for the province, the province for the nation 
and the nation for the world. A drop torn from the ocean, it shares the  glory of carrying on 
its bosom a fleet of mighty slips.  
 
II. ACHIEVEMENT OF COMMUNAL UNITY  
1. 
MUTUAL TOLERANCE  
BEFORE THIS UNITY becomes a reality, both the communities will have to give up a good deal and will have to make radical changes in ideas held heretofore.  
As with Hindus, so with Musalmans. The leaders among the latter should meet together 
and consider their duty towards Hindus. When both are inspired by a spirit of sacrifice, 
when both try to do their duty towards one another instead of pressing their rights, then and then only would the long -standing differences between the two communities cease . 
Each must respect the other’s religion, must refrain from even secretly thinking ill of the 
other. We must politely dissuade members of both the communi ties from indulging in bad 
language against one another. Only a serious endeavor  in this direction can remove the 
estrangement between us.  
Mutual tolerance is a necessity for all times and for all races. We cannot live in peace if 
the Hindus will not toler ate the Mohammedan form of worship of God and his manners and 
customs, or if the Mohammedan will be impatient of Hindu idolatry or cow -worship. It is 
not necessary for toleration that I must approve of what I tolerate all these in Hindus, 
Mohammedans and C hristians even as I expect them to tolerate my abstinence from all 
these although they may dislike it. All the quarrels between the Hindus and Mohammedans 
have arisen from each wanting to force the other to his view.  
The cow is as dear as life to a Hindu. The Musalman should, therefore, voluntarily 
accommodate his Hindu brother. Silence at his prayer is a precious thing for a Musalman. 
Every Hindu should voluntarily respect his Musalman brother’s sentiment. This, however, is 
a counsel of perfection.  
Clarity  towards  Opponents  
The unity we desire will last only if we cultivate a yielding and a charitable disposition 
towards one another.  
Evolution of democracy is not possible if we are not prepared to hear the other side. We 
shut the doors of reason when we ref use to listen to our opponents or, having listened, Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 11 make fun of them. If intolerance becomes a habit, we run the risk of missing the truth. 
Whilst with the limits that nature has put upon our understanding, we must act fearlessly 
according to the right vou chsafed to us, we must always keep an open mind and be ever 
ready to find that what we believed to the truth was, after all, untruth. This openness of 
mind strengthens the truth in us and removes the dross from it, if there is any.  
Those do not like things  do not coincide with their notions need not patronize them but it 
is ungentlemanly to behave like less that men when things are not to their taste.  
Let me not told, as I have often been, that it is all due to the misdeeds of the Muslim 
league. Assuming th e truth of the remark, is our toleration made of such poor stuff that it 
must yield under some uncommon strain? Decency and toleration to be of value must be 
capable of standing the severest strain. If they cannot, it will be a sad day for India. Let us not make it easy for our critics (we have many) to say that we did not deserve liberty. 
Many arguments come to my mind in answer to such critics. But they give poor comfort. It hurts my pride as a lover of India of the teeming millions, that our tolerant and  combined 
culture should not be self -evident.  
Nationalism  
When Hindu or a Musalman does evil, it is evil done by an Indian to an Indian, and each one of us must personally share the blame and try to remove the evil. There is no other meaning to unity than this Nationalism is nothing if it is not at least this. Nationalism is 
greater than sectarianism. And in that sense, we are Indians first and Hindus, Musalmans, 
Parsis and Christians after.  
We should deplore the fact that one Indian does not see the obviou s wrong that tour other 
brethren have done. There is no unity, if we must continuously look at things communally.  
Critics may say, ‘All this is sheer nonsense, because it is so inconsistent with facts. It is 
visionary.’ But my contention is that we shall n ever achieve solidarity unless new facts are 
made to suit the principle instead of performing the impossible feat of changing the 
principle to suit existing facts.  
2 
THE UNITARY METHOD  
Large Heartedness  
I know that Hindus are in a numerical majority, and t hat they are believed to be more 
advanced in knowledge and education. Accordingly, they should be glad to give way so 
much the more to their Mohammedan brethren. As a man of Truth, I honestly believe that 
Hindus should yield up to the Mohammedans what the latter desire, and that they should 
rejoice in so doing. We can expect unity only if such mutual large heartedness is 
displayed. When the Hindu and Mohammedans act towards other as blood brothers, then 
only we can hope for the dawn of India.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 12 Love is the ba sis of our friendship as it is of religion. I seek to gain Musalman friendship by 
right of love. And if love persists even on the part of one community, unity will become a 
settled fact in our national life.  
It is as simple as it is pure. A contract or pac t is between two parties. There is also 
consideration passing from one to the other. Such was the Lucknow Pact between the 
Congress and the Muslim League. The same thing could have been accomplished by the 
unitary method only. Then there would have been no  compromise dictated by fear and 
distrust. The Congress could have done, according to its notion, absolute justice, i.e., 
yielded the maximum consistent with the welfare of the whole nation without the 
expectation of any consideration from the League.  
In a well-regulated family the relations are governed by the unitary method. Thus, a 
father gives to his children not as a result of a pact. He gives out of love, a sense of 
justice without expecting any return therefore. Not that there is none. But everything  is 
natural, nothing is forced. Nothing is done out of fear or distrust. What is true of a well -
regulated family is equally true of a well regulated society, which is but an extended 
family.  
Properly applied the method never fails. It disarms criticism and  opposition. It 
presupposes a clean conscience and clean action.  
 
3 
PACTS  
WHAT IS a non essential to a Hindu may be an essential to a Musalman. And in all non -
essential matters a Hindu must yield for the asking. It is criminal folly to quarrel over trivial ities. 
No Resort to Force  
This (that we do not break one another’s heads in respect of religious matters) is the only 
pact that is immediately necessary between the parties, and I am sure that everything 
else will follow.  
Unless this elementary condition is recognized, we have no atmosphere for considering the 
ways and means of removing mis- understanding and arriving at an honourable lasting 
settlement. 
For political matters a pact or an understanding is certainly necessary. But, in my opinion, 
the restora tion of friendly feeling is a condition precedent to any effectual pact. Are both 
parties sincerely willing to accept the proposition that no dispute, religious or otherwise, 
between the communities should ever be decided by an appeal to fore, i.e., violence? 
I wish that the so -called alliance between the Musalmans and the Hindus will become a 
permanent reality based on a frank recognition of enlightened self -interest. It will then 
transmute the iron of sordid imperialism into the gold of humanitarianism. T he Hindu Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 13 Muslim alliance is intended to be a blessing to India and to the world, for it is conceived in 
a spirit of peace and goodwill to all. It has adopted non -violence and truth as the 
indispensable means for achieving Swaraj in India. Its symbol the Charkha, the spinning 
wheel is a symbol of simplicity, self -reliance, self control, voluntary co -operation among 
millions. If such an alliance proves a menace to the world, then there is no God, or God is 
asleep.  
I feel that any agreement between the compone nt parts of the nation must be voluntary 
and must remain so far all time. It must not, if it is conceived in terms of Swaraj, depend for its final ratification or enforcement upon legal enactment. Ratification by our 
respective organizations must be held t o be final and binding. Enforcement must depend 
upon the honour of the leaders of the respective parties and ultimately, in the absence of 
reliance on non -violence, on the arbitrament of civil war fought decently or indecently, as 
the case my be.  
It cannot  be that party seeks to force a pact by violent means. Even if such a pact were a 
possibility, it would not be worth the paper on which it might be written. For, behind such 
a pact, there will be no common understanding. What is more, even after a pact is arrived 
at, it would be too much to expect that there would never be any communal riots.  
I cannot think in terms of narrow Hinduism or narrow Islam. I am wholly uninterested in a patchwork solution.  
Union Of Hearts  
Communal pacts, whilst they are good if t hey can be had, are valueless unless they are 
backed by the union of hearts. Without it, there can be no peace in the land. Even Pakistan can bring no peace, if there is no union of hearts. This union can come only by 
mutual service and co -operative work.  
 
4 
THE VOW OF UNITY  
 
IN THE huge mass meeting of Hindus and Mohammedans held in the Sonapur Masjid 
compound on Sunday the 6
th April, the day of humiliation and prayer, a vow of 
Hindu0Muslim Unity was proposed to be taken as in the case of Swadeshi proposed at the Chowpaty meeting, and I had to utter a note of warning on the both occasions. At times, in a fit of joyous passion, we are spurred on to certain courses of action for which we have 
afterwards to repent. A vow is a purely religious act which cannot b e taken in a fit of 
passion. It can be taken only with a mind purified and composed, and with God as witness. 
Most of what I have said whilst writing about the swadeshi vow applied here. Acts which 
are not possible by ordinary self -denial become possible w ith the aid of vows which 
require extraordinary self -denial. Hence vows can uplift us.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 14 But the object of taking the vow is speedily to bring about by the power of self denial a 
state of things which can only be expected to come in the fullness of time. How  is this 
possible? Meeting should be called of Hindus I mean the orthodox Hindus where this 
question should be seriously considered..  
Our vow would have value only when masses of Hindus and Mohammedans join in the 
endeavour. I think I have now made suffici ently clear the seriousness and magnitude of 
this vow. I hope that on this auspicious occasion, and surely the occasion must be 
auspicious when a wave of Satyagraha is sweeping over the whole country, we could all 
take this vow of unity. For this, it is fu rther necessary that leading Hindus and 
Mohammedans should meet together and seriously consider the questions and then pass an 
unanimous resolution at a public meeting. This consummation will certainly be reached if our present efforts are vigorously conti nued. I think the vow may be taken individually 
even now and I expect that numerous people will do so every day. My warnings have reference to the taking of the vow publicly by masses of men. If it is taken by the masses, 
it should, in my humble opinion, b e as follows:  
With God as witness, we Hindus and Mohammedans declare that we shall behave towards 
one and another as children of the same parents, that we shall have no differences, that the sorrows of the other and that each shall help the other in removi ng them. We shall 
respect each other’s religion and religious feelings and shall not stand in the way of our 
respective religious practices. We shall always refrain from violence to each other in the 
name of religions.  
 
5 
THE MEANING OF UNITY  
Need for He art Unity  
For me, the only question for immediate solution before the country is the Hindu -
Musalman question. I agree with Mr. Jinnah that Hindu -Muslim unity means Swaraj. I see 
no way of achieving anything in this afflicted country without a lasting heart  unity 
between the Hindus and Musalmans of India. I believe in the immediate possibility of achieving it, because it is so natural, so necessary for both, and because I believe in 
human nature. The Musalmans may have much to answer for. I have come in clos er touch 
with even what may be considered a ‘bad lot’. I cannot recall a single occasion when I had 
to regret it. The Musalmans are brave; they are generous and trusting the moment the 
suspicion is disarmed.  
No Reservations  
Hindu -Muslim unity will be a ver y cheap and tawdry affair, if it has to depend upon mere 
reciprocation. Is a husband’s loyalty depend upon the wife’s or may a wife be faithful because the husband is a rake? Marriage will be a sordid thing when the partners treat 
their conduct as matter o f exchange, pure and simple. Unity is like marriage. It is more 
necessary for a husband to draw closer to his wife when she is about to fall. Then is the Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 15 time for a double outpouring of love. Even so, it is more necessary for a Hindu to love the 
Moplah and  the Musalman more, when the latter is likely to injure him or has already 
injured him. Unity to real must stand the severest strain without breaking. It must be 
indissoluble tie.  
And I hold that what I have put before the country in the foregoing lines is  a simple, 
selfish idea. Does Hindu love his religion and country more than himself? If he does, it follows that he must not quarrel with ignorant Musalman who knows neither country nor religion. The process is like that of the world -famed woman who profes sed to give up child 
to her rival instead of dividing it with the latter a performance that he would have suited 
the latter admirably.  
We must trust each other always, but in the last resort we must ourselves and our God.  
Pre-requisite of Freedom  
We all no w realize, as we have never before realized, that with that unity we cannot 
attain our freedom, and I make bold to say that without that unity the Musalmans of India cannot render the Khilafat all the aid they wish. Divided, we must ever remain slaves. 
That unity therefore, cannot be a mere policy to be discarded when it does not suit us. We 
can discard it only when we are tired of Swaraj. Hindu Muslim unity must be our creed to 
last for all time and under all circumstances.  
Nor must that unity be a menace to the minorities the Paris, Christians, Jews or the 
powerful Sikhs. If we seek to crush any of them, we shall some day want to fight each 
other.  
Unity Abroad  
While we are all engaged in trying to quench the fire of communal strike in our country, 
we must not forget our countrymen abroad. I refer to the Indian case which is being 
fought with such unity and gallantry by the Indian delegation before the U.N.O. What has pleased me immensely is Ispahani Saheb’s and Zaffarulla Saheb’s speeches reported in the 
Press today. They told their audiences in plain language how Indians are being 
discriminated against in South Africa and treated as outcastes. The Hindus and the Muslims 
in India have no different opinions on the question of the Indians overseas, which goes to prove that the two nation theory is incorrect. The lesson I have learnt from this, and what 
I want you also to learn from what I said, is that love is the highest thing. If the Hindus 
and Muslims can speak with one voice abroad, they can certainly do so  here if they have 
love in their hearts. To err is human. It is also human to mend one’s ways. To forgive and 
forget is always possible. If we can do that today and speak with one voice here as they 
did abroad, we will surely win through.  
 
 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 16 6 
WORK FOR UNITY  
Leaders’ Responsibility  
I AM convinced that the masses do not want to fight, if the leaders do not. If, therefore, 
the leaders agree that mutual rows should be, as in all  advanced countries, erased out of 
our public life as being barbarous and irreligious , I have no doubt that the masses will 
quickly follow them. Both (Hindus and Muslims) will act simultaneously (i.e., do the right 
thing without expecting reciprocation), as soon as the workers become true to them 
selves. Unfortunately, they are not. They a re mostly ruled by passion and prejudice. Each 
tries to hide the shortcomings of his co -religions and so the circle of distrust and suspicion 
ever widens.  
If we, the so -called leaders, have no control over our fighting elements, our agreement 
must be held to be unreal and useless. Before we think of real Swaraj, we must gain 
control over the masses. We must learn to behave ourselves.  
The Test  
You cause, all the best opinion of the world has borne witness is just. Are you just? Are you sincere? The rest is s imple. A sincere and true men is ready to sacrifice himself for a 
cause. Are you ready to sacrifice your ease, comfort commerce and even your life? Then, 
you are Satyagrahis and you will win.  
Workers of Faith  
For this consummation (that unity will be con sidered by the classes and masses as the 
breath of our nostrils’) we must, it seems to me, rely more upon quality than quantity. 
Given a sufficient number of Hindus and Musalmans with almost a fanatical faith in 
everlasting friendship between the Hindus an d Musalmans in India, we shall not be long 
before the unity permeates the masses. A few of us must first clearly understand that we 
can make no headway without accepting non -violence in thought, word and deed for the 
full realization of our political ambit ion. I would, therefore, beseech you to see that our 
ranks contain no workers who do not fully realize the essential truth I have endeavored to place before you. A living faith cannot be manufactured by the rule of majority.  
Only Solution  
But how is the cu re (of Hindu- Muslim tension) to be effected? Who will convince the Hindu 
maniac that the best way to save the cow is for him to do his duty be her and not goad his Musalman brother? Who will convince the Musalman fanatic that it is not religion but 
irrelig ion to break the head of his Hindu brother when he plays music in front of his 
mosque? Or, again , who will make the Hindu see that he will lose nothing by the 
minorities being even over -represented on the elective public secular bodies? These are 
fair que stions and show the difficulty to working out the solution.  
But if the solution is the only true solution all difficulties must be overcome. In reality, the difficulty is only apparent. If there are even a few Hindus and a few Musalmans only Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 17 who have a liv ing faith in the solution, the rest is easy. Indeed, even if there are a few 
Hindus only, or a few Musalmans only, with the faith, the solution would be still easy They 
have but to work away single heatedly and the others will follow them.  
Freedom of Actio n 
As to the distraction caused by opposing advice by different leaders the workers will make 
their selection of their leaders and follow them. But that is also only advisable when the 
advice of the leader appeals to their heart and head. In the case of conflict between two, they must boldly follow their own heart and head. Such is the dictate of all religions. If it 
is so in religious matters, it is more so in mundane matters.  
The answer (as to what should a Hindu worker do when he is being deliberately 
misrepresented by interested parties) in terms of Ahimsa, generally would be that acts 
should be that acts should be allowed to speak for themselves. Whilst this is good as a 
general proposition, there are occasions when to speak and explain is a duty and not  to 
speak will amount to a falsehood. Therefore, wisdom dictates that there are some 
occasions when speech must be accompany action. Of course, there is an occasion when 
mere thought will take the place of speech and action. Such is the attribute of the 
Almighty and might be almost possible for one in a billion, but I know no such instance.  
The fact is that a leader is made by his followers. He reflects in a clearer manner the 
aspirations lying dormant among the masses. This is true not only of India but of  all the 
world.  
What I would, therefore, suggest to both the Hindus and the Musalmans is that they should not look to the Muslim league or the Congress or the Hindu Mahasabha for the solution of their daily problems of life. For that they should look towar ds themselves; and if they do 
that, then , their desire for neighborly peace will be reflected by the leaders. The political institutions may be left to deal with specifically the political questions, but how much do they know about the daily needs of indi viduals? If a neighbor is ailing will they 
run to the Congress or the League to ask them what should be done? That is an 
unthinkable proposition.  
Let all political workers, be they Hindu, Muslim or any other, ponder well over what is 
happening before their  eyes. Let is not be said by the future generations that we were 
trying to learn how to lose liberty before it was even gained.  
Women’s Role  
In the mission of mine, I can count on the healthy and active co -operation my sisters, who 
beat all previous record s of suffering and sacrifice during the last heroic campaign. To 
them I say : If you are convinced that the Hindu -Muslim unity is a sine qua non, I ask you 
to use against your own countrymen the same weapon of Satyagraha that you used so effectively agains t the Government. Tell your men that you will non -co-operate with 
them, you will not cook for them, you will starve yourselves and them so long as they do not wash their hands of these dirty communal squabbles. Assure me your co -operation and 
you will add tremendously to my strength and to my power of pleading.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 18 Students and Teachers  
What can students do to bring about Hindu Muslim unity? The way was is simple. Even if all 
the Hindu turn rowdies and abuse you, you may not cease to regard them as your blood brothers and vice versa. Is it impossible? No, rather the contrary. And what is possible for 
the individual is possible for the mass.  
I would ask all the school masters, now that they are no longer under the observation of the foreign masters, that they sho uld recognize their true function, even at the risk of 
their lives, to give the right bent to the minds of those whom it is their proud privilege to 
mould.  
 
III. RELIGIOUS ASPECTS OF THE COMMUNIAL PROBLEM  
1 
RELIGION AND COMMUNIAL UNITY  
 
THERE IS nothin g in either religion (Hinduism or Islam) to keep the two (Hindus and 
Muslims) apart.  
Fundamental Unity  
I write in the name and for the sake of the heart -unity which I want to see established 
among the people of this land professing different faiths. In nat ure, there is a 
fundamental unity running through all the diversity we see about us. Religions are no 
exception to the nature law. They are given to mankind so as to accelerate the process of realization of fundamental unity.  
As I was studying Christianity , Hinduism and other great faiths of the world, I saw that 
there was a fundamental unity, moving amidst the endless variety that we see in all 
religions, viz. truth and innocence.  
If religion is allowed to be as it is a personal concern and a matter betwee n God and man, 
there are many dominating common factors between the two which will compel common 
life and common action. Religions are not for separating men from one another, they are meant to bind them. It is a misfortunate that, today, they are so disto rted that they have 
become a potent cause of strife and mutual slaughter.  
The Master Key  
Some principal religions are still extant. After a study of those religions to the extent it was possible for me , I have come to the conclusion that, it if is proper and necessary to 
discover an underlying unity among all religions a master key is needed. The master key is that to truth and non -violence.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 19 When I unlock the chest of a religion with the master key, I do not find it difficult to 
discover its likeness with other religions. When you look at these religions as so many 
leaves of a tree they seem so different, but at the trunk they are one. Unless and until we 
realize this fundamental unity, wars in the name of religion will not cease. These are not confined to Hindus and Musalmans alone. The pages of world history are soiled with the 
bloody accounts of these religious wars. Religion can be defended only by the purity of its 
adherents and their good deeds, never by their quarrels with those of other faith.  
No Unnatural Divisions  
Religion is a personal matters which should have no place in polities. It is in the unnatural 
condition of foreign domination that we have unnatural divisions according to religion. Foreign domination going we shall laugh at our folly in  having clung to false ideals and 
slogans.  
Should difference in religion, I ask, be sufficient to over -shadow our common humanity? I 
pray that fundamental commonsense should reassert itself, so that all contrary forces may be overpowered in the end.  
‘If there is only one God, should there not be only one religion? This is a strange question. 
Just as a tree has a million leaves, similarly, though, God is one, there are as many religions as there are men and women though they are rooted in one God. We do not see this plain truth because we are followers of different prophets and claim as many religions 
as there are prophets. As a matter of fact, whilst I believe myself to be a Hindu know that 
I do not worship God in the same manner as any one or all them.  
Equa lity of Religions  
I remind you of the folly of looking upon one religion as better than another  
For God fearing men, all religions are good and equal, only the followers of different 
religions quarrel with one another and thereby deny their respective reli gions.  
One of them gave a striking verse from the Granth Saheb where GuruNanak says that God 
may be called by the name of Allah, Rahim and so on. The name does not matter if he is 
enshrined in our hearts. GuruNanak’s efforts, like those of Kabir, has been directed towards synthesizing the various religions.  
Some go on a pilgrimage and bathe in the sacred river, others go to Mecca, some worship 
him in temples, others in mosques, some just bow their heads in reverence, some read the 
Vedas, others the Koran; s ome dress in blue, others in white; some call themselves Hindus 
others Muslims. Nanak says that he who truly God’s law knows His secret. This teaching is 
universal in Hinduism.  
Regard for Other Religions  
The Key to the solution of the tangle lies in everyo ne following the best in his own religion 
and entertaining equal regard for the other religions and their followers.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 20 Religious Toleration  
I got an early grounding in toleration for all branches of Hinduism and sister religions. For, 
my father and mother wo uld visit the haveli as also Shiva’s and Ram’s temples, and would 
take or send us youngsters there. Jain monks also would pay frequent visits to my father, and would even go out their way to accept food from us non jains. They would have talks 
with my fath er on subjects religions and mundane.  
He had, besides Musalmans and Parsi friends, who would talk to him about their own 
faiths, and he would listen to them always with respect, and often with interest. Being his 
nurse, I often had a chance to be present a t these talks. These many things combined to 
inculcate in e a toleration for all faiths.  
Hindu -Muslim unity requires the Musalmans to tolerate, not as a virtue of necessity. Not as 
a policy, but as a part of their religion, the religion of others so long a s they, the latter, 
believe it to be true. Even so is it expected of the Hindus to extend the same tolerance as 
a matter of faith and religion to the religion of others, no matter how repugnant they may appear to their (the Hindus)  sense of religion.  
The need of the moment is not one religion, but mutual respect and tolerance of the 
devotees of the different religions. We want to reach not the dead level, but unity in diversity. Any attempt to root out traditions, effect of heredity, climate and other surroundings is not only bound to fail, but is a sacrilege. The soul of religions is one, but it 
is encased in a multitude of forms. The latter will persist to the end of time. Wise men 
will ignore the outward crust and see the same soul living under a variety  of crusts.  
The struggle must be transferred to a change of heart among the Hindus and Musalmans. 
Before they dare think of freedom, they must be brave enough to love one another, to 
tolerate one another’s religion, even prejudices and superstitions, and t o trust one 
another. This requires faith in oneself. And faith in oneself is faith in God. If we have that 
faith, we shall cease to fear one another.  
I should love all the men, one only in India but in the world, belonging to the different faiths, to becom e better people by contract with one another, and , if that happens, the 
world will be a much better place to live in than it is today.  
I plead for the broadest toleration and I am working to that end. I ask people to examine 
every religion from the point of view of the religionists themselves. I do not expect the 
India of my dream to develop one religion, i.e., to be wholly Hindu, or wholly Christian, or wholly Musalman, but I want to be wholly tolerant, with its religions working side by side 
with one ano ther. 
The virtue of tolerance is never strained,  especially in matter of religion. Differences of 
religious opinion will persist to the end of time toleration is the only thing that will enable 
persons belonging to difference religions to live as good neig hbours and friends.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 21 Propaganda of Vilification  
No propaganda can be allowed which reviles other religions. For that would be negation of 
toleration. The best way of dealing with such propaganda is to publicly condemn it.  
Abuse and caricature of the Prophet  cannot wean a Musalman from his faith, and it can do 
no good to a Hindu who may have doubts about his own belief. As a contribution, 
therefore, to the religious propaganda work, it has no value whatsoever. The harm it can 
do I s oblivious.  
Another friend sends me a sheet called Shaitand printed at Public Printing Press, Lahore. 
It contains untranslatable abuse of Musalmans an aware of similar abuse by Musalman 
sheets. But that is no answer or justification for the Hindu or the Arya Samaj abuse. I would not  have even noticed these prints but for the information given to me that the 
writings command a fair patronage. The local leaders must find a way stopping these 
publications or at least discrediting them and distributing clean literature instead, showing 
tolerance for each other’s faiths.  
To revile one another’s religion, to make reckless statements, to utter untruth, to break 
the heads of innocent men, to desecrate temples, mosques, is a denial of God.  
They (  the Musalman writers and speakers) neither enha nce their own reputation nor that 
of the religion they profess by unrest raining abuse of the opponent. They can gain 
nothing, they cannot serve island by swearing at the Samaj and Samajists.  
Religion never suffers by reason of the criticism fair or foul o f critics it always suffers from 
the laxity or indifference of its followers.  
Religious Instructions  
If India is not to declare spiritual bankruptcy, religious instruction of its youth must be 
held at least as necessary as secular instruction true that kno wledge of religious books is 
no equivalent of that of religion. But, if we cannot have religion, we must be satisfied 
with providing our boys and girls with what is next best.   
Religious Freedom  
Everybody must be entitled to retain his or her own religion  with interference. All worship 
the same god although under different name “If I see my God in this tree and worship it, why the Muslim should  objects?” It is wrong for anyone to say that his God is superior to 
that another’s. God is one and the same for a ll.  
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 22 2 
TEMPLES AND MOSQUES  
Idolatry in Hindu Temples  
I AM both an idolater and an iconoclast in what I conceive to be the true sense of the 
terms. I value the spirit behind idol -worship. It plays a most important part in the uplift of 
the human Race. And I  would like to possess the ability to defend with my life the 
thousands of holy temples which sanctify this land of ours. My alliance with the Musalmans 
presupposes their perfect tolerance for my idols and my temples. I am an iconoclast in the 
sense that I  break down the subtle form of idolatry in the shape of fanaticism that refuses 
to see any virtue in any other form of worshipping the deity, save one’s own. This form of 
idolatry is more deadly for being more fine and evasive than the tangible and gross f orm of 
worship that identifies the deity with a little bit of a stone or a golden image.  
And what is it that we should be fighting for? We Hindus may be idol -worshippers. We may 
be mistaken. But when God gave every man the right to make mistakes, when God suffers us to live although we are idol –worshippers, why should not the Musalmans suffers us too?  
Idolatry is bad, not so idol -worship. An idolater makes a fetish of his idol. An idol -
worshipper sees God even in a stone and therefore, takes the help of an idol to establish 
his union with God. Every Hindu child knows that the stone in the famous temple in Banaras is not Kashi Vishwanath. But he believes that the Lord of the Universe does reside 
specially in that stone. This play of the imagination is permis sible and healthy. Every 
edition of the Gita on a book stall has not that sanctity which I ascribe to my own copy. 
Logic tells me there is no more sanctity in my copy than in any other. The sanctity is in my imagination. But that imagination brings about m arvelous, concrete results. It changes 
men’s lives. I am of opinion that whether we admit it or not, we are all idol -worshippers 
or idolaters, if the distinction I have drawn is not allowed. A book, a building, a picture, a 
carving, is  surely all images in  which God does reside, but they are not God. He who says 
they are errs.  
I ask you to accept the slavery of the one Omnipotent God, no matter by what name you address him. Then you will bend the knee to no man or men. It is ignorance to say that I coupled Rama, a mere man, with God. I have repeatedly made it clear that my Rama is 
the same as God. My Rama was before, is present now and will be for all time. He is Unborn and Uncreated. Therefore, you should tolerate and respect the different faiths. I am myse lf an iconoclast, but I have equal regard for the so -called idolaters. Those who 
worship idols also worship the same God who is everywhere, even in a clod of earth, even in a nail that is pared off. I have Muslim friends whose names are Rahim, Rahman, Kari m. 
Will, therefore, join on to them the name of God when I address them as Rahim, Karim or 
Rahman.  
Some dub Hindus as image worshippers. But is not the stone image which they worship but the God within, without whom not a particle of matter exists. If a de votee that his belief 
is a delusion, it deludes nobody but himself. It requires magnanimity and breadth of Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 23 outlook to understand and appreciate the religious convictions and practices of others. It 
is the same thing if they considered the Koran or the Gran th Saheb as God.  
Desecration of Places of Worship 
I hinted the last week that there was evidently as organization at the back of the mania 
for desecrating Hindu temples. Gulbarga is the latest instance in point. Whatever the 
Hindu provocation, if there was  any, the Musalman out burst has an ominous look about it. 
The desecration of temples cannot be justifies in any circumstances, whatsoever I feel 
perhaps more keenly than most of them, every fanatic outburst on the part of Musalmans. 
I am fully aware of my  responsibility in the matter. I know that many Hindus feel that I am 
responsible for many of these outbursts. For, they argue, I contributed the largest share to 
the awakening, of the Musalman masses. I appreciate the charge. Though I do not repent of my contribution, I feel the force of the objection. Therefore, if for no reason, for this 
at least greater responsibility, I must feel more keenly than most Hindus can, these 
desecrations.  
The law of retaliation we have been trying since the day of Adam and w e know from 
experience that it has hopelessly failed. We are groaning under its poisonous effect. Above 
all, the Hindus may not break mosques against temples. That way lies slavery and worse. 
Even though a thousand temples may be reduced to bits, I would n ot touch a single 
mosque and expect thus to prove the superiority of my faith to the so called faith of 
fanatics. I would love to hear of priests dying at the posts in defense of their temples and 
their idols. Let them learn to suffer and to die in the def ense of their temple, even as God 
allows himself be insulted and broken up in the insult and damage done to the idols which, being omnipresent, He undoubtedly resides. Hindus will not defend their religion or their 
temples by seeking to destroy mosques, and thus proving themselves as fanatical as the 
fanatics who have been desecrating temples. 
To the unknown Muslmans who are undoubtedly behind these desecrations, I submit: 
“Remember that Islam is being judged by your conduct. I have no found a single Musalm an 
defending these outbursts not under provocation. There seems to me to have been little, 
if any, provocation offered by the Hindus. But let us assume that it was otherwise, that 
the Hindus played music near mosques to exasperate the Musalmans, that they even 
removed a stone from a minaret. Yet I venture to say that Musalmans ought not to have 
desecrated the Hindu temples. Even the retaliations has its limits. The Hindus prize their temples about their lives. It is possible to contemplate with some degree of equanimity 
injury to life but not to temples.  
I have been trying to find proof for the allegation about Hindu desecration in the places referred to in my article on the Hindu- Muslim tension. I have failed to receive any proof in 
support of them. You wil l not enhance the reputation of Islam by the acts reported about 
Amethi, Shambhar, and Gubarga. If you will permit me to say so, I feel about the honour of Islam as much as I feel about my own religion. This I do because I desire to live in perfect, open a nd hearty friendship with the Musalmans. I cannot help saying that these 
desecrations are cutting a deep wound in my heart.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 24 If it could be proved, whilst I would still hold, under every conceivable circumstance, 
desecration of temples and equally of mosques to be unjustified from my point of view, I 
admitted that my condemnation would lose much of its force. I should be deeply hurt and 
ashamed, if the alleged Hindu desecration in Gulbarga was found to be true.  
A simple pujari nor knowing the meaning of non -violence told me with some glee that 
when a mob entered his temple to break his idols, he carefully hid himself away. Such a man I told to be unfit to be a pujari. He should have died at his post. He would then have sanctified the idol with his blood. He w ould have been justified in killing the intruders, if 
he had not the courage to die at his post with a prayer on his lips that God might have pity 
on the assailants. But it was unmanly for him to have hidden himself to save his perishable 
skin. The truth i s that cowardice itself is violence of a subtle and, therefore, dangerous 
type, and far more difficult to eradicate than the habit of physical violence. A coward 
never risks his life. A man who would kill often risks it. For he knows that the soul within 
never dies. The encasing body is ever perishing. The more a man gives his life, the more 
he saves it. Thus, non -violence requires more than the courage of the soldier of war. The 
Gita definition of a soldier is one who does not know what it is to run away f rom danger.  
If some misdirected individual took it into his head to desecrate a temple or break idols, should a Hindu in return desecrate a mosque on that account? Does it anyway help to 
protect the temple or to save the cause of Hinduism? Personally, I am  as much an idol 
worshipper as an idol -breaker, and I suggest that the whole of the audience, whether 
Hindu, Muslim or any other, are also so, whether they admit it or not. I know that mankind 
thirsted for symbolism. Are not masjids or churches in reality the same as mandirs? God resides everywhere, no less in stock or stone than in a single hair on the body of man. But 
men associate sacredness with particular places and things more than with others. Such 
sentiment is worthy of respect when it does not mean  restrictions on similar freedom for 
others. To every Hindu and Musalman my advice is that, if there is compulsion anywhere, 
they would gently but firmly refuse to submit to it. Personally, I myself would hug an idol 
and lay down my life to protect it rath er than brook any restriction upon my freedom of 
worship. That requires courage of a higher order than is needed in violent resistance.  
I had visited a mosque in the village Bola which was a damaged during the disturbances. I 
was told that on the Holi day the mosque was again desecrated by some villages who 
played Holi inside the mosque premises. If it is true, it is undoubtedly a notice given by them to the Muslims not to enter their homes even when they are rebuilt nor dare to visit 
the mosque. If this re ported desecration on the Holi day is a fact, it is a bad omen for the 
Hindus, for Bihar and for the whole country.  
If any attempt at desecration of the Gurudwaras is made by the Muslims, it will be 
contrary to the tradition of Islam as I know it and those  Muslims who take part in such 
desecration would be partakers in the destruction of Islam. Every faith is on its trial in India. God is the infallible judge and the world which is His creation will judge the Muslim leaders not according to their pledges an d promises but according to the deeds of these 
leaders and their followers. What I have said of the Muslim leaders is also true of the 
leaders and followers of other faiths.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 25 Do not look to any other power outside yourselves for the protection of these shri nes. I 
would liker every Sikh to be a defender of his faith and therefore, of all the gurudwaras  
and not merely of Panja Saheb, which one of the greatest.  
An Idol has no value unless it is duly installed in a consecrated place by duly qualified 
devotees. Forcible possession of a mosque disgrace Hinduism and Sikhism. It is duty of the 
Hindus to remove the idols from the mosques and repair the damage. I have not heard of any mosque being turned intoa Gurudwara. The Sikhs worship the Guru Granth Saheb will be an insult to the Granth Saheb if it is placed if it is placed in a mosque.  
Reparations  
Not perhaps eight miles from here is the mausoleum of Kutubudin Bakhtiyarkaki Chishtisaheb which is reputed to be second in sanctity to the one in Ajmer. Both are visited not only by Muslims but by the thousand of Hindus and other non -Muslims in equal 
veneration. Hindu wrath visited the sacred place in early September 1ast. The Muslims in the surroundings felt compelled to vacate their favorite home which had been such f or 
close on four centuries. It would be unnecessary to mention this tragic occurrence but for 
the fact that the place is still deserted by the Muslims, however much they may be 
devoted to the mausoleum. It behoves the Hindus , the Sikhs, the officials imme diately in 
charge and the Ministers to wipe out the disgrace and reinstate the place in all its original 
glory. What I have said here is equally applicable to all the Muslim places of worship in 
and around Delhi and elsewhere in the Union. It is high time that both the Governments by 
their firm action made it clear to their respective majorities that they could no longer 
tolerate desecration of the places of worship, big or insignificant. All damage done to 
them should be repaired without delay.  
I am also d istressed to see the costly marble trellis damaged. It is no answer to say that 
similar or worse things have happened in Pakistan. Have we fallen so low as to stop such acts of vandalism? Granting that such incidents have occurred on a larger scale in 
Pakistan, it will be improper to institute comparisons in evil doing. Even if the whole 
world did wrong, should we do likewise? If today I take to evil courses, will it not distress 
you? For me it will be worse than death. Similarly, we have reason to feel ashamed at the 
damage done to the Dargah. It behoves them all to show to such a holy place the 
veneration due to it.  
 
3 
MUSIC BEFORE MOSQUES  
THE THING became clear in Nellore when the problem confronted me in a concrete shape. 
The relations between the two we re none too happy. They fought only about two years 
ago over what appeared to me to be a small matter. It was the eternal question of playing 
music whilst passing mosques.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 26 The question of music before mosques, and now, even arati in Hindu temples, has 
occupied by prayerful attention. This is a sore point with the Musalmans as cow -slaughter 
is with the Hindus.  
The trouble about music is fast growing every day. A letter I had in Surat says that, as it is 
not obligatory on a Hindu to play music, he should stop  it before mosques to spare the 
feelings of the Musalmans. I wish the question is as simple. Not a single Hindu religious ceremony can be performed without the accompaniment of music. Some ceremonies require the accompaniment of music. Some ceremonies requ ire the accompaniment of 
continuous music. No doubt, even here due regard ought to be had for the feelings of the 
Musalmans. The music may in such cases be less noisy. But all this can be an ought to be 
done on the basis of ‘give and take’. Having talked w ith a number of Musalmans in the 
matter. I know that Islam does not make it obligatory for a Musalman to prevent a non -
Musalman from playing music near mosques. Nor is such a thing on the part of anon -
Musalman calculated to injure Islam Music should never,  therefore, be a bone of 
contention.  
I have heard of a peremptory demand for total cessation of music soft or loud, at any time what so over in front of mosques. There is, too, a demand for the stopping arati during prayer hours in temples in the neighborh ood of mosques. I heard in Calcutta that even 
boys passing by a mosque early in the morning and reciting Ramanama were stopped.  
Religious Necessity  
I hold that we may not dignify every trifle into a matter of deep religious importance. Therefore, a Hindu may not insist on playing music whilst passing a mosque. He may not even quote precedents in his own or any other place for the sake of playing music. It is not 
a matter a vital importance for him to play music whilst passing a mosque. One can easily 
appre ciate the Musalman sentiment of having solemn silence near a mosque the whole of 
the twenty four hours.  
Either continuous music arati or the repeating of Ramanama is a religious necessity or it is not. It if is a religious necessity, no prohibition order b y a court of law can be held 
obligatory. Music must be played,  arati must be made and Ramanama repeated, cost what 
it may. If my formula were accepted, a procession of the meekest men and women, 
unarmed even with lathis, would march with Ramanama on their lips, supposing that that 
was the bone of contention, and draw down on their heads the whole of the Musalman wrath. But, If they would not accept that formula they would still proceed with the sacred 
name on their lips and fight every inch of the ground. B ut to stop music for fear of a row 
or because of an order of court is to deny one’s religion.  
But then there is the other side to the question. Is continuous playing of music, even while 
passing mosques at prayer time, always a religion necessity? Is repea ting Ramanama a 
similar necessity? What about the charge that the fashion nowadays is to organize 
processions purely for sake of irritating Musalmans, and to make arati just at the time of the prayer, and to utter Ramanama not because it is held religiousl y necessary but in 
order to create an occasion for a light? If such be in the case, it will defeat its own end Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 27 and naturally the zest being wanting, a court’s order a military display or a shower of 
brick bats would end the irreligion show.  
A religious nec essity must, therefore, be clearly established. Every semblance of irritation 
must be avoided. A mutual understanding should be sincerely sought. Any where it is not 
possible, an irreducible minimum should be fixed making due allowance for the opposite 
sentiment, and then, without seeking the intervention of courts or in spite of a prohibition 
order, a fight must be put up for that minimum. Let no one charge me with every having 
advised or encouraged weakness or surrender on matters of principle. But I have  said, as 
say again, that every trifle must not be dignified into a principle.  
Use of Compulsion  
Hindu and Musalmans prate about no compulsion in religion. What is it but compulsion if Hindus will kill a Musalman for saving a cow? It is like wanting to con vert a Musalman to 
Hinduism by force. And, similarly, what is it but compulsion if Musalmans seek to prevent by force Hindus from prayers music before mosques? Virtue lies in being absorbed in one’s prayers in the presence of din and noise. We shall both b e voted irreligious savages by 
posterity if we continue to make a futile attempt to compel one another to respect our 
religious wishes.  
And just as the Hindus cannot compel the Musalmans to refrain from killing cows, so can 
the Musalmans not compel the Hin dus to stop music or arati at the point of the sword. 
They must trust to the good sense of the Hindus.  
But the Musalmans should never expect to stop Hindu music by force. To yield to the threat or actual use of violence is a surrender of one’s self -respect  and religious 
conviction. But a person, who never will yield to threat, would always minimize and, if 
possible, even avoid occasions for causing irritation.  
For the Hindus, cow -protection and the playing of music even near the mosque is the 
substance of H induism, and for the Musalmans cow -killing and prohibition of music is the 
substance of Islam. It is, therefore, necessary that the Hindus abandon the idea of 
compelling Musalmans to stop cow -killing, and the Musalmans the idea of compelling the 
Hindus to stop music.  
The middle class people must be prepared for a beating, if they wish to play music in the 
teeth of opposition, or they must befriend Musalmans in a self -respecting manner.  
In many places, however, the Musalmans have forcibly sought to stop Hind us from playing 
music. This is clearly intolerable. What is readily yielded to courtesy is never yielded to force. Submission to force is irreligion. If the Hindus stop music for fear of a beating from 
the Musalmans, they cease to be Hindus.  
Accommodation  
As a Hindu, I would certainly advice Hindus, without any bargaining spirit, to consult the 
sentiment of their Musalman neighbor, and wherever they can, accommodate him. I have 
heard that in some places the Hindus, purposely and with the deliberate intentio n or Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 28 irritation the Musalmans, perform arati when the Musalman prayers commence. This is an 
insensate and unfriendly act. Friendship presupposes the utmost attention to the feelings 
of a friend. It never requires consideration.  
It is clear that we have not  arrived at the stage when a pact is even a possibility. There 
can be, it is clear to me, no question of bargain about cow -slaughter and music. On either 
side, it must be a voluntary effort and therefore, can never be the basis of pact. 
General Principles  
The general in this respect may be said to be this, that where the Hindus have long been 
deliberately observing the custom to stop music before mosques, they must not break it. 
But where they have been playing music without interference, the practice shoul d 
continue. Where trouble is a apprehended and facts are disputed, both communities ought to refer the matter to arbitration.  
When a court of law has prohibited music, the Hindus should not take the law in their own hands. And the Musalmans should not ins ist on stopping music by force.  
Where the Musalmans refuse to yield, or where the Hindus apprehend violence, and where 
there is no prohibition by a court of law the Hindus must take out their processions with 
music accompanying,  and put up with all the bea ting inflicted on them. All those who join 
such processions or who form the musical band must thus sacrifice themselves. They will thereby defend their faith and their self -respect.  
The regulation of cow -slaughter and playing of music must be left to the g oodwill of the 
respective communities. Each practice would assume a becoming proportion with the growth of the tolerant spirit.  
For me, music before mosques is not on a par with cow -slaughter. But it has assumed an 
importance which it would be folly to ign ore. It is for the Musalmans to say what would 
spare Musalman feelings. And if complete stoppage of music before mosques will be the only thing that will spare the Musalman feelings, it is the duty of the Hindus to do so 
without a moment’s thought. If we a re to reach unity of hearts, we must each be prepared 
to perform an adequate measure of sacrifice.  
They (music before mosques, cow -slaughter etc.) are questions of law. I want to capture 
your hearts and see you welded into one. If this is attained, everyth ing else will be right 
itself. If your hearts are not united nothing can be right. Your unfortunate lot will then be 
slavery.  
I had to listen not without shame and sorrow to the statement that Muslim friend made to 
me. He said with a sign that there is not hing left but a kind of subjection to the Hindu 
majority, and that might have to suffer in silence the playing of music before mosques 
whilst they were offering prayers. I shall have no such despair on the part of Muslims. The friend, who made to remark, d id not realize that unconsciously implied that the Muslim 
majority would inflict duty in all humility, irrespective of what the other majority does in the other state. I suggest, therefore, that until the Prime Ministers of Pakistan and the union agree upo n another course in both the states, the practice that was followed during Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 29 the British regime, often under compulsion, should be fully and voluntarily impose their 
will on the minority are foolish and are vastly mistaken. If, therefore, you want to 
consoli date the prevailing goodwill, you will see to it that you act on the square under all 
circumstances.  
 
4 
COW SLAUGHTER AND COW -PROTECTION  
Cause of Friction  
SAVE FOR the cow, the Hindus have no ground for quarrel with Musalmans.  
The first ( constant cause of friction) is cow slaughter. Though I regard cow -protection as 
the central fact of Hinduism, central because it is common to the classes as well as the 
masses, I have never been able to understand the antipathy towards the Musalmans on 
that score. We say no thing about the slaughter that daily takes place on behalf of 
Englishmen: Our anger becomes red hot when a Musalman slaughters a cow. All the riots 
that have taken place in the name of cow have been an insane waste of efforts. They have 
not saved a single cow, but they have, on the contrary, stiffened the backs of the 
Musalmans and resulted in more slaughter.  
NO Obligation  
The latter (Musalmans) are under no religious obligation to slaughter a cow.  
The Koran so far as I have been able to understand it, decl ares it to be a sin to take the 
life of any living being without cause. I want to develop the capacity to convince the Musalmans that to kill the cow is practically to kill their fellow countrymen and friends, the Hindus. The Koran says that there can be n o heaven for one who sheds the blood of an 
innocent neighbor.  
Beef eating  
The standing complaint of Hindus against Musalmans is that the latter are beef eaters and 
that they purposely sacrifice cows on the Bakri Id day.  
It is generally known that I am a st aunch vegetarian and food reformer. But it is not 
equally generally known that Ahimsa extends as much to human beings as to lower animals 
and that I freely associates with meat -eaters.  
Hindus may not compel Musalmans to abstain from meat or even beef eatin g. Vegetarian 
Hindus may not compel other Hindus to abstain from fish, flesh or fowl. I would not make India sober at the point of the sword. Nothing has lowered the morale of the nation so 
much as violence.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 30 No Reform by Compulsion  
As a Musalman friend w rites, beef eating which is merely permissible in Islam will become 
a duty, if compulsion is resorted to by Hindus.  
Once, while in Champaran, I was asked to expound my views regarding cow protection. I 
told my Champaran friend then that,  if anybody was rea lly anxious to save to the cow, he 
ought once for all to disabuse his mind of the notion that he had to make the Christians and Musalmans to desist from cow -killing. Unfortunately today we seem to believe that 
the problem of cow protection consists merely in preventing non -Hindus, especially 
Musalmans, from beef eating and cow killing. That seems to be absurd. Let no one; 
however, conclude from this that I am indifferent when a non -Hindus kills a cow or that I 
can bear the practice of cow killing. On the co ntrary, no one probably experiences a 
greatly agony of the soul when cow is killed. But what am I to do? Am I to fulfill my 
dharma myself or am I to get it fulfilled by proxy? Of what avail would be my preaching 
brahmacharya to others if I am at the same t ime steeped in vice myself? But supposing 
even that I myself do not kill the cow, is it any part of my duty to make the Musalmans, 
against his will, to do likewise?  
The very Hindus who quarrel with the Muslims because they slaughter the cow for the beef 
she gives are not ashamed to accept the mastery of the English who are known to be beef -
eaters in a sense in which the Muslims never are. I have no quarrel with the Englishmen 
because they eat beef and as such I have none with Muslims either. I am concerned with 
showing the great inconsistency of the Hindus who for the sake of money gladly serve their 
English masters and quarrel with the Muslims. Then we forget that there are Hindus who 
gladly partake of beef. I have known orthodox Vaishnavas who eat -extract when it was 
prescribed by their doctors.  
Freedom of Food  
I do not know how this question (Will the Muslims be allowed to eat their national food -
beef under a Hindu majority Government?) arises. For, whilst Congressmen were in office, 
they are not known to have interfered with the practice of beef -eating by Muslims. The 
question is also badly conceived. There is no such thing as Hindu majority Government.  
It is, moreover, not true to say that beef is the national food of Muslims. In the first place, 
the Musl ims of India are not as yet a separate nation. IN the second, beef is not their 
ordinary food. Their ordinary food is the same as that of the millions. What is true is that 
there are very few Muslims who are vegetarians from religious motive. Therefore, they 
will take meat, including beef, when they can get it. But during the greater part of the years, millions of Muslims, owing to poverty, go without meat of any kind. These are facts. But the theoretical question demands a clear answer. As a Hindu, a confi rmed vegetarian, 
and a worshipper of the cow whom I regard with the same veneration as I regard my 
mother (alas, no more on this earth! ) I maintain that Muslims should have full freedom to 
slaughter cows, if they wish, subject of course to hygienic restric tions and in a manner not 
to wound the susceptibilities of their Hindu neighbours. Fullest recognition of freedom to 
the Muslims to slaughter cows is indispensable of communal harmony, and is the only way 
of saving cow.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 31 Essence of Hinduism  
Hinduism does no t consist in eating and not eating. Its essence consists in right conduct, in 
correct observance of truth and non -violence. Many a man eating meat, but observing the 
cardinal virtues of compassion and truth and living in the fear of God, is better Hindu th an 
a hypocrite who abstains from meat.  
He whose eyes are opened to the truth of the violence in beef -eating and who has 
therefore rejected them, who loves both man and bird and beast is worthy of our 
adoration. He has seen known God; he is His best devotee . He is the teacher of mankind.  
Muslim Response  
It is not correct to say that the appeal of the Khilafat associations against cow -killing 
leaves the Musalmans cold and unresponsive. In the first place, is it not a cheering phenomenon that Khilafat workers,  themselves Musalmans, are working to prevent cow -
killing? In the second place, I venture to assure that the appeal has had wonderful success in almost all parts of India. It is a small matter that the burden of cow -protection has been 
taken over almost entirely by Musalman workers? Was it not a soul stirring thing for Hindus 
to witness Messrs. Chhotani and Khatri of Bombay rescuing hundreds to cows from their 
coreligionists and presenting them to the grateful Hindus?  
I have been telling Maulana Shaukat Ali  along that I was helping him to save his cow, i. e., 
the Khilafat, because I hoped to save my cow thereby. I am prepared to place my life in 
the hands of the Musalmans, to live merely on their sufferance. Why? Simply that I might 
be able to protect the co w. I hope to achieve the end not by entering into a bargain with 
the Musalmans but by bringing about a change of heart in them. So long as this is not done, I told my soul in patience. For I have not a shadow of doubt in my mind that such a 
change of heart  can be brought about only by our own correct conduct towards them and 
by our personal example.  
I offered to share with the Musalmans their suffering to the best of my capacity not merely because I wanted their co -operation for winning Swaraj but also beca use I had in mind to 
object of saving the cow.  
If the Khilafat question had a just and legitimate basis, as I believe it had, and if the 
Government had really committed a gross injustice, the Hindus were bound to stand by 
the Musalmans in their demand for the redress of the Khilafat wrong. It would ill become 
them to bring in the cow question in this connection, or to use the occasion to make terms with the Musalmans, just as it would ill become the Musalmans to offer to stop cow -
slaughter as a price for th e Hindus support on the Khilafat question. But it would be 
another matter and quite graceful, and reflect great credit on them if the Musalmans of their own free will to stop cow slaughter out of regard for the religious sentiments of the Hindus, and from a sense of duty towards them as neighbours and children of the same 
soil. To take up such an independent attitude was, I contended, their duty, and would 
enhance the dignity of their conduct. But, if the Musalmans considered it as their 
neighbourly duty to  stop cow slaughter, they should do so regardless of whether the 
Hindus helped them in that Khilafat or not.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 32  I am satisfied that during 1921 more cows were saved by the sole and willing effort of 
Muslims themselves. In spite of the black clouds hanging ov er our heads, I refuse to give 
up the hope that they will disperse and that we heads, I refuse to give up the hope that 
they will disperse and that we shall have communal peace in this unhappy land. If I am asked for proof I must answer that my hope is based on faith and faith demands no proof.  
The late Maulana Abdul Bari used to say that, if the Hindus helped the Muslims to save the Khilafat, the Muslims were bound to save the cow for the sake of the Hindus.  
I claim that, without the assistance of law, but  because of my being able to cultivate 
friendship with the Muslims of India during the Khilafat days, I have been instrumental in saving more cows from the butcher’s knife than any other individual.  
Cow-Protection and Hinduism  
Cow-protection is the deares t possession of the Hindu and heart. It is the one concrete 
belief common to all Hindus. No one who does not believe in cow -protection can possibly 
be a Hindu. It is a noble belief Cow -worship means to me worship of innocence. For me, 
the cow is the personification of innocence. Cow -protection means the protection of the 
weak and the helpless. Cow protection means brother hood between man and beast. It is a noble sentiment that must grow by patient toil and tapasya. It cannot be imposed upon anyone. To carr y cow -protection at the point of the sword is a contradiction in terms. 
Rishis of old are said to have performed penance for the sake of the cow. Let us follow in 
the footsteps of the Rishi s, and ourselves do penance, so that we may be pure enough to 
prote ct the cow and all that the doctrine means and implies.  
Central Fact  
The central fact of Hinduism is cow -protection. Cow -protection to me is one of the most 
wonderful phenomena in human evolution. It takes the human being beyond his species. 
The cow to me means the entire sub -human world. Man, through the cow, is enjoined to 
realize his identity with all that lives.  
Why the cow was selected for apotheosis is obvious to me. The cow was, in India, the best companion. She was the giver of the plenty. Not only did she give milk, but she also made 
agriculture possible. The cow is as poem of pity. One reads pity in the gentle animal. She is the mother to millions of Indian mankind.  
Protection of the cow means protection of the whole dumb creation of God. The appea l of 
the lower order is all the more forcible because it is speechless. Cow –protection is the 
gift of Hinduism to the world. And Hinduism will live so long as there are Hindus to protect 
the cow. Hindus are enjoined to protect the cow by their tapasya, by  self-purification, by 
self-sacrifice.  
By every act of cruelty to our cattle, we disown God and Hinduism. Hindus will be judged 
not by their tilaks, not mean merely the Indian cow, but the cow all the world over. My 
religion teaches me that I should by my personal conduct instill into the minds of those 
who might hold different views, the conviction that cow -killing is a sin and that, 
therefore, it ought to be abandoned. My ambition is no less than to see the principle of Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 33 cow-protection established througho ut the world. But that requires that I should set my 
own house thoroughly in order first.  
Cow-protection to me is infinitely more than mere protection of the cow. The cow is 
merely a type for all that lives. Cow -protection means protection of the weak, the  
helpless, the dump and the deaf. Man becomes then not the Lord and master of all 
creation but he is its servant. The cow to me is a sermon on pity. So far we are merely 
playing at cow -protection. But we shall soon have to grapple with reality.  
There are s erious ignorance about the place of the cow in Hinduism and in the economy of 
Indian life.  
The purport (of a letter from a Muslim who describes himself as a sufi,) is that, in his opinion, there is nothing common between Hinduism and Islam and that the two  cannot be 
as if they are one. For, he argues that ht Hinduism do not believe in high and low, whereas 
Islam is a brotherhood in which there is no hierarchy and which believes in one God as 
Allah. In this there is a caricature of Hinduism. There is no Hind u who puts animals, the 
cow and the goat, before man. But I submit that if anyone like me believes himself to be 
the lowest in God’s creation, there is nothing wrong. It is  a sign of true humility.  
Not by Violence  
I believe myself to be an orthodox  Hindu and it is my conviction that no one who 
scrupulously practices the Hindu religion may kill a cow -killer to protect the cow.  
I would not a kill a human being for protection a cow, as I will not kill a cow for saving a 
human life, be it ever so precious.  
The cow question is a big question, the greatest for a Hindu. I yield to no one in my regard 
for the cow. Hindus do not fulfill their trust so long as they do not possess the ability to 
protect the cow. That, ability can be derived either from body force or s oul force. To 
attempt cow -protection by violence is to reduce Hinduism to Satanism and to prostitute to 
a base end the grand significance of cow -protection.  
The Hindus must scrupulously refrain from using any violence against Musalmans. Suffering 
and trust  are attributes of soul -force. I have heard that, at big fairs, if a Musalman is 
found in possession of cows or even goats, he is at times forcibly dispossessed. Those who, claiming to be Hindus, thus resort to violence, are enemies of the cow and of Hindu ism. 
I make bold to assert without fear of contradiction, that it is not Hinduism to kill a fellowman even to save the cow.  
To nurse enmity against the Musalman, for the sake of saving the cow, is a sure way to kill 
the cow and is doubly sinful. Hinduism w ill not be destroyed by anon Hindu killing a cow. 
The Hindu’s religion consists in saving the cow, but it can never be his religion to save the 
cow by a resort to force towards a non -Hindu.  
What profit would it be if I succeed in saving a few cows from dea th by using force against 
persons who do not regard cow -killing as sinful?  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 34 And if a Musalman thinks that he must slaughter the cow, why would a Hindu  stay his 
hands by force? Why should he not fall on banded knees before him and plead with him? 
But we wil l do no such thing. Well then, God will one day make the Musalmans and the 
Hindu do what we will not do today. If you are believers, I beseech you to retire into 
yourselves and pray to the Indweller to stay your hands from wrong and to make them do 
the rig ht thing. Let that be our prayer every morning and evening. There is no other way.  
Not by Law  
There is nothing strange about all the Shikarpur Hindus having voted unanimously in favour 
of the prohibition of cow -slaughter. Is there is a Hindu who will not v ote for it? The use of 
that unanimous opinion for bearing down Musalman opposition is the way to stiffen it. The 
Hindu members must have known, must have ascertained, Musalman feeling. And they should have refrained from going to a division, so long as Musalman opinion was against 
them.  
The Musalman claim that Islam permits them to kill the cow. To make a Musalman, 
therefore, to abstain from  cow-killing under compulsion, would amount in my opinion to 
converting him to Hinduism by force. Even in India under Swaraj, in my opinion, it would 
be unwise and improper for a  Hindu  majority to coerce by legislation a Musalman minority 
into submission to statutory prohibition of cow -slaughter.  
Nevertheless, a large number of vocal Hindus have began to believe the super stition that 
the Union belongs to the Hindus and that, therefore, they should enforce their belief by 
law even among non -Hindus. Hence an emotional wave is sweeping the country,  in order 
to secure legislation prohibiting the slaughter of cows within the un ion. 
In this state, which I hold, is based on ignorance, claiming to be a knowing lover and 
devotee, second to none in India of the cow, I must try in the best manner I can do dispel 
the ignorance.  
Rajendra Babu has told me that he has received about 50,00 0 post cards, 30,000 letters 
and thousands of telegrams asking for prohibition of cow -slaughter in the Union of India. A 
telegram was received today saying that a Pandit has undertaken a fast in Kanpur on that issue, Hindu religion prohibits cow -slaughter for the Hindus, not for the world. Religious 
prohibition comes from within. Any imposition from without means compulsion. Such 
compulsion is repugnant to religion. India is the land not only of the Hindus but also of the 
Muslims, the Sikhs, the Parsis, the  Christians, the Jews and all who claim to be of India 
and are loyal to the Union. If they can prohibit cow -slaughter in India on religious grounds, 
why cannot the Pakistan Government prohibit, say, idol worship in Pakistan on similar grounds? I am not in temple goer, but if I am prohibited from going to a temple in 
Pakistan, I shall make it appoint to go there even at the risk of losing to a temple in 
Pakistan, I shall make it a point to go there even at the risk of losing my head. Just as 
Shariat cannot b e imposed on the non -Hindus.  
It is obviously wrong legally to enforce one’s religious practice on those who do not share 
that religion.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 35 The complaint of one writer is why, when slaughter of pigs is prohibited in Pakistan, cow -
slaughter cannot be prohibited  in the Union? I have no knowledge of legal prohibition of 
the slaughter of pigs in Pakistan. If the information given by the complainant is true, I am 
sorry. I know that use of pork for good is prohibited in Islamic law. But even so. I cannot justify the prohibition of the use of pork by those other than Muslims.  
By Conversion  
The conversion of only one party is enough because the solution requires no bargains. For instance, the Hindus should cease to worry the Musalmans about the cow without 
expecting any  consideration from the later. They should yield to the Musalman demand 
whatever it may be regarding representation, again without requiring any return. And if  
the Musalmans insist on stopping the Hindu music or arati by force, the Hindus will 
continue pla ying it although every single Hindu should die at his post without retaliation. 
The Musalmans will then be shamed into doing the right thing in an incredibly short space of time.  
I have up to now confined myself to giving general advice. Maulana Hasrat Moh ani told me 
that the Musalmans ought to protect the cow for the sake of Hindus, and Hindus should 
cease to regard the Musalmans as untouchables, as he said they are regarded the North 
India. I told him: I will not bargain with you in this matter. If the Mu salmans think it their 
duty to protect the cow for the sake of Hindus, they may do so irrespective of how the 
Hindus behave towards them. I think it a sin for a Hindu to look upon a Musalman as an 
untouchable, and the Hindu ought not to do so, irrespective  of a Musalman killing or 
sparing the cow. The Musalman ought to be no more untouchable to Hindu than a Hindu any of the four caste s is to one of the other. I regard these things as axiomatic. If 
Hinduism teaches hatred of Islam or of non -Hindus it is doo med to destruction. Each 
community should then put its house in order without bargaining with each other.  
I am anxious to establish the best neighbourly relations with the Musalmans. I scrupulously avoid doing anything that might hurt their feelings. I eve n try to respect their prejudices. 
But I do this not in a spirit of bargain, I ask them for no reward. For that I look God only. 
My Gita tells me that evil can never result from a good action. Therefore, I must help the 
Musalmans from a pure sense of duty without making any terms with them. For more cows 
are killed today for the sake of Englishmen in India than for Musalmans. I want to convert the former also. I would like to convince them that, whilst they are in our midst, their duty lies in getting rid o f their Western culture to the extent that it comes in conflict with 
ours. 
Voluntary Self -denial by Muslims  
Professor Vaswani has unfurled the banner of the cow’s freedom. The danger has come 
sooner than I had expected. I had hoped that it would come when India could regard it 
with equanimity. In my humble  opinion, Professor Vaswani might have started the 
movement under better auspices. Any movement started by Hindus for protecting the 
cow, without whole -hearted  Musalman co -operation, is doomed to failure.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 36 It must be an article of faith for every Hindu that the cow can only be saved by Musalman 
friendship. Let us recognize frankly that complete protection of the cow depends purely 
upon Musalman good will. It is as impossible to bend the Musalmans to our wil l as it would 
be for them to bend us to theirs. We are evolving the doctrine of equal free partnership. 
We are fighting Dyerism the doctrine of frightfulness.  
The only effective and honourable way is to befriend the Musalmans and leave it to their honour t o save the cow.  
It would rebound to the credit of Hinduism, if stopping of cow -slaughter was brought 
about not by force, but as a deliberate voluntary act of self denial on the part of Musalmans and others. I would therefore, deem it unpatriotic even to nu rse a dream of 
Hindu Raj.  
I know what would spare the Hindu’s voluntary stoppage of cow -slaughter by Musalmans 
whether for sacrifice or for food. The Hindu dharma will not be satisfied if some tyrant secured by force of arms immunity of the cow from the sl aughter. Islam in India cannot 
make a better gift to the Hindus than this voluntary self -denial. And I know enough of 
Islam to be able to assert that Islam does not compel cow -slaughter and it does compel its 
followers to spare and respect to the full the feelings of their neighbours whenever it is 
humanly possible.  
 
5 
COMMUNAL SLOGANS  
CRIES OF Vande Mataram, Jai Bharat or Jai Hind frighten the Musalmans today. Are they 
shouts of Bharat Ki Jai (Victory of  India) going to mean MUsalman ki Kshay (destruction for 
Musalmans)? It is a matter of shame that thing shave been brought to such a pass.  
I am glad too that Shaheed Saheb suggested the revival of the slogan’Hindu Muslim Ki Jai’, for it was started during the palmy Khilafat days. I recall the memory of the o ld days when 
a Muslim fellow prisoner used to sing Iqbal’s sare jahanse achchha (Better than the entire  
world). I use  to have it sung equally when I heard it sung with equal sweetness and force. 
The words of the poem are as sweet as the tune. And among us what can be sweeter than that religion never teaches mutual hatred?  
ALLAH O AKBAR  
I HOLD THAT IT (the cry of Allah -O-Akbar) is probably a cry than which a greater one has 
not been produced by the world. It is a soul -stirring religious cry which means, God  only is 
great. There is nobility in the meaning. Does it become objectionable because it is Arabic? I admit that it has, in India, a questionable association. It often terrifies the Hindus 
because, sometimes, the Muslims in anger come out of the mosques w ith this cry on their 
lips to belabow the Hindus. I confess that the original had no such association. So far as I 
know, the cry has no such association in other part of the world. If, therefore, there is to 
be a lasting friendship between the two, the Hin dus should have no hesitation in uttering Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 37 the cry together with their Muslim friends. God is known by many names and has many 
attributes. Rama, Rahim, Krishna, Karim, are all names of the one God. Sat Shri Akal (God 
is True) is an equally potent cry. Shoul d a single Muslim or Hindu hesitate to utter it? It 
means that God is and nothing else is. The Ramadhun has the same virtue.  
Vande Mataram  
I now come to Vande Mataram. That is no religious cry. It is a purely political cry. The 
Congress had to examine it. A reference was made Gurudev about it. And both Hindus and 
Muslim members of the Congress Working Committee had to come to the conclusion that 
its opening lines are free from any possible objection. I plead that it should be sung 
together by all on due occ asion. It should never be a  chant to insult or offend the Muslims. 
It is to be remembered that it is the cry that had fired political Bengal. Many Bengalis have given up their lives for political freedom with that cry on their lips. Though, 
therefore, I fe el strongly about Vande Matram as an ode to mother India, I advice my 
League friends to refer the matter to the league High Command. I will be surprised if in 
view of the growing friendliness between the Hindus and the Muslim, the league High 
Command objec ts to the prescribed lines of the Vande Matram, the national song, and the 
national cry of Bengal which sustained her when the rest India was almost asleep and 
which is, so far as I am aware, acclaimed by both the Hindus and the Muslims of Bengal. 
No doubt , every act must be purely voluntary on the part of either partner. Nothing can 
be imposed in true friendship.  
 
IV. THE CAUSES OF COMMUNIAL RIOTS  
1 
SPECIAL CAUSES  
I THINK I have examined all the causes, both original and continuing of the tension 
between the two communities.  
The Shuddhi movement.  
The most potent cause being tiredness of non -violence and the fear that the communities 
might, by along course of training in non -violence forget the law of retaliation and self -
defence.  
Musalman cow -slaughter and  Hindu music.  
Hindu cowardice and consequent Hindu distrust of Musalmans.  
Musalmans bullying.  
Musalman distrust of Hindu Fairplay.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 38 2 
PSYCHOLOGY OF FEAR  
There is no doubt in my mind that in the majority of quarrels the Hindus come out second 
best. My own ex perience but confirms the opinion that the Musalman as a rule is a bully, 
and the Hindu as rule is a coward. I have notices this in railways trains, on public roads, 
and in the quarrels which I have had the privilege of setting. Need the Hindu blame the 
Musalman for his cowardice?  
Quarrels must break out so long as the Hindus continue to be seized with fear. Bullies are 
always to be found where there are cowards. The Hindus must understand no one can 
afford them protection if they go on hugging fear.  
Runnin g away for fear of death, leaving one’s dear ones, temples or music to take care of 
themselves, is irreligion; it is cowardice. It is not manly, it is unmanly. Non- violence is the 
virtue of the manly. The coward  is innocent of it.  
The remedy against coward ice is not physical culture but the braving of dangers. So long 
as the parents of the a middle class Hindus, themselves timid, continue to transmit their 
timidity by keeping their grown -up children in cotton wool, so long will there be the desire 
to shun d anger and run no risks. They will have to dare to leave their children alone. Let 
them run risks and even at times get killed in so doing. The puniest individual may have a 
stout heart. The most muscular Zulus cower before English lads. Each village has to  find 
out its stout hearts.  
Cure of Cowardice  
It is common cause between the correspondent and myself that the average Hindu is a coward. How is he to be turned into a brave man? Is he to become brave by muscular 
development or by developing the bravery of  the soul? My correspondent says, ‘The world 
has no place for the weak’. He means, I imagine, ‘physically weak’. If so, the proposition 
is unsound. There are many animals physically stronger than man and yet man lives. Many 
muscular races have died out and  some of them are even now in the process of dying out. 
the proposition should therefore be, so far as man is concerned, ‘The world has no place 
for the weak in spirit’.  
Non-violence Vs. Violence  
Fear of man argues want in faith in god. Only he trusts to h is physical strength who has no 
faith or very little faith in God’s omnipresence. The Hindu must cultivate either of these 
two faiths in God, or faith in one’s physical might. If he does neither, it will spell the ruin 
of the community.  
The first, viz, rel iance on God and shaking off the fear of man, is the way of non -violence 
and is the best way.  
The second, viz, reliance on one’s physical might, is the way of violence. Both have a 
place in the world. It is open to us to choose either. One man can not try both at the same 
time, if all the Hindus and Musalmans both elect the way of violence, we had better cease Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 39 to talk of winning Swaraj in the immediate future. Armed peace means not a little fighting 
that will end with the breaking of a few heads or of a dozen temples. It must mean 
prolonged fighting and rivers of blood.  
Cowardice Behind Riots  
These cases (of cowardice) have nothing to do with the inveterate enmity between the 
Hindus and Musalmans. Where there are fools there are bound to be knaves, where the re 
are cowards there are bound to be bullies, whether they are Hindus or Musalmans. Such 
cases used to happen even before the outbreak of these communal hostilities. The 
question here therefore is not how to teach one of the two communities a lesson or how  to 
humanize it, but how to teach a coward to be brave.  
If the thinking sections of both the communities realize the cowardice and folly at the back of the hostilities, we can easily end them. Both have to be brave, both have to be 
wise. If both or either deliberately get wise, theirs will be the way of non- violence. If both 
fight and learn wisdom only by bitter experience, the way will be one of violence. Either 
way there is no room for cowards in the society of men, i.e., in a society which loves 
freedom. Swaraj is not for cowards.  
Cowardice should no place in the national dictionary.  
Fearlessness  
According to the teaching of the Gita, the first requisite for spiritual conduct is 
fearlessness. I want you to make a firm resolve to shed all fear. Without fea rlessness all 
other virtues are turned into dust. Attainment of truth or non -violence is impossible 
without fearlessness.  
Fearlessness does not mean arrogance or aggressiveness. This in itself is assign of fear. Fearlessness presupposes calmness and peace of mind. For this it is necessary to have a 
living faith in God.  
It is shame to both the Hindus and Musalmans that the Hindus should have to run away 
from their homes as they have done. It is a shame for the Muslims because it is out of fear 
of the Muslims that the Hindus have run away. Why should a human being inspire another 
with fear? It is no less a shame for the Hindus to have given way to craven fear. I have always said that man should fear none but God.  
The verses of the Shrimad Bhagwadgita  describe  the characteristics of one who attained 
knowledge and brought his senses under full control. The lesson of Bhagwadgita is meant 
not for those who have for -saken the world, but for every householder, irrespective of his 
birth and state. Everybody’s duty sh ould be to attain the state described therein, and this 
can only be done if life is built rock of fearlessness.  
Anatomy of Fear  
Fear is thing which I dislike; why should one man be afraid of another? Man should stain in 
fear of god alone, and then he can s hed all other fears. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 40 The more I go about in these parts, the more I find that your worst enemy is fear. It eats 
into the vitals of the terror stricken as well as the terrorist. the latter fears something in 
his victim. It may be his different religion or his riches he fears. The second kind of fear is 
otherwise known as greed. If you search enough, you will find that greed is a variety of fear. But there has never been and will never be a man who is able to intimidate one who 
has cast out fear from his hear t. Why can no one intimidate the fearless? You will find that 
God is always by the side of his fearless. Therefore, we should fear Him alone and seek His 
protection. All other fears will then by itself disappear. Till fearlessness is cultivated by 
the peop le there will never be any peace in these parts for the Hindus, or for the 
Musalmans.  
In it writing  by a Musalman) the writer has rightly contended that a man of God is never 
afraid to die or  to lose his possessions for the sake of his self -respect or reli gion. God has 
given us life and can take it away. That teaching is universal and applied to all, Hindu as well a s Musalman. Those who have in God their sole refuge cast all fear. Then there can 
be lasting friendship between the two. I have been trying all  these days to din this lesson 
into the ears of my listeners. There was a time when Musalmans Also l listened to me, but 
now things seem to have changed and even among Hindus there are not many who will follow my advice. But I feel sure, lasting peace can come only when men of whatever community refuse to surrender to any fear save the holy fear of God.  
Only when the Hindus and Muslims shed their fear and mutual suspicion can real unity of heart come. There should not be any cause for hostility because thei r hearts are one. 
Atmosphere of Hatred  
The fact is that when blood boils, prejudice reigns supreme; man, whether he labels 
himself a Hindu, Musalman, Christian or what not, becomes a beast and acts as such.  
I would like to observe the laws of the game. Jus t as there is such a thing as honour among 
thieves, there should surely be honour between combatants. One hears so often of children and old men being butchered, women being outraged. If men must become 
beasts, there might even then be some decency observe d. 
The recent happenings are due. I am sure, to the atmosphere of hate that pervades the 
land today. If we remain calm in the midst of the storm, then only will we grow in 
strength.  
It grieves me to sense the existing hatred and spirit of revenge. I warn y ou that unless you 
calm and purify your hearts, you will light such a fire throughout the land as will consume us all. I remind you of the story of the Mahabharata which is not a history of India but of 
man. It is the story of fight between the worshippers  of Rama, the embodiment of good, 
and Ravan, the embodiment of evil. they fought  the Pandavas and the Kauravas blood brothers, and what was the result? While evil was certainly defeated, only seven of the 
evictors remained to tell the tale. This is the st ate of the country today.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 41 3 
DISTRUST  
IN MANY places we see that each community harbours distrust against the other. Each 
fears the other. It is an undoubted fact that this anomalous and wretched state things is improving day to day. The time spirit is ceas elessly working on unchecked, and willy -nilly 
we have to live together.  
I know that there is much, too much destruct of one another as yet. Many Hindus distrust 
Musalman’s honesty. They believe that Swaraj means Musalman Raj, for they argue that 
without th e British, Musalmans of India will aid Musalman power to build a Musalman 
empire in India Musalmans, on the other hand, fear that the Hindus being in an 
overwhelming majority will smother them. Such an attitude of mind betokens impotence on either’s part. If not their desire to live in peace would dictate a policy of mutual trust 
and mutual forbearance.  
There is still too much mutual distrust and consequent fear. I am not disappointed. The 
progress we have made in that direction is indeed phenomenal. We see m to have covered 
in eighteen months time to work of a generation. But infinitely more is necessary. Neither the classes nor the masses feel instinctively that our union is necessary as the breath of our nostrils.  
Another potent cause of the tension is the  growing distrust even among the best of us.  
The leaders distrusted one another. Distrust never comes from well -defined causes. A 
variety of causes, more felt than realized breeds distrust. We have not yet visualized the fact that our interests are identic al. Each party seems vaguely to believe that it can 
displace the other by some kind of maneuvering. But I freely confess that our not knowing 
the kind of Swaraj we want has also a great deal to do with the distrust used not to think 
so. I am now a confirme d convert. 
I can only guess and my guess (as to the real cause; whether remote or immediate, of the 
frequent riots and difference between Musalman and Hindus in North India and of their 
absence or infrequency in south India) is that the two communities qua rrel more 
frequently in the North because they are more equally balanced than in South. Where riots do take place, they occur because both think communally and because either fears or  
distrusts the other, and because neither has the courage or the foresigh t to forgo the 
present for the sake of the future, or the communal interests for the sake of the national. 
 
4 
TIREDNESS OF NON -VIOLENCE  
THE IMMEDIATE cause  is the most dangerous. The thinking portion seems to be tired of 
non-violence. It has not as yet unde rstood my suspension of Satyagraha after the 
Ahmedabad and Viramgam tragedies, then after the Bombay rowdyism, and lastly after 
the Chauri Chaura outrage. The last was the last straw. Thinking men imagined that all Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 42 hope of Satyagraha, and therefore of Swar aj, too, in the near future, was at an end. Their 
faith in non -violence was skin -deep. Two years ago a Musalman friend said to me in all 
sincerity, “I do not believe your non- violence. At least I would not have my Musalmans to 
learn it. Violence is the law  of life. I would not have  Swaraj by non- violence as you define 
the latter. I must hate my enemy.” This friend is an honest man. I entertain great 
Musalman friend of mine.  The report may be untrue, but the reporter himself is not an 
untrue man.  
Nor is th is repugnance to non -violence confined to Musalmans. Hindu friends have said the 
same thing, if possible, with greater vehemence.  
What I see around me today is, therefore, a reaction against the spread of non- violence. I 
feel the wave of violence coming. The Hindu -Muslim tension is an acute phase of this 
tiredness.  
 
5 
PROPAGANDA OF VILIFICATION  
Members of one community, when talking about those of the other, at times indulge in 
terms so vulgar that they but accentuate the strained relations between the two. In Hindu society, we do not hesitate to indulge in unbecoming language when talking of 
Mahomedans and vice versa.  
Fear has become a part of the national character. Non -co-operators will make a serious 
mistake if they seek to convert people to their creed by violence. They will play into the hands of the Government, if they use the slightest coercion towards anybody in the course 
of their propaganda.  
To what pass some of us have come in our blind zeal fo r our respective faiths. We refuse 
to see anything wrong in ourselves. When such becomes the normal state of a majority of people belonging to a particular faith, that faith is dying. For nothing based on a lie can 
persist for any length of time.  
Studies in Distortion  
I have before my volumes of Agakhani literature which I have not yet had the time to 
study carefully, but I am assured that it is a distortion of Hinduism. I have seen enough of 
it to know that it describes H.H. the Agakhan as a Hindu avatar.  It would be interesting to 
learn what the Agakhan himself thinks of all this literature. I have many Khoja friends. I 
commend this literature to their attention.  
But the worst form is that preached by a gentleman of Delhi, I have read his pamphlet from co ver to cover. It gives detailed instructions to preachers how to carry on 
propaganda. It starts with a lofty proposition that Islam is merely preaching of the unity of God. This grand truth is to be preached, according to the writer by every Musalman 
irrespective of character. A secret department of spices is advocated whose one business 
is to be to pry into the privacy of non -Muslim households. Prostitutes, professional singers, Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 43 mendicants, government servants, lawyers, doctors, artisans, are pressed in to  the 
service. If this kind of propaganda becomes popular, no Hindu household would be safe 
from the secret attention of disguised misinterpreters (I cannot call them missionaries) of 
the great message of the prophet of Islam. I am told by respectable Hindus that this pamphlet is widely read in the Nizam’s dominions and that the methods advocated init are 
extensively practiced there.  
As a Hindu, I feel sorry that methods of such doubtful morality should have been seriously 
advocated by a gentleman who is a w ell-known Urdu author and has a large circle of 
readers. My Musalman friends tell me that no respectable Musalman approved of the 
methods advocated. The point, however, is not what the respectable Musalmans think. 
The point is whether a considerable number  of Musalman masses accept and follow them. 
A portion of the Punjab press is simply scurrilous. It is at time even filthy. I have gone 
through the torture of reading many extracts. These sheets are conducted by Arya 
Samajists or Hindu and Muslaman writers.  Each vies with the other in using abusive 
language and reviling the religion of the opponent. these papers, have, I understand a 
fairly large circulation. They find place even in -respective reading rooms.  
I have heard it said that the Government emissarie s are at the back of this campaign of 
calumny. I hesitate to believe it. But even assuming the truth of it, the public of the 
Punjab should be able to cope with the growing disgrace.  
The language in some parts is simply revolting. I cannot disfigure these pages by 
reproducing it. I have also been favoured with a life, by a Musalman, of Swami Dayananand. I am sorry to say it is largely a distortion of the great reformer. Nothing that 
he did has escaped the author’s venom.  
Role of the Press  
The newspaper man becomes  a walking plague. He spreads the contagion of lies and 
calumnies. He exhausts the foul vocabulary of his dialect and injects his virus into the 
unsuspecting and often receptive, minds of his readers.  
The newspaper cutting in which partition is prea ched describes Hindus as practically 
untouchable. Nothing good can come out of Hindus or Hinduism. To live under Hindu rules 
is a sin. Even joint Hindu Muslim rules are not to be thought of. The cuttings show that 
Hindus and Muslims are already at war with  one another and that they must prepare for 
the final tussle.  
League Propaganda  
If newspaper reports are to be believed, responsible Ministers in Sindh and other equally 
responsible Leaguers almost all over are preaching violence in naked language. Nakedne ss 
is itself a virtue as distinguished from hypocrisy. But when it is a hymn of obscenity, it is a vice to be shunned, whether it resides in a Leaguer or any other person. Any Muslim who is 
not in the League is a traitor says one. The Hindu is a Kafir dese rving the fate of such, 
such, says another.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 44 The Muslim League may call Hindus names and declares India to be Dar -ul-Harb, where the 
law of Jehad operates, and all Muslims who co -operative with the Congress as Quislings fit 
only to be exterminated. But we m ust not cease to aspire, in spite of this wild talk, to 
befriend all Musalmans and hold them fast as prisoners of our love.  
By “Muslim” I mean the Muslim League. For, not all the Muslims are Muslims are Muslim 
Leaguers. The Muslim Leaguers have today raise d the slogan that ten crores of Indian 
Muslims are in danger of being submerged and swept out of existence, unless they 
constitute themselves into a separate State. I call that slogan scaremongering, pure and 
simple.  It is nonsense to say that any people can permanently crush or swamp out of 
existence one -forth of its population, which the Musalmans are in India.  
Others said that some Muslim officials are being kept here in order to keep all Muslims in 
India loyal to Pakistan. Some said that the Muslims lo oked upon all the Hindus as Kafirs. 
Learned Muslims have told me that this is wholly in correct. The Hindus are as much followers of inspired scriptures as the Muslims, the Christians and the Jews.  
As Urdu magazine published in the Union a verse to the eff ect that everyone is taking of 
the Somnath temple today. But in order to avenge the happenings in Junagadh, a new 
Gaznavi will have to come from Ghazni. This has deeply hurt me. How can any Muslim 
worth the name in the Union entertain such thoughts? Why  should he not be proud to 
associate himself with the act of renovation of Somnath? I hope that no true Muslim will be 
pledged my life of secure safety for the Muslims in the Union. I will not swerve from my 
pledge, because I believe in returning amongst the Sunni Musalmans. The suspicion or fear 
of their having set the Hindus and Musalmans by the ears is always entertained, because 
both have quarreled so often. It is this habit of quarrelling that needs to be abandoned if 
we want to have Swaraj and retain it.  
You may be certain that they (the disturbances) will end. If the British influence were 
withdrawn, they would end much quicker. While the British influence is here, both 
parties, I am sorry to confess, look to the British power for assistance.  
The British  officials should know what the people are whispering. Many believe that their 
hand is in the riots. I must refuse to believe the serious charge unless it is established 
beyond doubt.  
Our Weakness  
It is sign of weakness-  not of fitness for Swaraj to go to the foreign ruling power to 
arbitrate between us or to enforce the peace between us at the point of the bayonet. 
Largely, or I should say half and half, I the British attitude towards the communal question 
is an obstacle in my path. There has been consciou sly or unconsciously that the policy of 
divide and rule working here as in India. the British officials have something coquetted with one party, sometimes with another. Of course, if I were a British official, I would 
probably do the same and take advantag e of dissensions to consolidate the rule. Our share 
of responsibility lies in the fact that we fall easy victims to the game.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 45 Obstacle to Unity  
I am firmly of opinion that there is no unity whilst the third party is there to prevent it. It 
created the arti ficial division and it keeps it up. In its presence both Hindus and Muslims 
and, for the matter, all seemingly conflicting or disgruntled interest and elements will look to it for support and will get it. Their interest is greater than the independence of 
their country. No one need throw my other statement in my face viz., that there is no 
independence without unity. I do not withdraw a word of it. It is an oblivious truth. From  its contemplation I have discovered the formula of inviting the British power to withdraw. 
Their withdrawal does not by itself bring independence. It may induce unity or it may lead 
to chaos. There is also the risk of another power filling in the vacancy if it is there. If, 
however, the withdrawal is orderly and voluntary, the Briti sh not only gain a moral height 
but secure the ungrudging friendship of a great nation. I wish all conflicting elements and 
interest will make a combined effort to rid India of foreign domination. If they do not, any 
understanding with them will be like a house built on sand.  
But it is from the frustration of every effort made to bring about unity by me, among many 
others, that has arisen the for me logical step that not until British power is wholly 
withdrawn from India can there be any real unity, because  all parties will be looking to 
the foreign power. For the time being it is British, but it may be French, Russian, Chinese, 
even then it   would be the same thing. I have, therefore, come to the conclusion that real 
heart unity, genuine unity, is almost a n impossibility unless and until British power is 
withdrawn and no other power takes its place, that is to say, when India not only feels but 
is actually independent without a master in  any shape or form, Nevertheless, I shall try 
and welcome every effort for peace, well knowing that it is likely to be fruitless.  
Freedom a Prerequisite  
As for communal unity, the third party being removed, unity will follow as day follows night. Unity will not precede but will succeed freedom.  
I have not asked the British to  hand over India to the Congress or to the Hindus. Let them 
untrust India to Goa or, in modern parlance, to anarchy. Then, all the parties will fight one another like dogs, or will, when real responsibility faces them, come to reasonable agreement. I shall  expect non- violence to arise out of that chaos.  
Time is a merciless enemy, if it is also a merciful friend and healer. I claim to be amongst the oldest lovers of Hindu -Muslim unity and I remain one even today. I have been asking 
myself why every whole hea rted attempt made by all, including myself, to reach unity has 
failed, and failed so completely that I have entirely fallen from grace and am described by some Muslim papers as the greatest enemy of Islam in India. It is a phenomenon I can account for only  by the fact that the third power, even without deliberately wishing it, 
will not allow real unity to take place. Therefore, I have come to the reluctant conclusion 
that the two communities will come together almost immediately after the British power 
comes to a final end in India. If independence is the immediate goal of the Congress and the League, then without needing to come to any terms, all will fight together to be free from bondage.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 46 National Government  
When the bondage is done away with, not merely the two organizations but all parties will 
find it to their interest to come together and make the fullest use of the liberty in order to evolve a national government suited to the genius of India. I do not care what is called. Whatever it is, in order to be stable, it has to represent the masses in the fullest sense of 
the term. And, if it is to be broad based upon will of the people, it must be predominantly 
non-violent. Anyway, up to my last breath, I hope I shall be found working to that end, for 
I see no hope for humanity without the acceptance of non -violence. We are witnessing the 
bankruptcy of violence from day to day. There is no hope for humanity of the senseless, 
fierce, mutual slaughter is to continue.  
 
V.SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF COMMUNIAL RIOTS  
1 
THE GOONDAS AND RIOTS  
Reform  
IT IS easy enough to dig out a few criminals from their hiding places and hand them over 
to the police, but it does not protect society against the repetition of them. It is necessary to remove the causes by undertaking a thor ough process to reform. There must arise in 
Islam as well as in Hinduism men who being comparatively pure in character, would work 
among such men.  
We would not then try to shift blame for ugly happenings on the hooligan elements. We 
could convert and contr ol the hooligan elements too.  
There is not a man, however cruel and hard -hearted, but would give his admiration to a 
brave man. A goonda is not the vile man he is imagined to be. He is not without his noble traits.  
(‘A goonda does not understand reason.) B ut he understands bravery. If he finds that you 
are braver than he, he will respect you.  
Fight Goondas  
What I detest is the match between the goondas of both the parties. Any peace based 
upon such a trial of strength will turn to bitterness in the end. The  way to get rid of the 
Hindu cowardice is for the educated portion to fight the goondas. We may use sticks and other clean weapons. My Ahimsa will allow the use of them. We shall be killed in the fight. But that will chasten both the Hindus and the Musalma ns. That would remove the Hindu 
cowardice in a moment. As things are going, each party will be the slaves of their own goondas. That means dominance of the military power. England fought fort the predominance of the civil power and won and lived. Lord Curz on did much harm to us. But 
he was certainly brave and right when he stood out for the predominance civil authority. 
When Rome passed into the hands of the soldiery, it fell. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 47 My whole soul rises against the very idea of the custody of my religion passing i nto the 
hands of goondas. Confining myself, therefore, for the present to the Hindus, I must 
respectfully but earnestly warn the thinking. Hindus against relying upon the assistance of 
goondas for the protection of their temples, themselves and their wives  and children. With 
the weak bodies they have, they must determined to stand at their post and to die 
fighting or without fighting. It would have been a glorious death for Jamanlalji and his 
colleagues, if they had died in the act of securing peace. It wil l be a glorious death fort 
Dr. Moonje or me, when we defend temples single -handed. That were bravery of the spirit 
indeed.  
The goondas came on the scene because the leaders wanted them. 
Goondas do not drop from the sky, nor do they spring from the earth li ke evil spirits. They 
are the product of social disorganization, and society is therefore responsible for their 
existence. In other words, they should be looked upon as a symptom of corruption in our 
body politic. To remove the disease we must first discov er the underlying cause. To find 
the remedy will then be a comparatively easy task. So far we have not even attempted a 
proper beginning. But it is never too late to mend. It is enough that we are at last alive to 
the necessary of it. We have now to follow  it up with prompt action. Let everyone who is 
interested make a prompt beginning in his own neighbourhood.  
Moral alibi  
I deprecate the habit of procuring moral alibi for ourselves by blaming it all on the 
goondas. We always put the blame on the goondas. B ut it is we who are responsible for 
their creation as well as encouragement. It is therefore not right to say all the wrong that 
has been done is the work of the goondas.  
It would be wrong and misleading to underestimate the trouble by calling it the work of goondas.  
It (the habit of taking refuge behind moral alibis by blaming it all on the goondas) is a 
dangerous expedient.  
It is the cowardice or passive sympathy of the average citizen or the “man with the stake” 
that gives the so -called goondas the power  to do the mischief.  
 
2 
COMMUNAL CRIME AND TRUTH  
Expose Wrong doing  
From my earliest childhood I had learnt to dislike the wrong, never the wrong -doer. 
Therefore, even if the Muslims have done any wrong, they still remain my friends, but it is my duty to te ll them that they have done wrong. I have always applied that rule in life 
with regard to my nearest and dearest. I hold this to be the test of true friendship. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 48 I never said or did anything to please others. I have always taught that one should do one’s 
duty irrespective of the reaction it may have no others. A man who always does what he 
believes to be right never fears anyone.  
As a Satyagrahi, I stand by truth and it will be wrong on my part to hide suspicion or 
simply nurse a grievance in my heart. I can not serve the Hindus and the Muslims of Bengal 
without the Chief Ministers help, and I hope this will not be withheld. In the same way, I will not put my Ahimsa in my pocket and not advise the true path of the Hindus and the Sikhs in the Punjab if I am to be their friend.  
Why this Secrecy?  
I confess that the question (why, when mutual slaughter between brother and brother is going on, should the names of the respective communities be withheld?) has often occurred to me. There seems to me to be no reason for  this hush -hush policy save that it is 
a legacy from the autocracy which, let us hope, the national government have displaced. Those who ought not to know who stabs whom. And those who should know are kept in the dark. I am sure that there are many Hindus and Muslims, and even members of other 
communities, taking pride in being Indians first and last without ceasing to be devoted 
followers of their own religions and who love to do their best to dissuade blind fanatics 
from making mischief. I know many such.  They have no means of ascertaining facts expect 
through the Press. Let darkness be exposed to light. It will be dispelled quicker.  
How I wish that all those who call themselves the sons of the soil will think well and act bravely a very difficult performa nce at the moment when newspapers give gruesome 
details about senseless arson and murder.  
It is unfortunate that the Interim Government has inherited a bad tradition and , 
therefore, we do not know who killed whom. It was a the dead of “the members of a 
certain community.”  
Duty of Newspapers  
I am sorry that there is poison administered to the public by some newspapers. Newspapers today have almost replaced the Bible, the Koran, the Gita and the other religious scriptures. It is wrong but the fact has to be faced. Such being the case, I hold it to be the duty of news paper men to give nothing but facts to their readers.  
I have a suggestion to make to the Dawn and All the newspaper, whatever their hue, that they should avoid all exaggeration. In order to give effect to the suggestion, they should appoint a Joint Board to which all reports about communal trouble would be submitted 
and even passed on to responsible ministers and, when necessary, given publicity. My 
suggestion can find favour only if the editors r ealize their duty to the public and are 
anxious that a peremptory stop should be put to all communalism. Division having become settled fact, it is surely time that the country is allowed to settle down to the constructive 
work of feeding and clothing the ill- fed and ill -clad millions. the editors have a weighty 
part to play in the noble task. To foment trouble is ignoble.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 49 3 
RESTORATION OF PEACE  
WAR RESULTS when peace fails. Our efforts must always be directed towards peace. But it 
must be peace with honour  and a fair security for life and property. On these two 
conditions alone will the refugees return. Of course, if they develop enough courage, they 
will return without any safeguard. Today I have suggested one Hindu and one Muslim 
standing surety on none b ut god and their own strength of spirit for their defence. If they 
did that, all the goondas in Noakhali will feel the change in the atmosphere and behave 
decently.I know what I am saying. I come from Khatiawad, a province notorious for its 
bandits. I know  that they are not beyond redemption. Nor do I believe that goondas are 
responsible for all that has happened.  
“No” (They should not have only Muslims on the Peace Committees as the Hindus had 
played no part in breaking the peace’.) The Hindus must be ther e to play their part, else 
the Peace Committees will be a farce.  
The reality has to be faced and a determined effort made by everyone of you to root out the least trace of the feeling of hostility and make it possible for your Muslim neighbours 
to live in brotherly love once more.  
Real Penitence  
True repentance, with the consequent reparatory action, alone can restore abiding peace 
between the two sister communities.  
Contemplate on what internal strife means to forgive and forget what has happened and 
to be ar to malice in your hearts for all the tragic and bestial happenings of Noakhali, Bihar 
and Punjab.  
The riots are a matter of great shame and sorrow. But the shame of the sin can be turned 
to good account by adequate repentance. All the religions that I h ave studied are full of 
instances proving the maxim; “The greater the sinner the greater the saint.” For the 
poignancy of the pain, of the guilt enhances the joy that a guiltless life bring with it. I 
wish that the maxim can be proved true in the reformed life of the people of Hilsa. You will be replied by physical dirt. Surely the repulsion caused by mental dirt which the insanity of the Hindus of Hilsa meant is much greater than the pain caused by any physical 
dirt however great. I am wondering how I can awaken genuine repentance in the hearts of 
the Hindus of Hilsa. It has been suggested to me that, I settled down in Hilsa and went 
from house to house, I would be able to effect that desired transformation. Although there 
is truth in the remark, I must own  my physical weakness and consequent inability to follow 
the advice. You are none the better for my confession. I hope, therefore, that my remarks 
will penetrate the hearts of the large audience and that you will invite Muslim sufferers to return.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 50 Change o f Heart After Riots  
What does it matter, if you know everything but do not know how to live in brotherliness 
with your neighbours.  
If some people have committed grievous mistakes in their dealings with their neighbours, they should repent and ask their par don of God. If he granted it but the world did not, 
even then it did not matter to a man who had learnt to depend on God; such punishment nobly borne serves to elevate a man. In a book of sayings of the Prophet I have found that a man should never leave an  error uncorrected. If they did, they will be hauled up on the 
Day of Judgement and find no favour in the eyes of god.  
It is effective substitute for martial law which deals with the symptoms but not with the 
disease itself. The parties if they bring about  peace, will be dealing with the disease. 
Peace Committee  
The Central Peace Committee should consolidate results so far achieved. They have to see that poor Muslims are rehabilitated, just as the Hindus have to be rehabilitated in the areas from which they  have been evacuated. Local peace committees should be set up in 
each mohalla; and they must find at least one Hindu and one Muslim of clean heart to work together. These committees must tour the areas under their jurisdiction. They should work to create t he feeling of friendliness wherever it is lacking. For the purpose of 
rehabilitation, they will have to go into details. Food, shelter and clothing have to be 
found for the evacuees returning to women co -operate in this manner to consolidate their 
good fee lings, which the parties are to co -operate. For, now that all the parties concerned 
have come to an agreement with regard to the division of India two Dominions, there is no 
longer any reason to quarrel and they can join hands in the task of restoring peac eful 
conditions.  
Let the Premiers of the two divisions of Bengal meet often enough and jointly devise means to preserve peace in the two States and to find enough healthy food and clothing 
for the inhabitants and enough work for the masses in East and West  Bengal. When the 
masses, Hindu and Muslim, see their chiefs acting together and working together honestly, 
courageously and without intermission, the masses living in the two States will take the cue from the leaders and act accordingly.  
How can real peac e be established? You may feel pleased that peace appears to have 
returned to Delhi. I cannot share the satisfaction. The Hindus and the Muslims have become estranged from one another. They used to fight in the past too. Today they have 
become so embittere d that they feel as if they have been old enemies. I call this feeling 
weakness. They must shed it. Then alone can they become a great military power, or if 
they followed my way, they can become a great, non- violent and invincible power. In 
other case, the  first condition is the shedding of all fear.  
The only way to get near each other is that each must forget the mistakes of the other party and magnify its own. I recommend it to the Muslims, as, I do to the Hindus and the Sikhs, with all the force at my co mmand. Enemies of yesterday can become friends of Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 51 today provided they make a clean breast of their guilt. The policy of tit for tat is not 
conducive to friendship.  
Establishment of Communal Peace  
We have to be correct in our behavior irrespective of what o thers do. I am not unaware of 
the sufferings of the Hindus and the Sikhs in Pakistan. But knowing that, I want to overlook 
them. Otherwise, I will go mad. I will not be able to serve India. We are to look upon the 
Muslims in the Union as our blood -brothers . 
Surely, they should feel as safe among us as we ourselves. This cannot happen until we 
learnt the art of magnifying our own faults and minimizing those of our neighbours. All 
eyes rest on India, which has become the hope of Asia and Africa, may, of the w hole 
world. If India is to realize the hope, it has to stop the fratricide and all Indians have to live like friends and brothers. Clean hearts are the first condition of this happy state.  
I look forward to the day when all enmities will be forgotten and a ll hatred buried 
underground, and all those who have been driven away from their hearts and homes will return to them and resume their avocations in perfect security and peace as before. My 
heart will then dance with joy. I will never give up that hope so long as I live.  
Restoration of Mutual Trust  
The citizens of Delhi and the refugees have a heavy task in front of them. Let them seek 
occasions for meeting together as often as possible in perfect mutual trust. It was a soul -
stirring sight for me to meet Mu slim sisters in large numbers yesterday. Girls in my party 
told me that the sisters were sitting in Birla House uncertain whether they could come to 
me. They were in purdah, most of them. I asked them to be brought in and they came. I suggested that they w ould not have the purdah before their fathers or brothers. Why 
should they think me less? And off went the purdah without exception. This is not the first time that the purdah has disappeared before me. I mention the incident to illustrate what genuine lov e, as I claim mine to be, is able to do.  
Hindu and Sikh women should go to the Muslim sisters and establish friendship with them. They should invite on ceremonial occasion and be invited. Muslim girls and boys should be attracted to common schools not comm unal. They should mix in sports.  
Not only should there be no boycott of Muslims, but they should be induced to resume 
their previous occupations. Delhi is poorer for the disappearance of the exquisite 
workmanship of the Muslims. It is a miserable and miser ly thing for the Hindus and the 
Sikhs to wish to take away from their means of livelihood. On the one hand there should 
be no monopoly, and on the other, there should be no attempt at deprivation. In this 
great country of ours there is room for all.  
Condit ions for Peace  
The peace Committees that have been formed must not go to sleep as many committees 
unfortunately do in all countries in India live at peace with one another, not by force of 
arms but that of love than which there is no better cement to be fo und in the world.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 52 All breach of communal peace in any corner of India should make us and our Government 
hand our heads in shame.  
Reparations  
All i can say is that not one single case of maltreatment of  Muslims by Hindus having been 
reported to me has remai ned without investigation by me. This has been my practice since 
the days of the Khilafat. I have not always not always succeeded in finding the truth or in 
giving satisfaction to the aggrieved parties that I had done my best. The Bihar charge is too vague  to be answered more fully. If a particular instance were mentioned, I should be 
able to say what I had done about it. But supposing that I had failed in duty to do justice, supposing further that I did not “feel equally keenly about Hindu injustice to Mus lims”, 
would that justify indifference about Bihar? I have said that there is nothing like Bihar in all the previous cases of Hindu -Muslim clashes, assuming of course that the allegations 
made were true. All I have asked is that full justice and reparation should be made 
through a tribunal admittedly impartial. My proposal in the case of Bihar should be applicable to all such cases.  
I am interested in education of truth, not in the punishment of the guilty. But I am sorry I 
cannot forgo the suggestion for c ompensation. Compensation has been asked because it is 
alleged that the authorities failed to do their duty. The question of compensation has, 
naturally, to be referred to the proposed tribunal.  
 
VI PERSONAL REACTION TO COMMUNAL RIOTS  
1 
RELIGION AND  RIOTS  
JUST AS we do not break one another’s heads in respect of civil matters, so may be not do even in respect of religious matters. 
The world is watching some with glee and some with sorrow the dogfight that is 
proceeding in our midst. We have listened to Sata n Religion call it by what name you like 
is made of sterner stuff?  
It is unnecessary to discriminate and apportion the blame between the rival practices. 
Where both are to blame, who can arbitrate with golden scales and fix the exact ratio of 
blame? It is no part of self -defence to tell lies or exaggerate.  
It matters little to me whether the perpetrators of shameful deeds are Hindus or 
Musalmans. It is enough to know that some of us are blaspheming a patient God and doing 
inhuman deeds in the sacred name of  religion. I know too that neither assassination nor 
fratricidal acts can possibly save by religion. Religion  worth the name can only be saved by 
purity, humility and fearlessness of the uttermost type among its professors. It is the only 
Suddhi and only p ropaganda.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 53 No Sanction for Strife  
Poet Iqbal has written the immortal line:  
“Religion does not inculcate mutual strife”. Could there be a greater proof of our 
cowardice than fighting amongst ourselves?  
Islam means peace. Hindus claim to follow the path of Ahimsa. They both swear by god, 
but in practice they follow Satan. The Muslims stabs the innocent Hindu and the Hindu stabs the innocent Muslim.  
We are passing through trying times. There is news of stabbing in Calcutta, Dacca, 
Allahabad, Bombay and so on.  What is more, all this is done in the name of religion. How 
stabbing and murder of the innocents whether aggressive of retaliatory, can help the 
cause of religion, I fail to understand. The  spirit of religion requires us to make him 
witness of our littlest of little acts. In Mira’s song that has just been sung at the prayer the 
devotee prays to god to come to his aid and deliver him from distress. For he alone can do 
so, none else. Let us pray to god then to deliver us from our distress. If our prayer is sincere, we will rely on him entirely and put away the sword. And if even one party does 
so, violence would cease. 
I ask you to consider for yourselves why innocent women and children have been killed. Is 
it to any religion? No religion teaches anyone to ki ll his neighbours. What was done is 
nothing but wanton destruction. I do not stop think whether it is done from motives of self 
interest or any other.  
The Hindus and the Sikhs by killing and loot and arson are destroying their own religions. I 
claim to be a student of religions and I know that no religion teaches madness. Islam is no 
exception.  
 
2 
FASTS FOR COMMUNAL PEACE  
The way of the Cross  
Fasting cannot be undertaken mechanically. It is a powerful thing but a dangerous thing if handled amateurishly. It requires complete self -purification much more than what is 
required in facing death with retaliation even in mind. One such act of perfect sacrifice 
would suffice for the whole world. Such is held to be Jesus example. 
The idea is that you yourself and assimilate the essence of his sacrifice, symbolically 
represented by the bread and wine of the Eucharist. A man who was  completely innocent 
offered himself as a sacrifice for the good of others, including his enemies, and became the ransom of the world. It wa s a perfect act. ‘It is finished’ were the last words of Jesus, 
and we have the testimony of his four disciples as to its authenticity.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 54 But whether the Jesus tradition is historically true or not I do not care. To me it is truer 
than history because I hold  it to be possible and it enshrines and eternal law the law of 
vicarious and innocent suffering taken in its true sense.  
Genesis of Fasting  
The thought of a 24 hour’s fast had come to me one night in a dream. I had consulted 
Rajaji whose guest I then was i n Madras. The idea had appealed to the latter, notices had 
been issued at once and there had been a widespread and hearty response to the call. I 
had never dreamt that the country had been so awakened, and by the country I mean not 
the country had been so awakened, and by the country I mean not the few cities of India 
but the seven lakhs of villages where the vast mass of Indian humanity lives. I appeal to 
you to respond to the call once again, but only if you understand its implications. The fast who under taken in those days for the sake of vindicating Swaraj through Hindu Muslim 
unity, and the charkha, etc.  
Fasting in Hinduism, Islam  
Certainly. (‘Fasting is prescribed by our religion.’) What did the Rishis of old do? It is 
unthinkable that they ate anythin g during their penances, in some cases gone through in 
caves, and for hundreds of years. Parvati who did penance to win Shiva would not touch 
even the leaves of trees, much less fruit or food. Hinduism is full of penance and prayer.  
But I know of this sort  of penance even in Islam. In the life of the Prophet, I have read 
that the Prophet often fasted and prayed, and forbade others to copy him. Some one asked him why he did not allow others to do the thing he himself was doing. ‘Because I live on food divine ,’ He said. He achieved most of his great things by fasting and prayer. I 
learnt from him that only he can fast who has inexhaustible faith in god. The Prophet had 
relationships not in moments of ease and luxurious living. He fasted and prayed, kept 
awake for night s together and would be on his feet at all hours of the night as he received 
the revelations. Even at this moment I see before me the picture of the Prophet thus 
fasting and praying.  
Purpose of Fast  
My religion teaches me to love all equally. May  god help me to do so. My fast, is, among 
other things, meant to qualify me for achieving that equal and self less love.  
The object of the previous fasts was limited. The object of this is unlimited, and there is 
boundless love at the back of it. I am toda y bathing in that ocean of love.  
The penance of the Hindus and Musalmans is not fasting but retracing their steps . It is true 
penance for a Musalmans to harbor no ill for his Hindu brother, and an equally true penance for a Hindu to harbor none for his Mus alman brother.  
I ask of no Hindu or Musalman to surrender an iota of his religious principle. Only let him be sure that it is religion. But I do ask of every Hindu and Musalman not to fight for an 
earthy gain. I should be deeply hurt if my last made wither  community surrender on a 
matter of principle.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 55 But is it right for me to go through the fast under a Musalman roll? Yes, it is. The  fast is 
not born out of ill -will against a single soul. My being under a Musalman roof ensures it 
against any such interpret ation. It is in the fitness of things that this fast should be taken 
up and completed in a Musalman house.  
All I have done, all I am doing, is done in a fully God fearing spirit, and in the house of a 
God fearing Musalman at that.  
Bidding of Inner Voice  
Though the Voice within has been beckoning for a long time, I have been shutting my ears 
to it, lest it may be the voice of Satan, otherwise called my weakness. I never like to feel 
resource less; a Satyagrahi never should. Fasting is his resort in the place  of sword his or 
other’s. 
With God as my supreme and sole counselor, I felt that I must take the decision without 
any other adviser it  I have made a mistake and discover it, I shall have no hesitation in 
proclaiming it from the housetops and retracing my f aulty step. There is little chance of 
my making such a discovery. If there is clear indication as I claim there is, of the Inner 
Voice, it will not be gain said.  
Potency of the Fast  
I do not regard this fast as an ordinary fast. I have undertaken it after deep thought and 
yet it has sprung not from reasoning but God’s will that rules men’s reason. It is addressed 
to no particular section or individual and yet it is addressed equally to all. There is no 
trace of anger of any kind behind it nor the slightest tinge of impatience. But behind it is the realization that there is a time for everything and an opportunity, once missed never returns. The fast  is bid for nothing less.  
Yearning for Heart Friendship  
I yearn for heart friendship between the Hindus, the Si khs and the Muslims. It is subsisted 
between them the other day. Today it is non- existent. It is a state that no Indian patriot 
worthy of the name can contemplate with equanimity.  
I have no answer to return to the Muslim friends who see me from day to day as to what 
they should do. My impotence has been gnawing at me of late. It will go immediately the last is undertaken. I have been brooding over it for the last three days. The final 
conclusion has flashed upon me and it makes me happy. No man if he is pur e has anything 
more precious to give than his life. I hope and pray that I have that purity in me to justify 
the step. 
A pure fast, like duty, is its own reward I do not embark upon it for the sake of the result 
it may bring. I do so because I must. Hence, I urge everybody dispassionately to examine 
the purpose and let me die, if I must, in peace which I hope is ensured. Death for me 
would be a glorious deliverance rather than that I should be a helpless witness of the 
destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikhis m and Islam. That destruction is certain if Pakistan 
ensures no equality of status and security of the life and property for all professing the Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 56 various faiths of the world and if India copies her. Only, then Islam dies in the two India’s, 
not in the world.  But Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside India.  
 
VII COMMUNAL RELATIONS IN FREE INDIA  
1 
EQUALITY OF ALL 
Oneness of Man  
I BELIEVE in absolute oneness of God and, therefore, also of humanity. What though we 
have many bodies? We have but one soul. The rays of the sun are many through refraction. 
But they have the same source. I cannot therefore detach myself from the wickedest soul (nor may I be denied identity with the most virtuous). Whether, therefore, I will or no, I must involve in my experiment th e whole of my kind. Nor can I do without experiment. 
Life is but an endless series of experiments.  
Break through the crust of limitation and India becomes one family. If all limitations vanish, the whole world becomes one family, which it really is. Not to  cross these bars is 
to become callous to all fine feelings which make a man.  
No religious Divisions  
If a free India is to live at peace with herself, religious division must entirely give place to political division based on considerations other than reli gious. Even as it is, though 
unfortunately religious differences loom large, most parties contain members drawn from various sects.  
No Privileged Class  
No privileges should be given to anyone in the new India. It is the poor and neglected and 
down trodden and weak that should be our special care and attention. A Brahmana  should 
not grudge if more money is spent on the uplift of the Harijans. At the same time, a 
Brahmana may not be done down simply because he is a Brahmana. In fact, the Brahmana 
are a very small minority. There must be pure and undefiled justice for everyone in both 
Pakistan and Hindustan.  
It is the duty of every citizen to treat the lowliest on a par with the others.  
Regard for Lowliest  
What should we do then? If we would see our dream of P anchayat Raj, i.e. true democracy 
realized, we would regard the humblest and lowest Indian as being equally the ruler of 
India with the tallest in the land. This presupposes that all are pure or will become pure if 
they are not. And purity must go hand in hand with wisdom. No one would then harbor any 
distinction between community and community, caste and out -caste. Everybody would 
regard all as equal with oneself and hold them together in the silken net of love. No one would regard another as untouchable. We would hold as equal the toiling labourer and the Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 57 rich capitalist. Everybody would know how to earn and honest living by the sweat of one’s 
brow and make no distinction between intellectual and physical labour. To hasten this 
consummation , we would voluntarily turn ourselves into scavengers. No one who has 
wisdom will ever touch opium, Liquor or any intoxicants. Everybody would observe 
Swadeshi as the rule of life and regard every woman, not being his heart. He will be ready 
to lay down his life when occ asion demands it, never want to take another’s life.  
 
2 
STATUS OF MUSLIM MINORITY  
Loyalty to Union  
(DO) NOT see evil everywhere. All Muslims are not bad just as all Hindus are not bad. It is 
generally the impure who see impurity in others. It is your duty t o see the best and have 
no fear.  
I appeal to the Sikhs; the Hindus and the Muslims to forget the past, not to dwell on their sufferings but to extend the right hand of fellowship to each other and determine to live 
at peace with each other. Muslims must be  proud to belong to the Indian Union, they must 
salute the tri -colour.If  they are loyal to th eir religion, no Hindu can be their enemy. 
Similarly, the Hindus and the Sikhs must welcome peace loving Muslims in their midst.  
I am free to confess that I shall lose all interest in life if Muslims who have produced such men cannot live with perfect safety in the Union. It is suggested to me that the Muslims 
are all fifth columnists in the Union. I decline to believe in this sweeping condemnation. 
There are four a nd a four and a half crores of Muslims in the Union. If they are all so bad, 
they will dig the grave of Islam.   Quaid -i-Azam has asked the Muslims of the Union to be 
loyal to it. Let people trust their Government to deal with traitors. They must not take t he 
law into their own hands.  
Some said to me that every Muslim in the Indian Union is loyal to Pakistan and not to India. 
I would deny the charge. Muslim after Muslim has come and said the country to me. In any 
event, the majority here need not be frighte ned of the minority.  
As for traitors, if there are any, then can always be dealt, with by the law. Traitors are always shot, as happened in the case even of Mr. Amery’s son, though I admit that that is 
not my law.  
Surely, it is cowardly on the part of the majority to kill or banish the minority for fear that 
they will all be traitors.  
If the Muslims prove traitors, their treachery will kill them. It is the biggest offence in any 
state. No state can harbor traitors, but it is unbecoming to turn out men on su spicion.  
All Muslims cannot be traitors. Those who prove traitors will be dealt with severely by the Government.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 58 There can be no two opinions that those who wish to live in the Union must be loyal to the 
Union whatever may be their faith and they should su rrender unlicensed arms unsolicited. 
A third condition is to leave the execution of the conditions mentioned by me to the 
government. 
A Friend has told me that he found a Muslim trader who had proper scales and a Hindu one 
who had improper scales and asked  me whether it is not sure that the Muslim traders are 
honest and the Hindu traders dishonest. I am sure that the inference is wrong. In this 
imperfect world no community is wholly honest or dishonest. All I can say is that a man 
who sports false scales fo r deceiving his customers is a criminal. But I cannot take it upon 
myself to condemn the whole group or community.  
No wholesale Condemnation  
To liken a human being, however degraded he may be to a snake to justify in human 
treatment is surely a degrading p erformance. To damn crores in human beings for the 
faults of a few or many belonging to particular faiths  seems to me to be the height of 
madness. The correspondent should also remember that I have known rabidly Muslims to use the very analogy in respect o f Hindus. No Hindu would like to be regarded as a snake.  
To treat a man as a brother is not to say that he should be trusted even when he is proved 
untrustworthy. And is it not a sign of cowardice to kill a man and his family for fear that he may prove unt rustworthy? Picture a society in which every man is permitted to judge 
his fellow. Yet that is the state to which we are being reduced in some parts of India.  
Lastly, let me, for the sake of the snake kind, correct the common error by saying that eighty sn akes out of every hundred are perfectly harmless and they render useful service 
in nature.  
(A telegram had) said that 98% of the Muslims are traitors and will betray India in favour of Pakistan at a given moment. I do not believe it. The Muslim masses I the villages cannot be treacherous. Supposing that they are, they will destroy Islam. If the charge can be proved, 
the Government will deal with them.  
Is there any ground for the suspicion that the Muslims do not regard India as their country? 
They live in t he midst of the Hindus because they cannot help it, but one day they have to 
Part Company . I hope that this suspicion is baseless. Similarly , if there is a Hindu who 
regards  the Muslims as Yavanas or Asuras incapable of realizing god, he is guilty of the 
worst blasphemy which can possible have no room in the covenant which they have signed.  
I do not regard all the Musalmans of India to be innocent. What is obvious is that after the 
birth of Pakistan, the Muslims in the Indian Union have been placed in a ver y difficult 
situation and it is up to the majority community to mete out exact justice to them. It 
would spell the ruin of both Hindu religion and the majority community, if the latter, in the intoxication of power entertains the belief that it can crush t he minority community 
and establish a purely Hindu Raj. I consider the present occasion to be particularly auspicious for purging out of the dross from the hearts of both the communities by a strenuous effort at self -purification.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 59 Befriend Muslims  
We shoul d forget the past and learn the duty of having friendly feelings towards all and 
being inimical to none. The crores of Muslims are not all angles nor are all the Hindus and 
the Sikhs. There are good and bad specimens among all communities. World we be less  
than friendly towards the so -called criminal tribes amongst us?  
Muslims are a numerous community scattered all over the world. There is no reason why we, who stands for friendship with the whole world, should not be friends with the Muslims. I am not a fo rtune teller, but God has given me intellect and understanding 
enough to know that, if for some reason or other we cannot be friends with the Muslims of the Union, the Muslims of the whole world will be antagonized will lose India. Then, India, including b oth the dominions, will once again pass under foreign domination.  
No Exodus  
Even if I am the only one to say it, I will never advise the Muslims to leave their homes. If they live as abiding, honest and loyal citizens of India, no one can touch them. I am not in Government, but I have influence with those in the Government.  I have had long talks 
with them. They do not believe that in India the Muslims have no place or that if the 
Muslims wished to stay there they have to do so as slaves of the Hindus. Some  people have 
said that Sardar Patel encouraged in idea of Muslims going away to Pakistan. The Sardar is indignant at the suggestion. But he told me that he has reasons to suspect that the vast 
majority of the Muslims of India are not loyal to India. For su ch people it is better to go to 
Pakistan. But the Sardar does not let his suspicion colour his action. I am convinced that 
for the Muslims who wish to be citizens of the Indian Union, loyalty to the Union must come before everything else and that they should be prepared to fight against the whole 
world for their country. Those who wish to go to Pakistan are free to do so. Only I do not 
wish a single Muslim to leave the Union out of the fear of the Hindus or the Sikhs. Muslims 
in Delhi have assured me by the ir written declaration that they are loyal citizens of the 
Union. I shall believe their world as I wish others to believe me. As such, it is the duty of the Government to protect them. I for one shall not like to live if I cannot achieve this. The wrong ha s to be undone wherever it is. Abducted women have to be returned, forcible 
conversions considered null and void.  
Let this auspicious day mark the beginning of a new chapter in your life. Let the disgrace of driving out the Muslims from Delhi cease from to day. I found to my shame that as our 
motor car was passing through Chandni Chowk, which used to be filled with Hindus, Sikhs 
and Muslims, there was not a single Muslims passed by. Surely we have not come to such a 
pass as to be afraid of the minority of th e Muslims scattered  throughout the Indian Union. 
If there are any traitors in their midst, our Government is strong enough to deal with them. We must be ashamed of hurting children, women or old men. Everyman  must be 
considered innocent before he is found guilty by a properly constituted court of law. I fervently hope that such misdeeds will become now a thing of the past.  
I have been told that the Meos are  almost like criminal tribes. If the statement is correct, 
it calls for an all out effort on their par t to reform  themselves. It should not be left to 
others to do the work of reclamation. I hope that the Meos will not resent my advice, but Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 60 take it in the spirit in which it is offered. To the Government I would say that, even if the 
allegation regarding th e Meos is correct, this is no argument for sending them out into 
Pakistan. The Meos are subjects of the Indian Union and it is its duty to help them to 
reclaim themselves by providing them with facilities of education and establishing settlements for them to settle in.  
Common Cause With Minorities  
That the Muslim in India find themselves in a minority without protection from the 
majority in Pakistan is no disadvantage if they at all followed the technique of non -
violence during the past thirty years. It wa s not necessary for them to have faith in non -
violence to be able to appreciate the fact that a minority, however small it might be, never has any cause for fear as to the prese rvation of their honour and all that must be 
near and to dear to man. He is so made that it he understand his Maker and himself as 
made in His image, no power on earth could rob him of self -respect except he himself. A 
dear English friend in Johannesburg while I was fighting the mighty Government of the Transvaal, told me that he alw ays made common cause with of minorities. For, he said 
they were hardly even in the wrong and if they were, they could be weaned  from it 
without difficulty, where as majorities could not, owing to the intoxication that power gave them. The friend has utter ed a great truth, if by majority we would also understand 
the power that exclusive possession of weapons of destruction gave an aggregate of men. 
We know  to our cost that a handful of Englishmen were able to be the majority, keeping 
under their heels milli ons of Indians by possession of arms which India did not have and 
could not know how to wield even if she ha d. It is thousand pities that neither the Hindus 
nor the Muslims learnt the lesson whilst the English power was in operation in our country. 
The whi lst they were falsely proud of the Muslim majority in the West and the East. If they 
could realize the virtue of being in a minority , know  that they could now express in their 
own lives the best that is an Islam. Will they remember that Islam gave its best  during the 
Prophet’s ministry in Mecca? Christianity waned when Constantine  came to it. But I must 
not here carry this argument further. My advice is based upon implicit belief in it. 
There fore, if my Muslim friends do not share the belief, they will perhaps do well to reject 
the advice.  
Nationalist Muslims  
The Nationalists are not worth the proud name they bear if they fear the Muslim league. Can the Nationalists exclude the followers of the League from the sphere of the Muslims as 
Indians, the same as ot hers needing their care and attention.  
The Nationalist Muslims, who are good enough to see me, twit me for giving importance 
and life to the Muslim League and neglecting the Nationalist Muslims. I cannot plead guilty to either charge. The league has gained  importance without my or the congress aid. It 
became great because, rightly or wrongly it caught Muslim fancy. The congress and I have to deal with and recognize the fact that faces us. I am not sorry for having visited Quad -i-
Azam Jinnah eighteen times i n Bombay . My friends should also know that I alone can have 
done nothing without Shaheed Saheb and Osman Saheb and the other League members. 
There is no question of neglect of the Nationalist Muslims. Nationalism of a man is its own 
merit. It demands no re cognition. I would advise my friends to remain what they are and Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 61 exhibit in their every act courage, self -sacrifice and true knowledge born of study, and I 
am certain that whether they are few or many, they will make their mark on India’s  
future. I would even advise them to join the Lea gue and oppose it from within, whenever 
they find it to be reactionary. Whilst I say all this, I would advise my League friends to 
approach the Nationalist Muslims in a friendly spirit, whether they remain out or come in. 
True friendship does not admit of exclusion without the soundest reason.  
I am not guilty of asking you to discard nationalism or expecting the Congress to be 
another Hindu Sabha. I hope that the Congress will never commit suicide by being a 
communal organiza tion. When the congress ceases to represent all who are proud to call 
themselves Indians, whether prince or pauper, Hindus, Muslims or any other, it will have 
destroyed itself. Therefore, I cannot advise a Muslim congressman to join the League if the condi tions of joining the League are  to discard or suppress his Congress membership. 
He will vote for those resolutions of the League which are in the nation’s interest and against those which are contrary to neither in the Congress nor in the League. I advise the 
Nationalist Muslim friends to join the League, if they want to affect the Muslim masses. 
Real nationalists need no encouragement from me or anything else. Nationalism, like 
virtue, is its own reward. My one warning is that they should never think of po wer or 
bettering their worldly prospects by joining the one or the other organization. A nationalist will ever think of service, never of power or riches. It is, I hope, clear to the 
Nationalist Muslims under what conditions I advise them to join the Leagu e. 
Under a respons ible Government,  which ours is, services and favours I can expect only 
from the Ministers who are the representatives of the people. The Governor has 
undoubtedly powers with reference to the minorities  but these too he can exercise only 
with great restraint.  
Communalism in the Services  
Are the services disloyal? I hope not. Yet the complaint is universal. Various reasons are 
given for the alleged disloyalty. The most plausible one is that the military and the policy 
are largely divided on a communal basis and their members are carried away by the 
prevalent prejudice. I have given my opinion that if these members on whom depends the 
preservation of law and order, are affected by the communal taint, orderly government 
must give place to disor der and if the latter persists, to disruption of society. It is up to 
the upper ranks of these services to rise superior to communalism and then to infect the 
lower ranks with the same healthy spirit.  
Many Muslims, principally from the postal and railway d epartments, say that they had 
opted for the sake of propaganda. Therefore, they would now like to reconsider their view. There are Muslims who have been disc harged from their posts I presume, on the 
ground of suspected anti -Hindu bias. My sympathy goes out  to all such men. But I feel that 
the right course is not to resent pardonable suspicion, although it may be unjustified in individual cases. I can only prescribe my old, well tried remedy.  
Only very few can be accommodated in the various Government depart ments. to get a 
Governme nt job should never be the aim of life. Honest living is the only worthy aim. This 
is always assured when and if one is ready to do any labour that comes to hand. Until the Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 62 dominating and corroding communal poison is eliminated. I t hink it is necessary and 
dignified for Muslims not to aim at the loaves and fishes in Government employ. Power 
comes from sincere service. Actual  attainment often debases the holder. To fight for it is 
unseemly. At the same time, it is surely the duty of a  government to ensure bread labour 
for all unemployed men and women, no matter how a many they are. To do so 
intelligently pays  the State instead of costing it, assuming, of course, that the unemployed 
are physically fit and are not shirkers but willing wo rkers.  
 
3 
SECULAR STATE  
Challenge to Hinduism  
THE HINDUS want Swaraj in India, and not a Hindu Raj. Even if there is a Hindu raj, and 
toleration one of its features, there will be place in it for the Musalmans as well as the 
Christians.  
Undoubtedly, there s hould be no untouchability what so ever in Hinduism, no scheduled 
classes, therefore, in India, no caste divisions whatsoever in the eyes of law. Hindus are all one, no high or law. All the neglected classes such as the scheduled classes, the so called abo riginal classes, should receive special treatment in the matter of education, 
housing etc. On the electoral roll they will be one. This must be never mean a worse state 
than the present, but better in every way. Will Hinduism come up to the high level or w ill 
it court extinction by hugging infamous superstitions and aping bad manners?  
Complete Secularism ? 
There are indications that all is not well with the Musalmans. Some Hindus are now 
beginning to feel that they have the upper hand, and some Musalmans are  afraid that they 
will have to pay the underdog in the Union today. This  will be shameful indeed. If minority 
in India, minority on the score of its religious professions, is made to feel small on this 
account, I can only say that this India is not the Ind ia of my dreams. In the India for whose 
fashioning I have worked all my life, every man enjoys equality of status, whatever his 
religion is. The State is bound to be wholly secular. I go far as to say that no denominational educational institution in it sh ould enjoy State patronage.  
Cultural Democracy  
All subjects will thus be equal in the eye of the law. Be every single individual will be free to pursue his own religion without let it hindrance,  so long as it does not transgress the 
common law. The questio n of the protection of minorities is not good enough for me; it 
rests upon the recognition of religious grouping between citizens of the same state. What I 
wish India to do is to assure liberty of religious profession to every single individual. Then 
only India can be great, for it was perhaps the one nation in the ancient world which had 
recognized cultural democracy, whereby it is held that the roads of God are many, but the Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 63 goal is one, because God is one and the same. In fact, the roads are as many as t here are 
individuals in the world.  
Correct Conduct  
We must not produce a State in which respectable life is impossible and still claim that we 
do not want the Muslims to go. If, in spite of really equal treatment they choose to go to 
Pakistan, it is their own look -out. There should be nothing I n our behaviour to scare India 
and save Muslims. We should be correct in our conduct. Then we can serve India and save 
Hinduism. We cannot do so by killing the Muslims or driving them away or suppressing 
them in any way. 
Education  
Take the Hindu -Muslim question. The poison has assumed dangerous proportions, such that 
is difficult to forecast where it will land us. Assume that the unthinkable had happened 
and that not a single Muslim can Sikh can do likewise in Pakista n. Our education will then 
wear a poisonous form. if, on the other hand, Hindus, Muslims and all others who may 
belong to different faiths can live in either Dominion with perfect safety and honour, then 
in the nature of things our education will take a sh ape alto gether pleasing.  
Democratic State  
Freedom without equality for all irrespective of race or religion  is not worth having for the 
Congress. In other words, the Congress and government representative of the Congress 
must remain a purely democratic, po pular body leaving every individual to follow that 
form of to religion which best appeals to him. Without any interference from the State. 
There  is so much in common between people living in the same state under the same flag, 
owing undivided allegiance to  it. There is so much in common between man and man that  
it is a marvel that there can be any quarrel on the ground of religion. Any creed or dogma 
which coerces others into following one uniform practice is a religion only in a name, for a 
religion worth the name does not admit of any  coercion . Anything that it does under 
coercion has only a short lease of life. It is bound to die. It must be a matter of pride to us, whether  we are four anna congress members or not, that we have in our midst an 
institution  without a rival which disclaims to become a theocratic State, and which always 
believes and lives up to the belief that the State of our conception must be a secular, 
democratic State, having perfect harmony between the different units composing the 
State . 
Land of Hope and Promise  
Has not the Quaid – i-Azam said that Pakistan was not a theocratic State and that it is 
purely  a secular State? That the claim cannot always be justified in action is, 
unfortunately, too true. Is the Union to be a theocratic State  and are the tenets of 
Hinduism to be imposed on non Hindus? I hope not. The Indian Union will then cease to be 
a land of hope and promise, a land to which all Asiatic and African races look, indeed the 
whole world. The world expects not littleness and fanatism from India whether as the Union or Pakistan. It expects greatness and goodness from which the whole world can derive a lesson and light in its prevailing darkness.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 64 4 
RELIGION AND NATIONALISM  
No Conflict  
THERE NEVER can be any conflict between the rea l interest of one’s country and that of 
one’s religion. Where there appears to be any, there is something wrong with one’s 
religion, i.e., patriotism also means good thought and good conduct. To  set up a 
comparison between two synonymous things is wrong.  
I hope those in the Union of India would be worthy of their faiths and would be proud to 
call themselves sons and daughters of the same soil, claiming perfect equality in the eyes 
of the law. Religion is no test of nationality they are Indians first and Ind ians last, no 
matter what religion they profess. 
A friend asked me the other day whether I share the opinion, often expressed, that as 
between nationalism and religion, the former was superior to the latter. I said that the 
two were dissimilar and that the re could be no comparison between dissimilar. Each was 
equal to the other in its own place. No man who values his religion as also his nationalism 
can barter away the one for the other. Both are equally dear to him. He renders unto 
Caesar that which is Cea sar’s and unto God that which is God’s. And if Caesar, forgetting 
his limits, oversteps them, a man of God  does not transfer his loyalty to another Caesar, 
but knows how to deal with the usurpation.  A rehearsal of this difficulty gave rise to 
Satyagraha.  
Take a homely illustration. Suppose I have mother, wife and daughter. All three must be 
equally dear to me in their own places. It is vulgar error to think that a man is entitled to forsake his mother and his daughter for the sake of his wife. He dare not d o the converse. 
And if any of the three oversteps her limits, the law of Satyagraha comes to his assistance for the restoration of the equilibrium of the three forces.  
The Hindus, the Muslims, the Sikhs, the Christians, the Parsis and the Jews should be 
Indians first and Indians last. Religion is the personal affair of each individual. It must not 
mixed up with politics or national affairs.  
State Religion  
I do not believe in State religion even though the whole community has one religion. The 
state interfer ence will probably always be unwelcome. Religion is purely personal matter. 
There are in reality as many religions as minds. Each mind has a different conception of 
God from that of the other.  
Religious Education  
I am also opposed to state aid partly or wh olly to religious bodies. For I know that an 
institution or group which does not manage to finance its own religious teachings is a 
stranger to true religion. This does not mean that the state schools will not give ethical 
teaching. The fundamental ethics are common to all religions.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 65 I do not believe that the state can concern itself or cope with religious education. I 
believe that religious education must be the sole concern of religious associations. Do not 
mix up religion and ethics. I believe that funda mental ethics is undoubtedly a function of 
the State. By religion I do not have in mind fundamental ethics but what goes by the name 
of denominationalism. We have suffered enough from State aided religion and a State 
Church. A society or a group which depe nds partly or wholly on State aid for the existence 
of its religion does not deserve better still does not have any religion worth the name. I do not need to give any illustrations in support of this truth obvious as it is to me.  
State Funds  
A letter of Ch ristian in a newspaper holds that the temple of Somnath cannot undergo 
renovation from the State funds, I sympathize with the objection. The Sardar happened to be with me. He was shown the cutting and he said that not a pie would be spent from the 
Junagadh  State funds or, for the matter, from the Central fund for such purposes. The 
temple of Somnath will be renovated from funds donated by the Hindus and others who 
may be interested in the renovation. The Indians union  is a secular state and not a 
religious one. 
 
5 
RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS  
Holi 
I have no doubt in my mind that a religious ceremony like Holi should never be marked by 
wild revelry, but by a disciplined effort to put oneself in communion with God.  
There was a time when the Hindus and Musamans lived sid e by side as peaceful 
neighbours. If things have today come to such a pass that they cannot look upon one 
another as friends, they may at least not behave as enemies. There is fear among the Musalmans that the occasion of Holi may be marked by renewed atta ck upon them. It is 
surprising that I am hearing what I had heard from the Hindus in Naokhali and Tipperah, and I feel ashamed to have to listen to the same tales in Patna as in Naokhali. I shall therefore venture to say to my Muslim brothers in Bihar what  I have said to the Hindus in 
Naokholi, viz., that they should shed all fear of man and trust God; but I know that it is a 
counsel of perfection.  
I want everyone to celebrate Holi in such a manner that every single Muslim feels that the 
Hindus have not onl y repented for what has been done to them, but have also gathered 
love for them to an extent which out did their previous sentiments. If Holi is marked by 
this revival of the old friendly relations, then, indeed, it will be a truly religious celebration.  
It is not enough that the Hindus should express lip repentance or compensate the 
sufferers,  by means of money. What is really needed is that their hearts should become 
pure and, in place of hatred or indifference which is sweeping over them, love should Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 66 reign so that under its glow every single Muslim man, woman and child feels perfectly 
secure and free to pursue his or her own religious without the least let or hindrance. Let  
us all, I pray, make Holi an occasion for the  initiation of this relation between two sister 
communities.  
Dussehra  
I would remind you of the origin of the Dussehra festival. It is to commemorate the victory 
of Rama over Ravan. Durga Puja means worship of the all -pervading shakti. The ten days 
are followed by Bharat Milap. All this conno tes self restraint, not lenience. The nine days 
are the days of fasting and prayer. My mother used to fast during these nine days. We, her children were taught to practice as much abstinence as we could. Are we to celebrate the sacred by killing and harass ing our brothers? Shed all enmity and bitterness on the 
occasion of these festivals.  
No Festivities During Distress  
A sister who is a refugee writes:  
The question whether we  should or should not celebrate Diwali as festival agitates most of 
us. I wish to p ut before you our thoughts on the question, no matter how lisping my Hindi 
words may be. I am refugee from Gujranwala. I have lost my all in that place. Nevertheless, our hearts are full of joy that after all we have our independence. This will 
be the firs t Diwali in independent India. Therefore, it behooves us to forget all our sorrows 
and wish to have illuminations throughout India. I know that your heart is sore over our suffering and you would have all India to abstain from the rejoicings. We are thankf ul for 
your sympathy. Not withstanding the fact that your heart is full of sorrow, I would like you to tell the refugees and the rest of India that they should rejoice during the festival and 
ask the moneyed men to help those who are without means. May God  Almighty give us the 
wisdom to rejoice over all the festivities the might come to us after independence. 
Whilst I admire the sister and others like her, I cannot help saying that she and those who think like he rare wrong. It is well known that a family w hich is overtaken by sorrow 
abstains from participation in festivities according to capacity. It is illustration of the 
doctrine of oneness on a very limited scale.  
We must not be self -centered or, being falsely sentimental, ignore facts. My advice to 
abstain from the rejoicing is broad based on many solid considerations. The refugee 
problem is there, affecting lakhs of Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs. There  is as well want of 
food and clothing. The deeper cause is dishonesty of the many who can mould public 
opinion, obstinate refusal of suffers to learn from their sufferings and extensive 
inhumanity of man to man. I can see in this misery no cause for joy. A resolute and wise 
refusal to take part in festivities will be an incentive to introjections and self purif ication. 
Let us not do anything which will throw away a blessing which has been won after hard toil 
and tribulation.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 67 6 
SYNTHESIS OF CULTURE  
INDIA IS  a big country, a big nation composed of different cultures, which are tending to 
blend with one another, ea ch complementing the rest. If I must wait for the completion of 
the process, I must wait. It may not complete in my day. I should love to die in the faith 
that it must come in the fullness of time. I should be happy to think that I had done 
nothing to hamp er the process. Subject to this condition, I would do anything to bring 
about harmony.  
Either people of different faiths having lived together in friendship have produced a beautiful blend of cultures, of which we shall strive to perpetuate and increasingl y 
strengthen the shape, or we shall cast about for the day when there was only one religion represented in Hindustan and retrace our steps to that exclusive culture. It is just possible 
that we might not be able to find any such historical date and if we d o and we retrace our 
steps, we shall throw our culture back to that ugly period and deservedly earn the 
execration of the universe. By way of example, if we make vain attempt to obliterate the 
Muslim period, we shall have to forget that there was a mighty Jama Masjid in Delhi 
second to none in the world, or that there was a Muslim University in Aligarh, or that 
there were the great forts of Delhi and Agra built during the Moghal period. We shall then 
have to rewrite our history with that end in view. Surely , today we have not the 
atmosphere which will enable us to come to a conclusion about the conflicting choices.  
 
7 
COMMUNAL LIFE IN VILLAGES  
New Basis  
The new basis has to be built here in the villages where the Hindus and the Muslims have lived and suffered  together on the land of their forefathers and must live together in the 
future.  
I ask all Hindus and Muslims to devote themselves to the noble task of recognizing village life and in improving their economic condition. Through cottage industries they will  find 
themselves working together in the common task, and unity will thereby grow among 
them. You must carry out my eighteen point constructive work which will spread like a life 
giving influence over the entire country side.  
You should banish intoxicating  drinks and drugs from your midst. I hope that you will 
eradicate untouchability if there is any trace of it still left in your village . The Hindus, the 
Muslims, the Sikhs, the Parsis and the Christians should all live as brothers and sisters. If 
you ac hieve all I have mentioned, you will demonstrate real independence and people 
from all over India will come to see your model village and take inspiration from it.  
That the edifice of unity can rest on constructive work alone is a maxim which everybody should  remember. The question is how to realize it. It is up to every worker who believes Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 68 in it to live it in his life and to bring home to his neighbor’s. By going into explaining the  
scientific basis of the constructive programme, it can be made interesting. O ur daily 
experience shows that this programme cannot be advanced by mechanical or unintelligent 
work.  
 
8 
INDIA OF MY DREAMS’  
Unity, Non -violence  
India is finding true independence and self -expression through an imperishable Hindu -
Muslim unity and through non -violent means, i.e., unadulter ated self -sacrifice, can point a 
way out of the prevailing darkness.  
I believe that nothing remains static, Human nature either goes up or goes down. Let us 
hope, in India, it is going up. Otherwise, there is nothing but d eluge for India, and, 
probably, for the whole world.  
I am not thinking of the eternal law of love, much as I believe in it. If the whole India accepted this, India will become the unquestioned leader of the whole world. Here I 
merely wish to suggest that t here should be no surrender except to reason.  
I am only hoping and praying and I want all the friends here and in other parts of the 
world to hope and pray with me, that this blood -bath will soon end and out of that 
perhaps inevitable butchery will rise a new and robust India not warlike, basely imitating the West in all its hideousness but a new India learning the best that the West has to give and becoming the hope not only of Asia and Africa, but the whole of the aching world.  
I must confess that this is hoping against hope, for, we are today swearing by the military  
and all that naked physical force implies. Our statesmen have for over two  generations 
declaimed against the heavy expenditure on armaments under the British regime, but now the freedom from political serfdom has come, our military expenditure has increased and 
still threatens to increase and of this we are proud! There is not a voice raised against it in our legislative chambers. In spite, however of the madness and the vain imitation of the tinsel of the West, the hope lingers in me and many others that India shall survive this death dance and occupy the moral height that should belong to her after the training 
however imperfect, in non -violence for an unbroken period of thirty two years sinc e 1915.  
“Will the war weary Asiatic countries follow in the foot -steps of Japan and turn to 
militarization?” The answer lies in what direction India will throw its weight. India is becoming the laughing stock of the world. The world asks, where is your non -violence with 
which you have won your independence? I have to hang down my head in shame. Will a 
free India present to the world a lesson of peace or of hatred and violence, of which the 
world a lesson of peace or of halted  and violence, of which the worl d is already sick unto 
the death.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 69 Hope of Exploited Races  
If India fails, Asia dies. It has been aptly called the nursery of many blended cultures and 
civilizations. Let India be and remain the hope of all the exploited races of the earth, 
whether in Asia,  Africa or in any part of the world.  
Paradise on Earth’  
I remember to have read, I forget whether in the Delhi or the Agra Fort, when I visited them in 1896, a verse on one of the gates, which when translated reads: “If there is 
paradise on earth, it is he re, it is here, it is here.” The fort, with all its magnificence at 
its best, was no paradise in my estimation. But I should love to see that verse with justice 
inscribed on the gates of Pakistan at all the entrance. In such paradise, whether it is in the Union or in Pakistan, there will be neither paupers nor beggars, or high nor low, 
neither millionaire employers nor half starved employees, nor intoxicating drinks nor 
drugs. There will be same respect or women as vouchsafed to men, and the chastity and 
purity of men and women will be jealously guarded. Where every woman, except one’s 
wife, will be treated by men of all religions, as mother, sister or daughter according to her 
age. Where there will be equal respect for all faiths. There will be all, proudly , joyously 
and vol untarily, bread labourers. I hope everyone who listens to me or read these line will 
forgive me if, stretched on my bed and basking in the sun, inhaling life giving sunshine, I 
allow myself to indulge in this ecstasy.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 70 SOURC ES 
A bunch of o ld letters: Written to Jawaharlal Nehru and some written by him: Asia 
Publishing House, Bombay, 1958, xv ii + 511 p.p  
An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth:  M.K.Gandh; Navjivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1956, xv +528 pp  
Gandhi began writing the autobiography in 1922, in prison. It first appeared in Gujarati in 
December 1925. The English translation by Mahadev Desai, approved by Gandhiji, was 
serialized in Young India. The autobiography appeared in book form – Vol.II in 1929. It was 
issued in a one -volume edition in 1940 and has since been reprinted several times. 
Gandhiji Correspondence with government  : Forward  and introduction by Pyarelal, 
Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmadabad, 1959, xviii=375pp.  
A collection of Gandhiji’s letters to Government from Aga Khan’s Palace, Poona  ,where he 
was in detention during 1942 -44, and after his release.  
Harijan: weekly journal founded by Gandhiji and published under the auspices of the Servants of the untouchables society (Harijan Sewak Sangh) Poona.  It had a succession of 
editors: R.V.Sastri (February 11, 1933 to April 5, 1935); Mahadev Desai (April 13, 1935 to October 20, 1940 and January 18, 1942 to August 16, 1942), and Pyarelal (February 10, 1946 to February 22, 1948), K.G. Mashruwala (April 4, 1 948 to September 13, 1952) and 
M.P. Desai (September 20, 1952 to February 25, 1856), when it was published from 
Ahmedabad. The paper was suspended during the “Individual Satyagraha” against War in 
1940, and again in 1942 on the eve of the “Quit India” Move ment and Gandhiji’s arrest and 
incarceration. The management came over to the Navjivan Trust, ahmedabad, 
simultaneously with its revival on January 18, 1942. In 1946 (when publication was 
resumed) and 1947, the paper published reports of Gandhiji’s prayer speeches during his 
tours of West and east Bengaland Bihar and stay in Delhi, during a period of unpresented communal  turmoil. Started originally as the mouthpiece of the movement for the removal  
of untouchability under Gandhiji’s leadership, Harijan soon became the authentic forum 
for the expression of h is views on all major subjects, constituting thus a basic source of his 
writing until his death.  
Indian Review: Monthly magazine founded in 1900 and edited and published by G.A. 
Natesan from Madras.  
Speeches and writing of Mahatma Gandhi: G.A. Natesan & co., Madras, 1934, 4
th edition, 
viii+1072+xvpp.  
With Gandhiji in Ceylon: Ed. Mahadev Desai : S. Ganesan, Madras, 1928, 159+vii pp.  
A Journal of Gandhiji’s Ceylon tour in 1927 and authorized version of his sp eeches in 
course of it.  
Young India : Weekly paper edited by Gandhiji and published by Navjivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad, from October 8, 1919. On Gandhiji’s imprisonment in 1922, Shuaid 
Qureshi took over the editorship, from March 30, and continued as editor till May 25. C. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 71 Rajagopalachari then assumed editorship on June  1, and functioned till September 20, 
1923. After him, Ge orge Joseph took over the responsibility from September 27 and acted 
as editor till March 27, 1924 and carried on as editor till May 8, 1930. One issue after this 
date appeared under the editorship of J.C. Kumarappa. During the period July 17, 1930 to 
March 5, 1931, the paper appeared in the form of cyclostyled sheets, published by M.M. 
Bhatt. On March 12, 1931, Gandhiji once again became the editor, holding that position 
till December 31, 1931, after which weekly ceased publication. During 1919 -31, expect for 
the term of his imprisonment in 1922 -24 and his absence at ht second Round Table 
Conference in 1931, the weekly carried his i nnumerable writings and report of his 
important speeches, becoming a basic source for the period.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 72 NOTES  
APPROCH TO COMMUNAL UNITY  
1. CHARACTER OF COMMUNIAL UNITY  
1. Young India, May 7, 1919.  
2. Young India, February 26, 1925, p. 75, in commenting on a  letter fro m a Bengali  
 Zamindar.  
3. Young India, December 24, 1931, p. 413; speech at Plenary session of the Round Table  
 Conference in London.  
4. Harijan, April 21, 1946, p. 94; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, April 6. Gandhiji 
was  
 referring to the Rowlatt Act Satyagr aha, inaugurated on April 6, 1919.  
5. Harijan, March 16, 1947, p.62; speech at prayer meeting, February 19.  
6. Harijan, May 25, 1947, p. 165; at prayer meeting, May 10. 
 
HINDU –MUSLIM UNITY    
7. Young India, May 7, 1919.  
8. Young India, October 6, 1920, p.4.  
9. Young In dia, September 29, 1921. p.307; in reply to a friend.  
10. Young India, May 11, 1921, p. 148.  
11. Ibid. 
12. Young India, January 26  
13. Young India, October 11, 1928, p. 342; in reply to a volunteer from Ahmadabad  who 
had written to him seeking advise as to what Hindus sho uld do in cases of Muslim 
assaults.  
14. Harijan, March 16, 1947 , p.62; vide note 5above.  
15.  Young India, September 29, 1921, p.307.  
16.  Young India, April 2, 1925, p.115; in reply to a Muslim lawyer.  
17. Young India  Gandhiji was asked by Maulana Abdul kalam Azad to ca ll a meeting of 
the Congress Working Committee in order to consider the Hindu -Muslim Conference 
at Allahabad on June 30, 1920.  
18. A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 46; letter to Jawaharalal Nehru, April 23, 1926.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 73 19. Young India, September 9, 1926, p. 316, the alternati ve way referred to was Non -co-
operation, adopted unanimously at a Hindu -Muslim Conference at Allahabad on June 
30, 1920.  
20.  Young India, January 27, p. 31; in the course of a speech in Hindi at Sewan in Bihar 
when asked to speak on Hindu -Muslim Unity.  
21. Young India, September 24, 1931, p.273; in an address to an Arab audience at 
Adenon August 30, 1931, on his way to the Round Table Conference in London . 
EQUAL  SERVANT OF ALL  
22. Young India, March 10, 1927, p. 80; speech at Solapur.  
23. Ibid. 
24. arijan, Ja nuary 27, 1940 p. 429; in reply to a visitor who charged him with having 
offered to sell his soul to win the favour of his Muslim friends.  
25. Harijan March 8, 1947, p. 59; speech at Rajpura, February 16.  
26. Harijan, July 6, 1947, p.218; speech at prayer meeting.  
27. Harijan, June 8, 1940, p. 156.  
28. Harijan, May 11, 1947, p. 146; speech at prayer meeting, Patna, April 28. The 
reference to Iqbal’s song to Saare Jahanse Achchha, Hindustan Hamara.  
29. Harijan, May 25, 1947, p. 165; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta, May 10.  
30. Harijan, September 28, 1947, p. 349, address at a meeting at Rashtriya Swa yam 
Sewak Sangh (RSS) on September 16, at New Delhi.  
31. Harijan, September 21, 1947, p. 336; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, 
September 13. 
COMMUNALISM 
32. Young India, September 9, 1926, p. 316.  
33. Harijan, January 6, 1940, p. 403; referring to the communal riots at Sukkur and Shikapur in Sindh.  
34. Harijan, September 15, 1940, p.284. 
35. Harijan, November 17, 1946, p. 402; speech at prayer meeting at P anchgaon, 
January 29.  
36. Harijan, March 23, 1947, p.78 in reply to a question at prayer meeting, February 26. 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 74 II. ACHIVEMENT OF COMMUNAL UNITY  
MUTUAL TOLERANCE  
1. Young  India, May 7, 1919  
1. Ibid 
2. Young India, February 25, 1920, p.3.  
3. Young India May 11, 1921,  p.148.  
4. Harijan May 31, 1942, p. 172; Ga ndhiji was commenting on hooliganism at Rajaji’s 
meeting : “Hooliganism is no answer to Rajaji’s argument. The disturbance at his 
meetings is  a sign of great intolerance”. The latter had advocated, inter alia, 
conced ing the Muslims the right of secession.  
5. Harijan, October 13, 1946, p. 354; a speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, 
September 22. 
6. Harijan, October 5, 1947, p. 334; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, September 
22. 
7. Young India, January 26, 1922, p. 22.  
THE UNITARY METHOD  
8. Indian Review, October 1909, p.p. 760; quoted from a letter to a Mohammedan correspondent.  
9. Young India, October 20, p. 333.  
10. Harijan, February 1, 1942, p. 27; the Lucknow Pack, signed in December 1916, conceded separate electorat es and increase in the ‘weightage’ to Muslims in the 
Punjab and Bengal legislatures, in excess of representation on a population basis.  
Representation at the Centre too was enhanced, Muslims agreed to give up their 
right to vote both in the general and the  separate electorates, and agreed to a 
constitutional formula which would amount to dominion status for India.  
PACTS  
12. Young India, May 11, 1921, p. 148 
13. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 176  
14. Ibid, p. 182.  
15. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 176  
16. Ibid, p. 182.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 75 17. Young India, August 21, 1924, p. 276; in the course of reply of the charge from some 
American friends that, in the name of religion, he was introducing Bolshevism in 
India.  
18. Young India, June 16, 1927, p. 196.  
19. Harijan, June 18, 193 8, p. 152.  
20. Harijan, May 4, 1940, p. 115.  
21. Harijan, January 25, 1942, p. 13.  
THE VOW OF UNITY  
22. Young  India, May 7, 1919; April 6, 1919 was observed as a “day of humiliation and 
prayer” in view of the passing of the Rowlatt Act in March despite un animous 
opposition in the country. Gandhiji issued a leaflet on Hindu -Muslim unity, in Hindi, 
of which a free translation appeared in Young India.  
23. 22. Young India, May 29, 1924, pp. 182 -3. 
24. Young India, January 26, 1922, p. 62; with reference to the Mop lah trouble in 
Malabar and the Musalman attitude.  
25. Young India, September 29, 1921, p. 307.  
26. Young India, March 16, 1922, p. 161; letter to Hakim Ajmal Khan from Sabarmati Jail, Ahmadabad , on March 12.  
27. Harijan, November 23, 1947, p. 425; speech a t prayer meeting, Delhi, November 16. 
WORK FOR UNITY  
28. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 182.  
29. Young India, June 5, 1924, p. 185.  
30. Young India, June 16, 1927, p. 196.  
31. Young India, September 29, 1919; speech at public meeting of Musalmans in Bomb ay, 
September 18, on a resolution on the threatened dismemberment of Turkey.  
32. Young India, March 16, 1922, p. 161; letter to Hakim Ajmal Khan on March 12, from 
Sabarmati Jail.  
33. Young India, June 5, 1924, p. 185.  
34. Harijan, March 16, 1947, p. 61; sp eech at prayer meeting, February 17. Gandhiji was 
asked how workers for communal unity could avoid divided coun sels. 
35. Harijan, March 16, 1947, p. 62; speech at prayer meeting. February 19.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 76 36. Harijan, February 2, 1947, p. 3; speech at prayer meeting, o n the way to Badalkote 
January 18.  
37. Harijan, May 25, 1947, p. 166; written message at prayer meeting on silence day, 
Calcutta, May 12.  
38. Young India, March, 12, 1931, pp. 32 , 36; speech at Delhi, March 7.  
39. Harijan, April28, 1946, p. 103; in reply t o question by a Jamina Millia Student, New 
Delhi.  
40. Harijan, May 25, 1947, p. 166; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta, May 12.  
III. RELIGIOUS ASPECTS OF THE COMMUNAL PROBLEM  
RELIGION AND COMMUNAL UNITY  
1. Young India, May 11, 1921, p.148.  
2. Young India, Augus t 20, 1925, p. 292; address to European Christians, Jamshedpur. 
3. With Gandhiji in Ceylon, p. 89; speech at Zahira College; Colombo, November 22, 1927.  
4. Harijan, June 8, 1940, p.157.  
5. Harijan, July 13, 1940, p.207.  
6.  Harijan August 9, 1942, p. 261.  
7. Harijan, Feb ruary 23, 1947, p.37; speech on silence day, Palla, January 27.  
8. Harijan, March 16, 1947, p.63; speech at prayer meeting. February 19.  
9. Harijan, April 20, 1947, p. 119; speech at prayer meeting. New Delhi, April 5.  
10.  Harijan , June 29, 1947, p. 214; in convers ation with Khwaja Saheb Abdul Majid, at 
New Delhi.  
11.  Harijan October 5, 1947, p. 361; speech at prayer meeting. New Delhi, September 
26. 
12.  Harijan October 5, 1947, pp. 362 -3; speech at prayer meeting, September 27. 
13.  Young India, January 4, 1948, p. 497; spee ch at prayer meeting. New Delhi. 
December 23, 1947.  
14.  Autobiography, p. 33.  
15.  Young India, August 28, 1924, p. 284.  
16.  Young India, September 25, 1924, p. 284.  
17.  Young India, October 2, 1924, p.321.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 77 18.  Young India, December 22, 1927, p. 425; speech at a meeting o f missionaries at 
Jafna, Ceylon, during his tour.  
19.  Harijan, November 3, 1946, p. 383; in the context of a ban imposed by the Sindh 
Government on Satyartha Prakash, a sacred book of the Arya Samaj.  
20.  Young India, May 29, 1924 , p.180 . 
21.  Young India, September 22, 1927, p. 320; quoted by Gandhiji from his earlier article 
in Young India: “Inflammatory Literature” June 19, 1924, on Rangila Rasul, “highly 
offensive” pamphlet in Urdu by an anonymous author, p ublished by Arya Pustakalaya, 
Lahore.  
22. Young India, Septem ber, 25, 1924, p. 313.  
23. Young India, September 22, 1927, p. 320; quoted by Gandhiji from an earlier Article: 
half a Dozen and six”, Young India, July 10, 1924, p. 332.  
24.  Harijan, November 3, 1946, p. 3283; vide 19 above.  
25. Young India, August 25, 1927, p. 272 . 
26.  Harijan, December 8, 1946, p. 444; speech at prayer meeting. Madhupur, November 
19. 
TEMPLES AND MOSQUES  
27. Young India, August 28, 1924, p. 284 . 
28. Young India, January 27, 1927, p. 31.  
29. Harijan, March 9, 1940, p.30.  
30. Harijan, February 23, 1947 , p. 40; speech at prayer meeting. Sadurkhil, February 4. 
31. Harijan, January 25, 1947, p. 533; speech on the occasion breaking his fast, January 
18. 
32. Young India, August 28, 1924, p. 284.  
33. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 310. 
34. Young India, D ecember  18, 1925, p. 411. 
35. Harijan, March 30, 1947, pp. 86;  speech at prayer meeting, Patna March 12 .  
36. Harijan, April 13, 1947, p. 107-8; speech at prayer meeting, Patna, March 28.  
37. Harijan August 17, 1947, p. 278 ; in reply to an address in Gurumu khi at Patna 
Saheb, the famous Sikh Gurudwara in  west Punjab.  
38. Ibid, Gandhiji observed this with reference to the protection of Panja Saheb, 
Nanakana Saheb and other gurudwaras in Pakistan and elsewhere.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 78 39. Harijan, December 7, 1947, p. 461; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, November 
30. 
40. Harijan, January 4, 1948 p. 495; speech at prayer meeting. New Delhi, December 22 
1947.  
41. Harijan, February 8, 1948, p. 20; speech at prayer meeting. New Delhi, January 27. 
Gandhiji had visited the Dargah Sheri ff at Mehrauli that morning and was referring to 
damage done to it.  
‘MUSIC BEFORE MOSQUES’  
42. Young India, May 11, 1921, p. 148.  
43. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 181.  
44. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 312.  
45. Young India, October 22, 1925, p. 3 60. 
46. Young India, May 11, 1921, p. 148.  
47. Young India, October 22, 1925, p. 360.  
48. Ibid  
49. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 175.  
50. Ibid., pp. 181 -2 
51. Young India, September 25, 1924, p. 317.  
52. Young India, May 29. 1924, p. 117.  
53. Young India, September 18, 1924, p.312.  
54. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 182 -2. 
55. Ibid, p. 182.  
56. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 312.  
57. Young India, September 25, 1924, p. 317.  
58. Young India, January 5, 1928, p.4.  
59. Harijan, February 23, 1947, p. 40; sp eech at prayer meeting; vide note 134 above.  
60. Harijan, August 31, 1947, p. 298; speech at prayer meeting. Beliaghata, August 19.  
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 79 COW-SLAUGHTER AND COW -PROTECTION  
61. Young India, May 11, 1921,p. 148.  
62. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 181.  
63. Young I ndia, May 11, 1921, p. 148.  
64. Young India, January 29, 1925, pp. 38 -9. 
65. Young India, May 7. 1919  
66. Young India, May 18, 1921, pp.156 -7. 
67. Young India, January 29, 1925, p.38.  
68. Harijan May 11, 1947, pp. 145 -6; speech at prayer meeting. Patna, Ap ril 25.  
69. Harijan April 27, 1940, p. 101.  
70. Young India, April 8, 1926, pp. 131 -2. 
71. Young India, October 20, 1921, p. 333; in the course of reply to the editor, Modern 
Review.  
72. Young India, January 29, 1925, p. 38.  
73. Autobiography, pp.478 -9. 
74. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 181.  
75. Young India, April 27, 1094, p. 101; in reply to question if, under a Hindu majority 
government, Muslims will be allowed to eat their ‘national’ food, beef.  
76. Harijan, May 11, 1947, p. 146; speech at prayer me eting, Patna, April 25.  
77. Harijan, November 16, 1947, p. 411; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, 
November 4; vide para 245, p. 102. 
78. Young India, June 8, 1921, p. 182.  
79. Young India, October 6, 1921, p. 318.  
80. Young India, January 29, 1921, p. 38.  
81. A Bunch of Old Letters, p. 42; letter to Jawaharlal Nehru, April 25, 1925.  
82. Harijan, August 31, 1947, p. 300.  
83. Harijan, September 7, 1947, p. 310; speech at prayer meeting Calcutta, August 25.  
84. Young India, May 7, 1919.  
85. Young India, May 18, 1921, pp. 156 -7. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 80 86. Young India, June 29, 1921, p.237.  
87. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 311.  
88. Young India, January 29, 1925, p. 39.  
89. Young India, January 27, 1927, p. 31; speech at Sewan, Bihar. 
90. Young India, June 8, 1921, p. 182.  
91. Young India, January 29, 1925, p. 38.  
92. Harijan, August 10, 1947, p. 300.  
93. Harijan, August 10, 1947, p. 273 at prayer meeting, New Delhi, July 25.  
94. Harijan August 31, 1947, p. 300.  
95. Harijan November 16, 1947, pp. 410 -1. 
96. Young India, June 5, 1924 p. 65.  
97. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 311.  
98. Young India, January 29, 1921, p. 39.  
99. Young India, June 8, 1921, p. 182.  
100. Young India May, 29, 1924, p. 181.  
101. Young India, September 18, 1924, pp. 311 -2. 
102. Young India, January 5, 1928, p. 4.  
COMMUNAL  SLOGANS  
103. Harijan, March 23, 1947, p. 74; speech at prayer meeting, Patna, March 6.  
104. Harijan, August 31, 1947, p. 299; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta, August 21.  
105. Ibid, p. 303; speech at prayer meeting, Alipore, August 23.  
IV. THE CAUSES OF COMMUNAL RIOTS  
SPECIFIC CAUSES  
1. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 181; Gandhiji wrote a long and detailed survey entitled 
“Hindu Muslim Tension” : Its Cause and Cure Ibid pp. 173 -81. 
2. Young India, June 5,  1924, p. 188, a summary of  the long statement above.  
PHYCHOLOGY OF FEAR  
3. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 176.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 81 4. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 312.  
5. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 177.  
6. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 308, in commenting on a correspondent’s 
observat ions. 
7. ibid, p. 311.  
8. Young India, October 11, 1928, p. 342; with reference to acts of Muslim vandalism at 
Godhra. 
9. Harijan, January 6, 1940, p. 403, writing in the context of communal riots in Sukkur 
and Shikapur in Sindh; vide para 15, p. 266 -7. 
10. Harijan,November 3, 1946, p. 388; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, giving a new 
year’s message on the eve of Diwali.  
11. Harijan, December 1, 1946, 1946, p. 422; speech at a gathering of Hindus and Muslims; 
Dattapara, November 8.  
12. Harijan, January  5, 1947, p. 479; speech at prayer meeting, Shriampur, November 20.  
13. Ibid, p. 477; speech at prayer meeting, Shr iampur, November 20.  
14. Harijan, December 8, 1946, p. 442; written message at prayer meeting Kazirkhil, 
silence day, November 18. 
15. Harija n, January 5, 1947; speech at prayer meeting, Shrirampur , December  6. 
16. Harijan, January 26, 1947, pp. 517 -8; speech at prayer meeting, Chandipur, December 
28, 1946.  
17. Young India, May 29, 1924 p. 174.  
18. Harijan, January 6, 1940, p. 403, with referen ce to communal trouble in Sindh.  
19. Harijan, April 20, 1947, p. 119, speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, April 5. Gandhiji 
was referring to acts of violence in Nokakhali, Bihar and the Punjab.  
20. Ibid, p. 120; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, April 6. Gandhiji was writing 
against the background of violent out breaks in the Punjab.  
DISTRUST  
21. Young India, May 7, 1919.  
22. Young India, May 11, 1921, p. 148.  
23. Young India, March 16, 1922, p. 161; letter to hakim Ajmal Khan, February 12, 1922, from Sabarmati  jail. 
24. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 177; vide note 1 above.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 82 25. Young India, June 19, 1924, p. 205; in reply to questions raised by Babu Bhagwandas in 
a letter addressed to Gandhiji and published in the same issue.  
26. Young India, April 2, 1925, p. 115; in answer to a question by a  Muslim la wyer.  
TIREDNESS OF NON -VIOLENCE  
37. Young India, May 29, 1924, pp. 174 -5; discussing the causes of Hindu -Muslim tension.  
PROPAGANDA OF VILIFICATION  
38.  Young India May 7. 1919.  
39.  Young India, May 18, 1921, p. 156; with referenc e to reported instances of forcible 
removal of fish and meat from people by overzealous vegetarians under the pretext 
that Gandhiji had made vegetarianism part of non -co-operations.  
40. 30. Young India, July 16, 1925, p. 248; Gandhiji had received abusive lett ers from 
Hindu correspondents after he had stated in an interview to the associated Press about 
the Hindu -Muslim riots in Kidderpore, that the Hindu labourers were wholly in the 
wrong.  
41. 31. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 180.  
42. 32. Young India, May 10, 1924, p . 332, quoted in Young India, September 22, 1924, p. 
320; Gandhiji was writing with refer ence to Rangila Rasul, controversy over which 
arose again in 1927.  
43. 33.Young India, December 30, 1926, p. 458; Gandhiji was writing in the context of the 
assassination of Swami Shraddhanand by Abdul Rashid. Vide para 40, p. 193.  
44. 34. Harijan  May 4. 1940, p. 298.  
45. 35. Harijan, August 25. 1946, p. 298.  
46. 36. Harijan, October 6, 1946, p. 338; at a meeting of the presidents and secretaries of 
District and Provincial Congress Co mmittees, on the occasion of the A. I. C. C. 
meeting, Delhi. 
47. Ibid, pp. 338 -9. 
48. Harijan, September 28, 1947, 352, speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, September 20. 
49. Harijan, January 4, 1948, pp. 498 -9; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, Decembe r 
25, 1946.  
50. Young India, December 30, 1926 , p. 458; vide note 33 above.  
51. Young India, September 22, 1927, p. 321; vide note 21 above. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 83 52. Harijan, January 19, 1947, p. 496; ‘silence day’ message at prayer meeting, New 
Delhi, December 23 as reported by the Associated Press Of India.  
53. Harijan, February 1, 1948, p. 13; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, January 27. 
54. Harijan, February 8, 1948, p. 21; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, January 27. 
Gandhiji was speaking with reference to a telegr am from Muslims that” his fast had 
produced no effect in Mysore”. This was disproved by another telegram later which claimed that, on the contrary, it had eased the tension.  
THE THIRD PARTY  
55.  Young  India, October 6, 1920, p. 4.  
56.  Young India, June 8, 1 921,p. 182.  
57. Young India, October 20, 1921, pp. 333 -4; in commenting on an editorial in the Modern 
Review; vide note to para 202, p. 91.  
58. Young India, June 5, 1924, p. 185.  
59. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 311, Gandhiji was writing in the cont ext of 
communal trouble in parts of Gujarat.  
60. Harijan, November 3, 1946, p. 382; interview of Preston Grover at New Delhi, on October 21. Gandhiji was asked as to when this type of disturbances would end in India, the reference being to the outbreak of disorder in East Bengal.  
61. Harijan, June 8, 1947, p. 181; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, May 29.  
62. Young India, June 16, 1927, p. 196; Gandhiji was referring to the desirability of “any 
agreement between the component parts of the nation” being volunta ry and capable 
of enforcement. Vide para 37, p. 26.  
63. Young India, November 12, 1931, p. 346; in a talk to the members of the Raleigh Club, 
London, in answer to a question whether the British attitude was an obstacle in his 
path.  
64. Harijan, May 24, 1942, p. 162; in reply to a question: “You have repeated in your 
interview in Bombay ( vide para 17, p. 20 and note) and you have said often that 
nothing can prevent the Muslims from having what they want unless the objectors would fight over the issue. What is the difference between you and Shri Rajagopalachari’s attitude?” Gandhiji replied: “Though he has quoted me in his 
support, I see the same difference between him and me that is there between chalk and cheese. He yields the right of secession now to buy unity i n the hope of keeping 
away the Japanese. My statement amounts to the enunciation of the proposition that I 
cannot prevent my neighbor from committing a sin. Shri Rajagopalachari would be a 
party to the sin, if the neighbour chooses to commit it. I cannot b e party. Fear of the 
Japanese has blinded C.R. to the oblivious truth. Independence sheds all fear - fear of 
the japans, of anarchy, and of the wrath of the British Lion.”  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 84 65. Ibid, p. 166; in answer to the question: “Would you review the situation created by the 
Allahabad A.I.C.C. meeting? What would you say regarding Rajaji’s quoting your words 
regarding Pakistan in support of his latest move?” Gandhiji replied: “I would leave the 
Allahabad resolution to them. C.R has quoted me correctly.” Vide also para 17, p. 20.  
66. Harijan, June 7, 1942, p. 180; in commenting on a “content letter form a friend who is 
most anxious to bridge the political gulf between Rajaji and me.” Vide paras 25 and 
26, pp. 303 -4. 
67. Harijan, June 14, 1942; p.187, in answer to the question, “But what does a free India 
mean, if as Mr. Jinnah said, Muslims will not accept Hindu rule?” Interview to two 
American newspaper men Mr. Chaplin (International News Service, America) and Mr. Beldon (representing Life of Time) at Sevagram.  
68. Harijan, June 21, 1942, p. 198. The Nagpur correspondent of the Hindu asked Gandhiji 
: “Till the last day, you said there can be no Swaraj without Hindu -Muslim unity. Now, 
why is it that you think there will be no unity until India has achieved independence?”  
V. SOCIAL IMPL ICATION OF COMMUNIAL RIOTS  
THE GOONDAS AND RIOTS  
1. Young India, May 29, 1924, p. 180.  
2. Harijan, April, 7, 1946 p. 74; speech at Shivaji Park, Mumbai March 14. Vide para 65, 
p. 282.  
3. Harijan, December 1, 1946, p. 422; a speech on board Kiwi, at Chan dpur, E. Bengal. 
November 7.  
4. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 309.  
5. Young India, June 19, 1924, p. 205.  
6. Harijan September 15, 1940, p. 285. 
7. Harijan, November 17, 1946, p. 402; speech at Calcutta, with reference to riots in 
Bihar.  
8. Harijan, September 7, 1947, pp. 315 -6; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta August 29. 
Gandhiji was asked whether the minorities would have recognition as religious 
minorities had.  
9. Harijan, September 7, 1947, p. 318; speaking to all community deputation comprising  
Shahed Suhrawardy, N.C. Chatterji and Niranjan Singh Taleb, on September 4, at 
Calcutta, regarding the recrudescence of communal trouble.  
 
 
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 85 COMMUNAL CRIME AND TRUTH  
10. Harijan, November 17, 1946, p. 401; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta.  
11. Harijan, December 8, 1946, p. 444; speech at prayer meeting, Dasgharia November 
17. 
12. Harijan, April 27, 1947, p. 127; speech at prayer meeting New Delhi, April. Shaheed 
Suhrawardy, Chief Minister of Bengal, had issued a st atement in the Press that the 
release of  Satish Babu’s wires regarding the Noakhali happenings had provoked fresh 
trouble in Calcutta.  
13. Harijan, October 20, 1946, p. 368. 
14. Harijan, June 8, 1847, p. 181; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, May 29.  
15. Ibid, p. 182; speech at prayer meeti ng, New Delhi, May 30. Gandhiji was referring to 
murder and incendiaries in villages near Gurgaon, Delhi.   
16. Harijan, February 9, 1947 , p. 181; speech meeting, Muraim, January 24.  
17. Harijan, July 27, 1947, p. 255; commenting on an editorial in Dawn of Lahore of July 
18, which had taken to task for his statement that Jinnah’s assurances about the 
protection of the minorities in Pakistan would be valued according to the 
corresponding deeds of the Muslims there.  
RESTORATION OF PEACE  
18. Harijan, January  12, 1947, p. 489; in an interview.  
19. Ibid.  
20. Harijan, March 30, 1947, p. 88, speech prayer, Khursupur, March 14. The secretary of 
the Provincial Muslim league had c omplained to Gandhiji that though the 
Government had made arrangements for repatriation, the mental attitude of the 
Hindus was not sufficiently reassuring.  
21. Harijan, April 4, 1947, p. 97; speech at prayer meeting Masurhi March 17. 
22. Harijan, April 20, 1947, p. 119; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, April 5. 
23. Harijan, June 1, 1947, p. 175; speech at prayer meeting. Hilsa (Bihar), May 20. 
24. Harijan, February 2, 1947, p. 3; speech at prayer meeting, January 18.  
25. Ibid.  
26. Harijan, July 6, 1947, p. 218; on June 25 newspapers carried reports that Hindu Sikh 
and Muslim leaders of La hore had issued a joint peace appeal and that they were 
determined to put down violence.  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 86 27. Harijan, August 31, 1947, p. 299; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta, August 20. The 
Central Peace Committee and local committees were set up soon after August 15.  
28. Harijan, August 31, 1947, p. 310; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta August 25. 
29. Harijan, October  26, 1947, p. 382; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi October 14.  
30. Ibid, pp. 387 -8; speech at prayer meeting. New Delhi, October 19. Gandhiji was 
referring to the presence, at the prayer meeting the previous day, of Sheikh Abdula 
and the widow of Rafi Ahmed Kidwai’s brother.  
31. Harijan, December28, 1947, p.482; address to a gathering of Meos, who had been 
driven out of Alwar and Bharatpur States, in  the village of Jesarah, Gurgaon, near 
Delhi, December 9.  
32. Harijan, January 25, 1948, pp. 535 -6; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, January 
19. 
33. Harijan, February, 1, 1948, p. 10; speech at prayer meeting, New delhi, January 19.  
34. Harijan, May 11 , 1940, p. 123; in reply to the question: “You feel keenly about Bidar. 
You ask for justice about it and you want Muslims outside Hyderabad to see that 
justice is done. Do you feel equally keenly if Muslims are ill -treated as they were in 
Bihar?”  
35. Harij an, June 1, 1940, p. 149. Five persons from Hyderabad, Deccan, writing to 
Gandhiji, had suggested the appointment of an impartial Commission of inquiry to go into the communal disturbances in Bidar.  
 
VI. PERSONAL REACTION TO COMMUNAL RIOTS  
RELIGION AND RIOT S 
1. Young India, May 29, 1924, p.176.  
2. Young India, September 25 1924, p. 313. Gandhiji was referring to the violent 
disturbances in Amethi, Shambhar, Gulbarg and Kohat; vide para 28, pp.225 -6.  
3. Young India, December 30, 1926, p. 458. Gandhiji was writing i n the context of the 
assassination of Swami Shraddhanand, vide para 40, p. 193.  
4. Young India, June 16, 1927, p. 196.  
5. Harijan, July 28, 1946, p. 244; writing of the “butchery’ in Ahmedabad.  
6. Ibid, p. 243; speech at prayer meeting. Panchagani, July 20.  
7. Harijan, October 6, 1946, p. 342; speech at prayer meeting,  New Delhi (prior to 
October 1 )  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 87 8. Harijan, April 6, 1947, p. 97; speech at prayer meeting , Patna March 21.  
9. Harijan, September 21, 1947, p. 335; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi September 
12. 
FASTS F OR COMMUNAL PEACE  
10. Harijan , October 27, 1946, pp. 372 -3; in the course of a  talk with two friends from 
Bengal who asked him whether he would recommend to check violence in Bengal.  
11. Harijan, April 20, 1947, p. 119; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, April 5.  
12. Ibid, pp. 353; in reply to Mahadev Desai’s question; vide 14 above.  
13. Ibid, p. 354; to Shaukat ali. 
14. Young India, September  25, 1924, p. 314.  
15. Young India, October 23, 1924, p. 353; to Shaukat Ali, in a discussion of the fast.  
16. Young India, September 25, 1924, p. 313.  
17. ibid, p. 314.  
18. Young India, October 23, 1924, p. 354; to Shakut Ali in a discussion of the fast.  
19. Harijan, January 18, 1947, p. 523; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, January 12. 
Vide3 para 54, p. 238.  
20. Ibid, p. 517; open letter ‘To the people of Gujarat’ New Delhi, January 14.  
21. Ibid, p. 523.  
VII COMMUNAL RELATIONS IN FREE INDIA  
EQUALITY OF A LL 
1. Young India, September 25, 1924, p. 312.  
2. Harijan, November 16, 1947, p. 416; speech at prayer meeting. New Del hi, November 
9. A refuge lady had written to Gandhiji suggesting celebrations for Diwali, the first 
after Independence.  
3. Harijan, April 27, 1940, p. 101.  
4. Harijan, July 27, 1947, pp. 250 -1; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, July 13.  
5. Harijan, June 8, 1947 , p. 180; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi (prior to May 29) 
Vide para 43, p. 367.  
6. Harijan, January 18, 1948, p. 517; open letter “to the people of Gujarat” , New Delhi 
January 14.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 88 STATUS OF MUSLIM MINORITY  
7. Harijan, July 27, 1947, p. 254; speech at pray er meeting, New Delhi, July 15.  
8. Harijan, September 21, 1947, p. 335; speech at prayer meeting New Delhi, September 
12. 
9. Ibid, speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, September 13.  
10. Harijan, September  28, 1947, p. 352; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi , Septe mber 
20. 
11. Harijan, October 5, 1947, p. 354; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, September 22.  
12. Ibid, p. 361; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, September 25.  
13. Ibid, p. 362; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi September 26. 
14. Harijan, October 12, 1947, p. 366; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, October 1. 
15. Harijan, March 9, 1947, p .56; speech at prayer meeting, Vijayanagar, February 10. 
16. Harijan, October 12, 1947, p. 368; Gandhiji was commenting on a correspondent’s  
letter whic h, in English translation, read;  
17. “This is with reference to your many and continued appeals to treat Muslims as 
brothers and guarantee their safety so that they do not migrate from here to Pakistan - 
‘A man was walking along one cold day, when he came across a snake lying frozen with  
the cold. Taking pity on the reptile, he picked it up and thinking to give it warmth, put it in his pocket. The warmth soon revived the snake and the first thing it did was to dig 
its poisonous fangs into his savior and kill him.”  
18. Ibid, p. 372; speech at  prayer meeting, New Delhi, October 4.  
19. Harijan, January 25, 1948, p. 533; speech on the occasion of breaking his fast, January 
18. 
20. Harijan, February 1, 1948, pp. 5 -6; comment on the observations of a young man who 
wrote about Muslims being potential fifth  columnists.  
21. Harijan, January 25, 1948, p. 534, speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi January 18. 
22. Harijan, September 28, 1947, p. 339; address to Muslims,Daryaganj, New Delhi, September 19. 
23. Harijan, November 30, 1947, p. 449; address to Sikhs on Guru Nana k’s birthday.  
24. Harijan, December 14, 1947, p. 482; address to a gathering to Meos in Jesarah village, 
Gurugaon, December 9.  
25. Harijan , January 4, 1948, pp. 495 -6; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, December 
22. Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 89 26. Harijan, May 25, 1947, p. 164; Gandhiji was  commenting on a for expr essed to him 
that Nationalist Muslims might suffer at the hands of the Muslim League after the 
British withdrawal.  
27. Harijan, August 31, 1947, p. 304; speech at prayer meeting, Alipore, August 23.  
28. Harijan, September 7, 1947, pp. 31 3-4; speech at prayer meeting, Calcutta, August 27, 
Nationalist Muslims had asked him : “You have expressed the opinion that the 
Nationalist Muslims should join the League. Then,  does it imply that the Congress has 
now become a communal organization?”  
29. Harijan, March 30, 1947, p. 88; speech at prayer meeting, Khusrupur, March 15.  
30. Harijan, November 8, 1947, p. 399; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, October 27, 
Gandhiji was referring to the reported forcible evacuation of Muslims to Pakistan.  
31. 30. Harijan,  January 11, 1948, p. 506; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, December 
29, 1947.  
SECULAR  STATE  
32. Young India, September 18, 1924, p. 310.  
33. Harijan, July 6, 1947, p. 218; in a written, ‘silence day’ prayer message, New Delhi, 
June 23.  
34. Harijan, August 31, 1 947, p. 297, speech at prayer meeting Narkeldanga, West Bengal, 
prior to August 19.  
35.  Harijan, October 26, 1947, p. 383; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, October 15.  
36.  Harijan, November 2, 1947, p. 392.  
37.  Harijan, November 16, 19476, p. 423; speech at pra yer meeting , New Delhi, 
November 13.  
38.  Ibid, p. 411; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, November 4.  
RELIGION AND NATIONALISM  
39. Young India, January 9, 1930, pp. 13 -14 
40. Harijan, June 29, 1947, pp. 214 -5; in conversation with Khwaja sahib Abdul Masjid, 
New Del hi, prior to June 18.  
41.  Harijan, December 7. 1947, p. 452.  
42.  Ibid, p. 459; speech at prayer meeting New Delhi, November 28.  
43.  ‘Harijan, March 16, 1947, p. 63; speech at Kamalpur, February 21. Gandhiji was 
replying to the question put to him:  Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 90 “Should religiou s instruction form part of the school curriculum as approved by the 
State?  Do you favour separate school for children belonging to different 
denominations for facility of religious instruction? Or, should religious instruction be 
left in the hands of priva te bodies? If so, do you think it is right  for the state to 
subsidize such bodies? ” 
44. Harijan, March 23, 1947 p. 76; E. W. Aryanayaam of the Hindustani Talimi sangh had sent Gandhiji a cutting from the Hindustani Standard of February 19 reporting Maulana Abd ul Kalam Azad’s interview on the subject of religious instruction. The 
relevant extract from the report read;  
“In India, emphasis on religion has been and is greater than in other countries. Not 
only the past tradition of India but also the present temper of the people tends  to 
emphasize the importance of religious instruction. If Government decides that 
religious instruction should be included in education, it seems imperative that the 
religious instruction should be of the best type.  
“Religious instructio n often imparted in India in private institutions is of a kind which, 
instead of broadening the outlook and inculcating a spirit of toleration and goodwill to 
all men, produces exactly the opposite results. It is likely that under State supervision 
even de nominational teaching can be imparted in amore liberal spirit than under 
private control. The aim of all religious  teaching should be to make men more 
tolerant and broad minded, and it is my opinion that this can be more effectively 
done if the State takes  charge of the question than if it is left to private initiative.”  In 
the letter Gandhij prefaced his opinion on the subject by saying categorically “that it (the above view)is inconsistent with the line followed by the Hindustani Talimi 
Singh”.  
45.  Harijan D ecember 7, 1947, p. 459; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi. November 
28. 
RELIGIOUS FESTIVALS  
46. Harijan, March 2, 1947, p. 74; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, March 6 . 
Gandhiji was asked how Holi, falling on the next day out to be celebrated.  
47. Harijan, November 2, 1947, p. 391; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, October22, 
Gandhiji spoke with reference to the approaching Diwali and Bakr-Id festivals.  
48. Harijan, November 16, 1947, p. 416; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, November 
11. 
SYNTHESIS OF CULTURE  
49. Harijan, May 4, 1940, p. 115.  
50. Harijan, November 2, 1947, p. 392; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, October 22, Vide para 114, p. 395 for earlier part of the statement.  
 Gandhi and Communal Problems  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  Page 91 COMMUNAL LIFE IN VILLAGES  
51. Harijan, January 12, 19 47, p. 490; in conversation with Dr. Amiya Chakravarty  (prior 
to December 12, 1946). 
52. Harijan, January 26, 1947, p. 518; speech at prayer meeting, Chandipur, December 
28, 1946.  
53. Harijan, January 4, 1948, p.500; speech at prayer meeting, Sammalka vill age, New 
Delhi, December 27, 1947.  
54. Harijan, February 1 , 1948, p. 5; commenting on letter from a young man, Vide para 
75, p. 250.  
“INDIA OF MY DREAMS”  
55. Young India, October 6, 1930,p. 4.  
56. Harijan, June 8, 1947, p. 177; in conversation with the  Chinese Ambassador in India, 
Dr. Lochia Luen, at New Delhi (after May 25). 
57. Ibid, p. 181; speech at prayer meeting, New Delhi, May 29. Gandhiji was retorting to 
a correspondent’s demand that he should retire to forest life unless he asked the 
Hindus to  “answer sword with sword and arson” Gandhiji refused to deny his whole 
life and advocate the law of brute force in the place of the law of man.  
58. Harijan, December 7, 1947, p. 453; replying to Madama Edmund Privat’s letter of 
August 27, 1947 (ibid).  
59. Harijan, June 8, 1947, p. 177 vide 142 above. The Chinese Ambassador had talked of the havoc caused by the war in China, and raised the question as to what line Asiatic countries would follow.  
60. Harijan, October 5, 1947, p. 354; speech at prayer meeting , New Delhi, september22.  
61. Harijan, January 18, 1947, p. 526; speaking on the way on the day of his final fast, at a prayer meeting, New Delhi, January 14. The verse under reference is inscribed on the walls of the Dewan- i-Am of the Red Fort in Delhi.  
 