GANDHIJI'S VISION OF A FREE SOUTH
AFRICA
A collection of articles
E. S. REDDY"If we look into the future [of South Africa], is it
not a heritage we have to leave to posterity, that all
the different races commingle and produce a
civilisation that perhaps the world has not yet seen?"
-M.K. Gandhi, in a speech in Johannesburg in
1908
[NOTE: The following is a revision of a book published in 1995
by Sanchar Publishing House, New Delhi, in 1995. It includes an
additiona l article entitled: "Mahatma Gandhi -South Africa's Gift
to India".]DEDICATED
TO
NELSON MANDELA AND HIS COLLEAGUES
IN THE STRUGGLE FOR A NEW SOUTH AFRICA
WHERE, IN THE WORDS OF GANDHIJI, "ALL THE
DIFFERENT RACES COMMINGLE AND PRODUCE A
CIVIL ISATION THAT THE WORLD HAS NOT YET SEEN"1FOREWORD
With the establishment of a non -racial democratic government in South Africa,
under the leadership of Nelson Mandela, in a remarkable spirit of reconciliation,
the vision of Gand hiji, during the satyagraha he led in that country, remains an
abiding source of strength and inspiration to the South African people. He had
said in 1908:
"If we look into the future, is it not a heritage we have to leave to
posterity, that all the dif ferent races commingle and produce a civilisation
that perhaps the world has not yet seen?"
Interest in Gandhiji, his method of struggle, and his vision for the future of
humanity has been rekindled of late across the globe, not least in South Africa. As
Nelson Mandela said in September 1992: "Gandhiji was a South African and his
memory deserves to be cherished now and in post -apartheid South Africa. We
must never lose sight of the fact that the Gandhian philosophy may be a key to
human survival in the twenty -first century."
It is most appropriate at this time to recall the role of Gandhiji in the
movement for emancipation of South Africa and in clear perspective that
provided him for directing the Indian freedom struggle. The publication of this
book is intended to meet that timely requirement.
The author, an international civil servant with the United Nations (1949 -
85), has rendered valuable service towards globalising the problem of South
Africa through his writings, initiatives and actions. Whi le a student in the United
States he met a delegation of the South African freedom movement in 1946 and
since then he has unswervingly helped the struggle of the South African freedom
fighters to secure genuine independence from apartheid rule. His contri bution to
that cause as the Principal Secretary of the Special Committee against Apartheid
as well as the Director of the Centre against Apartheid in later years was indeed
"formidable", as was noted by the late Olof Palme, the Prime Minister of Sweden.
Onretirement from the UN, he continued to promote the international campaign
against apartheid as a member of the Council of Trustees of the International
Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa, and in other capacities.
While championing the cause of So uth African freedom he was inexorably
drawn towards analysing the phenomenal part that Gandhiji played as one of the
prime motive forces behind the struggle to obliterate the tyrannical system
founded in racism. The collection of articles comprising this publication is a
vivid testimony of his scholarship and comprehension of both the Gandhian
approach and the essence of the movement for freedom in South Africa. He
effectively brings out the symbiotic relationship between the two while also2pointing to the "South African roots of the ideas of Gandhiji" (to explore which he
has called for further indepth study).
Mr. Reddy's words are of special significance in the current context.
While recounting Gandhiji's observation in 1946 -"that he would not shed a
single tear if all the Indian satyagrahis were wiped out (in South Africa), for they
would thereby point the way to the Africans and vindicate the honour of India" -
he projects the "true Gandhiji" and not the caricature drawn in some supposedly
scholarly studies. Gandhiji repeatedly emphasised until the end of his life that he
was an Indian and a South African. He does not belong to Indian South Africans
alone but to all South Africans. He then asserts without any trace of ambiguity:
"The spirit of Gandh iji lives not only in the hearts of Indians struggling against
racism and for a non -violent democratic society, but in those of Nelson Mandela,
Oliver Tambo, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Reverend Beyers Naude and
many, many others."
His article on Gandhi ji's influence on Dr. Yusuf Dadoo focuses attention
on how Dr. Dadoo, an outstanding South African freedom fighter of Indian origin,
carried forward the Gandhi legacy "by building an alliance of Indians and
Africans as the basis for widest unity of the peo ple against racism".
Of particular value is the illuminating article on Gandhiji's association
with the remarkable European women -pacifists, feminists and socialists -who
helped him in South Africa. Gandhiji's unpublished letters also throw light on t his
association. It is necessary here to underscore what Mr. Reddy has written in
conclusion: "those who assumed that he must be a reactionary if he wore peasant's
clothes or professed religion; and those who called him an agent of Gujarati
capitalists be cause he did not advocate class struggle and tried to unite the Indian
community in the struggle for its dignity and honour -could not understand
Gandhiji nor the admiration he evoked among the greatest men and women of this
century. I hope that the new information which is becoming available will
persuade scholars in India and South Africa to reconsider their assumptions and
understand the real Gandhi."
This book, we are confident, would prove invaluable both for scholars
engaged in Gandhian studies an d for those concerned with promoting friendship
and cooperation between India and the new South Africa.
New Delhi SUMIT CHAKRAVARTTY
August 15,1994 Editor, Mainstream3INTRODUCTION
I have put together a collection of articles and papers as my modest
contribution to Indian -South African relations and to the observance of the 125th
birthday of Gandhiji.
It was in South Africa where he had gone in search of gainful employment -
first as an employee of a merchant and later as an advocate i n Durban and
attorney in Johannesburg -that Gandhiji found his vocation because of his spirit
of service and the influence of emergent Indian nationalism.
The precarious position of the small Indian community, the experience of rabid
racism against I ndians, and the repeated betrayals of promises by the authorities
in South Africa and Britain did not lead him to despondency or to a lack of faith
in humanity. He discovered satyagraha and became convinced that it was
invincible. His philosophy was tested in South Africa in an unequal contest
between the determined racist authorities and the small Indian community divided
by class, language and religion. The seven -year satyagraha climaxed in the
heroism of tens of thousands of working people -coupled with the sacrifices of
many professionals and youth, as well as some prosperous merchants -and forced
the government to negotiate an honourable settlement.
This experience transformed M.K. Gandhi, the "Indian patriot in South Africa",
into a leader whose efforts to spiritualise politics inspired many struggles around
the globe for freedom, justice and a sane society.
I became particularly interested in Gandhiji during the many years I spent, as
Director of the United Nations Centre against Apartheid, in promoting
international action against racism in South Africa. These articles are a result of
my search for an understanding of the evolution of the freedom struggle in the
country and its continuing relevance. They were written over several years -
before and after mass defiance forced the regime to negotiate with the liberation
movement -and will need to be understood in that context.
I am most grateful to a number of friends for their encouragement, advice and
assistance in my research -notabl y the editors of Mainstream (New Delhi) and
The Leader (Durban) where most of the articles appeared; to Haridev Sharma,
Deputy Director of the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi; to the
Southern Africa Research Program at Yale University and its Director, Prof.
Leonard Thompson; to the Librarians at the Yale University, the University of
Witwatersrand and the University of Cape Town -Moore Crossey, Anne
Cunningham and Leonie Twentyman Jones -to the University of Durban -
Westville and its Document ation Centre; and, above all, to the numerous friends I
cherish from the South African liberation movement.4E.S. Reddy
New York
July 12, 19945CONTENTS
Foreword
Introduction
1. Mahatma Gandhi -South Africa's Gift to India?
2. Gandhiji and South Africa
3. The First Martyrs of Satyagraha
4. Mahatma Gandhi and John Dube
5. Gandhiji and Africans in South Africa
6. Some Remarkable European Women who helped Gandhiji in South Africa
Append ix: Some Unpublished Letters of Gandhiji
7. Gandhiji and the Struggle for Liberation in South Africa
8. Dr. Yusuf Dadoo, Mahatma Gandhi and the South African Struggle
9. Nana Sita: Gandhian Resister in South Africa
10. Are Gandhiji's Ideas Relevant in a N ew South Africa?6MAHATMA GANDHI -SOUTH AFRICA'S GIFT TO INDIA?1
Eighty years ago, on January 9, 1915, M.K. Gandhi returned to Bombay after
21 years in exile, wearing a loin cloth and travelling from London in the lowest
class of the ship. He was acclaimed by the whole nation which was inspired by his
struggle and sacrifice in South Africa for the honour of the "Motherland". As he
went around the country with Kasturba, the heroine of the last phase of the South
African struggle, huge recept ions were held and addresses presented to him in
every city. "Moderates" welcomed him as much as "extremists", Muslims and
Parsis as much as Hindus.
This Gandhi had little relation to the M.K. Gandhi, the 23 -year-old barrister in
a suit, who had sail ed from Bombay in April 1893 by first class in the hope of
finding opportunity in a new land.
In later years, Gandhiji said that he was born in India but "made" in South
Africa;2"it was after I went to South Africa that I became what I am now".3
He told the Kanpur Congress in 1925 that "Indians of South Africa claim that
they have given me to you. I accept that claim. It is perfectly true that whatever
service I have been able to render... to India, comes from South Africa."4
To under stand the evolution and transformation of Gandhiji in South Africa, it
is necessary to note, as he himself stressed on several occasions, that he was not a
born saint and had not had an extraordinary childhood or youth.
He said in a speech in 1925:
"I never had a brilliant career. I was all my life a plodder.
When I went to England... I couldn't put together two
sentences correctly. On the steamer I was a drone... I finished
my three years in England as a drone."5
And further in a speech in 1937 :
"At school the teachers did not consider me a very bright
1Published in Mainstream , weekly, Ne w Delhi, January 21, 1995
2Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi (hereinafter referred to as Collected Works), Volume 84,
page 380.
3Collected Works , Volume 87, page 257.
4Collected Works , Volume 29, pages 358.
5Speech at Law College in Travancore, March 1 925. Mahadev H. Desai, Day-to-Day with
Gandhi , Volume VI, pages 103 -04.7boy. They knew that I was a good boy, but not a bright boy. I
never knew first class and second class. I barely passed. I was
a dull boy. I could not even speak properly. Even when I went
toSouth Africa I went only as a clerk."6
His primary concern as a student in London and on his return to
India was to make money. He was unsuccessful as a barrister and
could only earn some 300 rupees a month as a writer of petitions
and memorials, a p rofession in which he was to excel later.
Frustrated, he accepted an offer of employment from a friend of his
brother in Durban. He was to get first class fare, but only £105 and
local expenses for the year. He was in fact put up as a boarder in
Pretoria.
He showed little interest in politics and had no organisational
experience except for his work with the Vegetarian Society in
London. His main assets were his honesty, spirit of sacrifice and
innate love of his country.
The Gandhi who returned from South Africa was an inspiring
leader -fearless, selfless and with a vision -who had led a small
community in a long and difficult, yet victorious, struggle against a
stubborn racist government. He had developed a philosophy of life
and of non -violen t defiance of injustice which were to influence
millions of people around the world. He had also formed definite
views on reform of the Indian society and means to secure Swaraj .
In considering the influences which moulded Gandhiji in South
Africa, w e are handicapped by the serious gaps in knowledge
about his life in that country. He said in 1939 that he had intimate
relations with many Africans and had the privilege often advising
them.7He was a close friend of Olive Schreiner, a prominent writer
anda very progressive South African8and he was in contact with
many other South Africans of all backgrounds. But no information
is available on his discussions with them. The evolution of his
thinking has often been described -relying mainly on his book, My
Experiments with Truth -as the result of his "ethical experiments"
and of his study of religions and some Western writers. I would
suggest that a major influence on him was the Indian national
movement in the early years of this century.
The incid ent soon after his arrival in South Africa, when he was
thrown out of a train in Pietermaritzburg in bitter cold, has often
6Speech to Gandhi Seva Sangh, Hudli, April 17, 1937. Collected Works , Volume 65, pages 100 -1.
7Collected Works , Volume 69, page 377.
8Collected Works , Volume 29, page 361 and Volume 31, page 208.8been cited as a landmark in his transformation. He himself said in
an interview with Dr. John Mott:
"I was afraid for my very life... What was my duty, I asked
myself. Should I go back to India, or should I go forward, with
God as my helper, and face whatever was in store for me? I
decided to stay and suffer. My active non -violence began from
that date. And God put me through th e test during that very
journey. I was severely assaulted by the coachman for my
moving from the seat he had given me."9
Gandhiji was, I believe, particularly shocked as he was a well -
dressed barrister who had only recently returned from Britain
where he would have been treated with respect. The conductor and
the constable who evicted him were British and would have been
considered of lower class. The fact that he was humiliated in a
foreign country, especially a British colony, outraged him and
aroused his patriotism.
While this incident was a turning point in his life, it did not
have a significant effect on his activities for many years. Returning
to India was not a serious option for him at the time. His only
public activity in the followin g year was to encourage meetings of
Indians in Pretoria to consider their grievances and to draft
petitions to the authorities. One of the first petitions was to secure
assurance from railway authorities that first and second class
tickets would be issued to "properly dressed" Indians.
After his initial contract expired, he agreed to stay on in
Durban and undertake public service. It was decided in his
discussions with the local Indian merchants that he would be
provided retainers of at least £300 a year so that he could set up an
independent household and live in a style usual for barristers. He
was firm that he would not charge for public work.
He enrolled as a barrister and his practice developed. He rented
a house at Beach Grove and enterta ined Europeans and Indians.
His service to the Natal Indian Congress, essentially an
organisation of the Indian merchants, was mainly in drafting
petitions to authorities and letters to the newspapers. He gave legal
services to the poor Indians and indentu red labourers at no charge
and did volunteer work as a compounder in a hospital. He devoted
much time to the welfare and improvement of the Indian
community. He organised debates and other programmes for
young Indians -most of them Natal -born and educated -and even
9Collected Works , Volume 68, pages 165 -73.9led sporting activities. He gained respect as a public -spirited
barrister but had not become a fighter for justice. He lived
comfortably and apparently sent money to his family.
Returning in 1902 after a brief stay in India, he decided to settle
in Johannesburg and enrolled as an attorney. He sought no
retainers, but had a successful practice, earning as much as £5,000
a year, though devoting much of his time to public service. He
spent part of his income to finance Indian Opinion andthe Phoenix
Settlement.10
The establishment of the Phoenix Settlement in 1904 was a new
phase in his experiments, especially as regards simple living. This
was followed in 1906 by two crucial decisions in his life -the vow
ofbrahmacharya and a lette r to his brother that he had no interest
in worldly possessions. These decisions were also a preparation for
a new level of public service, and were followed by the
abandonment of legal practice in 1908, when his friend, Mr.
Hermann Kallenbach, undertook t o look after his simple needs.
It was in 1906 that Gandhiji decided to defy a humiliating law
and soon became a leader in struggle rather than an adviser to the
community. I believe Gandhiji was greatly influenced by the rise
of national movement in India in taking this step.
He had visited India for five months in 1896 and met a number
of public leaders to secure their support to redress the grievances
of Indians in South Africa. But it was his second visit for a year in
1901 -2 which had a prof ound effect on him. He attended the
Congress session in Calcutta and spent more than a month with
G.K. Gokhale whom he admired greatly for his efforts to
"spiritualise" politics and to organise a corps of "servants of India"
for whom politics would be a wh oletime occupation.
Returning to South Africa, he began to follow the national
movement in India. He called for united opposition by Hindus and
Muslims against the partition of Bengal, and supported the
swadeshi movement. Soon after, he abandoned "pe tition politics"
as useless, unless there was some sanction behind the petitions, and
decided to defy the Transvaal Asiatic Ordinance. One of the most
dramatic events of the satyagraha was the burning of the passes,
similar to the burning of British cloth in the swadeshi movement.
Throughout the satyagraha , Gandhiji emphasised that it was not so
much for the rights of the Indians in South Africa as for the honour
of the "motherland". Many young people who were not particularly
10He spent nearly £5,000 for this purpose. He transferred the Settlement to a Trust in 1912.10affected by the discriminatory laws repeatedly went to prison for
that cause. Significantly, the first biography of Gandhiji, by the
Rev. J.J. Doke, was entitled " An Indian Patriot in South Africa ".11
During this time, Gandhiji began to express his views on the
situation in Indi a and they reflected his own experience with the
Indian community in South Africa which included people of many
religions and castes who spoke many languages and were mostly
illiterate.
He repeatedly stressed the need for Hindu -Muslim unity. He was
strongly opposed to untouchability, especially as all Indians were
treated almost like untouchables by South African whites. (Many
of the Indians in South Africa were descendants of untouchables.)
In an article in Indian Opinion on July 8, 1905, he cal led for the
abolition of the salt tax in India. In another article in August 1906,
he advocated the adoption of Hindustani as the common language
for India. He "discovered" the spinning wheel while on a
deputation from South Africa to London in 1909.12
He had already been advocating total prohibition, especially
because of the effect of liquor in degrading the indentured workers.
(Non -violence was not an issue in South Africa as armed
resistance by the small Indian community was unthinkable.
Gandhi ji's emphasis was on the duty to defy unjust laws and on the
need for sacrifice. He wrote about non -violence mainly in relation
to terrorism in India and his discussions with Indian
revolutionaries in London.)
But perhaps more important was the exper ience he gained in the
seven -year satyagraha in which thousands of Indians courted
imprisonment and suffered brutal assaults with hardly a single
instance of weakening or apology. Tens of thousands of workers
went on strike, with little organisation, even while he was in prison
and defied intimidation and violence by the police and military.
Gandhiji was inspired by the heroism of the people even as they
were inspired by his example.13The courage and sacrifice of
11Gandhiji approved this biography.
12Collected Works , Volume 37, page 288. He said he had referred to t he handloom in Hind Swaraj
which he wrote that year, as he did not know the distinction between the spinning wheel and the
loom.
13Gandhiji said in a speech in Madras on April 21, 1915:
"You have said that I inspired these great men and women, but I ca nnot accept that
proposition. It was they, the simple -minded folk, who worked away in faith, never11women, who responded to his invitation to join the satyagraha in
its final phase, was particularly striking. He had closely followed
the suffragette movement in Britain and admired the tenacity of the
women. He was perhaps also inspired by the sacrifices of Boer
women during the Anglo -Boer Wa r.14Yet his call to the Indian
women was bold and their response magnificent.
Equally impressive was the discipline and steadfastness of the
poor workers. Gandhiji recognised: "These men and women are
the salt of India; on them will be built the India n nation that is to
be."15
Benefiting from this experience, Gandhiji was able to lead the
Indian national movement to an entirely new stage by encouraging
the active participation of peasants and workers, as well as women,
and by making people lose f ear of jail.
Gandhiji -or rather his philosophy and outlook -was thus a gift
from South Africa to India, but it had its roots both in India and
in South Africa.
expecting the slightest reward, who inspired me, who kept me to the proper level, and
who compelled me by their great sacrifice, by their great faith, by the ir great trust in the
great God to do the work that I was able to do."( Collected Works , Volume 13, pages 52 -
53.)
14Gandhiji said in a speech to college students in Lahore in 1920: "Every woman in the Transvaal
was a Rani of Jhansi. When will our women be s o brave?" ( Collected Works , Volume 18, page
364.)
15Speech in London on August 8, 1914. Collected Works , Volume 12, page 524.12GANDHIJI AND SOUTH AFRICA16
"...the striking role of India in the deve lopment of the struggle
for national and social liberation in South Africa has its firm roots
in the early campaigns led by Mahatma Gandhi in that country,
coupled with the continuing and active interest he took in the
South African situation. All South Af ricans have particular cause
to honour and remember the man, who was in our midst for 21
years and went on to enter the history books as the Father of Free
India. His imprint on the course of the South African struggle is
indelible."
-Oliver Tambo, in hi s speech in New Delhi
accepting the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for
International Understanding on behalf of
Nelson Mandela, 1980
"Gandhiji was a South African and his memory deserves to
be cherished now and in post -apartheid South Africa. The
Gandhian philosophy of peace, tolerance and non -violence
began in South Africa as a powerful instrument of social
change... This weapon was effectively used by India to
liberate her people. The Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., used it
to combat racism in the United St ates of America...
"We must never lose sight of the fact that the Gandhian
philosophy may be a key to human survival in the twenty -first
century."17
-Nelson Mandela, in his speech opening the
Gandhi Hall in Lenasia, September 1992
Speaking at a prayer meeting in New Delhi on June 28, 1946,
commending the passive resistance movement launched by Indian
South Africans, under the leadership of Dr. Yusuf M. Dadoo and
16Published in India Perspectives , New Delhi, July 1993; and Times of India , New Delhi, June 24,
1993.
17The Leader , Durban, Octob er 2, 1992.13G.M. Naicker, Gandhiji said that he was born in India but was
"made" in South Af rica.18
When Dr. Dadoo and Dr. Naicker called on him in 1947, he told
them:
"Truly speaking, it was after I went to South Africa that I
became what I am now. My love for South Africa and my
concern for her problems are no less than for India..."19
It was in South Africa -where he spent two decades in the prime
of his life -that Gandhiji realised his vocation and developed his
philosophy of life. It was there that his views on the problems of
India crystallised. It was there that he discovered and first practised
satyagraha -a most civilised and humane form of resistance to
injustice, with a willingness to suffer rather than hurt, to love rather
than hate the adversary.
When he was leading the satyagraha in the Transvaal, Count Leo
Tolstoy wrote to him from Russia on September 7, 1910, that his
activity in the Transvaal "is the most essential work now being done
in the world, and in which... all the world will undoubtedly take
part."
Today, as South Africa looks forward to redempt ion from the
centuries -old legacy of racist domination -after an essentially non -
violent struggle of the oppressed people, supported by the solidarity
of governments and peoples around the world -the centenary of the
arrival of Gandhiji in South Africa takes on a special significance.
The South African people have now the opportunity to realise
Gandhiji's vision of a South Africa in which "all the different races
commingle and produce a civilisation that perhaps the world has not
yet seen."20
A public servant
M.K. Gandhi, a 23 -year-old barrister, arrived in South Africa in
May 1893, on a one -year assignment to assist an Indian merchant in
a civil suit. He had shown little interest in politics, and had little
experience in organising and leading peo ple. But he had a strong
sense of duty, an attachment to truth, an urge to serve humanity, a
love of his motherland and an open mind.
18Harijan , July 7, 1946; Collected Works , Volume 84, page 380.
19Collected Works , Volume 87, page 257.
20Collected Works , Volume 8, pages 242 -48.14Within days of his arrival, he was thrown off a train, assaulted by
a white coachman, denied hotel rooms and pushed off a sidewalk -
all because of his colour. He saw the dispossession and oppression
of the Africans, the children of the soil. And he learnt of the
harassment and humiliations suffered by Indians -not only the
indentured labourers who were forced to wor k under semi -slave
conditions, but those who had completed indenture, their children
born in South Africa, and the traders who had arrived on their own.
He agreed to extend his stay in South Africa and try to help improve
the situation.
Gandhiji's fi rst concern was to educate and unite the Indian
community consisting of a little over 50,000 in Natal and about
12,000 in the Transvaal. It was dispersed, and divided by class,
religion and language. Of those in Natal, one -third were indentured
labourers in plantations and mines; about 30,000 were "free
Indians" who had completed indenture and their children; and 5,000
who belonged to the trading community. There was little contact
between the traders and the poorer sections of the community.
The In dians were mainly Hindus and Muslims, with a few Parsis
and a number of Christians. They spoke many languages -Tamil,
Telugu, Gujarati, Hindi, Urdu etc. Most of them were illiterate and
communication among them was difficult.
Gandhiji helped establis h the Natal Indian Congress in 1894 and
the Transvaal British Indian Association in 1903 to defend Indian
rights. These were mainly associations of traders, as membership
fees were too high for the poorer sections of the community. But
Gandhiji developed c lose relations with the youth and helped
associate them in public work. He provided free legal services to
indentured labourers and acted as a volunteer in a charitable
hospital, thereby getting to know the workers and their families.
Gandhiji, at th at time, had great faith in the principles professed
by the British Empire. He felt that the colour prejudice in Natal was
local and temporary, and would give way to the British sense of
justice. He sought to persuade the Europeans that Indians were a
civilised people entitled to equal rights under solemn commitments
by Britain.
He lived in a European area and entertained Europeans and
Indians in the hope of promoting better understanding. He drafted
many appeals and petitions, organised deputati ons and meetings,
and wrote numerous letters to the press. He led an Indian ambulance
corps in the Anglo -Boer War, and later a stretcher -bearer corps15during the "Zulu rebellion" -though his sympathies were with the
Boers and the Zulus -to demonstrate tha t Indians were willing to
shoulder the responsibilities of citizenship.
On visits to India and Britain and through extensive
correspondence, he secured understanding and sympathy among
Indian leaders and British friends for the plight of Indians in So uth
Africa.
These efforts, however, proved almost fruitless, as more and more
measures were enacted to make the life of Indians miserable.
Gandhiji came to recognise that petitions could help only when
they had some sanction behind them -either physical force or the
immensely superior soul force, satyagraha .
Meanwhile, he had continued his quest for self -realisation, drawing
inspiration from thinkers like John Ruskin and Leo Tolstoy and
from Hinduism and other religions which he considered different
paths to God.
Concerned with human equality and quality of life, he believed
that physical and manual labour was essential. He rejected
uncontrolled industrial development which turned workers into
slaves of machines and caused alienation .
By 1903, he began to give up most of his income for public work,
established the weekly Indian Opinion to inform the Indian
community and the Europeans, and set up the Phoenix Settlement as
a place for simple communal living. He took a vow of celib acy in
1906, and subsequently gave up his lucrative legal practice to live in
poverty and identify himself with the poor.
Non-violence, love and truth became to him indispensable in
human relations. His attachment to non -violence was strengthened
byhis experience nursing the Zulus who had been brutally lashed
by the European militia and left unattended.
In 1906, when the Transvaal Government issued the Asiatic
Ordinance (later enacted as Asiatic Registration Act), he saw it not
only as a meas ure designed to ruin the Indian community but as an
affront to the dignity and honour of India. He decided to defy the
law, whatever the consequences. The Indian community followed
his lead and refused to register under the Act.
Thus began a new pha se in the life of Gandhiji to which the years16of petitions and appeals were a preparation. He discovered
satyagraha -an active, yet non -violent, defiance of injustice with
fearlessness, sacrifice and suffering. He said in 1909:
"Asatyagrahi must be afraid neither of imprisonment nor
of deportation. He must neither mind being reduced to
poverty, nor be frightened, if it comes to that, of being mashed
into pulp with a mortar and pestle."21
The Satyagraha
The resistance by the small Indian communit y against the racist
laws was difficult and lasted eight years from 1906 to 1914. But
thousands of people, young and old, joined the struggle and
displayed great heroism.
Gopal Krishna Gokhale, who visited South Africa in 1912,
observed that Gandhij i had shown "the marvellous spiritual power to
turn ordinary men around him into heroes and martyrs."
In January 1908, after 150 Indians went to prison in defiance of
the Act, a compromise was reached between General Jan Smuts, the
Interior Minister, and Gandhiji, but it soon broke down as the
Government refused to repeal the Act. Satyagraha was resumed and
over two thousand persons out of a total Indian community of a little
over ten thousand went to prison, several of them repeatedly.
Thesatyag raha was again suspended in 1911, after the formation
of the Union of South Africa, in the hope of a negotiated settlement,
but again the talks failed. The Union Government, moreover,
declined to take action when the Supreme Court ruled that all
marriages not performed according to Christian rites -that is, most
Indian marriages -were invalid. It prevaricated on its promise to
Gokhale to repeal the Natal law requiring former indentured
labourers and members of their families to pay an unjust and
exorbit ant annual tax of £3 each.
So the third phase of the satyagraha was launched in September
1913 all over the country. Gandhiji invited women to join and
called on the workers to strike until the £3 tax was abolished.
"The whole community rose like a surging wave. Without
organisation, without propaganda, all -nearly 40,000 -courted
imprisonment. Nearly ten thousand were actually
21Indian Opinion , October 30, 1909; Collected Works , Volume 9, page 447.17imprisoned..."22
Gandhiji led the great march of 2,200 workers and their families
from Newcastle to the Transva al border and was jailed for the fourth
time. There was then a spontaneous strike by all Indian workers in
Natal, the biggest general strike that the country had ever seen.
Thousands were confined in prisons and mine compounds and the
prisoners were subjec ted to cruel treatment. Many striking workers
were brutally assaulted and a number of them were killed or
wounded.
Gandhiji led in sacrifice and members of his family repeatedly
went to prison. The resisters included men and women of all faiths,
rich and poor, and none flinched at the increasing severity of prison
conditions and repression. Even when Gandhiji and other leaders
were in prison, the resisters showed commendable discipline and
adherence to non -violence.
Europeans like Henry Polak, Hermann Kallenbach and A.H.
West, who had become admirers and associates of Gandhiji,
identified themselves with the Indian cause and even went to prison.
Supporters of the struggle in the European community, though a
small minority, included many churchm en and prominent public
figures -such as Olive Schreiner, the writer, William Hosken, leader
of the Progressive Party, and Vere Stent, an editor.
General Smuts was obliged in the face of the determination of the
Indian community, backed by a powerful national agitation in India
and pressure from Britain, to sign an agreement with Gandhiji,
conceding all the main demands of the satyagraha .
Gandhiji then left for India on July 18, 1914 -exactly four years
before Nelson Mandela was born -leaving b ehind him the example
of a righteous struggle which knows no defeat.
South Africa to India
Gandhiji carried with him to India not only his philosophy of
satyagraha , but firm views derived from his South African
experience on the problems of India.
His close association with the Muslims in South Africa, and their
contribution to the satyagraha , convinced him that Hindu -Muslim
unity must be an essential tenet of the Indian national movement.
Outraged at the treatment of Indians in South Africa as virtual
22Young India , April 20, 1921; Collected Works , Volume 20, page 15.18untouchables, he sought to eliminate the scourge of untouchability
in India. His experience in trying to unite the Indian people in South
Africa led him to advocate a national language for India.
He also brought with him respect for women w ho played a crucial
role in the final stage of the satyagraha , braving imprisonment with
hard labour, many of them with their infants. Valliamma, a 16 -year-
old girl, gave her life for the cause rather than accept early release
from prison, and his own wif e, Kasturba, came out of prison in
shattered health.
Gandhiji was most impressed by the way the poor workers had
acquitted themselves in the struggle. He said in London on August
8, 1914:
"These men and women are the salt of India; on them will
be built the Indian nation that is to be."23
He proceeded to bring the mass of the people of India, including
women, into action while leading the struggle for the independence
of India. He combined political struggle with a constructive
programme to promote respect for manual labour, the regeneration
of village industries and simple living.
The heritage of Gandhi
Gandhiji was against any cult of his followers. He disliked the
term "Gandhism", as much as the title Mahatma , bestowed on him
by a grateful nation. What he left for posterity was the example of
his life, his search for truth and his actions in practising what he
believed. "My life is my message," he said.
His outlook was universal. To him all religions make for "peace,
love and j oy in the world". "Let us all merge in each other", he
exhorted, "like drops of ocean."
The example of Gandhiji and the satyagraha he led in South
Africa and India have encouraged and inspired the struggles for
freedom of oppressed peoples in many lan ds around the world
where the leaders absorbed his thought and creatively applied it in
the light of their own traditions and situations.
Non-violent defiance has been a major phenomenon in the world,
especially in recent years, when powerful dictator ships have been
toppled by popular resistance. It has been practised by many public
23Indian Opinion , September 30, 1914; Collected Works , Volume 12, pages 523 -26.19movements for causes which Gandhiji cherished -such as peace,
disarmament, and protection of the environment.
These struggles and movements have, in turn,
enriched t he heritage of Gandhiji.
As Nelson Mandela declared recently, the spirit of Gandhiji -that
is, the satyagraha conceived and tested in Africa at the beginning of
this century -may well be a key to human survival in the twenty -
first century.20THE FIRST MARTYRS OF SATYAGRAHA24
Gandhiji often stressed that satyagraha is
not mere jail -going. He warned, during the first
satyagraha in South Africa, as early as 1909:
"Asatyagrahi must be afraid neither
of imprisonment nor of deportation. He
must neither mind being reduced to
poverty, nor be frightened, if it comes
to that, of being mashed into pulp with a
mortar and pestle."25
It was already clear that though satyagraha
is a totally non -violent and civilised form of
resistance, the oppressor s would try to break it
by resort to an escalation of brutality, together
with "dirty tricks" to confuse and divide the
ranks of the resisters.
Thesatyagrahis in South Africa were at first
sentenced to short terms of simple imprisonment.
But as the movement proceeded, the courts handed
down longer sentences with hard labour, even for
women with small children. Prison conditions
became harsher. The Government resorted to
illegal deportations to India and pressure was
exerted by European creditors on Indian merchants
to force them into insolvency. At the last stage
of thesatyagraha in 1913, when Indian workers
went on strike, they were subjected to brutal
assaults by the army and mounted police, as well
as mine and estate managers.
Thesatyagrah aled to the martyrdom of
several resisters, and injuries and shattered
health to many more.
Gandhiji in Satyagraha in South Africa , and
earlier in Indian Opinion , wrote moving accounts
in tribute to four martyrs: Sammy Nagappan, a
teenager who died o f pneumonia after being forced
24Published in Mainstream , New Delhi, August 14, 1993.
25Indian Opinion , October 30, 1909; Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Volume 9, page 447.21to break stones in bitter cold; A.
Narayanaswami, who was not allowed to land for
two months when he returned from illegal
deportation to India, though shivering on the
open deck without adequate clothes; Valliamma,
the young girl who refused to seek release from
prison despite serious illness and died soon
after completing her sentence; and Harbat Singh,
an illiterate 70 -year-old worker who insisted on
serving imprisonment.
One of the last acts of Gandhiji before
leaving South Africa was to attend the unveiling
of memorials to Valliamma and Nagappan at the
Braamfontein Cemetery in Johannesburg. I was
shocked on my last visit to South Africa, when I
wished to pay tribute to them, to hear that the
tombstones of these mart yrs-precious not only
for the Indian community in South Africa but for
India-had been removed by the Johannesburg
municipality, under United Party management,
during the era of apartheid. I hope that the
Indian Government and the Indian community in
South Africa -as well as the African National
Congress -will denounce this act of desecration
and ensure the restoration of the memorials.
But there were many more martyrs in the
struggle who have been forgotten and deserve to
be recalled and honoured .
Gandhiji mentioned in Satyagraha in South
Africathat two infants died during the Great
March of Indian workers in October -November 1913
-one of exposure and the other of drowning,
falling from the arms of its mother while she was
crossing a spruit . Little is known of their
parents.
Gandhiji, however, did not refer to the
workers who were killed in the last phase of the
satyagraha while he was in prison. He wrote his
account from memory, mostly in Yeravda prison,
and did not attempt to write a detailed history
of the struggle.
Reports in Indian Opinion , the weekly founded22by Gandhiji, indicate that many workers had been
killed and wounded, and several may have
subsequently died of the injuries. The following
accounts are mainly based on r eports in Indian
Opinion, between November 1913 and March 1914.
Firing at Mount Edgecombe
Five Indians were killed and nine wounded at
Blackburn and Hillhead barracks of Natal Estates
Ltd., Mount Edgecombe, on November 27, 1913.
Those who gave their lives were:
Pachiappen
Ragavan
Selvan
Guruvadu
Soubrayen Gounden
One more died of injuries in Avoca hospital, but
the name was not published.
At the inquest, which was held before the
Acting Magistrate of Verulam, the doctor who
examined the dead said that the five were shot
from the back.
Evidence at the inquest disclosed that Colin
Campbell, the estate manager, went to the
barracks at Blackburn estate, and threatened to
shoot the indentured workers unless they returned
to work. He shot Pachiappen (aged about 35). Then
the troopers (police) fired. Ragavan was killed;
Pancham was wounded in the right leg, and
Hoosenigadu in the left shoulder.
An hour later, the workers walked towards
Hill Head: they had relativ es there and were
anxious to see what was happening to them. They
were met on the main road by the police and by
Campbell who fired two shots at them.
Campbell then went to the Hill Head barracks
and ordered a roll -call. While calling the roll,
he asked Selvan whether he was going to work.
Selvan had completed indenture and was free.23He said he would wait until the satyagraha was
over before entering into a contract of re -
indenture. "The whole of Natal has struck, and
when they go back to work, we will start too."
Some other workers said that they would not
return to work until the £3 tax was abolished.
Campbell decided that Selvan must be the
leader. He asked Selvan to hold his horse but as
he came near, struck him with a stick. Selvan
fell. Then, under orders of Campbell, a Zulu
guard handcuffed Selvan and stabbed him with an
assegai. As Selvan's eldest son, Antonimuthu,
ran screaming to his father, there was firing:
Selvan died and his son got three bullet wounds.
Several others w ere shot and injured.
Thathaya and his wife were shot in their hut in
the presence of their two small children. Kullen
was shot in the left thigh.
The troopers then charged the Indians and ran
over them.
The Magistrate, however, exonerated Campb ell.
Instead, 22 Indians, including some wounded,
were kept in jail for six months and then charged
with public violence. Eight Indians, including
Antonimuthu, were charged with perjury. They
were discharged after several weeks.
The widow of Selvan returned to India with
her children. Gandhiji arranged a small allowance
for her; Antonimuthu joined Gandhiji's ashramin
Ahmedabad.
The death of Soorzai
On the same day that the killings took place
at Blackburn and Hill Head, Soorzai (also
known as Amhalaram), an employee of the Phoenix
Wattle Plantations, was brutally flogged by the
manager, G.J. Todd, who suspected him of leading
a strike. He died two weeks later.
Soorzai had been ill for three years; his
left arm was paralysed. He was l ate for work that24morning as he waited for the rain to stop -as
did other workers. Todd saw Soorzai standing
near the doorway of his hut, flogged him several
times and kicked him in the presence of his
common law wife -Iyamah. He then assaulted
several other workers with a whip.
A group of Indian labourers then took Soorzai
to the Phoenix Settlement nearby. Todd went there
a few days later with constables, threatened A.
H. West, who was then in charge of the
Settlement, for giving refuge to Soorz ai, and
took Soorzai away. The latter was jailed on
December 3rd and five days later, taken from
jail in an unconscious state to Verulam Indian
hospital. He died on December 10th.
Four hundred mourners, led by leaders of the
Natal Indian Associat ion, followed the funeral
procession as the body was taken to the Umgeni
Crematorium. Among those in the procession
was Miss Elizabeth M. Molteno, sister of the
Speaker of Parliament, who had seen Soorzai when
he arrived at the Phoenix Settlement and later
testified at the inquest on the wounds.
Todd was only charged with common assault
and acquitted.
Y
Other Cases
During November and December 1913, striking
Indian workers in the mining area were being
whipped and beaten, and taken dow n the mines by
force. There were several cases of firing on the
plantations. But only sketchy information is
available in press reports.
In Ballengeich mine, the men were brutally
whipped for refusing to work. Some fell
unconscious, and 186 were sent to prison.
Narjia, a worker, died at Ballengeich Prison.
The government claimed that he died of
tuberculosis.25On November 16, police fired on Indian
strikers in Durban: one died and 16 were injured.
On November 25, 1913, police fired a t
strikers at the Beneva Estate, Esperenza. Two
were killed and a number of others wounded.
In all cases, the victims of violence -
Indian workers -were punished while the
criminals went scot free.
Appeal to historians
The violence by the empl oyers and the mounted
police was so outrageous that the Indian
community in South Africa, and public opinion all
over India, demanded an impartial investigation.
The Viceroy of India felt obliged to support the
demand. The Natal Indian Association colle cted
affidavits and other information on brutality
against the satyagrahis .
Under pressure from India and Britain, the
Union Government set up a Commission of three
members, two of whom were notorious for their
hostility to Indians. When demands for a
balanced composition were rejected, the Indian
community decided, on the advice of Gandhiji (who
was released from prison on December 18th, not to
present evidence to the Commission.
The records of the NIA, if found, would
provide fuller informatio n on the martyrs and the
great sacrifices made by the working people in
thesatyagraha .
I do hope Indian historians and Indian South
Africans will undertake research to document the
heroism and sacrifices of these early freedom
fighters who gave their lives for the honour of
India. Let it not be said that they were ignored
because they were poor and illiterate; for it was
they who inspired Gandhiji to recognise that the
future of India depends on workers and peasants -
the salt of the earth.2627MAH ATMA GANDHI AND JOHN DUBE26
The historic relationship between the national movements of India and South
Africa goes back to the early years of this century when Mahatma Gandhi and the
Reverend John Langalibalele Dube, who was to become the first Pre sident -
General of the African National Congress, developed friendship and mutual
respect.
The early lives of Gandhiji and Dube were largely parallel. Gandhiji was born
in 1869 and Dube in 1971. Gandhiji studied in Britain from 1888 to 1891 and
Dube in the United States from 1887 to 1892. Dube returned to South Africa in
1892 and was employed as a teacher for several years; Gandhiji went to South
Africa in 1893 and stayed on for 21 years as a barrister and public worker.
Dube was very much influen ced by Booker T. Washington, the conservative
Black leader in the United States who stressed self -help and vocational education
for the Blacks. Overcoming great difficulties, he established, in 1901, an
Industrial School at Ohlange, modelled after the Tus kegee Institute of Dr.
Washington.
Gandhiji too greatly admired Dr. Booker T. Washington and his educational
methods. In 1904, he bought about a hundred acres of land in Phoenix, about a
mile or two from Ohlange, and established a settlement dedica ted to simple
living. He set up a school for Indian children which stressed manual work as
much as the three R's.
Both men were involved in public work for their communities. Gandhiji
founded the Natal Indian Congress in 1894; Dube helped found the Natal Native
Congress in 1900. Gandhiji began publishing Indian Opinion -a weekly in
English, Gujarati, Hindi and Tamil -in June 1903. Dube launched the Ilange lase
Natal , an African weekly in English and Zulu, in the same year; it was printed in
thesame press as Indian Opinion until Dube acquired a press for the Ohlange
Institute.
We do not know when Gandhiji and Dube became acquainted. But in August
1905 they met at the residence of Marshall Campbell at Mount Edgecombe when
the latter hosted a reception for delegates of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, which had held its annual meeting in South Africa.
Gandhiji was impressed by Dube's speech on that occasion.
26Published in Hindustan Times . New Delhi, January 26, 1992; and The Leader , Durban, June 5,
1992.28Dube told the gathering that to deprive the Africans of t heir land and rights in
Natal, the land of their birth, was like banishing them from their home. Without
the Africans, he said, the whites could not carry on for a moment. It was unfair to
burden them with taxes. Members of the British delegation were mo ved to
subscribe and present 60 pounds on the spot to Dube for his school.
Gandhiji, writing about this meeting in Indian Opinion (September 2, 1905),
said that Dube was an African "of whom one should know."
There was frequent social contact be tween the inmates of the Phoenix
Settlement and the Ohlange Institute, as well as the mission at Inanda. Zulus and
whites used to attend Gandhiji's prayer meetings at Phoenix. He was often seen
playing with Indian and Zulu children.
The Bambata rebell ion of 1906 was a time of trial for both Gandhiji and Dube.
Two white police officers were killed by Africans in February 1906, near
Richmond, during the unrest following the imposition of a poll tax on all adult
African males in Natal. The governme nt declared martial law and sent its militia
to crush African resistance. Chief Bambata and his followers carried on guerilla
warfare for more than a year but were brutally suppressed. Almost four thousand
Africans were killed and thousands were sentenced to whipping.
Gandhiji did not realise the scale of resistance and the strong feeling among the
Zulus. He felt that Indians, who were seeking rights as citizens of the Empire,
should shoulder their responsibilities to the government. He led a small
stretcher -bearer corps which nursed the wounded Zulus whom the whites
despised and left to suffer.
Gandhiji's family and friends were worried when he was in the field for a few
weeks with the corps. The Phoenix settlement was in a Zulu area and the Z ulus
could have easily attacked it. But, happily, Gandhiji did not lose the friendship of
the Zulus: "he became known as a well -wisher of the Zulus who became friends
of the Phoenix Settlement..."27
There was some criticism of Gandhiji in the small Af rican press, because of his
services during the Bambata rebellion, but this was forgotten when the Indians
launched passive resistance later in the year, under his leadership, against the
Transvaal Asiatic Ordinance.
Gandhiji was for many years re luctant to speak about his traumatic experience
during the rebellion, but it had a great influence on his thinking. It helps explain
his defiance of the Transvaal Ordinance, as well as his insistence on strict non -
violence by the passive resisters.
27Prabhudas Gandhi, My Childhood with Gandhi , 1957, page 42.29Dube, for his part, came under attack by the whites for denouncing the military
action against the Zulus. He was summoned before the Governor and given a
reprimand. He then expressed regret and wrote:
"There are grievances to be dealt with, but I can fully realise that
at a time like this we should all refrain from discussing them, and
assist the government to suppress the rebellion."28
He probably feared that, in the tense atmosphere at the time, he might lose all
white financial assistance for the Ohlange Institute.
As the Boers and Britons agreed to form a Union of South Africa, with a colour
bar, Gandhiji supported the Africans in their opposition to self -government under
white rule. Indian Opinion wrote in an editorial on August 1, 1908: "Our
sympathies go out to our oppressed fellow subjects who are made to suffer for
the same cause that we suffer, viz., our slight pigment of skin."
In 1909, when discussions were held in London on the proposed Act of the
Union, the African a nd Coloured organisations sent a delegation to lobby against
the Act. Dube assisted the delegation though he declined membership for fear of
retaliation by the whites against his educational enterprises. Gandhiji and Hajee
Habib were then in London, on b ehalf of the Transvaal Indians, to make
representations on discriminatory measures against the Indians.
Gandhiji felt that while indigenous African and Coloured groups could demand
full equality, Indians were a small community of recent settlers who should
concentrate at that stage on their civil rights, rather than political rights. But his
sympathies were clear. Indian Opinion had written on February 13, 1909, that the
draft Act amounted to a declaration of war against the black population.
While the African organisations continued with protests, petitions and
deputations -and the formation of a national body, the South African Native
National Congress (later renamed the African National Congress) on January 8,
1912, with Dube as its first Pre sident -the Indian people continued with direct
action.
Gopal Krishna Gokhale, the highly respected leader of the Indian national
movement, visited South Africa in October -November 1912, at the invitation of
Gandhiji, to meet the Indian community and the Government, and try to promote
a settlement. Gandhiji, acting as his secretary, arranged for him to visit the
Ohlange Institute on November 11, 1912, to meet John Dube and discuss the
"Native question". He received a warm reception from the staff and students at the
school.
28Quoted by Andre Odendaal in Vukani Bantu , 1984, p. 70.30On September 16, 1913, Gandhiji launched national mass resistance by the
Indians and invited women and workers to join. Sixteen satyagrahis, including
Mrs. Kasturba Gandhi and three other women, left Phoenix for the Transvaal to
defy the immigration law restricting inter -provincial movement by Indians.
Then followed a general strike of tens of thousands of Indian workers -in the
mines, plantations and municipalities -with hardly any formal organisation. The
workers were inspired, above all, by the example of Gandhiji, his family and his
colleagues. They said: "When the King (Gandhiji) and the Queen (Kasturba) and
their children were imprisoned by the government for demanding justice for the
workers, how can we continue to work?"
Unable to break the strike, the army and police, and the employers, resorted to
utmost brutality -assaults even on women, solitary confinement, flogging,
shooting of demonstrators, etc., -but though Gandhiji and other leaders were in
prison, the workers stood firm and disciplined.
Dube followed the Indian struggle with great interest, though he could not
conceive of such direct action by the Africans at the time.
Early in 1914, the Reverend W. W. Pearson, who had come from India to
investigate the condition of Indian workers, visited Dube at the Ohlange Institute
to enquire about the position of the Africans. We are indebted to Raochandbhai
M. Patel, an inmate of the Phoenix Settlement who accompanied Pearson, for an
account of t he conversation which has been little known as it was published only
in 1939 in a Gujarati book in India, Gandhijini Sadhana .
Dube explained to Pearson that the status of the Zulus was even worse than that
of Indians. "The white man even doubts if we belong to the human race."
Asked why the Africans did not fight for their birthrights as the Indians did,
Dube replied:
"Yes, Mr. Pearson, I understand what you say. I have thought over it a
lot. I have studied in depth the struggle fought by t he Indians under the
leadership of Gandhi. And after being an eye witness to the struggle,
instead of taking the Indian workers as uncivilised and treating them
disdainfully, I have acquired a sense of respect for all the Indians.
"Mr. Pearson, we c annot emulate the Indians. We do not possess that
divine power. I have been wonder -struck to see their work with my own
eyes."
Then he gave a moving eye -witness account of the heroism of the Indian workers:
"The satyagraha struggle was going on. D uring that period one day I was31coming from Durban. I alighted at Phoenix Station. At a little distance
from that station there is an open square. There, about five hundred Indians
were sitting together in a group. They had come there after going on a
strike in their factory. They were surrounded from all sides by the white
managers, their staff and white police. I tarried there for half an hour to see
what would happen. Whiplashes began to descend on the backs of the
Indians sitting there, in quick rapidity, without stop. The whites beat them
with sticks and said, 'Get up, do your work. Will you go for duty or not?`
But nobody rose. They sat, quite motionless. They would reply calmly,
'We will not report for duty, so long as Gandhi Raja is in j ail.` When whips
and sticks failed, gun butts came to be used. The whites now began to beat
ladies and children also, along with the men. Some screamed, but none
would budge. At last mounted police arrived and horses were made to run
over them. 'Get up , otherwise you would be crushed,` they warned. The
horses made their way through the legs and backs of some persons. Their
skin was torn; the horses' feet caused wounds; they continued to bleed and
groaned with pain, but did not move.
"Meanwhile t he police brought there an Indian foreman. He was
regarded as their leader. He gave bold replies. In reward to his fearless
replies, cruelties began to be inflicted upon him. The spectacle of this
torture made me shiver.
"Just then a police offi cer ordered the policemen belonging to my
community, 'Spear this man. Don't just stand and stare. All this is due to
this wicked man.` Those policemen immediately complied with the orders
and pierced that leader of the workers with a spear. This inflam ed the
workers somewhat and taking that as an excuse, police opened fire, killing
one or two persons. The 'leader` breathed his last. Others were injured.
But no one moved from the place where they were sitting.
"Trembling at the cruelty of thos e white men that I had witnessed and
amazed at the Himalayan firmness of the Indians, I walked away..."
Dube continued:
"But Mr. Pearson, we will be totally ruined if I ask my people to follow
this path. Howsoever illiterate, ignorant, uncultured and wild the Indian
workers may be, in their veins there runs the blood which is invigorated
with the glory of the ancient culture of the Indians. After getting such a
leader as Gandhi that culture has found a renewal. Their original divine
power manifeste d itself again and they could display extraordinary
endurance. If our Natives come in their place, nobody can control their
violent nature. For their safety they would certainly retaliate. The white
men of this place require only this much. If any brot her of mine kills a
white man after being excited, it would precipitate a great disaster upon us.32Thousands of brothers of mine would be put to death in no time and we
would be totally ruined. We do not possess so much prowess also to wage a
satyagraha struggle. Only the strength of the Indians can endure it."
While, as an Indian, I greatly appreciate the handsome tribute paid by Dube to
Indian workers and to Gandhiji, I feel that he was perhaps very much influenced
by the frustration following the Bambata rebellion. For, at that very time, African
women in the Orange Free State were carrying on an effective non -violent
resistance movement against the pass laws.
Dube was certainly right in his assumption that white public opinion at the time
would have been hardly outraged by violence and savagery against Africans. The
success of the Indian movement depended partly on patient efforts by Gandhiji to
develop understanding and support for the cause of the Indian community -
among whites in South Af rica, as well as in India and Britain. The violence
against Indian women and workers in 1913 so outraged opinion in India that the
Indian and British Governments had to intervene and prevail on the South African
regime to bend and compromise.
What wa s most lacking on the African side was perhaps the type of leadership
which Gandhiji gave to the Indian people -a leadership by example of courage,
perseverance and sacrifice. It took time for the Africans to develop such a
leadership and launch the Defia nce Campaign in 1952. That campaign put an end
to the myth that the African people were too "uncivilised" to follow the example
of the "civilised" Indians. It also helped promote a powerful international
movement of solidarity with all the oppressed peopl e of South Africa.
In the long and difficult struggle since then, in cooperation with Indians and
others, the African people and their leaders won the admiration of India and the
world.33GANDHIJI AND AFRICANS IN SOUTH AFRICA29
"My aim is not to be consistent with my previous
statements on a given question, but to be consistent with
truth as it may present itself to me at a given moment...
My words and deeds are dictated by prevailing
conditions. There has been a gradual evolution in my
environment and I react to it as a satyagrahi. "
"I would like to say to the diligent reader of my
writings and to others who are interested in them that I
am not at all concerned with appearing to be consistent.
In my search after Truth I have discarded many ideas
and learnt many new things. Old as I am in age, I have
no feeling that I have ceased to grow inwardly or that
my growth will stop at the dissolution of the flesh. What
I am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of
Truth, my God, from moment to moment and, therefore,
when anybody finds any inconsistency between any two
writings of mine, if he has still faith in my sanity, he
would do well to choose the later of the two on the same
subject."
Gandhiji often cautioned his readers not to look for consistency in
his writings as they reflected truth as it appeared to him at a
particular time. His thinking had evolved through his experience -
his "experiments with truth" -while he kept his mind open to
influences from varied sources. He had no hesitation to admit his
errors and change his views. To quote his writings out of their
context, ignoring the evolution of his thinking, would be most
misleading.
The danger of drawing conclusions from isolated quotations is
perhaps greatest in regard to his sojourn in South Africa as it was
there that he developed his philosophy and became transformed
from a barrister seeking gainful employment to a leader identifying
himself with the poorest of the poor as he led the satyagraha which
was to ha ve a great impact on world history.
Unfortunately many critics of Gandhiji have ignored his caution.
29Revision of paper pres ented to a seminar of the Southern Africa Research
Program at Yale University, March 31, 199334Nowhere is this more flagrant than in the description of his attitude
toward the indigenous Africans of South Africa.
The criticisms originated l argely from some Marxists who
described him as an agent of Gujarati capitalists and berated him for
leading a movement of Indians rather than promoting a joint
struggle of Africans and Indians for freedom from racist domination.
They represent the preconc eptions of the critics rather than the facts.
Gandhiji arrived in South Africa in 1893 as an employee of a
Gujarati merchant for a year. When he agreed to stay on in South
Africa to serve the Indian community, he was provided retainers by
Indian merc hants to enable him to live in proper style as a barrister
and entertain Europeans. He helped found the Natal Indian Congress
which was an "elite" organisation like the Indian National Congress.
But Gandhiji soon developed contacts with the poorer sections of
the Indian community, including indentured labourers. He served
them as a volunteer in a hospital and provided free legal services.
He moved to Johannesburg in 1902 and had a flourishing legal
practice, but devoted most of his income for the c ommunity's
interests. After the launching of the satyagraha , he gave up his legal
practice and identified himself with the "coolies" in his way of life
more than most Marxists have been able to. The workers played a
heroic role in the satyagraha , while mo st merchants were equivocal.
That would make him a strange representative or agent of the
capitalists.
As for the criticism of Gandhiji for not promoting a joint struggle
with the Africans, the critics ignore the fact that Gandhiji dedicated
himself t o the struggle for the dignity of the Indian community -that
is, a struggle of a small community of aliens or recent settlers for
their civil rights -and hoped to return to India to serve his
motherland. He made no pretensions to lead the Africans -thesons
and daughters of the soil -to liberation; that would have been quite
improper.30
A modern national movement had developed earlier in India than
in South Africa. The impact of that movement, together with the
leadership of Gandhiji, enabled the Indian community to launch a
mass struggle. Gandhiji always led in sacrifice and inspired a band
of volunteers to flinch at no sacrifice. The African movement was
30After his return to India, Gandhiji declined many invitations to visit the United
States and other countries, and explained that he wished to devote his energie s to his task in India.
He made no pretensions to spread a gospel around the world and said repeatedly that his life and
work were his message.35still in its infancy and its leaders were not yet prepared to confront
the racist regime. No united or joint struggle was feasible at that
time. But Gandhiji supported the aspirations of the Africans and the
Coloured people.
In the 1920s and 1930s, close colleagues of Gandhiji like Mrs.
Sarojini Naidu, the Reverend C.F. Andrews and Pandit Ja waharlal
Nehru were outspoken in advocating that the Indians should identify
themselves with the African majority. While appreciating that
sentiment, Gandhiji was cautious about calls from India for a joint
struggle in South Africa.
He had to respond to urgent appeals from the leaders of the Indian
community for help in alleviating grievances and preventing new
discriminatory laws. He was disappointed that they had forsaken the
spirit of satyagraha but could not ask them to wait for the eventual
libera tion of the country.
Moreover, as the architect of a mighty united front in the struggle
of Indians in South Africa, and later of the masses of people in
India, Gandhiji was conscious of the prerequisites for a joint
struggle.
When the matter came up in the 1930s, Dr. Dadoo and others who
advocated a united front with Africans did not enjoy a clear majority
support in the Indian community. The African National Congress
was weak and the African leaders did not seek a united front with
the India ns. It was only in 1950 that the leaders of the ANC were
persuaded to go beyond African nationalism and build a multi -racial
alliance for liberation.
Gandhiji was also concerned that any attempts by Indians to lead
the Africans would be unwise and da ngerous. Dr. Dadoo and Dr.
Naicker made a great contribution by espousing joint action under
African leadership. In the course of the struggle, Nelson Mandela,
Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu and other Africans emerged as great
leaders. Dr. Dadoo and Dr. Naic ker came to be recognised by the
Africans as among the giants of the liberation struggle.
Meanwhile, Gandhiji, by his example, earned the respect of
Africans and his thought has had a profound influence on the South
African liberation movement. It ha s had an equally significant
impact on the freedom movement of the African -Americans in the
United States.
The Marxists, though ill -advised, deserve attention as they made a36significant contribution to African -Indian unity and a united struggle
since the 1940s at considerable sacrifice. Of a different character are
those who have made no contribution to the liberation struggle but
ventured to write articles and books criticising Gandhiji by quoting
from his earliest writings alone. Maureen Swan's Gand hi: the
South African Experience is an example of an armchair
revolutionary trying to comment on how Gandhiji should have
conducted the struggle and denigrate him. She wrote:
"In choosing not to attempt to ally with the articulate
politicised element s in either the Coloured or African
communities, Gandhi facilitated the implementation of the
divisive segregationist policies which helped ease the task of
white minority rule in South Africa."
I wonder why this self -styled radical espousing the interest s of the
"under -class" prefers an alliance only with the "articulate politicised
elements".
She then attacks Gandhiji because in response to discrimination
against Indians by the Europeans, he wrote in 1903: "We believe as
much in the purity of race a s we think they (Europeans) do."
The fact is that the Europeans used "purity of race" -their master
race -as an excuse to confine the others to miserable ghettoes with
hardly any services. Gandhiji, like many African leaders, held that
their people too had feelings about their social life. They did not
oppose segregation (which was a means) but condemned
discrimination and repression.31
The European rulers enforced racial segregation and differential
policies well before Gandhiji arrived in Sou th Africa. They tried to
incite Africans against the Indians and attempted to degrade the
status of the Indians. Neither the racist authorities nor the oppressed
people ever claimed that Gandhiji's efforts to avert such degradation
and seek basic human ri ghts for the Indian community helped the
imposition of apartheid. That was left to Maureen Swan and other
"experts".
It is unfortunate that there has been little serious study of the
evolution of Gandhiji's attitudes toward the Africans and the
Coloured people, or of the impact of his life and philosophy on the
liberation struggle in South Africa.32This paper is an attempt to deal
31It may be recalled that it was not until 1954 that the "separate and equal"
doctrine was rejected by the Supre me Court in the United States.
32An article by Dr. James D. Hunt on "Gandhi and the Black People of South37with the subject, and I hope it will encourage further study.
EVOLUTION THROUGH EXPERIENCE
Gandhiji was influenc ed for several years after his arrival in
South Africa by the racist prejudices prevalent in the European and
Indian communities. He outgrew them only after he passed the stage
of "petition politics", launched the satyagraha and widened his
friendships.
In the early writings of Gandhiji, there are frequent references to
"raw Kaffirs ", describing them as lazy, uncivilised and even savage.
He argued that Indians were civilised and should not be subjected to
repressive legislation like Africans. (There was little knowledge of
African history and civilisation at that time). It was only during the
later years of his stay in South Africa, when an African national
movement was emerging, and he came to know the Africans, that
he avoided derogatory expression s and espoused African rights. His
views advanced further after he returned to India. In an interview
with the Reverend S. S. Tema in 1939, he said:
"They (the Indians) may not put themselves in opposition to
your legitimate aspirations, or run you do wn as `savages'
while exalting themselves as cultured people in order to secure
concessions for themselves at your expense."33
In July 1946, when white gangsters were brutally attacking Indian
passive resisters in Durban, he declared that he would not shed a
single tear if all Indian satyagrahis were wiped out, for they would
point the way to the Africans.34
I would suggest that the evolution of the thinking of Gandhiji may
be divided into three periods, and that the attitudes towards Africans
might best be understood in that context.
From 1893 to 1906, he was engaged in "petition politics". His
public service consisted mainly of drafting petitions and organising
community support for them, and promoting improvement of the
community by self -help. He was a lawyer and a public servant or
adviser rather than the leader. The petitions were influenced by
Africa" in Gandhi Marg , New Delhi, April -June 1989, is perhaps the only worthwhile study of the
subject. Dr. Hunt, however, does not trace the evoluti on of Gandhiji's thinking after he left South
Africa in 1914.
33Harijan , February 13, 1939; Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Volume 68,
pages 272 -74
34Harijan , July 21, 1946; Collected Works , Volume 84, pages 422 -2338community sentiment and a legal (rather than political) approach.
His commitment to non -violence was limited to personal behaviour.
The second period begins in August 1906, when he decided to
defy the Asiatic Law Amendment Ordinance of the Transvaal
which he considered humiliating. The passive resistance movement
was launched in 1907.35Gandhiji served his first term of
imprisonment in January 1908. Soon after, he rejected "Western
civilisation" and "discovered" satyagraha which became the
guiding principle of his life. Non -violence was now extended to the
resistance of people against injustice, though not to actions of the
State.
The r adical change in his outlook, the experience of simple living
in the Phoenix Settlement in the midst of African communities, and
perhaps his friendship with intellectuals like Olive Schreiner, led to
a rejection of any feeling of racial superiority and to respect for the
African people.
During both these periods, Gandhiji retained faith in the British
Empire, and considered himself a "citizen of the Empire".
The third period began in 1920, after he returned to India, when
he lost faith in B ritain and became a "non -cooperator". His
approach to issues was now that of a political leader, committed to
ethical values, and was little influenced by his training as a lawyer.
Non-violence became a creed of universal application. He developed
an inte rnational outlook as his work in India attracted attention
abroad and resulted in friendships with pacifists and others in
several countries.
This evolution explains the inconsistencies in Gandhiji`s writings
and speeches. For an understanding of the se, it is also necessary to
take into account certain aspects of the Indian struggle in South
Africa during Gandhiji`s stay in that country.
It was not against apartheid nor a challenge to the legitimacy of
European rule in South Africa. Nor wa s it to secure a special status
for Indians and set up a caste system in South Africa, though that
could have been the response of the authorities.36It was a struggle
35Gandhiji rejected the term "passive resistance" and coined the word
"satyagraha ". But the term "passive resistance" is often used in this paper as it is more commonly
known.
36Gandhiji`s own thinking was that non -Europeans would gain equality during a
long process in which they advanced to European standards and European public opinion was
educated.39by members of the small Indian community for the rights they had
been solemnly promis ed by imperial Britain and enjoyed, to an
extent, until the local European settlers gained self -government and
began a process of degradation of the Indians. The community,
under the advice of Gandhiji, soon abandoned its claim even for
limited franchise rights, so that there was no question of aspiring to
join Europeans in the oppression of the indigenous people.
What was at stake was not only the rights of Indians -or, rather,
the mere right not to be harassed or humiliated -but the security and
survival of the entire community. The danger was real as the mass
deportation of Chinese labourers in 1906 -7 showed.
Many of the Indians in South Africa -especially the traders and
their staff -were alien settlers with families and property in Ind ia.37
Their position was very different from that of the African people.
The status of the Indians was not, as is assumed, higher than that of
Africans in all respects.38The Indians were very vulnerable.
Any indication of an attempt by Indians to incit e the Africans to
confront the authorities in struggle for emancipation would have led
to such a hysteria among the whites as to endanger the entire
community. That is why perhaps there appears to be a deliberate
omission in the writings of Gandhiji of his discussions with African
leaders.
Moreover, for Gandhiji in particular, the Indian struggle was,
above all, for the honour of the "Motherland", India. It was an
extension of India`s national movement for freedom.
Gandhiji often stressed that t hesatyagraha struggle was not to
gain individual rights but to ensure "national" dignity. It was limited
to demands for the repeal of legislation which constituted "national"
insult.
If it was precipitated by the racist animosity of the rulers in Sou th
Africa, it was inspired and encouraged by the resurgence of the
He was opposed to "class legislation" -different provisions for different communities in law, as
distinct from administrative discrimination -as that was humiliating and would inhibit this
evolution.
37Gandhiji frequently referred to Indians as "settlers" even in the 1930s.
38The three pound tax was levied only on Indians who had completed indenture
and their families. Restriction of inter -provincial movement applied only to Indians. Indian s alone
were prohibited from the Orange Free State. Indians became the targets of European hostility as
they competed with European traders and skilled labour. Many of the laws and municipal
regulations were designed to harass them. They alone had to face attempts to force them out of the
country.40national movement in India after the partition of Bengal. The
dramatic burning of the registration certificates in Johannesburg in
1908 was perhaps inspired by the burning of foreign cloth in the
Swadeshi movement in India.
EARLY YEARS IN NATAL, 1893 -1901
Gandhiji went to South Africa as a young man of 23. Though
unsuccessful in India in his profession as a barrister, he was
proficient in drafting memorials. He was also an admirer of the
British Empire, and loyal to the British Constitution and the Crown.
He believed that British rule was beneficial to India. But, though not
active in politics, he was influenced by Indian nationalism and pride
in Indian civilisation and culture.
Within two weeks of his arrival in South Africa, travelling from
Durban to Pretoria, he was ordered to remove his turban in the
Durban Magistrate`s Court, thrown off a train at Pietermaritzburg,
assaulted by a coachman on the way from Charleston to St anderton
for refusing to sit on the footboard, and denied a room in a hotel in
Johannesburg. Later in Pretoria, he was thrown off a sidewalk by a
policeman and was obliged to obtain an exemption from the curfew.
He heard of the humiliations faced by the Indians, and was told
by Abdul Gani, a prominent Indian in Johannesburg: "Only wecan
live in a land like this, because, for making money, we do not mind
pocketing insults..." He wrote in his autobiography:
"I saw that South Africa was no country for a self -
respecting Indian, and my mind became more and more
occupied with the question as to how this state of things might
be improved."39
The small Indian community was dispersed and divided.
The majority of Indians were indentured laboure rs-mainly from
Tamil Nadu, Andhra, Bihar and eastern Uttar Pradesh -living under
semi -slave conditions, or labourers who completed their contracts
and became "free Indians". Many of the latter were able to obtain
small plots of land and engage in marke t gardening. They made
great sacrifices to enable their children to obtain education and
secure clerical and other jobs.
39Autobiography , Part II, Chapter XIII, page 13141In addition, there were Indian traders and their employees who
followed the labourers. They were known as "passenger Indians" as
they paid their own passage to South Africa. The traders were
mainly Muslims from Gujarat and their employees were largely
Hindu. The traders were isolated from the labourers and had little
contact even with the Natal -born children of free Indians.
When Gandhiji arrived in South Africa, there were about 51,000
Indians in Natal. Of these, 16,000 were indentured labourers; about
30,000 were "free Indians". Five thousand belonged to the trading
community. There were another 12,000 Indians in the Transva al and
a smaller number in the Cape.
Little information is available on Indian -African relations at that
time.
It was reported in the 1870s that while Africans refused to work
for the whites, Indian merchants and farmers had little trouble in
obtaining good black labour.40
Later, however, as Africans entered trade and skilled work,
competition developed between them and the Indians.
James Stuart papers, a diary of oral evidence relating to the
history and attitudes of the Zulu people at the turn of the century,
contains a few stray items indicating tension between Africans and
Indians. One African complained that Indians could buy land,
though they were aliens, while Africans could not. Several
complained that Indian farmers were industr ious and ploughed up
the land they bought so that the Africans could not use it to graze
their cattle. Another said that Indians took up positions as domestic
servants or workers in hotels and restaurants, clerks in courts etc.,
and prevented African adva ncement. But the papers reflect some
admiration for the Indians, rather than serious animosity.41
Among the Europeans, however, anti -Indian feeling was rampant.
Indian indentured labour had developed the economy of Natal, but
with the increase in th e number of "free Indians" and Indian traders,
the Europeans faced competition. Moreover, they saw the very
existence of the Indians, except as labourers under semi -slave
conditions, as a menace to the system of white domination based on
40Natal, Blue Book 1979 , "Inanda Division Report", quoted by Manning Marable
inAfrican Nationalist: The Life of John Langalibalele Dube , Ph. D. dissertation, page 77.
41The James Stuart Archive of Recorded Oral Evidence relating to the History of
the Zulu and Neighbouring Peoples , Volume I, pages 103, 147 -48, 157, 222, 231. University of
Natal Press, Pietermaritzburg, and Killie Campbell Africana Library, Durban, 19 76.42colour. They sou ght to repress and humiliate the Indians in the same
way as the Natives, make their life uncomfortable and force them to
re-indenture or leave. They tried to incite Africans against Indians so
as to divert attention from repression of both.
Natal was granted self -government in 1893, and its legislature
rushed to consider laws against Indians. The Franchise Amendment
Bill of 1894, to deprive Indians of their limited franchise, was a first
step.42
Gandhiji agreed, at the request of Indian merchant s in Durban, to
cancel his return to India and help in organising an effective
campaign against the franchise legislation. The campaign brought
together the merchants and their employees, as well as Natal -born
Indians. The British Government refused its a ssent after the Indians
sent a "monster petition" signed by ten thousand persons.43
The same year, Gandhiji helped establish the Natal Indian
Congress, the oldest political organisation in South Africa. He chose
the name "Congress" as "the Congress [I ndian National Congress]
was the very life of India".44
He stayed on in Durban for continued public service to the Indian
community. An income of £300 a year was assured for him by
retainers from several Indian merchants, so that he could live in
style as a barrister since that was considered essential.
He rented a house in Beach Grove, opposite the house of Harry
Escombe, a leading lawyer and later Attorney -General. He made
some friends among the Europeans and entertained whites and
Indians t ogether at his home.45
He developed broader contacts with the Indian community. He
helped promote the advancement of the "Colonial -born" Indians -
mostly educated youth, many of them Christians. He provided free
legal services to indentured laboure rs and volunteered as a
compounder at a charitable hospital for Indians, thus getting in touch
with the poorer sections of the community. The knowledge and
42The Indian population of Natal was then about 51,000 as against 50,000
Europeans and 400,000 Africans. There were 9,309 European voters and only 251 Indian voters.
(Collected Works , Volume 1, page 274 and Volume 2, page 3).
43But a revised bill in 1896, omitting mention of Indians in its text, but serving
the same purpose, received assent.
44Autobiography , Part II, Chap. XIX, page 149
45Autobiography , Part II, Chapter XXIII, page 162; Memoir of Vincent Lawrence,
formerly confidential clerk of Gandh iji, at UNISA Documentation Centre for African Studies,
Pretoria.43respect he thus gained proved crucial for the satyagraha in its final
stage.
But there is hardl y any information on Gandhiji`s contacts with
the Africans in the 1890s. His attitudes towards the Africans were
perhaps influenced by those of the older Indian residents -
particularly the traders and their accountants and clerks, most of
whom spoke his l anguage, Gujarati.46
Main concern to influence European opinion
The main preoccupation of Gandhiji during the period of "petition
politics" -and even after satyagraha was launched -was to secure
understanding and support among the whites who had t he power,
since it was the white authorities who were enacting discriminatory
legislation against Indians. African opinion was of little
consequence in preventing such legislation and securing the rights of
Indians.
As a petitioner, lawyer and publi cist, Gandhiji claimed rights for
the Indians on the basis of their citizenship in the British Empire -
and solemn promises made by the British Government.47He argued
that the discriminatory laws were against "the spirit of the British
46Indians were particularly prominent in retail trade in the African market.
Especially in the smaller communities outside Durban, the Indian traders learnt Zulu. Since the
Indians spoke many different languages, Zulu was often the means of communication among
Indians. The Indian traders knew Africans mainly as customers, employees and tenants,
Indian indentured labourers had a different relationship with Africans, as the plantati on owners
employed Zulu guards with their assegais to control and punish them, thereby arousing fear,
contempt and hatred.
47Queen Victoria had said in a proclamation of 1858 to the people of India:
"We hold ourselves bound to the natives of our In dian territories by the
same obligations of duty which bind us to all our other subjects..."
In 1875, Lord Salisbury, Secretary of State for India, in agreeing to the
resumption of recruitment of Indian labour for Natal, had stated that the labourers
after their indenture would be "free men in all respects, with privileges no whit
inferior to those of any other class of Her Majesty`s subjects resident in the
colonies".
Lord Ripon, when Secretary of State for the Colonies, affirmed, in reply to a
representation from Natal:
"The Queen's Indian subjects were entitled to the same rights in the
Colonies as all her other subjects."44Constitution" and " notions of British justice".48He believed that the
colour prejudice in South Africa was contrary to British traditions
and was only local and temporary.49He tried to persuade the
Europeans that Indians were civilised and that they could be good
citizens .
The question of identification with Africa or with the Africans
was hardly considered by the Indian community at that time.50
Responding to the fears of the Europeans of being "swamped" by
Indians, Gandhiji and the Indian community soon aband oned the
demand for equal rights with the Europeans. They did not press for
political (as distinct from municipal) franchise; agreed in principle
to restriction of Indian immigration; and were prepared to accept
administrative discrimination in many fields so long as there was no
colour bar in legislation.
Gandhiji and the Indian community opposed classification with
Africans in matters concerning residence, trade and seating in trains
and tramways. They have been criticised as "racist" because of thi s
but that is unfair.51
Africans had been deprived of all rights even before the arrival of
Gandhiji. The indentured Indians were under semi -slave conditions.
The rest of the Indians were being deprived of rights they were
promised and enjoyed. They co uld not be expected to welcome
degradation as supposed solidarity with the Africans. The Coloured
people, too, resisted classification with the Africans.
A fear spread by anti -Asiatics was that if rights were granted to
Indians, they would then nee d to be extended to the Natives, which
was, to them, unthinkable.
Gandhiji tried initially to avoid comparison between Indians and
Africans,52merely stressing the promises made to Indians by Britain
48For instance, petition to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, August 11,
1895, in Collected Works , Volume 1, s ee pages 233 and 235, paragraphs 4 and 13.
49Autobiography , Part II, Chapter XXVI, page 172
50The first time that was brought up was perhaps in a speech by Miss Elizabeth
Molteno at an Indian meeting in January 1914 when she called on them to recognise Afr ica as
their Motherland and become worthy children of Africa. Andrews, C.F. What I Owe to Christ ,
page 243; Chaturvedi, Benarsidas and Marjorie Sykes, Charles Freer Andrews , page 11.
51No other community -for instance the European or Jewish immigrants -has
been criticised for seeking rights of which the Africans were deprived.
52See petition to the Natal Legislative Council, July 6, 1894, paragraph 9 in
Collected Works , Volume 1, page 142; and petition to Lord Ripon, Secretary of State for the
Colonies, J uly 1894, paragraph 20, in Ibid., page 152.45or suggesting rights for all non -Europeans.53But t his could win him
little sympathy from the Europeans, and he felt obliged to take
account of their prejudices. In the process, Gandhiji imbibed and
gave expression to the racist prejudices of the whites which were
shared to some extent by the Kholwa (educated Christian Africans).
Disparaging remarks about Africans
The first eight volumes of Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi ,
covering the period until 1908, contain frequent references to
Kaffirs54and derogatory remarks about them, as well as asserti ons of
superiority of Indians over the Natives. It was only from 1908 that
he avoided use of the term Kaffir .
In an Open Letter to the members of the Natal Legislature in
December 1894, he wrote:
"A general belief seems to prevail in the Colo ny that the
Indians are little better, if at all, than savages or the Natives of
Africa. Even the children are taught to believe in that manner,
with the result that the Indian is being dragged down to the
position of a raw Kaffir ."55
On September 26, 1896, Gandhiji delivered an address at a public
meeting in Bombay on the grievances of South African Indians. He
elaborated on the insults, repressive laws and humiliations faced by
Indians, and was carried away by his anger to make an insensitive
and t houghtless statement reflecting the prevalent prejudices about
the Africans:
"Ours is a continual struggle against a degradation sought to
be inflicted upon us by the Europeans, who desire to degrade
us to the level of the raw Kaffir whose occupation is hunting,
and whose sole ambition is to collect a certain number of
cattle to buy a wife with and, then, pass his life in indolence
and nakedness."56
53He wrote to the editor of Times of Natal on October 25, 1894:
"The Indians do not regret that capable Natives can exercise the
franchise. They would regret if it were otherwise." ( Collected Works ,
Volume 1 , pages 166 -67).
54The term Kaffir was in common use in South Africa at the time, and even
educated Christian Zulus -theKholwa -used the term for the other Zulus.
But Gandhiji must have been conscious that the term was derogatory as it was used in India
against the Hindus.
55Collected Works , Volume 1, page 177
56Collected Works , Volume 2, page 7446In a petition he drafted in 1899 concerning the designation of an
Indian location, he wrote:
"Your petitioner has seen the Location intended to be used
by the Indians. It would place them, who are undoubtedly
infinitely superior to the Kaffirs, in close proximity to the
latter."57
In "notes on the Indian question" he prepared in India in Ma y
1902, he wrote about Natal:
"The indigenous people, that is, the Zulus, are a fine body
of men, but they are very lazy, and will with difficulty work at
a stretch for six months."58
The remarks were most derogatory against African prisoners in
accounts of jail experiences. He wrote in Indian Opinion (March 7,
1908):
"Many of the Native prisoners are only one degree removed
from the animal and often created rows and fought among
themselves in their cells."
It must be noted, however, that the Indian political prisoners
sentenced to hard labour were housed with hardened African
criminals and faced not only discomfort but fear for their safety.
African and Indian interests
Gandhiji was well aware that European traders resented Indian
compe tition, and perhaps of complaints by European trade unionists
about competition by free Indians. But there was little publicity
about competition between Indians and Africans, and Gandhiji
seemed unaware at first of any conflict of interest between them o r
of antipathy by Africans towards Indians.
Indians believed the propaganda that Europeans obtained labour
from India since the Natives were "lazy" and undependable. They
did not recognise that the import of Indian labour was designed to
bring down Af rican wages.
Many of the free Indians -especially children of labourers,
known as "colonial -born Indians" -became cooks, waiters, clerks,
57Collected Works , Volume 3, page 76
58Collected Works , Volume 3, page 24347teachers, interpreters, compositors, photographers, compounders
etc., and there must have been competition wi th the Africans. But
there is little information on the extent of competition.
The relations between Africans and Indians were strained, and
some whites were trying to fan conflict between Africans and
Indians in order to intimidate the Indians. Whe n Gandhiji returned
from India in January 1897, they not only organised lynch mobs of
Europeans, but instigated a demonstration by five or six hundred
Africans armed with sticks.59
Gandhiji seems to have felt that since Indians did not seek
political power, they were not in conflict with the aspirations of
Africans as the "sons of the soil".
But from the late 1890s, he opposed the system of indentured
labour not only because it humiliated Indians, but also because the
import of Indian labour w as detrimental to the interests of the
Africans.
He wrote in 1916, when he was leading a campaign for the
abolition of indentured labour, that the effect of abolition of slavery
was largely neutralised by the dissatisfied slave -owner resorting to
thedodge of indentured labour.
"The yoke, if it fell from the Negro`s black neck, was
transferred to the brown neck of the Indian. In the process of
transfer, it had to be somewhat polished, it had to be lightened
in weight and even disguised. Neverthe less, in all its
essentials, it retained its original quality..."60
One of the greatest achievements of Gandhiji, arising from his
South African experience, was indeed the abolition of the indentured
labour system in India which had lasted more than 70 years as the
successor to slavery.61
AFTER THE SOUTH AFRICAN WAR: EMERGENCE AS A
POLITICAL LEADER
Gandhiji returned to India in 1901 but was called back in 1902 to
59Collected Works , Volume 2, pages 242 -44
60Collected Works , Volume 13, pages 24 7-50
61Recruitment of indentured labour for Natal was stopped by India in 1911; the
indentured labour system was prohibited a few years later.48lead a deputation to Joseph Chamberlain after the Anglo -Boer War.
During the yea r in India, he had attended the session of the Indian
National Congress and met many of its leaders. He spent much time
with Gopal Krishna Gokhale, his mentor. He became much more
political.
He recognised that the position of Indians in the Transvaal had
become worse under the new British administration. The British
Government had given the oppression of the British Indian subjects
as one of the causes of the war with the Boer Government of the
South African Republic, but the British administrators r etained and
supplemented all the discriminatory laws and enforced them with
greater efficiency and callousness.
Gandhiji decided, this time on his own initiative, to stay in South
Africa and enrolled in Johannesburg as an attorney. He helped set up
the Transvaal British Indian Association in 1903: a leading Indian
merchant was elected President and Gandhiji acted as secretary.
He also founded the weekly Indian Opinion in 1903 to inform and
unite the Indians all over South Africa, to secure unde rstanding and
goodwill among the Europeans, and to promote support from India
and Britain. He established a settlement at Phoenix, near Durban, in
1904 and moved Indian Opinion there. Though he resided in
Johannesburg until the beginning of 1913, he often visited Phoenix
and Durban.
He also began to speak at a number of public meetings outside the
Indian community. He became a public figure in the country, not
merely an adviser to the Indian community, though his primary
concern remained the security and dignity of the Indian community.
He established contacts and developed friendships with a large
number of liberal Europeans -churchmen, journalists, lawyers,
politicians etc.62Some of them became his close associates in the
struggle for the "Indi an cause"; some became members of the
Committee of European Sympathisers with the cause; and some
helped in Parliament to secure approval for the settlement in 1914.
Coloured and African organisations began to be formed at this
time, and Gandhiji came to know some of their leaders. Though
Indian Opinion was devoted almost wholly to Indian affairs,
62Gandhiji wrote in Satyagraha in South Africa that many European liberals were
sympathetic to African aspiration s but not to the Indians.
They had to be persuaded to support the minimum demands of the Indians.49Gandhiji occasionally contributed reports and editorials on
developments concerning other groups.
In 1906 two important and seemingly contradictory d evelopments
took place in Gandhiji`s life.
First, his service as head of the Stretcher -Bearer Corps with the
Natal Militia fighting the Zulus in rebellion.
Second, his decision to defy an obnoxious law against Asiatics in
the Transvaal and his " discovery" of satyagraha .
These two developments are briefly reviewed here as they
represent a change in the general outlook of Gandhiji and hence his
attitude to the indigenous people.
Stretcher -Bearer during the Zulu Rebellion
Gandhiji had or ganised an Indian Ambulance Corps during the
Anglo -Boer War to show that Indians were good British citizens,
though his sympathies were with the Boers.63He saw the Zulu
rebellion of 1906, provoked by a poll tax, as another opportunity for
Indians to show that Indians were willing and able to shoulder the
responsibilities of citizenship. The Natal Indian Congress recruited
and paid for a corps of twenty stretcher -bearers, with Gandhiji as
Sergeant -Major, and it served for a little over a month.64
Gandhiji was not unaware of the moral issues,65nor perhaps of
the sentiments of the Zulus.66But he argued:
63He wrote:
"I felt that if I demanded rights as a British citizen, it was also my duty,
as such, to participate in the defence of the British
Empir e."(Autobiography , Part III, Chapter 10, page 214).
The Indian Ambulance Corps of 1,100 men -about 300 free Indians and the
rest indentured -served for six weeks.
64This was particularly significant when it is realised that Indians were al so liable
to a poll -tax-and many Indians were fined or jailed for not paying the tax in time. (Editorial in
Indian Opinion , March 17, 1906).
65InIndian Opinion of April 14, 1906, he wrote about the killing of 12 Africans
by whites and the death of some of those who shot the Africans in an ensuing battle with Bambata
and his men. He said: "Such is the law of God. The executioners met their death within two days."
66Prabhudas Gandhi, a grandnephew of Mahatma Gandhi, wrote in his memoirs
that the family w as in great fear during the Zulu rebellion.
"Phoenix was in a Zulu area. Seeing the Indian residents supporting the
whites against them the Zulus could have attacked the settlement and
completely destroyed it. But it was Gandhiji`s greatness that eve n when he50"What is our duty during these calamitous times in the
Colony? It is not for us to say whether the revolt of the Kaffirs
is justified or not. We are in Natal by virtue of British power.
Our very existence depends upon it. It is therefore our duty to
render whatever help we can."67
Fortunately, the Corps was assigned to minister to the Zulus who
had been brutally flogged or wounded, and performe d a
humanitarian service, as the Europeans were unwilling to treat the
Zulus.
If Gandhiji undertook ambulance work, it was not because he
was against raising combat soldiers. Indian Opinion had been
calling for a permanent Volunteer Corps in which I ndians would get
military training and be issued weapons.
Gandhiji did not make any moral distinction between soldiers and
members of an ambulance corps. He wrote in 1928, referring to his
participation in ambulance work:
"I draw no distinction between those who wield the
weapons of destruction and those who do Red Cross work.
Both participate in war and advance its cause. Both are guilty
of the crime of war."68
The Reverend Joseph J. Doke, Gandhiji`s first biographer, wrote
of Gandhiji`s wor k in the Stretcher -Bearer Corps:
"Mr. Gandhi speaks with great reserve of this experience.
What he saw he will never divulge. I imagine it was not
always creditable to British humanity. As a man of peace,
hating the very thought of war, it was almost intolerable for
him to be so closely in touch with this expedition. At times he
doubted whether his position was right. No one besides his
men, however, was prepared to do the work, and sheer pity for
the sufferers forbade them to relinquish it. Not infre quently,
the condition of the lashed men who were placed in their
charge, was appalling, the wounds filthy, their lives hanging in
the balance... So these Indians toiled at their irksome tasks day
after day, cleansing wounds, binding up rents which the las h
helped the whites he never lost the friendship of the Zulus. In fact, he
became known as a well -wisher of the Zulus who became friends of the
Phoenix Settlement for ever." (Gandhi, Prabhudas, My Childhood with
Gandhiji , page 42. Ahmedabad: Navaji van Publishing House, 1957.)
67Collected Works , Volume 5, page 282
68Collected Works , Volume 37, page 26951had made, carrying the helpless men behind the cavalry, up
and down the hills for twenty and twenty -five miles at a
stretch, or attending to the sanitation of the camp."69
Gandhiji never quite understood the Zulu rebellion.70He saw
the event as a refusal by one man, Chief Bambata, to pay the poll tax
and a manhunt by the whites who proceeded to perpetrate "horrors"
on the Zulus.71
The short period of service in the Stretcher -Bearer Corps was
important in Gandhiji`s life and it may well have g reatly
strengthened his attachment to non -violent resistance. The sense of
betrayal by Britain, soon after his loyal service to the authorities in
Natal, helped transform the petitioner into a challenger of
oppression.
The Satyagraha
When the Transva al Government issued the Asiatic Ordinance
requiring Indians to register, with finger print impressions, and show
the registrations to the police when asked, Gandhiji decided, for the
first time, to defy the law. In his mind, the issue was not merely one
of carrying passes. Indians were to be treated as criminals.72
Leaders of the Indian community enthusiastically supported this
course, and a mass meeting of Indians decided on defiance unless
the Ordinance was repealed.73There were religious objecti ons by
Indian Muslims to being photographed or fingerprinted. There was
also concern that any " Kaffir " constable could harass the Indians,
even women.74
Defiance began in 1907 and about one hundred and fifty persons
went to prison by the end of Januar y 1908 when General Smuts and
69Joseph J. Doke, M.K. Gandhi: an Indian Patriot in South Africa , pages 70 -71.
(London: London Indian Chronicle, 1909)
70It is only recently that sc holars have described the scale of the rebellion and
political groups have extolled it as the last armed liberation struggle of the Africans until it was
resumed in 1961.
71See his interview to the Reverend S.S. Tema in Harijan , February 18, 1939;
Collecte d Works , Volume 68, pages 272 -74.
72He had perhaps in mind the Criminal Tribes Act in India. He felt that civil
servants from India brought to the Transvaal were worse than the authorities in the South African
Republic and were intent on harasssing the Ind ians.
73After representations by Indians, the British Government withheld assent to the
Ordinance. But it granted self -government to the Transvaal in 1907 and assented when the
provisions of the Ordinance were enacted as the Asiatic Registration Act.
74There was a common feeling among the Coloured people and Indians that Zulu
constables in the Transvaal showed no respect for them.52Gandhiji reached a provisional settlement.
Satyagraha was resumed later in 1908 as the Government refused
to repeal the law, and continued intermittently until 1911 when it
was suspended in the hope of a negotiated settle ment. By then,
almost 2,500 of the ten thousand Indians in the Transvaal had gone
to prison.75Prison conditions became harsher.
Satyagraha was again resumed in September 1913 and extended
to Natal as the authorities -now the Government of the Uni on of
South Africa -reneged on their promise to repeal the £3 tax on
members of families of formerly indentured Indians, and failed to
provide legislative relief when the Cape Supreme Court declared
most Indian marriages invalid. Gandhiji invited women a nd workers
to join the satyagraha , and the response was far beyond
expectations.
In this last phase of the satyagraha , about 60,000 Indian workers
in Natal -indentured and free -went on strike, and perhaps ten
thousand men and women were confined to prisons and mine
compounds. Several workers were killed or wounded.
The Government was finally obliged, under pressure from India
and Britain, to arrive at a settlement with Gandhiji, accepting the
basic demands of the satyagraha .76
The success of the small Indian community in its confrontation
with the powerful Government, by employing passive resistance as
the means of struggle, set an example that the indigenous majority
could follow.
Gandhiji was the principal organiser of the satyagraha and one of
the first to go to prison.77Through his leadership in sacrifice, as well
as the respect he had gained in the community over the years, he
came to be recognised as the leader of the struggle.
75The figure of 2,500 may not be quite correct as there is often confusion between
the number of persons arrested and the numbe r of convictions. Several satyagrahis went to prison
more than once.
76The essence of the 1914 settlement was that some major grievances would be
redressed and that no further disabilities would be imposed on the Indians. The fact that authorities
found wa ys in later years to depart from the letter and spirit of the agreement does not detract from
the success of the satyagraha .
77Many of the traders who were eloquent in calling for defiance had by then
developed cold feet and were prepared only to support t he movement with financial contributions.
The majority of the passive resisters came from the poorer sections of the community -especially
Tamils and Hindustanis.53The transformation of the status of Gandhiji in the Indian
community and his leadership of the struggle affected his attitudes
to, and relations with, the Africans and the Coloured people.
RELATIONS WITH AFRICAN AND COLOURED LEADERS
AND SUPPORT TO THEIR ASPIRATIONS
Coloured and African political organisations began to emerge in
South Africa at the beginning of this century, during Gandhiji`s
second sojourn in South Africa. Gandhiji came in contact with
several of their leaders.
He knew John L. Dube who had established an industrial school
inInanda, very near Phoenix. They were both admirers of Booker
T. Washington, the African -American leader and educator.
Dube launched the Ilange lase Natal , an African weekly in
English and Zulu, in the same year when Gandhiji founded Indian
Opinion ;it was printed in the press of Indian Opinion until Dube
acquired a press for the Ohlange Institute.
Gandhiji reported in Indian Opinion (September 2, 1905) on a
speech made by Dube and commented that Dube was an African "of
whom one should know." There was frequent social contact
between the inmates of the Phoenix Settlement and the Ohlange
Institute.
Gandhiji informed his readers of the achievements of African
leaders.
InIndian Opinion (December 30, 1905, and March 17, 1906) he
prais ed the efforts of Tengo Jabavu to establish a college for
Africans. He wrote:
"... it is not to be wondered at that an awakening people,
like the great Native races of South Africa, are moved by
something that has been described as being very much aki n to
religious fervour... British Indians in South Africa have much
to learn from this example of self -sacrifice."78
InIndian Opinion of September 24, 1910, he congratulated Dr.
W.B. Rubusana on his election to the Cape Provincial Council, and
comment ed:
78Collected Works , Volume 8, page 23554"The election is really a challenge to the Union Parliament
with reference to the colour clause. That Dr. Rubusana can sit
in the Provincial Council but not in the Union Parliament is a
glaring anomaly which must disappear if South Africans are to
become a real nation in the near future."79
Gandhiji had closer personal contact with the leaders of the
Coloured people than with African leaders. The Coloured people
and Indians had much in common. Both faced the problem of
losing existing right s, while Africans had virtually no rights. In the
Transvaal, the Coloured people and Indians were governed by same
or similar laws. (Asiatics were included in the definition of
"Coloured persons" in several laws.)
Moreover, there had been close relat ionship between Indians and
the Cape Malays (Cape Muslims). Many Indians in the Cape had
registered as Coloured and there was some intermarriage by
Muslims with the Malays. There were Indians in the leadership of
the Coloured political movement in the Cape.80
Gandhiji was drawn to Dr. Abdulla Abdurahman,81leader of the
Coloured people, who was not only a professional educated in
Britain but had Indian ancestry. As member of the Cape Town City
Council, he helped Indian traders.82
Indian Op inion carried a number of news items concerning Dr.
Abdurahman and the African People`s Organisation, the major
political organisation of the Coloured people.83
As he became acquainted with African and Coloured leaders and
recognised that discrimina tion against any non -European group
tended to affect other groups, he began to comment on
developments concerning the African and Coloured peoples. His
support for their demands became more pronounced after the
launching of the Indian satyagraha , as Africa n and Coloured
organisations had become more militant. But there was always some
caution to avoid allegations that he was inciting other groups against
the whites. Some of Gandhiji`s reports and comments in Indian
Opinion are illustrative.
79Collected Works , Volume 10, page 325
80For instance, Haji Ojer Ally, a prominent member of the Indian community in
the Transvaal and a close colleague of Gandhi until 1907, had been a leader of the Coloured
community in Cape Town before he moved to the Transvaal.
81His name is generally spelled "Abdur Rahm an in Collected Works .
82Indian Opinion , September 10, 1910
83The APO was formed in 1902 as the "African Political Organisation".55He condemne d a proposal in the Johannesburg Town Council in
1905 for a bye -law that African cyclists within the Johannesburg
municipal area should wear a numbered badge and a permit in a
conspicuous position. He wrote:
"We are, as a rule, very reluctant about e xpressing opinions
on matters not specially coming within the purview of this
journal, but the proceedings of the Town Council are, in our
opinion, scandalous, that we should be failing in our duty if
we did not, in the interests of the community of South Africa,
raise our humble protest against them."84
Reporting on a petition by the Coloured people in 1906,
demanding the same rights in the Transvaal and the Orange Free
State as in the Cape, he wrote:
"The petition is non -Indian in character, alt hough British
Indians, being Coloured people, are very largely affected by
it... Whilst, therefore, the Indian and non -Indian sections of
the Coloured communities should, and do, remain apart, and
have their separate organisations, there is no doubt that each
can give strength to other in urging their common rights.
Hence we have no hesitation in welcoming the document
before us."85
On January 2, 1909, Indian Opinion published the text of a letter
by Olive Schreiner to the Transvaal Leader on "Closer U nion" and
commented:
"We agree entirely with Mrs. Cronwright -Schreiner, that a
people kept in a state of political helotage are a source of
danger to the State, sooner or later. The Indian community in
South Africa has never demanded or fought for the political
franchise, but we certainly believe that to prevent any section
of the community from exercising political rights for reasons
of race or colour alone, is the height of political unwisdom."
Personal relations with Africans
Gandhiji`s own personal relations with Africans were always
warm and friendly. Africans from Inanda frequently visited the
Phoenix Settlement and were treated with respect.
In an article on the Phoenix settlement, soon after his visit to it in
84Indian Opinion , February 4, 1905; Collected Works , Volume 4, page 347
85Indian Opinion , March 14, 1906; Collected Works , Volume 5, page 242561914, the Rev. C.F. A ndrews wrote:
"For here (Phoenix ashram ) distinctions of creed and race
and colour had been resolved in a higher synthesis which was
wonderful to witness. It was not only that the Indian coolie in
distress found here a home and a welcome, and the poor,
sickly Indian children from the town of whatever rank were
here nursed back to health, but here also the Zulu and the
Kaffir were received with love and tenderness."86
Support by Africans and Coloured people to Indian satyagraha
Gandhiji and hi s colleagues made great efforts, with considerable
success, to secure support for the Indian cause and struggle by
Europeans in South Africa and by public opinion in Britain and
India. They seem to have made no special effort to obtain support
from Afric ans. When the satyagraha began, there was apparently
some antipathy among Africans, but that was soon overcome by
sympathy and admiration.
Ilanga lase Natal (as quoted by Indian Opinion of January 18,
1908), expressed admiration for the courageous act ion of the Indians
in the Transvaal. The Basutoland Star said that the Indian struggle in
the Transvaal was "worthy of emulation" by the Natives of South
Africa.87John Dube, in an interview in 1914, after the end of the
satyagraha , expressed great admira tion for the Indian struggle.88
Raojibhai M. Patel, one of the first batch of passive resisters in
1913, wrote of the admiration of some Zulu prison warders to the
satyagraha . One warder brought him a newspaper to the toilet, at
considerable risk to himself, so that the prisoners could learn of the
progress of the satyagraha . Another warder told him when they
were alone: "You are real men, real heroes! You have put these
86C. F. Andrews, "Mr. Gandhi at Phoenix" in The Modern Review , Calcutta, May
1914, pages 563 -66.
In his book, What I Owe to Christ , Mr. Andrews described the first evening he spent at Phoenix
Ashram in January 1914:
"He(Gandhi) w as there, with the little children round him whom he
loved... One baby girl, belonging to an `untouchable' family in India,
nestled in his arms, sharing her place there with a weak little invalid
Muslim boy who sought eagerly to gain his special notice. A Zulu
Christian woman had stayed for a while to take food with us on her way to
the Zulu Mission on the hill." (pages 247 -48).
87Odendaal, op. cit. , page 213
88Indian Opinion , February 1, 190857arrogant whites in their right places!"89
Coloured leaders recognised that t hey had a common interest with
the Indians and expressed full sympathy. The Kimberley Branch of
the APO held a public meeting in 1907 to express the "full sympathy
(of the Coloured inhabitants of Kimberley) with the Transvaal
Indians in their unequal stru ggle against, and passive resistance to,
the Asiatic Registration Act..."90
In January 1908, the Conference of the APO passed a resolution
expressing sympathy for the Indians. Dr. Abdurahman sent a
telegram to that effect to the Transvaal British I ndian Association.91
At a big Diwali meeting of Hindus in Johannesburg in 1913, held
in support of the passive resistance, one of the speakers was the
Chairman of the APO. He drew attention to the fact that many
Coloured women were then in jail in Blo emfontein for passively
resisting the pass laws.92
Gandhiji`s Vision of the Future
Gandhiji welcomed such mutual support, and felt that the
example of the Indian satyagraha was itself an effective help to the
Africans and Coloured people.
The re lations that developed during the satyagraha were reflected
in his vision of a future South Africa. Two of his statements in 1908
are illustrative.
In reply to attacks by European politicians that Indian passive
resistance placed a new weapon in the hands of the Natives, he said,
as quoted by the Reverend Joseph Doke, his first biographer:93
"Men who see far believe that the problems which are
connected with the Natives will be the problems of the future,
and that, doubtless, the white man will h ave a stern struggle to
maintain his ascendancy in South Africa. When the moment of
collision comes, if, instead of the old ways of massacre,
assegai , and fire, the Natives adopt the policy of Passive
89Patel, Raojibhai M. The Making of the Mahatma (adaptation by A bid Shamsi of
Gandhiji ni Sadhana . Ahmedabad, 1990), pages 216 -17.
See "Mahatma Gandhi and John Dube" earlier in this volume.
90Patel, op. cit. , pages 200, 201
91Report in the Diamond Fields Advertiser , reproduced in Indian Opinion ,
November 9, 1907
92Indian Opinion , November 12, 1913
93Gandhi read the biography before publication and approved it.58Resistance, it will be a grand change for the Colony...
"When the Native peoples have risen sufficiently high in the
scale of civilisation to give up savage warfare and use the
Christian method of settling a dispute, they will be fit to
exercise the right to vote in political affairs...
"If, then, t he Natives accept the doctrines which are now so
prevalent amongst the Indian community, South Africa need
not fear the horrors of a racial uprising. It need not look
forward to the necessity of maintaining an army to keep the
Natives in awe. The future wi ll be much brighter than its past
has been."94
In a speech at the YMCA in Johannesburg, on May 18, 1908, he
said:
"... in studying the Indian question, I have endeavoured to
study the question as it affects the Africans and the Chinese. It
seems to me that both the Africans and the Asiatics have
advanced the Empire as a whole; we can hardly think of South
Africa without the African races. And who can think of the
British Empire without India? South Africa would probably be
a howling wilderness wit hout the Africans...
"They [the African races] are still in the history of the
world`s learners. Able -bodied and intelligent men as they are,
they cannot but be an asset to the Empire...
"If we look into the future, is it not a heritage we have t o
leave to posterity, that all the different races commingle and
produce a civilisation that perhaps the world has not yet
seen?"95
THE QUESTION OF JOINT ACTION
Gandhiji has often been criticised, especially by radicals from
among Indian South Afric ans, for not engaging in joint action with
other oppressed people of South Africa.
The matter deserves to be seen in its proper context, rather than in
94Joseph J. Doke, M.K. Gandhi: an Indian Patriot in South Africa , pages 86 -87.
London: London Indian Chronicle, 1909.
95Collected Works , Volume 8, pages 242 -4659the perspective of the 1940s when Indian leaders like Dr. Dadoo and
Dr. Naicker sought to build a united front of Indians with Africans,
Coloured people and liberal whites.
At the beginning of the century, when political movements were
emerging in South Africa, each racial group pressed its demands
separately. There was no unity between the Colour ed people and the
Africans. The African People`s Organisation, while espousing the
unity of the oppressed people, remained a Coloured organisation.
The African organisations were weak and ineffective.
The question of joint action with other groups did not arise until
the Indian satyagraha was launched in 1907, and until the African
and Coloured organisations had become effective. Even then there
was no approach by the latter to the Indian Passive Resistance
Council for any joint action. A few European s joined the Indian
struggle and went to prison, but no African or Coloured person
did.96
There was close cooperation between the Indian and Chinese
communities in Johannesburg in the campaign against the Asiatic
Registration Act which affected both. Gandhiji advised the Chinese
community and the Chinese went to prison with the Indians. But the
struggles were kept separate and parallel. As a result, the Indian
satyagraha was not affected by problems which came up within the
Chinese community.
Gand hiji, perhaps more than any other public leader, gave serious
thought to the question of cooperation among the oppressed people
and he was convinced that the different communities should fight
their battles separately while expressing sympathy and support to the
others. His reasoning deserves attention.
Writing on the Coloured petition of 1906, he said:
"This Association of Coloured People does not include
Indians who have always kept aloof from that body. We
believe that the Indian community has been wise in doing so.
For, though the hardships suffered by those people and the
Indians are almost of the same kind, the remedies are not
identical. It is therefore proper that the two should fight out
96Gandhiji said in reply to a question from the African -American delegation in
1936 as to whether the Africans took part in his movement in South Africa: "No, I purposely did
not invite them. It would have endangered their cause. They would not have unde rstood the
technique of our struggle nor could they have seen the purpose or utility of non -violence."
Collected Works , Volume 62, page 199.60their cases, each in their own appropriate way. We can cite the
Proclamation of 1858 [by Queen Victoria to India] in our
favour, which the Coloured people cannot. They can use the
powerful argument that they are the children of the soil. They
can also argue that their way of life is entirely European. We
can petition the Secretary of State for India, whereas they
cannot. They belong largely in the Christian community and
can therefore avail themselves of the help of their priests. Such
help is not available to us."97
In 1909, Gandhiji led a deputation t o London on behalf of the
Indian community. Delegations of Africans and Coloured people
were in London at the same time to make representations concerning
the draft South Africa Act to establish a Union of South Africa
dominated by the white minority. The Transvaal Native Congress
instructed its delegates to work in cooperation with the others,
including Gandhiji.98There is, however, no evidence that the
African delegates suggested cooperation to Gandhiji.
Gandhiji was in close contact with Dr. Abdura hman and met Mr.
W. P. Schreiner, who assisted the Coloured delegation, but his
writings contain no information on contact with the other delegates.
He referred, however, to suggestions by Indians that his
deputation should take up the question of the Union. He wrote
during his voyage to London:
"Many Indian friends have urged the deputation not to
forget the question of the Union. I must say that this request
proceeds from ignorance as to the implications of a Union...
The Union Bill makes no reference to us at all. The Act will
unite all the Colonies. But the respective laws of the Colonies
will remain intact. What can we say against this? We can do or
say nothing against a Union of the Colonies of South Africa.
If, after the Union is formed, they attempt any legislation
against us, we can fight out the question then. Our rights will
not be liquidated by the mere formation of the Union. No
doubt, that will be one of the consequences of the Union. But
we cannot oppose the Union merely on the gr ound that we
97Collected Works , Volume 5, page 243
98Odendaal, Andre, Vukani Bantu , page 205.
The delegations consisted of : Dr. Abdulla Abdurahman, Matt J. Fredericks, D.J. Lenders, Dr.
W.B. Rubusana, Thomas Mtobi Mapikela, Daniel Dwanya, John Tengo Jabavu, J. Gerrans (Ibid.,
page 216).
They were all in the gallery in the House of Lords, as was Gandhiji, on July 27, 1909 , when the
draft Act was debated. (Ibid.)61might be ruined under it...
"Dr. Abdurahman is going to England entirely in
connection with the question of the Union, and that is
justified. For, under the Union Act, some of the rights of the
black races will be abrogated right now... I t is not the same
with us."99
The approach of Gandhiji in this instance, as in the case of the
Coloured petition, may perhaps be criticised as legalistic, and
appropriate to "petition politics". But the African and Coloured
organisations had not yet ou tgrown that stage.
Gandhiji, however, went on to say:
"However, no one should suppose that the deputation will
not raise the subject [of the Union] at all. It cannot but do so.
It is because negotiations for a Union are in progress that the
deput ation is going. It will, moreover, urge in no uncertain
terms that the Union should not be permitted if the Transvaal
grievances are not redressed. And I say further that, if the
Indians act with all their strength, the deputation cannot but
gain its point . It will also raise the subject of the laws that
have been enacted in the whole of South Africa. This does not
mean that these laws will be repealed. Their repeal can be
achieved only through satyagraha ."100
He pointed out that Indians could not preven t the enemies (white
population in the different Colonies) from uniting. The solution was
for the Indians to unite. The whites were the strong and favoured
sons, and Indians would get no hearing by merely petitioning or
begging. Petitions must be backed by some sanction -physical force
or soul force ( satyagraha ). He was hinting on the one hand that
Indians were not united101and on the other that the Africans and the
Coloured people were merely petitioning.
A united front was inappropriate and meaningl ess unless the
constituent bodies were all engaged in struggle with common
objectives and tactics, and could pool their strength. Such a situation
did not exist during Gandhiji`s stay in South Africa.102
99Collected Works , Volume 9, pages 272 -73
100Ibid.
101The satyagraha was then confined to the Transvaal and the Natal Indians had
sent a separate delegation to London.
102Gandhi refrained from any effort to cooperate with the European strike in
1913 -14 and in fact, suspended the satyagraha as a gesture of goodwill towards the Government.62Gandhiji, however, welcomed expressions of suppor t by other
organisations to the Indian cause and, in turn, supported their
demands. Indian Opinion (February 11, 1909) denounced the draft
South Africa Act as amounting to a declaration of war against the
black population.
Gandhiji continued to mainta in an interest in the Indian struggle
in South Africa until his death. His statements since his departure
from South Africa in 1914 may be noted for a clearer understanding
of his views.
As a leader in India, he was more outspoken in his recognition of
a community of interests between the Indians and the Africans. He
wrote in Harijan (July 22, 1926) that since the whites were more
hostile to the Indian "settlers" than to Africans, "justice to them is
not to be expected if injustice is done to the Nat ives".103He strongly
condemned the Mines and Works Amendment Act, 1926, though the
Indians were not immediately affected by it.104
He wrote in April 1928:
"Indians have too much in common with the Africans to
think of isolating themselves from the m. They cannot exist in
South Africa for any length of time without the active
sympathy and friendship of the Africans."105
In his interview with the Reverend S. S. Tema on January 1,
1939, he was asked: "Of late there has been some talk of forming an
Indo-African united non -white front in South Africa. What do you
think about it?" He replied:
"It will be a mistake. You will be pooling together not
strength but weakness. You will best help one another by each
standing on his own legs. The two cas es are different. The
Indians are a microscopic minority. They can never be a
menace to the white population. You, on the other hand, are
the sons of the soil who are being robbed of your inheritance.
You are bound to resist that. Yours is a far bigger iss ue."106
In June that year, Gandhiji drafted a resolution for the All India
Congress Committee denouncing new discriminatory legislation
against Indians in South Africa as a breach of agreements between
103Collected Works , Volume 31, page 182
104Ibid., page 332
105Young India , April5, 1928; Collected Works , Volume 36, page 190
106Harijan ,February 18, 1939; Collected Works , Volume 68, pages 272 -7363India and South Africa. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, a So cialist,
probably inspired by the formation of the Non -European United
Front in South Africa, moved an amendment supporting a united
front. The amendment was withdrawn after Gandhiji indicated that it
was out of place in that resolution.
Gandhiji exp lained his position in Harijan (July 1, 1939):
"... I yield to no one in my regard for the Zulus, the Bantus
and the other races of South Africa. I used to enjoy intimate
relations with many of them. I had the privilege of often
advising them. It used to be my constant advice to our
countrymen in South Africa never to exploit or deceive these
simple folk. But it was not possible to amalgamate the two
causes. The rights and privileges (if any could be so called) of
the indigenous inhabitants are differe nt from those of the
Indians. So are their disabilities and their causes. But if I
discovered that our rights conflicted with their vital interests, I
would advise the foregoing of those rights. They are the
inhabitants of South Africa as we are of India. The Europeans
are undoubtedly usurpers, exploiters or conquerors or all of
these rolled into one. And so the Africans have a whole code
of laws specially governing them. The Indian segregation
policy of the Union Government has nothing in common with
the p olicy governing the African races... ours is a tiny problem
compared to the vast problem that faces the African races and
that affects their progress. Hence it is not possible to speak of
the two in the same breath."107
Later, in reply to criticisms of his position, he wrote in the
Harijan (July 15, 1939):
"However much one may sympathise with the Bantus,
Indians cannot make common cause with them. I doubt if the
Bantus themselves will as a class countenance any such move.
They can only damage and c omplicate their cause by mixing it
up with the Indian, as Indians would damage theirs by such
mixture. But neither the AICC resolution nor my advice need
deter the Indians from forming a non -European front if they
are sure thereby of winning their freedom. Indeed, had they
thought it beneficial or possible, they would have formed it
long ago."108
These statements perhaps reflect the position when Gandhiji was
107Collected Works , Volume 69, pages 376 -79
108Collected Works , Volume 69, page 40864in South Africa rather than the realities of 1939. By then most
Indians in South Africa were So uth Africa -born and had developed
roots in that country. Many of them had joined radical movements
and espoused unity of the oppressed people. They had cooperated
across colour lines in the trade unions, the Communist Party, the
Young Liberal Club, etc., a nd were active in the Non -European
United Front.
Gandhiji seems to have been unaware of these developments as
his main sources of information were Indian Opinion and letters
from his son, Manilal Gandhi.109He received anxious enquiries from
Indians i n South Africa and learned that his former colleague,
Ebrahim Aswat, was the Chairman of the NEUF in the Transvaal.
He discussed the question of united front with Moulvi I.A. Cachalia
and other Indian South Africans. He was soon in correspondence
with Dr. Yusuf M. Dadoo, radical leader of the Transvaal Indians,
who was to become an architect of Indian -African unity.
He never opposed joint action since then, but constantly stressed
that there should be no abandonment of non -violence in the process.
IMPACT OF GANDHIJI AND THE INDIAN SATYAGRAHA
ON THE LIBERATION STRUGGLE
"Passive resistance" has been in the consciousness of South
Africa ever since the Indian satyagraha led by Gandhiji early in the
century. It has had a profound influence on t he struggle for national
liberation.
In 1909, when the Coloured deputation to London failed in its
efforts to get the draft South Africa Act amended, Gandhiji and Dr.
Abdurahman discussed the possibility of passive resistance by the
Coloured community .110
At a meeting of the Coloured people in Johannesburg on
December 16, 1909, several speakers declared that if the authorities
proved unreasonable, they would take up passive resistance.111
109See Gandhiji's letter of June 25, 1939, to Manilal Gandhi. Collected Works ,
Volume 69, page 373.
110Collected Wo rks, Volume 9, pages 365 -66, 388.
111Indian Opinion , February 16 and 20, 1910; Collected Works , Volume 10, page
165.
Gandhiji wrote in Indian Opinion (March 5, 1910):65Though the Coloured people did not launch passive resista nce,
their discussions are likely to have influenced the women's anti -pass
movement in 1913 in which the APO and Coloured women were
active, and the men's anti -pass movement in the Transvaal in 1919.
The anti -pass movements of 1913 and 1919
The women `s anti -pass movement in the Orange Free State in
1913 arose from the tightening of pass laws -against both Africans
and Coloured people -by the OFS Legislative Assembly in 1906.
After failure of appeals to the Governor and in 1912 to the Union
Governmen t, the Bloemfontein women launched a passive
resistance campaign in June 1913.112It soon spread to the rest of the
province.
Coloured women and the African Peoples' Organisation (APO)
played a significant role in the leadership, together with African
women. The newly -formed South African Native National Congress
(later renamed the African National Congress) actively supported
the resistance.113
On June 6, 1913, six hundred women in Bloemfontein marched to
the Town Hall and handed over sacks of pass es to the authorities.
Hundreds of women were arrested during the movement. They
refused to pay fines and went to prison.
The movement could claim success: the Government asked the
police in 1917 to hold its hand in the OFS so far as Native women
were concerned, pending enactment of a new pass law.
The men's anti -pass movement on the Rand in 1919 was initiated
by the South African Native National Congress after appeals for the
abolition of passes were rejected. African women joined the
resistanc e, though women were not required to carry passes in the
"Our struggle is producing a profound effect on the Coloured people. Dr.
Abdurah man has commented on it in his journal at great length and has
held up the example of the Indian community to every Coloured person.
Some of them have also passed a resolution in Johannesburg to defy the
laws of the Government and take to satyagraha ."
112This was shortly before the last phase of the Indian satyagraha . Although
Gandhiji had decided on resuming the satyagraha and invited the women in the Phoenix
Settlement to join, that was not generally known, and the defiance of laws did not begin until
September 1913.
113It has been suggested that the endorsement of "passive action" in the first
constitution of the ANC (then SANNC), Chapter IV, Clause 13, was a reflection of the influence
of Gandhiji's Indian passive resistance campaigns upon African opinion. (Karis, Thomas and
Gwendolen M. Carter (eds.) From Protest to Challenge , Volume I, pages 62 and 78.66Transvaal. Passes were collected from workers in bags and handed
over to the authorities. About seven hundred Africans were
arrested and went to jail, refusing to pay fines.
There was brutal violence against the Africans, both by the police
and white civilians, and the movement was suppressed.114
The two anti -pass movements have many parallels with the Indian
satyagraha led by Gandhiji.
The resistance was preceded by many appeals for redress of
grievances. It was led in connection with very serious grievances.
The resisters defied the law and were prepared to suffer the
consequences. They refused to pay fines and went to prison.
There was also a burning of passes, reminiscent of t he burning by
Indians of the registration certificates in August 1908.
But there were also notable differences.
1. The Indian satyagraha was led by Gandhiji and his
colleagues who were prepared for any sacrifice, and who
refused to surrender when brutality by the authorities
increased. Such leadership had not yet emerged among the
Africans.
2. Gandhiji had patiently built up a "solidarity movement"
among the Europeans in South Africa, and in India and
Britain. As a result, there were protests against violence by the
authorities and pressure on them to negotiate.
No such solidarity movement had yet been built by the
African leaders. The killings of Africans aroused little
attention or protest in South Africa or Britain.
In subsequent years, peaceful resistance by Africans was met by
massive violence on many occasions. Passive resistance could not
spread until a new leadership emerged among the Africans and
succeeded in securing sympathy and support in South Africa and
abroad.
114For an account of the two anti -pass campaigns of 1914 and 1919, see Wells,
Julia, "Passes and Bypasses: Freedom of Movement for African Women unde r the Urban Areas
Act of South Africa" in Hay, Margaret and Marcia Wright (eds.) African Women and the Law:
Historical Perspectives , Boston University Papers on Africa -VII; Ginwala, Frene, "Women:
Forever Marching Forward" in Sechaba , August 1986; Meli, Francis, A History of the ANC: South
Africa Belongs to Us ; Benson, Mary, The Struggle for a Birthright ; Roux, Edward, Time Longer
than Rope: A History of the Black Man's Struggle for Freedom in South Africa .67The Ind ian passive resistance of 1946 -48
The Indian passive resistance movement of 1946 -48-in which
about 2,000 Indians courted imprisonment -was conducted under
the personal guidance of Gandhiji.
Young radicals, led by Dr. Yusuf Dadoo, a Communist, opposed
the compromising leadership of the Transvaal Indian Congress in
the 1930s and pressed for militant resistance against racist laws and
for cooperation with the Africans in the struggle against racist
tyranny. They gained strength when they were ab le to work with
Gandhians, both in the Nationalist Bloc of the TIC and in the Non -
European United Front.
A similar radical movement developed in the Natal among the
Indians who were active in the trade union movement, the Young
Liberal Club and the Anti-Segregation Council. Again, Communists
and Gandhians cooperated and Dr. G.M. Naicker, a Gandhian,
became their leader.
In 1946, when the Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation
Act was adopted, a passive resistance movement was launched by
the Indian community -under the leadership of Dr. Dadoo and Dr.
G.M. Naicker -with the full and active support of Gandhiji.
The cooperation of Communists and Gandhians had a great
influence on the nature of the struggle. Gandhiji lent his support
knowing well that Dr. Dadoo and several other leaders were
Communists, since he saw Dr. Dadoo as one who was dedicated to
the cause and willing to sacrifice.
There was some continuity with the satyagraha led by Gandhiji.
One of the resisters -Mrs. P.K. Naidu -had courted imprisonment in
thesatyagraha and many others were children of satyagrahis . Some
had participated in the struggles led by Gandhiji in India.
A significant feature of this campaign -largely due to several
years of effort by t he Indian radicals to establish cooperation with
other movements -was the support it received from the African
National Congress and other organisations. Several Europeans,
Coloured people and Africans joined the passive resistance and went
to prison.
The Indian Government provided effective diplomatic and
political support to the movement and helped it to secure68international solidarity.
This movement was perhaps much more significant in the history
of the freedom struggle in South Africa than is generally recognised.
It was the first well -organised mass struggle in South Africa. It
led to a strengthening of the Indian Congresses.115The race
problem in South Africa was internationalised and solidarity
committees began to be set up abroad. T he issue of sanctions against
South Africa was raised for the first time, following an embargo by
India.
During the course of the struggle, cooperation was built across
colour lines. The pact of cooperation between the African and Indian
Congresses, s igned in March 1947, was to be the precursor of the
Congress Alliance of the 1950s. Above all, the Indian passive
resistance eventually led to the Defiance Campaign of 1952.
M. B. Yengwa, a leader of the ANC and a close colleague of
Chief Lutuli, said at the Treason Trial that African nationalism was
exclusive until the Xuma -Naicker -Dadoo pact of March 1947, and
changed since then.
"Previously it [the African National Congress] was
exclusive in the sense that it regarded its struggle as that of th e
African people only, but after that there was a definite change
in the sense that other groups, non -African groups, were taken
in-and actually our nationalism included all non -European
groups as well as European groups who worked with us."116
Campaign of Defiance against Unjust Laws
In their discussions in 1950 -51, on plans for the Defiance
Campaign, leaders of the African National Congress and the South
African Indian Congress took note of the experience of Indian
passive resistance and adapted t he strategy to the requirements of a
multi -racial, and predominantly African, resistance. The Defiance
115The Natal Indian Congress claimed an increas e in membership to 35,000. At
that time, the ANC had a membership of only about 3,000 and the ANC Youth League perhaps
500.
116Treason Trial transcript, page 17. The change in outlook was, however,
effective only after May 1950 when several of the younger l eaders of the ANC from the ANC
Youth League, who had been hostile to cooperation with the Indians -Walter Sisulu, Nelson
Mandela and Oliver Tambo -became convinced of the desirability of joint action and began to
espouse a broader nationalism.69Campaign was greatly influenced by Gandhiji,117but was not purely
Gandhian.
In a paper on the Defiance Campaign, M.P. Naicker wrote:
"In the detailed discussions that were held by the National
Planning Council and the leaderships of the African National
Congress and the South African Indian Congress prior to the
formulation of the plan of action, the efficacy of the Gandhian
philosophy of satya graha (i.e., changing the hearts of the
rulers by passively suffering imprisonment) in the face of an
avowedly fascist regime was discussed at length. Undoubtedly
there was a very small minority among the leadership who
supported the Gandhian creed absolut ely. But the vast
majority agreed that the campaign itself could not defeat white
supremacy. The major aim therefore was to build the
liberation movements so as to embarrass the Government and
to lead the people to mass industrial action.118
Mr. M.B. Y engwa said, during the Treason Trial, in reply to
questioning by Mr. Kentridge:
"Would you say that the African National Congress as such
has taken over the whole philosophy of Gandhiji? -No, my
Lord, it has not done so.
"Do you think Gandhiji`s ideas have had any influence on
African National Congress policy? -It has had a very strong
influence on the African National Congress.
"In what direction? -In the direction of non -violence, my
Lord; the African National Congress has seen non -viole nce in
practice in India and it has seen India becoming independent,
and the ANC has been inspired by that philosophy."119
117Thevery name "defiance" indicates that the leaders understood the spirit of
Gandhiji. For the satyagraha launched in 1907 was "defiance" of an unjust law; there was little
discussion of violence and non -violence as violent resistance by the Indians in the Tra nsvaal was
unthinkable.
118Naicker, M.P. "The Defiance Campaign Recalled", paper published by the
United Nations Unit on Apartheid in June 1972. Reprinted in Reddy, E.S. (ed.) The Struggle for
Liberation in South Africa and International Solidarity: A Selec tion of Papers Published by the
United Nations Centre against Apartheid . New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Private Limited, 1992.
119Treason Trial transcript, pages 504 -06.
It must be noted that many Indians in the "Congress alliance" did not fully accept the
philosophy of Gandhi.70"Why do you think the African National Congress adheres
to the policy of non -violence, apart from the reason you`ve
given, of the influence of Gandhiji and so on; is there any
other reason? -Yes, my Lord; one of the reasons is the
Christian influence in the Congress. I think people who hold
strong Christian views do not approve of violence in any
sense, but much more than that, my L ord, the African National
Congress is committed to a multi -racial society in South
Africa, and it is the belief of the African National Congress
that the multi -racial society in this country must be attained by
methods of non -violence, because violence is inconsistent
with a multi -racial form of State in this country. We think that
hatred would then be bred and in unending animosity between
the races."
Molvi I. A. Cachalia, in his testimony at the same trial, elaborated
on the difference between non -violence as a creed (as for Gandhiji)
and as a tactic (as for the leaders of the Defiance Campaign).120
The mass defiance of the 1980s
Though the Defiance Campaign greatly strengthened the ANC
and built an effective solidarity movement abroad, it was sus pended
when the Government enacted draconian laws prescribing harsh
punishments, including whipping, for defiance of laws.
One might wonder what the course of struggle might have been if
the leaders followed the Gandhian precept and refused to surrend er,
inviting the Government to implement its law. But the movement
and its leaders were not yet ready for such a course.
However, the experience of the Defiance Campaign greatly
influenced the political outlook of the leaders of the ANC as they
planne d and organised many new campaigns. Non -violence became
a part of their philosophy. It affected the nature of the "armed
struggle" decided on in 1961 by the ANC, with emphasis on the
avoidance of killing of innocent persons.
Non-violent struggle cont inued even in the period when armed
struggle was being extolled. Nana Sita, the Gandhian, held up the
banner of resistance in the darkest days of repression. The mass
student struggles before and after the Soweto massacre of 1976, and
actions by resurgent African trade unions were essentially non -
120See E.S. Reddy, ed., Indian South Africans in the Struggle for National
Liberation: Evidence of Molvi Ismail Ahmad Cachalia in the South African Treason Trial, June
21-28, 1960 . New Delhi: Sanchar Publishing House, 1993.71violent. These struggles encouraged Bishop Desmond Tutu and
other churchmen to undertake defiance.
In the 1980s -after a long process in which many people lost the
fear of batons and bullets, and of torture i n prisons -mass defiance
could be undertaken.
The intention was to make unjust laws inoperative and the
country ungovernable. Though there was little mention of Gandhiji
at this stage, the new strategy was in harmony with Gandhian
thought.
The m ass defiance campaign of 1989 led to fissures in the camp
of the adversary and a great strengthening of the international
solidarity movement. The Government could no longer obtain
external economic and other support. It was obliged to release the
politic al prisoners, abrogate obnoxious laws and negotiate with the
leaders of the oppressed people for the establishment of a non -racial
democratic society.
The South African liberation movement faced great odds and had
to carry on a protracted struggle. I t drew inspiration from the
Gandhian philosophy and the experience of the Indian satyagraha ,
as well as from other sources. In the process, it enriched the heritage
ofsatyagraha . Two of its leaders -Chief Albert J. Lutuli, who
emerged as the leader d uring the Defiance Campaign of 1952, and
Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who led the mass defiance in the 1980s
-were honoured with the award of the Nobel Peace Prize.
I have been fortunate to have enjoyed the friendship of many
South African leaders -abov e all, Oliver Tambo, President of the
ANC during the most difficult and decisive stage of the struggle -
and to know how greatly they respected Gandhiji and drew
inspiration from him.72SOME REMARKABLE EUROPEAN WOMEN WHO HELPED
GANDHIJI IN SOUTH AFRICA121
Gandhiji led a seven -year long struggle in South Africa from 1907 to 1914 for
the security and dignity of the Indian settlers in that country who were subjected
to humiliations by the white rulers. In his account of that struggle, Satyagrah a in
South Africa , he makes special mention of three European women who "never
missed an opportunity of doing a good turn to the Indians" -Emily Hobhouse,
Olive Schreiner and Elizabeth Molteno.
Gandhiji wrote this book in prison, entirely from mem ory, not as a definitive
history of the satyagraha, but as a guide to his followers in India. It contains a
few errors and many omissions. Little is said, for instance, on how these women
helped the Indian cause. Not a single letter from these women to Gandhiji in the
crucial period of 1913 -14-and they wrote many -is available in the Indian or
South African archives. There is little information on their assistance in books on
Gandhiji, except for some references, partly erroneous, in the memoirs of
Prabhudas Gandhi and Raojibhai Patel.
But in my research on Gandhiji and South Africa, I was able to find some
unpublished letters by Gandhiji, through the kind courtesy of the University of
Cape Town Libraries, the South African Library and the Univer sity of
Witwatersrand Library. These letters and further information I obtained from
various sources indicate that the intervention and assistance of these remarkable
women was crucial in enabling Gandhiji to secure a settlement with General
Smuts and ret urn triumphant to his motherland.
The three women -Emily Hobhouse was British and the other two South
African -belonged to influential families. They were pacifists, feminists and,
indeed, socialists in their outlook. They had courageously oppo sed the barbarous
war launched by British imperialism against the Boers in 1899, and had become
intimate friends. They were distressed when peace led to an alliance of Britons
and Boers against the Africans, Coloured people and Indians, and responded to
appeals by Gandhiji for justice to the Indians.
Two other women associated with them also deserve recognition: Alice
Greene and Ruth Alexander.
Gandhiji's acquaintance with the women
Gandhiji came to know Olive Schreiner, Miss Molteno and Miss Greene during
his tireless efforts to secure understanding and sympathy among the Europeans.
121Written for the anniversary of the death of Gandhiji on January 30, 1993.73(He was specially interested in friends of the Boers who could use their influence
on the regime in the Transvaal and later of the Union of South Africa.) He met
Emily Hobhouse and Ruth Alexander only in 1914. He admired these courageous
women of principle, not only for their unqualified and unhesitating support of the
rights of the Indians, but also for their convictions and sincerity. They too
understood and admir ed him as few Europeans did, and became his intimate
friends.
Emily Hobhouse (1860 -1926)
Emily Hobhouse, daughter of a churchman in Britain, dedicated herself to the
movement in Britain against the Anglo -Boer War. Her visits to the concentration
camps in South Africa where Boer women and children were confined -and
thousands perished -and her campaign in Britain to help the victims of this dirty
war had much to do with the ending of the war. She earned the reverence of the
Boer people and the gr eat respect of Boer leaders like General Louis Botha and
General Jan Christiaan Smuts.
She had a great regard for India. She had met many Indians at the home of her
uncle, Lord (Arthur) Hobhouse, who was a Law Member of the Council of the
Government o f India and later of the Privy Council. She was, therefore,
distressed that the Boers, who had heroically fought for their freedom, joined with
the British South Africans after the war to oppress the Indians.
She arrived in South Africa in December 1 913 to attend the unveiling of a
memorial to Boer women in Bloemfontein, but was forced to remain in Cape
Town because of illness. That was the time when Gandhiji most needed help and
she provided it without hesitation.
Olive Schreiner
Olive Sch reiner was not only the most prominent South African writer of the
time but a woman of advanced views. Her writings on the future of South Africa
read even today as the most perceptive and prophetic and can well be an
inspiration for all those who seek to build a non -racial democratic South Africa.
During her stay in Britain in the 1880s, she developed friendship with
Havelock Ellis, Eleanor Aveling, the daughter of Karl Marx, Edward Carpenter,
the socialist whom Gandhiji admired, and many other i ntellectuals.
She vehemently opposed the Anglo -Boer War of 1899 -1902 and was virtually
interned by the British authorities.
I do not know when Gandhiji first met Olive Schreiner -it may have been in
1907 when she moved to De Aar -but he was proud of the friendship. Indian
Opinion , in an editorial note on January 2, 1909, probably written by Gandhiji,74had highly commended her for a letter she wrote on the race problem,
commenting that she was of "greater permanent value to the world than a
continent of Napoleons."
Gandhiji said in his speech on South Africa at the Kanpur Congress in 1925:
"I claim the privilege of having been a close friend of that great poetess
and philanthropist and that most self -effacing woman -Olive Schrein er.
She was a friend of the Indians equally with the Natives of South Africa.
She knew no distinctions between white and black races. She loved the
Indian, the Zulu and the Bantu as her own children... Such precious men
and women have also been born a nd bred in South Africa."
In 1909, when Gandhiji was leaving on a deputation to Britain, Olive
Schreiner went to the ship in Cape Town with her sister and, in defiance of the
racist authorities, shook hands with Gandhiji and expressed sympathy for t he
Indian cause. Gandhiji was thrilled. He wrote: "She performed this ceremony
most heartily in the presence of a huge crowd and both the sisters were quite for a
few minutes with us. Fancy the author of Dreams paying a tribute to passive
resistance."122
She was instrumental in persuading her brother, W.P. Schreiner, a promiment
liberal parliamentarian, to support the Indian cause.
The admiration of Gandhiji to Olive Schreiner was reciprocated. She told Mrs.
Sarojini Naidu in London in 1914: "Tell your young Indians that Mr. Gandhi is
the greatest spirit that has ever come to South Africa; he is the Mazzini of the
Movement."123
Elizabeth M. (Betty) Molteno (1852 -1927)
Betty Molteno came from a very prominent South African family . Her father,
Sir John, was the first Prime Minister of the Cape Colony, and her brother was the
first Speaker of the South African Parliament.
Tired of riches and leisure, she took to teaching and became principal of a girls'
school in Port Eliza beth. She was forced to leave her job because of her
opposition to the Anglo -Boer War. She supported Emily Hobhouse and
developed a close friendship with her.
She was not happy at the developments after the War and went to England.
She met Gandhiji in London in 1909.
Returning to South Africa in 1912 she visited the Phoenix Settlement: "Your
122Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Volume 9, page 287
123Indian Opinion , September 30, 191475sweet Phoenix is a poem -a dream of loveliness," she wrote to Gandhiji.
She bought a cottage at Ohlange, a mile or two from Phoenix, and was there
during the crucial phase of the satyagraha , lending invaluable moral support
which no European of her standing could conceive of.
Visiting the Phoenix Settlement in November 1913, when Gandhiji was in
prison, she saw Soorzai, an invalid Indian work er, brought there by his family and
colleagues after he was brutally flogged by his estate manager on suspicion of
leading a strike. Soorzai was subsequently jailed and died in prison on
December 10th. Miss Molteno went to see the dead body in the hos pital, joined
the funeral procession organised by the Natal Indian Association in Durban, and
later testified at the inquest.124
She spoke at an Indian meeting in Durban on January 4th to welcome the
Reverend C.F. Andrews -Gandhiji was among the ot her speakers -and called on
Indians to identify with Africa: "Only as you learn to call Africa your Motherland
can you become worthy children of her sacred soil."125
Indian Opinion (January 7, 1914) quoted her speech as follows:
"... After the Boer War I saw that Boer and Briton would have to unite,
but would they try to do it at the cost of their dark brothers? Broken -
hearted I went to England. For eight long years I remained away from
Africa -in body -never in soul and spirit. And England and Europe have
sent me back with this message to white South Africa: `Open your hearts -
your souls -to your brethren of colour'. We are in the 20th century. Rise to
the heights of this glorious century. Try to comprehend the words of
DuBois -that g rand and sympathetic soul: `The 20th century will be the
century of colour.'126And I say it is also the century of the woman. She,
too, is divine and supreme. She, too, must play her God -appointed part -
and in this 20th century her part will be a great o ne."
On January 12, 1914, she spoke at a meeting to welcome Mrs. Sheikh Mehtab
and Hanifa Bibi, the two Muslim women passive resisters, on their release from
prison. On January 20, she spoke at another meeting to welcome a group of
women passive resisters from the Transvaal, and expressed the hope that in the
future multi -racial South Africa, women would take a prominent part.
Alice M. Greene (died 1920)
124Indian Opinion , January 28, 1914
125Benarsidas Chaturvedi and Marjorie Sykes, Charles Free r Andrews , pages
111-12. (New Delhi: Publications Division, 1982).
126Dr. W.E.B. DuBois said -and this was included in the declaration of the Pan
African Conference held in London in 1900: "The problem of the twentieth century is the problem
of the colour line..."76Alice Greene, friend and companion of Miss Molteno, came from another
distinguished family. One of her uncles was head of the Admiralty in Britain. Her
brother, principal of a public school in Britain, was father of Graham Greene, the
famous novelist.
She was Vice -Principal of the school in Port Elizabeth of which Miss Molteno
wasPrincipal. She too opposed the Boer war and was an advocate of women's
rights.
Ruth Alexander
Ruth Alexander deserves mention in this group though she arrived in South
Africa after the Anglo -Boer War and was not involved in the anti -war cam paign.
Daughter of an American Jewish scholar, Ruth married Morris Alexander in
1907 at the age of 19 and went to South Africa. Advocate Alexander -a relative
of Herman Kallenbach, associate of Gandhiji -was a Jewish leader and liberal
Parliamentari an who had been helpful to the Indians. Ruth soon became an
admirer, disciple and friend of Olive Schreiner.
Gandhiji first met her in Cape Town in February 1914. He and Kasturba stayed
at the Alexander home on their last night in South Africa in Jul y 1914.
The course of the Satyagraha and the situation in December 1913
Gandhiji launched the satyagraha in the Transvaal against the Asiatic
Registration Act in 1907. Five hundred Indians courted imprisonment, from
among the small Indian populatio n of less than ten thousand in the province.
Through the intervention of Albert Cartwright -a journalist respected by the
Boers for his opposition to the Ango -Boer War -a provisional agreement was
reached with General Smuts and the prisoners were relea sed at the end of January
1908.
But there were misunderstandings on the agreement and the satyagraha was
resumed later that year. Two thousand and five hundred persons defied the law
by 1909, but the movement seemed to be petering out with no succ ess. Gandhiji
went on a deputation to London that year but found the British Government
unwilling to intervene. He moved to the Tolstoy Farm in 1911 and seemed to be
whiling away his time. He alone perhaps held firm to the faith that true
satyagraha , even by one individual, cannot but succeed.
Jail-going was suspended to give time for talks with the Government of the
Union of South Africa which was formed in 1910. Gopal Krishna Gokhale
visited the country in October 1912 and obtained assurances fro m General Botha,
the Prime Minister, and senior cabinet members (General Smuts and Patrick
Duncan) that action would soon be taken to meet the main Indian demands.77Gandhiji closed the Tolstoy Farm and moved to the Phoenix Settlement in
Durban.
But a gain, the agreement broke down and satyagraha was resumed in
September 1913. This time women were allowed to join the satyagraha,
especially since the Courts had refused to recognise Indian marriages and the
government refused to validate them. Work stop page by mine workers was also
envisaged, but only on the issue of the three pound tax on Indian labourers who
completed indenture and became free.
Gandhiji's wife, Kasturba, insisted on joining the satyagraha, despite her poor
health, and was in the first batch from Natal which crossed the Transvaal border
in defiance of the law. Two of his sons, Manilal and Ramdas, also went to prison.
Gandhiji expected less than a hundred satyagrahis , but the participation of
women electrified the atmosphere. Thousands of workers in the coal mines came
out on strike in response to appeals by the women, and Gandhiji led a "great
march" of 4,000 workers from Newcastle, Natal, towards the Transvaal border.
He was arrested and sentenced on November 11th to nine months' hard labour.
Gandhiji had not intended to extend the strike, but in his absence, it spread
spontaneously to the municipalities and plantations. It soon involved some sixty
thousand Indians in the largest general strike that South Africa h ad seen.
The Government mobilised police and the army and together with mineowners
and plantation managers, attempted brutal suppression of the strike. Several
workers were killed; some were stabbed by Zulu guards, on orders from the
managers; thou sands were brutally assaulted in mine compounds turned into
prisons -but the poor, illiterate workers stood firm in their resolve: "When
Gandhi Maharaj is in jail for us, when the the queen and the princes are in prison
for us, we will not go to work."
The brutality against the women and the workers aroused opinion in India, and
led to protests all over the nation. Contributions for the satyagraha poured in, not
only from professionals and students, but even from princes, including the Nizam
of Hyd erabad. Ratan Tata, the industrialist, made a munificent donation. The
Reverend C.F. Andrews and several British residents (missionaries and civil
servants) contributed to the fund.
The Indian and British Governments were obliged to act. Under press ure from
them, the South African regime appointed a Commission to investigate the Indian
grievances and charges of violence, and released Gandhiji and his two European
colleagues (Hermann Kallenbach and H.S.L. Polak) on December 18th. With its
usual dupl icity, however, it appointed to the Commission one judge and two
notorious anti -Indian agitators.78On Gandhiji's advice the Indian community pledged to boycott the
Commission unless the community was consulted and one or two members
acceptable to the community were appointed to the Commission -failing which
the struggle would be resumed with a march on New Year's Day.
Leaders in India and Britain who had pressed for an investigation could not
understand the seeming intransigence of Gandhiji. F rantic appeals came to him
from Gokhale, his mentor; on behalf of Lord Hardinge, the Viceroy, who had
publicly expressed sympathy with the satyagraha ; and Lord Ampthill, who
headed a committee of supporters in Britain. But Gandhiji would not budge from
his vow. He was set to go into wilderness.
Intervention of Betty Molteno and Emily Hobhouse
Kasturba was released from prison on December 22nd. She had been on a fruit
diet before arrest but the prison authorities deliberately refused her fruit. Sh e
came out in shattered health. A huge welcome procession planned in Durban had
to be cancelled and she was taken to Phoenix to recuperate.
Miss Molteno went to see her and was shocked to hear of the prison treatment.
She could not understand why th e government had to be so cruel to the frail
woman. She wrote about Kasturba and the Indian struggle to Alice Greene in
Cape Town and requested her to speak to Miss Hobhouse.
On December 27th, Gandhiji received a telegram from Miss Hobhouse, whom
he and the Boers admired so greatly, appealing to him as a "humble woman" to
postpone the march for fifteen days. Gandhiji consulted his colleagues and agreed
because of his esteem for her.
This is how Alice Greene described the origin of the telegram:
"She (Miss Hobhouse) was sitting up on her couch... and round her
shoulders... was your little Indian shawl from Durban, which I gave her
yesterday and which she has worn since. It suited her beautifully. Directly I
told her I had sent off a telegram to Gandhi and that you had suggested her
sending one too. She instantly took pencil and paper and wrote down a long
telegram which I sent off... She sent it to Maritzburg to catch him at the
mass meeting this afternoon. It was to the effect that her personal sympathy
was intense but that she would venture to advise patience. It would not do to
alienate sympathy and even endanger the very cause itself. Could he not
wait until the meeting of Parliament before having recourse to further
resistance? Even yet Engl ish women had not achieved full freedom. She
used much gentler language than this, but that was the gist of it. She told
him also that everything was being followed with much sympathy and
feeling."79She then wrote a long letter to General Smuts recall ing her special connection
with India through her uncle. She said that as a woman without a vote, she
sympathised with other voteless folk as the Indians. She then pressed him to meet
and talk to Gandhiji:
"You see January 15 is the date now proposed for another march. Before
then some way should be found of giving private assurance to the leaders
that saisfaction is coming to them. Their grievance is really moral... never
will governmental physical force prevail against a great moral and spiritual
upheaval. Wasted time and wasted energy, dear Oom Jannie..."
General Smuts could not possibly ignore an appeal from her. Gandhiji was
invited to Pretoria and negotiations began on January 13th. The Reverend C.F.
Andrews, who accompanied Gandhiji to Pret oria, wrote:
"There can be no doubt that during the days that followed the influence of
Miss Hobhouse with the Boer leaders did much to pave the way to a
reconciliation. While we were in Pretoria she wrote again and again both to
Mr. Gandhi and mysel f. She thus kept herself in touch with the whole
negotiations and took part in them."127
Gandhiji was surprised to see a great change in the attitude of General Smuts
and that was undoubtedly due to Miss Hobhouse. A provisional agreement was
reached on January 22, 1914.
Gandhiji in Cape Town
Gandhiji and Kasturba went to Cape Town in mid -February to bid farewell to
the Reverend C.F. Andrews and to follow the developments on the Indian
question. Kasturba's condition deteriorated and gave cause for grave concern.
Miss Molteno, Miss Greene and Mrs. Alexander frequently visited the Gandhis
at the home of Dr. A.H. Gool where they stayed and enquired about her health.
The aristocracy of South Africa was thus visiting and paying respects to a simple
woman from India and her husband!
Miss Molteno was busy introducing Gandhiji to influential personalities.
Gandhiji wrote to Kallenbach on February 25, 1914:
"What is happening just now is that I am becoming a society man and
Miss Molteno is the instrument... She is undoubtedly a tactful
peacemaker."128
127C.F. Andrews, "Mr. Gandhi at Phoenix" in Modern Review , Calcutta, May
1914
128Kallenbach papers, National Archives of India80Miss Molteno not only took the Gandhis to the palatial Molteno estate, but
arranged for them to meet Miss Hobhouse who was now staying at Groote
Schuur, the residence of the Prime Minister, as the guest of General and Mrs.
Botha. There they met Mrs. Botha -as well as Mrs. Gladstone, the wife of the
Governor -General -who were both friendly and considerate.
Gandhiji had written many times to General Botha for an interview but without
succe ss. But a few days after meeting the Gandhis, Miss Hobhouse invited
Gandhiji again for a discussion at Groote Schuur -and General and Mrs. Botha
joined them.
When Miss Hobhouse died, Gandhiji wrote in an obituary in Young India on
July 15, 1926:
"She played no mean part at the settlement of 1914...
"Let the women of India treasure the memory of this great
Englishwoman."
Continuing friendship
Gandhiji cherished the friendship of these women and tried to maintain
continuing contact.
When he went to London in August 1914 -and he soon fell ill -Olive Schreiner
was already there and rather ill. They kept in contact through Hermann
Kallenbach.
Olive Schreiner, as a pacifist, was very upset when Gandhiji decided to raise an
Indian Vol unteer Corps during the First World War. But she continued her
friendship and spoke at a farewell meeting on the eve of his departure for India.
Also in London, Gandhiji visited Miss Hobhouse who was equally opposed to
the war.
Mrs. Schreiner die d soon after the end of the War and I am aware of no letters
by her to Gandhiji after 1914. But Gandhiji and Miss Hobhouse continued
correspondence until her death.
Mrs. Ruth Alexander sent a letter to Gandhiji on April 4, 1926, through the
Reverend C.F. Andrews. She wrote:
"Dear Mr. Gandhi, I am touched more than I can tell you when I look
back at the time when you did me the great honour to stay with me and to
talk with me, and remembered how patient you always were with me, how
uncondemning ev en of things you must have disapproved. It was wonderful81of you.
"Let me tell you, for the pleasure it gives me, that you have always been,
since I knew you, and always will be, until I die, one of the three great souls
with whom I live from day to da y, beyond those who speak to me from the
printed pages. My father and Olive Schreiner are the other two...
"Please remember me to Mrs. Gandhi, whose gentle courage I have never
forgotten..."
Pacifist, Feminist, Socialist
I have stressed that th ese women were pacifists, feminists and socialists: the
common ideology not only brought them together, but explains the affinity of
Gandhiji to them.
Gandhiji believed in non -violence and was a pacifist though he supported
recruitment to the army u ntil the end of the First World War because of his faith
in the Empire and his feeling that Indians must learn to fight before they can
embrace true non -violence.
He had great interest in feminism and his success in encouraging the
participation of wo men in the political struggle was no accident. When he went to
London in 1909, he went to see Miss E. Pankhurst, the leader of the suffragettes,
and attended many of their meetings. He wrote often in Indian Opinion about
equality of women and the role of w omen in the struggle for justice.
Gandhiji also believed in socialism. He came in contact with socialist thought
during his student days in London. Socialism had not then become rigid or
doctrinaire. His thinking was similar to that of Edward Carpent er and others who
were concerned not with mechanisation and rising production and consumption,
but with equality, quality of life, and protection of the environment. They
believed that man should not be enslaved by machine and alienated, and should
not shu n physical labour.
Gandhiji knew socialists in South Africa and spoke at least twice at the
Socialist Club in Johannesburg.
In 1912, when Gokhale was visiting South Africa, J.T. Bain, a socialist, met
them and the question came up as to their at titude to socialism. Gokhale said he
was a socialist "to some extent", but Gandhiji declared himself an "out and out
socialist".129
129Wilfrid H. Harrison, Memoirs of a Socialist in South Africa, 1903 -1947 .
Published by the author.82The satyagraha of 1913 -14, with the heroism of the poor working men and
women, strengthened the conviction of Gandhiji th at they were the "salt of the
earth" who would free India. He identified himself in dress and living habits with
them.
The convictions of Gandhiji explain the bond which linked him to the European
women who helped him and his cause. They understood hi m, as did the Indian
labourers in South Africa and later the people of India. But those critics who
tried to place him in their pre -determined categories -moderate and extremist, for
instance; those who assumed that he must be a reactionary if he wor e peasant
clothes or professed religion; and those who called him an agent of Gujarati
capitalists because he did not advocate class struggle and tried to unite the Indian
community in the struggle for its dignity and honour -could not understand
Gandhij i nor the admiration he evoked among the greatest men and women of this
century. I hope that the new information which is becoming available will
persuade scholars in India and South Africa to reconsider their assumptions and
understand the real Gandhi.83APPENDIX
SOME UNPUBLISHED LETTERS OF GANDHIJI130
Letter of January 5, 1914, to Miss Emily Hobhouse131
5th January, 1914
Dear Miss Hobhouse,
It was a perfect pleasure to have received your very kind and generous letter.
Had I known how to approach you before, I would undoubtedly have
endeavoured to enlist your large heart in our behalf. It was during the Boer war
that I came to admire your selfless devotion to Truth, an d I have often felt how
nice it would be if the Indian cause could plead before you for admission; and it is
evident to me that your first telegram uttering a note of warning was an answer to
that yearning. I am loath to write to you on this question, as Miss Molteno has
told me how feeble you are now in health. She was good enough to read to me a
part of Miss Greene's letter, telling her in most pathetic tones how it was the duty
of those who loved you to refrain from imposing fresh burdens on you. I am ,
therefore, torn by conflicting emotions. But, as Miss Molteno, who knows you
better assures me that to expect you now not to interest yourself in our cause is to
misjudge you and to aggravate your illness, because you would, she says, fret
about us with out being enabled by us to render your assistance effective.
If your health permits and if the climate on the North Coast of Natal would not
be too trying for you, I would esteem it a privilege if you could take rest on the
little settlement at Phoen ix where "Indian Opinion" is published. Miss Molteno
knows the settlement well. It is situated about eighty feet above sea -level and is
exposed to certain winds which sweep across the hills that overlook the settlement
and purify the atmosphere. The sce nery around is certainly very charming, the
site is beautifully isolated, there is no bustle or noise, it is two miles from the
nearest station and I venture to think that you will find loving hands to administer
to your wants, and nothing would give me pe rsonally greater pleasure than, if I
were free, to be able to wait upon you and nurse you. You will, I hope, consider
130I obtained copies o f these letters from the Molteno -Murray family papers
through the courtesy of the University Cape Town Libraries
131The typed copy of this letter which I obtained is unsigned, but is certainly from
Gandhiji.84this offer as coming from the heart without the slightest hesitation accept it if you
can.
I will not weary you with copies of corr espondence and details about the
question. I enclose the telegrams exchanged between General Smuts and myself,
which speak for themselves. We have always accepted what we could get in
matters of detail, but, in this matter of the Commission, we are solem nly bound to
sacrifice ourselves for the principle of consultation. In striving to secure this
recognition of an elementary right, if we must, for the time being, forfeit public
sympathy, we must be prepared to do so. Knowing that the truth is on our sid e,
past experience will enable us to have patience, and, as days go on, the mists of
ignorance will be removed, the cloud will lift and I have no doubt that Truth will
conquer. What we have asked for is the smallest measure and, if the Government
obstinat ely refuses to grant that measure of justice, surely it will be an indication
of their dis -inclination to recognise the status of British Indians throughout the
Union. Indeed, through my twenty years' experience, I have been able to gather
many an indicat ion of the same spirit and it is really against that that we are
fighting. In those matters to which Passive Resistance is directed, I hold there can
be no compromise. Could Daniel have compromised by bowing to one of the
laws of the Medes and Persians a nd not to others, or would the whole body of
those laws have represented the influence of Satan and, therefore, been
unacceptable in toto?
The last paragraph of your letter seems to assume that we are following the
tactics of the high -souled militant s of England. May I say that we have not only
not copied them, but, wherever it has been necessary, I have drawn a sharp
distinction between their methods and ours. Indeed, I used to have long
discussions with the followers of the great Mrs. Pankhurst on this very question.
At no stage, do we believe in the use of physical force, but I am free to confess
that we have certainly been encouraged, in the hour of our weakness, by the noble
example of devotion to duty and self -sacrifice that the militants have set, though
we condemn their methods and tactics as suicidal and beneath the dignity of
woman.
I hope that God will restore you to health and spare you for many a long year
to continue your noble and unassuming work in the cause of Humanity.
I am,
Yours truly,
Miss Hobhouse,
The Cottage,
Kenilworth,
Capetown85Letters to Miss Elizab eth M. Molteno
7 Buitencingle
Capetown 23rd Feb 1914
Dear Miss Molteno,
My impression is that I said we would call on you tomorrow (Tuesday), but Dr
Gool does not remember. Not to make any mistake we shall be coming there
between 3 and 4 tomorrow and take our chance.
Thevisit to Miss Hobhouse was entirely successful. It was a perfect
pilgrimage for me. Mrs Botha was all you described her. She was most kind to
both of us and most loving towards Mrs Gandhi. Thank you for all this.
Incidentally we met Lady Gladstone too ... Are you not pleased?
With our regards to you and Miss Greene
I remain
Yours since rely
M.K. Gandhi
***
7 Buitencingle
24th Feb 1914
Dear Miss Molteno,
I am sorry to have to inform you that Mrs Gandhi has had a relapse and she is
at the time of writing lying in bed. She wants me therefore to say that whilst she
would try her best to keep the appointment for tomorrow, she might not be able to
go out at all. I thought that I should let you know this. In any case I shall expect
you tomorrow afternoon and we shall be able to discuss. If she is very ill, I would
also have to remain in t o be by her side. It is a great pity events have turned out
so. But man proposes?
I am
Yours sincerely
M.K. Gandhi
***
7 Buitencingle
Capetown 27thFeb 1914
Dear Miss Molteno,86How nice of both of you to have come yesterday! I was out seeing Miss
Hobhouse at her r equest. She wished to discuss the marriage question with me. I
am deeply grateful to you for having brought me in contact with that noble soul.
To be with her is a spiritual uplifting for me.
We meet on Monday.
With regards from us both to y ou both
I am
Yours sincerely
M.K. Gandhi
***
7 Buitencingle
Capetown 8th March 1914
Dear Miss Molteno,
I am sorry both of you had to rush away yesterday. I was in the act of shaving
when you were announced. You had hardly gone when I came out of the bath
room.
You will be glad to learn that Mrs Gandhi is decidedly better today. I had a
most anxious week but if today's condition continues the danger is over for the
time being.
I enclose for your acceptance and Miss Greene's a copy of Mr. Andrews'
lecture. I f you want more copies or if you want me to send copies elsewhere
please let me know.132
With regards to you both from us both
I am
Yours sincerely
M.K. Gandhi
***
Phoeni x
132The Reverend C.F. Andrews gave a lecture in Cap e Town City Hall in mid -
February 1914 on Poet Rabindranath Tagore --who had recently received the Nobel prize for
literature. Gandhiji had the lecture printed and sent complimentary copies to a number of people.
(Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Volum e 12, page 385).8719th May133
Dear Miss Molteno,
I know that I owe you a letter. But since leaving Cape Town I have passed
through so many trials that I have not had the time or the inc lination to write
really to anybody. Mrs. Gandhi had a very serious relapse and she absorbed all
my time. Then followed a disciplinary fast of 14 days -the severest trial of my
life. The fast was broken on Saturday last and I am feeling much better tod ay.
Mrs. Gandhi too has responded to the careful nursing and today for the first time
after my return to Phoenix I am at the Press working at the desk having just left
Mrs Gandhi to her household work.
Now I know you will excuse me why I should not have written a line to you
after that very serious conversation we had. Do please let me hear from you.
I had a very sweet letter from Miss Hobhouse this week. I am not replying just
yet but may do so next week.
Mrs. Gandhi often recalls your love to her and thinks of the kind friends in
Cape Town.
Manilal is still in Johannesburg with Mr Kallenbach.
With our united regards to both of you
I am
Yours sincerely
M.K. Gandhi
***
20: 7: 14134
Dear Miss Molteno,
I had your two letters. I am sorry we were not able to meet to say goodbye to
one another. Mrs. Gandhi and I cannot forget the affection you and Miss Greene
showed us during our stay in Capetown . May God reward you for it.
Do please write to me occasionally. My address will be Rajkot via Bombay.
With our united regards to you both
133This must be 1914. Gandhiji was in Cape Town in February -March 1914 and
returned to Phoenix Settlement, near Durban, at the end of March 1914.
134Gandhiji was then on way to London. The letter was written from the boat.88Yours sincerely
M.K. Gandhi
LETTER OF OLIVE SCHREINER TO GANDHIJI, AUGUST 15, 1914135
30 St. Mary Abbotts Terrace
Kensington London W.
Telephone 3350 Western Saturday
My dear Mr. Gandhi
I have at last got your address from the Steamship's Company. I want much to
see you. Could you and Mr. Kallenbach perhaps come and see me here, or could
I meet you anywhere. I was struck to the heart this morning with sorrow to see
that you, and that beautiful and beloved Indian poetess whom I met in London
some months ago136and other Indian friends had offered to serve the English
Government in this evil war in any way they might demand of you. Surely you,
who would not take up arms even in the cause of your own oppressed people
cannot be willing to shed blood in this wicked cause. I had longed to meet you
and Mr. Kallenbach as friends who would understand my hatr ed of it. I don't
believe the statement in the paper can be true.
135Obtained thr ough the courtesy of the South African Library, Cape Town
136Mrs. Sarojini Naidu89GANDHIJI AND THE STRUGGLE FOR LIBERATION IN SOUTH
AFRICA137
As important as the fortieth anniversary of the assassination of Gandhiji which
is observed on January 30, 1988, i s the eightieth anniversary of his first
imprisonment in South Africa in January 1908, which was a turning point in his
life.
Gandhiji always considered himself an Indian and a South African. Not only
had he spent twenty -one years of his adult life in South Africa, but he had served
four of his ten terms of imprisonment in that country -in the prisons of
Johannesburg, Volksrust and Dundee. It was in South Africa that he developed his
philosophy of satyagraha .
In a sense, his last satyagraha was a lso in South Africa. Though he could not
be physically present, he guided and inspired the great Indian passive resistance
movement of 1946 -48 and lent it enormous support.
Birth of Satyagraha
The small Indian community in the Transvaal had launched , in July 1907, a
passive resistance campaign against the Asiatic Registration Act (the Black Act)
designed to humiliate, harass and eventually expel them from the territory.
Volunteers picketed registration offices and most of the Indians refused to take
out permits under the Black Act.
Gandhiji found that "passive resistance" was seen even by European friends as
a "weapon of the weak." He sought a term which could be understood by Indians
and make it clear that the resistance was out of moral strengt h rather than any
weakness. He invited suggestions and, in November 1907, invented the term
"satyagraha " (firmness in truth). The choice of the term itself appears to have
helped crystallise his thinking.
On December 28, 1907, Gandhiji and several of his colleagues were taken to
court for refusing to register and were ordered to leave the Transvaal within two
weeks. They defied the order and were sentenced on January 10, 1908, to two to
137Written in connection with the 80th anniversary of the imprisonment of
Gandhiji in South Africa. Published in Asian Times , London, January 29, 1988, and in several
papers in India.90three months` imprisonment.
General Smuts, however, was o bliged soon to negotiate a settlement with
Gandhiji and the prisoners were released on January 30th -the very day that
Gandhiji was to be assassinated forty years later.
The brief imprisonment was not only the "baptism of fire" for Gandhiji but
trans formed him from a public servant and adviser to the Indian community into
the leader of resistance.
In the many years that the struggle lasted with its ups and downs -jailings,
beatings, torture and deportations of resisters, as well as the intervals when they
were obliged to while away their time on the Tolstoy Farm -Gandhiji developed
the concept of satyagraha which was later to inspire the national movement in
India.
There was little discussion at the time of non -violence, for no one had
contemplated an armed struggle which was, in any case, unthinkable for an
unarmed and vulnerable community of a mere 12,000 Indians in the Transvaal.
Gandhiji had not yet become an uncompromising devotee of non -violence: he had
in fact favoured the enlistment of Indians in the armed forces. The emphasis was
on the duty to defy an unjust law and to defend the honour of India.
Satyagraha -the common heritage of India and South Africa
Thesatyagraha in South Africa was not only a struggle for the rights of the
Indians or the redress of their grievances, but a part of the struggle of India for
freedom and dignity. It was influenced by the upsurge in India in protest against
the partition of Bengal and the mass boycott of British goods in the swadeshi
movem ent.
The experience of Gandhiji in the struggle in South Africa had, in its turn, a
great influence on the Indian national movement.
Out of his close association with the Muslims in South Africa, and their great
contribution to the passive resis tance campaign, came his stress on Hindu -Muslim
unity as a tenet of the Indian national movement.
Out of his outrage at the treatment of Indians in South Africa by the Europeans
as virtual untouchables came his determination to eliminate untouchabilit y in
India.
Out of his experience in trying to unify the Indian people in South Africa,
speaking many languages, came his advocacy of a lingua franca for India. It was
inIndian Opinion in Durban on August 18, 1906, that he first called for the
adopt ion of Hindustani as the common language for India.91As the national movement developed in India under Gandhiji`s leadership -
from non -cooperation to civil disobedience and then to the "do or die" struggle in
1942 -it became radicalised. It stopped seeking a compromise settlement with
the oppressors and became committed to the complete independence of India. It
also became strongly internationalist under the influence of Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru, and by 1946 Gandhiji began advocating the unity of all the oppressed
peoples of the world for the elimination of colonialism.
Gandhiji, meanwhile, kept in contact with developments in South Africa. He
encouraged the Indian passive resistance movement of 1946, under the leadership
of Dr. Yusuf M. Dadoo a nd Dr. G.M. Naicker, and lent it great support. While he
had confined the first satyagraha in South Africa to the Indian and Chinese
settlers whose security was threatened, he gave his blessings to the efforts of the
Dadoo -Naicker leadership to build a united democratic front.
He was, in a sense, a patron of the movements both in India and among Indians
in South Africa. In the last year of his life, when he felt anguish at the eruption of
violence between Hindus and Muslims in India, he seemed to fi nd some solace in
thesatyagraha in South Africa.
One of his last speeches -at the prayer meeting in Delhi on January 28, 1948 -
was devoted to the struggle in South Africa. He said:
"Today we are also a free country as South Africa and are
mem bers of the same Commonwealth, which implies that we should
all live like brothers and equals... Why should they look down on the
Coloured people? Is it because they are industrious and thrifty? I
shall tell the Government of South Africa through this meet ing that
it should mend its ways."
The Indian people in South Africa benefitted from the lessons of their own
satyagraha of 1907 -14, as well as the experience of the Indian national
movement. The concept of satyagraha was enriched by their passive res istance of
1946 -48 which was joined by several Africans, Coloured people and whites out
of solidarity.
The Indian satyagraha was the precursor of the great non -violent resistance
under African leadership in 1952, aptly named the "Campaign of Defianc e against
Unjust Laws" and, indeed, the beginning of mass resistance in South Africa.
The heritage of Gandhiji and of satyagraha is thus a common heritage South
Africa and India.
Continuing inspiration of Gandhiji92One does not need to be a Gan dhian to recognise that the philosophy and
example of Gandhiji remain a powerful force in the world, spreading wider and
adapting to the traditions and circumstances in different countries.
The leaders of the freedom movements in many colonial countri es
acknowledge the inspiration of Gandhiji. The civil rights movement in the United
States, led by the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was inspired by his
example, as was much of the movement against the Vietnam war.
The mass movement for disarm ament and against nuclear war, and the
environmentalist movement, have been influenced, among others, by Gandhiji.
Non-violent resisters in the Philippines played a significant role in the struggle
to overthrow the Marcos dictatorship. The mobilisati on of hundreds of thousands
of unarmed people to surround and protect the armed forces which turned against
Marcos was a crucial event in the struggle and added a new dimension to the
history of non -violent resistance.
Liberation theology, which has spread in Latin America, Africa and Asia,
draws some of its inspiration from Gandhiji.
A dramatic affirmation of the vitality of the heritage of Gandhiji was the Delhi
Declaration of Mikhail Gorbachev and Rajiv Gandhi in November 1986 -calling
for a non-nuclear and non -violent world -the reference to non -violence reportedly
included at the suggestion of Gorbachev.
None of the recent non -violent movements perhaps strictly follows the tenets of
Gandhiji, as understood by his disciples in India, bu t he has been an inspira tion as
people tried to choose the most peaceful and effective means of struggle against
injustice and oppression in the light of the relevant conditions. The philosophy of
Gandhiji cannot be codified into immutable rules, but must always be creative. It
evolved with his experience in forty years of struggle. He kept his windows
open to receive inspiration from all sources. He learnt from the humblest in the
resistance campaigns. He welcomed discussion and debate. He changed his views
many times and never hesitated to admit errors.
It is a pity that Indian thinkers and public leaders have not followed the spread
and development of Gandhian ideology and have made little contribution to the
movements inspired by it.
Is non -violent resistance relevant to South Africa?
Hassatyagraha lost all relevance in South Africa as a means of resistance,
especially after the Sharpeville massacre?93The answer is not simple.
I believe that patient suffering with love has har dly ever melted the hearts of
oppressive rulers. Satyagraha has succeeded to the extent that it aroused public
opinion in the camp of the adversaries and beyond so as to restrain and exert
pressure on the oppressors. That is why Gandhiji always devoted gre at attention
to publicity.
Given the possibility to reach and arouse public conscience, non -violent
resistance makes it difficult for the oppressors to resort to extreme savagery and
thereby saves lives. It helps the oppressed people to overcome fear of prison and
torture and steels them in the struggle. It makes it possible to reach settlements
without bitterness.
In South Africa, however, the movement faced not only an enemy which
became ever more brutal, refusing to recognise the humanity of th e black people,
but powerful international forces of greed and prejudice hindered effective
pressure against the racist regime.
Regrettably, many people in the Western world are not outraged by violence
against people with a black skin and such vio lence gets little press and public
attention. As powerful vested interests from abroad became involved in South
Africa, they tended to exert their influence to protect the racist structures which
ensure them exorbitant profit. Perhaps even more important, mass resistance in
South Africa began at a time when the world was divided by the "cold war" and
cold war calculations began to influence the policies of powerful nations much
more than justice. The ANC was branded by Western intelligence services as pro -
Communist, because like most national movements it tried to encompass all the
people and had not excluded Communists or followers of other ideologies. This
has largely determined the actions of Western Governments, particularly that of
the United Stat es, whatever the public pronouncements of their leaders.
As a result, even on occasions when some of the white rulers in South Africa
contemplated a change of course, powerful influences from abroad reinforced
those who advocated reliance on ever gre ater violence to perpetuate racist
domination.
It is, therefore, understandable, to say the least, that the leaders of the liberation
movement felt that they had to undertake violent resistance. But that does not
necessarily mean that non -violent resi stance has become totally irrelevant nor that
the spirit of satyagraha had disappeared.
In many countries, non -violent resistance took place at the same time as
violent resistance, or threat of such resistance. There was, for instance, violent
resist ance in India on many occasions and a threat of violence by others in the94United States when Dr. King was leading the civil rights movement. The
oppressors are often obliged to choose between compromise with the mainstream
of the movement pursuing non -violent resistance and confrontation with the
growing trend toward violent resistance.
In South Africa, the movement has used peaceful means whenever possible and
hardly any other country has seen such persistent non -violent resistance, even
alongside arm ed struggle, as South Africa.
There are also situations in which effective non -violent resistance by the
oppressed people is not practicable, but non -violent action can be carried on by
those abroad outraged by the injustice. For instance, the Vietna mese peasants
could not non -violently resist unseen persons throwing bombs from high up in
the sky, but the American people could carry on such resistance against
involvement in the Vietnam war. In the case of South Africa, too, there have been
times wh ensatyagraha abroad in solidarity with the oppressed people was more
feasible and effective than non -violent resistance inside the country.
Mass satyagraha against apartheid and all its protectors and accomplices all
over the world may well be the mo st effective means to put an end to the
continuing tragedy in South Africa.
The answer to the question of relevance is then that even though the oppressed
people and their leaders are convinced that clandestine activity, sabotage and
armed struggle ha ve become essential or indispensable, the spirit of Gandhiji has
not lost all its relevance.
I would like briefly to trace the course of the liberation struggle, in the context
of violence and non -violence, to underline this conclusion.
Unconcer n for African lives
One of the first mass actions of the ANC was the 1919 campaign against the
pass laws, reminiscent of the Indian satyagraha in South Africa a few years
earlier. Thousands of men and women threw away their passes and were
sentenced t o imprisonment with hard labour; those who were sentenced to fines
refused to pay fines and chose to go to prison.
The regime reacted with savagery. Many Africans, including even children,
were trampled under horses` hoofs as mounted policemen cha rged on a peaceful
demonstration outside a Johannesburg court and shot at by white vigilantes.
Several were killed. But there was hardly a murmur of protest in the world -
though that was the time when leaders of Allied Powers were waxing eloquent
about h uman rights -as the victims were Africans.95When the Indian people launched passive resistance on June 13, 1946, the
police in Durban stood by without arresting the resisters and let white ruffians
attack them with bicycle chains. At least two resiste rs fell unconscious, and one
bystander died.
Fortunately, a white priest, the Reverend Michael Scott, felt compelled to join
the resisters. Gandhiji expressed his outrage and sent a personal appeal to General
Smuts so that the violence was curbed.
The great Campaign of Defiance against Unjust Laws in 1952 attracted
attention and sympathy around the world as 8,000 people of all racial origins
courted imprisonment. The regime responded with inhuman laws for whipping
passive resisters. There was har dly a protest from the governments of the great
Western democracies.
The ANC, however, managed to carry on non -violent resistance -bus boycotts,
school boycott, potato boycott and resistance against the removal of African
communities -over the next few years. Its leaders were subjected to arbitrary
restrictions and even a four -year trial for "High Treason". But there was not even
verbal condemnation of apartheid violence by the major Western Powers until the
Sharpeville massacre of 1960.
Instead, they called for sympathy and understanding for white fears for the
future rather than for the suffering of the black majority. They invited the Pretoria
regime to discussions of Western military strategy and alliances in Africa and the
Middle East. Britain signed the Simonstown military alliance with the Pretoria
regime in 1955.
When some National Party leaders advocated a change of course in the wake of
the flight of capital after the Sharpeville massacre, Western financial interests
bailed out the regime and thereby strengthened the position of Prime Minister
Hendrik Verwoerd and other advocates of greater repression.
Combination of armed struggle and non -violent resistance
As a result, the ANC leaders felt obliged, in 1961, to aband on strict adherence
to non -violence and prepare for armed resistance. As Nelson Mandela explained
in his statement to the court in April 1964, members of the ANC had begun to
lose confidence in the ANC policy, as fifty years of non -violence seemed to have
achieved nothing, and were developing ideas of terrorism. Scattered incidents of
violence had broken out in the country and there was a danger of uncontrolled
violence. The ANC leaders felt that a properly controlled violent resistance,
under the guidan ce of the ANC, was essential to avert the danger of terrorism and
make any progress.96TheUmkhonto we Sizwe , the military wing of the ANC, said in its first
manifesto on December 16, 1961:
"We of Umkhonto we Sizwe have always sought to achieve lib eration
without bloodshed and civil clash. We hope, even at this late hour, that our
first actions will awaken everyone to a realisation of the dangerous situation
to which the Nationalist policy is leading. We hope we will bring the
government and its s upporters to their senses before it is too late, so that
both the government and its policies can be changed before matters reach
the desperate stage of civil war."
The Umkhonto carried on some three hundred acts of sabotage between 1961
and 1963 aga inst symbols of apartheid and some economic installations in order
to warn the regime and its supporters, give hope to the people and promote
international action. Every care was taken to avoid loss of human life. Only one
person -a police informer in the eastern Cape -was killed by the ANC
underground while the regime tortured several leaders of the people to death.
Vuyisile Mini, the respected composer of freedom songs, and his colleagues were
executed.
Until today, the total number of persons kill ed in numerous ANC armed actions
is perhaps less than two hundred. Several of the casualties were possibly
unintended and resulted from malfunction of the timing mechanisms of
explosives.
Even after gruesome killings of refugees in Maputo and Maseru b y South
African raiders, and a series of tortures of detainees to death, the ANC was able to
prevent retaliation in kind.
It was not beyond the capacity of ANC, or of the black people in spontaneous
eruptions of anger, to kill thousands of whites. The absence of such terrorism was
due to the enormous restraint of the ANC and its influence among the people, an
influence which it would not have had if it had opposed all violence.
During all these years since 1961, the freedom movement has also utili sed
every opportunity for non -violent defiance of unjust laws at great sacrifice.
The student upsurge in the 1970s was essentially non -violent. The funeral
processions defying laws prohibiting the display of the ANC flag and symbols -
thereby making the laws virtually inoperative -were non -violent resistance, as are
the rent boycotts, the consumer boycotts and the "end conscription" campaign.
The United Democratic Front and allied organisations have contributed an
impressive chapter to the his tory of non -violent resistance.
The growth of non -violent resistance in South Africa, and the development of97international solidarity, encouraged and enabled Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the
Reverend Alan Boesak and other churchmen to defy the laws on many occasions
and force the regime to retreat.
Since 1985, the violence of the apartheid regime under its State of Emergency -
the indiscriminate shootings and the mass torture of detainees -as well as the
series of ghastly murders by vigilante gro ups, provoked counter -violence.
Enraged youth groups resorted to killing suspected informers by "necklacing,"
and that was used by the regime and its friends to malign the liberation
movement.
The ANC could perhaps have said -as even Mahatma Gandhi wrote from jail
in 1942 -that it could not condemn, without full information, people who were
provoked to violence by the "leonine" violence of the regime when their leaders
were confined and exiled.
But Oliver Tambo, the President of the ANC, declar ed last year that the ANC
opposed "necklacing". He was reported to have advised African youth last
September to try to win over informers and vigilante groups. I can think of none
but a Mahatma Gandhi who could show such courage and humanism in the midst
of a difficult battle and popular emotions.
Spirit of Gandhiji lives on in South Africa
The spirit of Gandhiji lives on in South Africa eighty years after he went to
prison in the Transvaal defying unjust racist laws, forty years after his ashes wer e
immersed in the ocean off the mouth of the Umgeni river in South Africa -not
least in the hearts of the leaders of the liberation struggle.
They have stood firm on truth, despite constant provocation and bestiality by a
racist regime, resisting all forms of racism and constantly upholding the objective
of a non -racial democratic society. They have resisted unjust laws with
exceptional courage and sacrifice. They have recognised that ends and means are
inseparable, and have avoided the temptation to reply to the massive terrorism of
the white racist regime with terrorism against white civilians. Even in the course
of armed resistance, they have avoided the loss of innocent lives.
Gandhiji did not condemn Sant Bhagat Singh or those who resorted to sabotage
when he was jailed along with other leaders of the national movement in 1942 -
but placed the blame squarely on the violence of the British Raj. Martin Luther
King, Jr., did not condemn John Brown or Malcolm X, but only slavery and
racism.
Chief Albert Lutuli did not condemn Nelson Mandela for founding and leading
the military wing of the African National Congress, but declared when Mandela98and his colleagues were sentenced in June 1964:
"... in the face of the uncompromising white refu sal to abandon a policy
which denies the African and other oppressed South Africans their rightful
heritage -freedom -no one can blame brave just men for seeking justice by
the use of violent methods nor could they be blamed if they tried to create
an or ganised force in order to ultimately establish peace and racial
harmony...
"They represent the highest in morality and ethics in the South African
political struggle..."
The ANC is attacked by the Botha regime, which relies on violence and
terror ism, as violent; and that charge is echoed by the friends of that regime who
instigate and support violence and terrorism in many countries of the third world.
But it has earned the understanding, sympathy and even active support of the
greatest pacifists of our time, many of whom acknowledge the inspiration of
Gandhiji.99DR.YUSUF DADOO, MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE SOUTH
AFRICAN STRUGGLE138
Speaking to a group of South African Indian students in February 1939,
Gandhiji said that if the Indian c ommunity in South Africa had guts in them, they
would launch a satyagraha .
"I am hoping that some day from among the youths born in South
Africa a person will rise who will stand up for the rights of his
countrymen domiciled there, and make the vindi cation of those
rights his life`s mission."139
He had been distressed for a long time with the situation in South Africa where
he had discovered and dedicated his life to satyagraha , with a conviction that
defiance of evil and willingness to sacrifice w ould prevail over brute force of the
oppressors. Ever since he had left the shores of that country in 1914, more and
more humiliating restrictions had been imposed on the Indians -undermining all
that had been achieved by the great satyagraha of 1906 -14-but there had been
little resistance. Leaders of Indian organisations had become docile and selfish,
and engaged in petty squabbles and shameful compromises of the dignity and
honour of the Indian people.
Gandhiji did not know, when he met the stude nts, that a dedicated leadership
was emerging from a new generation of South Africans -one that would recapture
the spirit of defiance he had inculcated and take it forward to a new level, one of
which India could be proud.
At a mass public meeting called by the Transvaal Indian Congress on March 1,
1939, Dr. Yusuf Mohamed Dadoo and his supporters secured the adoption of a
proposal, against the opposition of the leadership, to launch passive resistance if
a pending segregation bill was enacted. At a subsequent meeting chaired by E. I.
Asvat, a veteran who had been imprisoned many times in Gandhiji`s satyagraha ,
Dr. Dadoo was elected leader of the campaign and head of the Council for Action.
That marked the dedication of his life to public ser vice.
Dr. Dadoo sought the "advice, guidance and inspiration" of Gandhiji who
readily endorsed the emerging leadership. Advising a postponement of passive
resistance -while he contacted General Smuts and the Indian Government to
138Written for the 80th anniversary of the birth of Dr. Dadoo on September 5,
1989, and 120th anniversary of Gandhiji, October 2, 1989. Published in Mainstream , New Delhi,
September 16, 1989, and Sechaba , November 1989.
139Harijan , February 18, 1939; Collected Works , Volume 68, page 385.100secure an abandonmen t of the obnoxious bill -he assured Dr. Dadoo that if his
efforts failed, the whole of India would back the resisters.
"It has stirred me to find you heading the satyagraha band," he wrote to
Dr. Dadoo on August 19, 1939, recalling that Dr. Dadoo`s father had been
his client. "You are engaged in a very hard struggle. And if as a result of the
present effort a handful of you make it the mission of your life to serve the
cause there you will gradually build up a prestige that will stand you in
good st ead."
The confidence and hope of Gandhiji were not misplaced. Dr. Dadoo not only
led the Indian people in mass defiance but proceeded to do what Gandhiji could
not envisage in his time. He became an architect of the unity of all the oppressed
people in the struggle to end racist tyranny.
The African National Congress honoured him in 1955 with the award of the
decoration Isitlawandle Seaparankoe . Nelson Mandela described him, in evidence
during the Treason Trial in 1960, as "one of the most outst anding leaders in our
movement, revered throughout the country." The ANC elected him Vice -
Chairman of its Revolutionary Committee in 1969. Oliver Tambo said at his
funeral in London in September 1983, on behalf of the National Executive
Committee of the Af rican National Congress: "He was one of the foremost
national leaders of our country, of the stature of Chief Lutuli, Moses Kotane, J. B.
Marks, Bram Fischer, Nelson Mandela and others."
Education of a revolutionary
Yusuf Dadoo was born on Sept ember 5, 1909, in Krugersdorp, the son of a
prosperous Indian trader. Even as a child, he experienced racism and was
involved in fights with white boys who insulted and attacked him. He learnt
about the struggle led by Gandhiji and participated in hartals (strikes) in protest
against anti -Indian measures such as the Class Areas Bill of 1923.
While a student at Aligarh Muslim College in India from 1925 to 1927 he took
great interest in the Indian national movement, rejecting communalism.
Proceeding t o London in 1929 at the age of 19, he joined the London branch of
the Indian National Congress and was arrested in a demonstration for Indian
freedom and against the Simon Commission. While studying medicine in
Edinburgh, he took an active part in polit ics-as a member of the Independent
Labour Party and of the League against Imperialism which advocated unity of the
oppressed people of the world. He joined hunger marches in Britain, addressed
meetings in Hyde Park and worked for the India League. He cam e under the
influence of Pandit Nehru and of Marxists who advocated a "united front" against
fascism. All the time, he kept close contact with South Africa, trying to encourage
resistance against the racist onslaughts.101Returning to South Africa in 19 36, he became a popular doctor and his
professional work only strengthened his political commitment. He recalled:
"I came across the poverty, the misery, the malnutrition, the sickness of
the black people every day... And that made one`s blood boil. W hat can one
do to help these people? Medicine is one thing -you give a few tablets or a
mixture -but it doesn`t go to the basis of the problem. That had a great deal
to do with my thinking and I got into political struggle."140
He proceeded to rally the Indian people against the compromising leadership
of the Transvaal Indian Congress, for militant resistance against anti -Indian
measures and for a united front with the African majority against racist -fascist
oppression. He was soon able to secure the support of the great majority of the
Indian people, including many former colleagues of Gandhiji and their children.
He organised the Non -European United Front in the Transvaal and became its
Secretary -General. And in 1939, the year he contacted Gandhiji, he joined the
Communist Party of South Africa.
Passive Resistance of 1946 -48
The postponement of passive resistance in 1939, on the advice of Gandhiji, was
utilised by Dr. Dadoo to strengthen the organisation of the Indians and to develop
unity with the Africans. He spent much time addressing meetings in African
locations and was twice sentenced to prison on the charge of inciting Africans
against the war.
He became a leader -together with Dr. A.B. Xuma, President of the African
National Congr ess-of the Anti -Pass Council set up in 1943 to campaign against
the humiliating restrictions on the movement of Africans. It collected 800,000
signatures to a petition against the pass laws and Dr. Dadoo was again arrested for
leading a procession to pre sent the petition to the government.
He earned the respect of the Africans by identifying himself with their concerns
-a square in Orlando township was named after him -and developed intimate
friendship with African leaders like J.B. Marks and Moses Kotane.
The Indian passive resistance movement of 1946 -48-led by Dr. Dadoo, a
Marxist, and Dr. G. M. Naicker, a Gandhian -in which two thousand people went
to jail, made South African racism a world issue. It also laid the basis for a
national ma ss movement for freedom in South Africa. The African National
Congress backed the Indian resistance. A number of non -Indian volunteers -
Africans, Europeans and Coloured people -courted imprisonment in solidarity
with the Indian people. Internationa l solidarity with the Indian and African people
was promoted by the Indian Government and, in Britain and the United States,
140Interview to United Nations Radio in 1979.102through the efforts of V.K. Krishna Menon, Fenner Brockway and Paul Robeson
with whom Dr. Dadoo had come in contact as a studen t activist.
A few weeks after the launching of the resistance, when African mineworkers
went on strike under the leadership of J. B. Marks, and many were massacred, the
Indian community rushed to provide assistance. Dr. Dadoo was brought from
prison t o be tried on the charge of inciting the strike.
Later that year, when the Indian complaint against South Africa was discussed
in the United Nations, a multi -racial delegation led by Dr. Xuma visited New
York to assist the Indian delegation. And in Ma rch 1947, Dr. Xuma, Dr. Dadoo
and Dr. Naicker signed the pact of cooperation between the African and Indian
Congresses.
Mantle of Gandhiji
It may seem strange that the mantle of Gandhiji in South Africa had thus fallen
on a Marxist. But Gandhiji, w ho followed and guided the movement, fully
supported Dr. Dadoo, brushing aside complaints of Communist influence. For
him, the objectives of the struggle and the means employed were the essentials,
rather than the ideological and other labels of participan ts. And Dr. Dadoo
demonstrated integrity, courage and willingness to sacrifice that Gandhiji valued
in a public servant.
Speaking of early influences on his thinking, Dr. Dadoo said in an interview
with the United Nations Radio in 1979:
"I hold G andhiji in very high respect and affection. He, as a matter of
fact, had a great deal in moulding my thinking and subsequently my
political activities. I believed in Gandhiji to the extent that there must be
resistance, there must be struggle for justice a nd righteousness. But after
Gandhiji went back to India there arose another great revolutionary fighter,
Pandit Nehru whose broad views on politics attracted young people at the
time. I believed in the policy of Nehru who also did not believe completely,
implicitly, in absolute non -violence."
In his mind, the influence of Pandit Nehru, and one might add Karl Marx, did
in no way erase the spirit of defiance he had imbibed from Gandhiji. He became
noted for constant refusal to submit to racist intimida tion and repression which led
to numerous arrests. He risked even his life for the cause. And though he did not
believe in non -violence as a creed, he took every care to see that the passive
resistance movement was totally non -violent -even when white ruf fians began
brutally to assault passive resisters, including women.
The interaction of Gandhism and Marxism perhaps enhanced the significance103of the Indian satyagraha of 1946 -48 and made it the rehearsal for mass resistance
by all the oppressed peopl e of South Africa.
For Gandhiji who was deeply anguished by the Hindu -Muslim carnage that
spread in the Indian sub -continent on the eve of independence, as if his life`s
work had been in vain, the resistance in South Africa was a solace, demonstratin g
that satyagraha was alive and well in the land of its birth.
Unity of Indians and Africans
Much has been written about Gandhiji`s opposition to a united front of Indians
with Africans, but his attitude is often misunderstood and requires explan ation.
During his sojourn in South Africa, the Indian community was composed
largely of people born in India who were essentially alien settlers, though some
Indians had arrived in that country long before the first shipload of indentured
labourers were brought in 1860. Many of the Indian traders maintained their
contacts and property interests in India.
The struggle led by Gandhiji was for the security of the settlers and to enable
them to live with self -respect. It was, for him, even more for the honour of India
which was affronted by the racial legislation. It was thus a contribution to the
Indian national movement rather than an attempt to change the social order in
South Africa.
The victory of the satyagraha -when the determinati on and sacrifices of
resisters and the savage repression by the regime aroused opinion in India and
persuaded the Imperial Government in London to intervene -was of great historic
significance for India and the world. But its immediate effect in counter ing
racism in South Africa was very limited. Gandhiji secured satisfaction of the
minimum demands, leaving the rest for the future. Further Indian immigration to
South Africa was virtually stopped and Gandhiji assured the authorities that
Indians did not seek political rights.
The Indian demands -ending of the three pound tax on former indentured
workers and members of their families, validation of Hindu and Muslim
marriages, and protection of vested rights as regards ownership of property or
tradin g licences -had little to do with the legitimate aspirations of the African
people for self -determination in their country. There was, moreover, little
possibility of a united struggle since the African political movements were then at
a nascent stage.
Gandhiji, however, foresaw the inevitability of confrontation between the
Africans and the white rulers. Replying to fears that his passive resistance would
place a new weapon in the hands of Africans, he said, soon after the Bambata104uprising, as repor ted by the Reverend Doke:
"Men who see far believe that the problems which are connected with the
Natives will be the problems of the future, and that, doubtless, the white
man will have a stern struggle to maintain his ascendancy in South Africa.
Whe n the moment of collision comes, if, instead of the old ways of
massacre, assegai and fire, the Natives adopt the policy of Passive
Resistance, it will be a grand change for the Colony...
"If, then, the Natives accept the doctrines which are now so pr evalent
amongst the Indian community, South Africa need not fear the horrors of a
racial uprising. It need not look forward to the necessity of maintaining an
army to keep the Natives in awe. Its future will be much brighter than its
past has been."141
While this early experience conditioned the thinking of Gandhiji, the situation
in South Africa had changed by the 1930s when Dr. Dadoo came on the political
scene. Most of the Indians had been born in South Africa, and saw the rise of the
African politica l consciousness. African -Indian dialogue and cooperation began to
develop in the trade unions and among intellectuals. As the regime continued with
its plans to force out or segregate the Indians, more and more Indians began to
feel that new means of strug gle had become necessary. The small Indian
community could not by itself stop the racist onslaught nor could it depend on the
agents of the colonial government in India. Unity with the Africans, they felt, was
the only hope for a secure future.
The is sue of Indian -African unity provoked a public debate in India in 1939
when the Non -European United Front was set up in South Africa. Gandhiji
strongly opposed a proposal by Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia that the Indian National
Congress welcome the efforts toward s united struggle.
The reasoning behind Gandhiji`s opposition to united struggle may be found
in an interview he had given to the Reverend S.S. Tema somewhat earlier, when
asked for his views on the "talk" of a united front of Africans and Indians . He
said:
"It will be a mistake. You will be pooling together not strength but
weakness. You will best help one another by each standing on his own legs.
The two cases are different. The Indians are a microscopic minority. They
can never be a menace to the white population. You, on the other hand, are
the sons of the soil who are being robbed of your inheritance. You are
bound to resist that.
Yours is a far bigger issue. It ought not to be mixed up with that of the
Indian. This does not preclude the establishment of the friendliest relations
141Joseph J. Doke, M. K. Gandhi: an Indian Patriot in South Africa , 1909.105between the two races."142
He added that the Indians should never put themselves in opposition to the
legitimate aspirations of the Africans, and encouraged the development of an
African mass movement.
Gandhiji still thought of Africans as the only rightful owners of South Africa,
the Indians as alien settlers and the Europeans as "undoubtedly usurpers,
exploiters or conquerors or all of them rolled into one."143He was not persuaded
that the new trends of thinking had taken hold among Indians or that the Africans
sought a united front. Neither seemed well organised to be able to combine
strength.
When his position at the Congress came under criticism in India, he conceded
that his view "need not deter the Indians from forming a non -European front if
they are sure thereby of winning their freedom."144He was to change his views in
the light of further developments in South Africa and the sentiment in India.
Indian nationalist opinion was essent ially in favour of identification of Indian
settlers abroad with the indigenous people in the cause of freedom and human
dignity. Mrs. Sarojini Naidu forcefully expressed this view on her visit to South
Africa in 1924. Pandit Nehru spoke out for a united f ront of the oppressed people
and advanced sections of the whites, in South Africa and elsewhere, since the
Brussels Congress against Imperialism in 1927.
The urge for unity in struggle grew stronger during the Second World War.
This was reflected by I ndira Nehru who visited South Africa in April 1941 on the
way home from studies in England. Together with a party of fellow students, she
issued a statement welcoming "the new awakening of the exploited and oppressed
nationalities in South Africa". She ad ded:
"We wholeheartedly support the Non -European United Front in its
historic task of mobilising the progressive forces against all manifestations
of political and racial tyranny of your existing government.
"At a time when we are fighting our ba ttles in India, this growing
movement in your land provides the basis for united action by the enslaved
peoples of our two countries."145
By the end of the War, Gandhiji too began to espouse the unity of the exploited
races of the earth. Never again d id he oppose a united front in South Africa, but
merely kept warning against any abandonment of non -violence. In the message he
142Harijan , February 18, 1939; Collected Works , Volume 68, pages 272 -73.
143Harijan , July 1, 1939; Collected Works , Volume 69, pages 376 -79.
144Harijan , July 15, 1939; Collected Works , Volume 69, page 408.
145The Guardian , Cape Town, April 10, 1941.106gave to Dr. Dadoo and Dr. Naicker on their visit to India, soon after the pact of
cooperation between the African and Indian Co ngresses, he said:
"Political cooperation among all the exploited races in South Africa can
only result in mutual goodwill, if it is wisely directed and based on truth and
non-violence."146
He constantly stressed the primacy of African interests. He even told the All
India Congress Committee on July 7, 1946, on learning of the murder of an Indian
near the site of passive resistance, that he would not shed a single tear if all the
Indian satyagrahis were wiped out, for they would thereby point the w ay to the
Africans and vindicate the honour of India.147
Defiance Campaign and After
Gandhiji was no more when the National Party came to power in May 1948 and
began to erect the structure of apartheid for perpetual white domination and the
disposses sion of all the black people.
Dr. Dadoo and Dr. Naicker came out of prison in July calling for a united front
against racism -Dr. Naicker used the term "united democratic front" -and they
immersed themselves in efforts to build a truly firm allian ce. This led to the
"Campaign of Defiance of Unjust Laws" -organised jointly by the African
National Congress and the South African Indian Congress -in which over 8,000
people of all racial origins went to prison: Dr. Dadoo was among the first to defy.
The African movement had come of age: it contributed most of the resisters
and from their ranks emerged inspiring national leaders such as Nelson Mandela,
the Volunteer -in-Chief, Walter Sisulu and Oliver Tambo.
The non -violent Defiance Campaig n was not only a great landmark in the long
struggle of the South African people, but had a much wider significance. For it
was that campaign in South Africa, and the Civil Rights Movement in the United
States which followed, which showed that the concept ofsatyagraha was not for
the Indians alone. These campaigns, as much as Gandhiji`s satyagrahas , were to
inspire numerous upsurges of aroused peoples around the world to topple mighty
dictators, stop wars and save the human environment.
With the launc hing of the Defiance Campaign, the perspective was no more of
petitions or actions to alleviate grievances, but a long and hard struggle to end
racist rule. Victory would be the culmination of a series of ever more difficult
battles, each perhaps ending i n defeat but ultimately leading to triumph. That
required a band of determined men and women willing to dedicate their lives to
146Harijan , May 25, 1947; Collected Works , Volume 87, page 492.
147Harijan , July 14 and 21, 1946; Collected Wor ks, Volume 84, pages 422 -23.107the cause and make the supreme sacrifice if need be.
The Defiance Campaign, which began as a joint African -Indian effort,
transformed the freedom movement into one under African leadership and buried
for ever the myth that the Africans were not advanced enough to undertake and
lead a well -organised and humane resistance. The mantle of Gandhiji passed from
Dr. Dadoo and Dr. Na icker to Chief Albert Lutuli who was to carry it with honour
and dignity.
Dr. Dadoo continued to make a crucial contribution -for eight years under
severe restrictions and three decades in exile -as an elder statesman as well as a
militant, under th e leadership of the African National Congress. The tremendous
contribution he made, under conditions of illegality, will not be known for some
years. But he fought on till the end, with unbounded faith, exhorting his
colleagues even on his death bed on Sep tember 19, 1983: "You must never give
up, you must fight to the end."
The Legacy of Dr. Dadoo
Dr. Dadoo began his political life in the small Indian community in South
Africa, with a conviction that its destiny was with the African majority and tha t its
future should be built by its willingness to sacrifice in the struggle for a free,
democratic South Africa. That conviction was in harmony with the views of
Gandhiji who warned in Young India on April 5, 1928, that Indians "cannot exist
in South Afr ica for any length of time without the active sympathy and friendship
of the Africans."148
Dr. Dadoo carried forward the tradition of Gandhiji by building an alliance of
Indians and Africans as the basis for widest unity of the people against racism.
He became the prototype of the new men and women of the future -as against
the carricature of a human being which apartheid sought to mould. Ezekiel
Mphahlele, the African writer, said, perhaps half in jest, as early as 1956:
"One might even say Y usuf Dadoo has a Marxist head, a Hindu heart,
Mohammedan nails, and an African blood -system."
Under his leadership, and with the legacy of Gandhiji, the Indian community,
consisting of hardly three percent of the South African population, has been
privileged to make a very significant contribution at a crucial stage of the freedom
struggle. Let us hope that it will make a worthy contribution in the coming final
effort to transform the country from a prison of the black people to a land that can
inspire the world with people of African, Asian and European ancestry living in
freedom and harmony.
148Collected Works , Volume 36, page 190108109NANA SITA: GANDHIAN RESISTER IN SOUTH AFRICA149
Among those who kept the spirit of Mahatma Gandhi alive in South Africa,
long after he left the sh ores of that country in 1914, Nana Sita holds a special
place.
Nanabhai, as he was affectionately known, came into prominence during the
Indian passive resistance movement of 1946 -48 and helped build the alliance with
the African majority. He continue d non -violent defiance of apartheid until his
death in 1969, long after most militants of the liberation movement had become
convinced that underground and armed resistance to apart heid had become
imperative. Though they disagreed with him, members of th e African National
Congress and the Indian Congress respected his views and actions -for he
continued to defy apartheid, without fear and flinching at no sacrifice.
The regime had been able to supress organized resistance in 1963 -64, with the
impris onment and torture of thousands of leaders and activists, and a series of
repressive laws. But the adamant defiance of Nanabhai -now old and sick -
against forcible racial segregation, was an inspiration to the people. He helped
keep alive the flame of p eaceful resistance which was to grow in subsequent
years.
When he passed away on December 23, 1969, shortly after the centenary of
Gandhiji, at the age of 71, the Johannesburg Star wrote that he had enjoyed
"universal respect of South Africans, white and non -white."150Sechaba , the organ
of the African National Congress, pai tribute to his heroic life, full of sacrifice and
devotion to the struggle in which he went to prison seven times. It said:
"... in paying our tribute to a fallen freedom fighte r, the African
National Congress works for the day when we can remember publicly in
South Africa the man who was our comrade and friend."151
The life of Nana Sita deserves to be recalled now when the people of South
Africa look back at their strugg le-armed and non -violent -and acknowledge the
contribution made to it by people of varied backgrounds and ideologies, united in
uncompromising resistance against racist domination.
Nana Sita was born in Matwadi, a village in Gujarat, India, in 1898 , in a family
which was active in the Indian freedom movement. He went to South Africa in
1913 and lived for some time with J.P. Vyas in Pretoria, to study book -keeping.
149Published in Sechaba , August 1986.
150The Star , weekly edition, December 27, 1969.
151Sechaba, March 1970.110Soon after his arrival, Gandhiji, then leading a Satyagraha , went to Pretoria for
negotiations with General Smuts and stayed almost two months in the same
house.
Identifying himself with the indentured Indian labourers, Gandhiji ate only
once a day, wore only a shirt and loincloth, slept on the floor and walked barefoot
several miles to the government offices to meet General Smuts. The contact with
Gandhiji had a great influence on Nanabhai`s life. He followed the simplity of
Gandhiji, and became a vegetarian, teetotaller and non -smoker. More important,
he was always ready to resist i njustice and gladly suffer the consequences.
He worked for some years in his uncle`s fruit and vegetable business and then
started his own business as a retail grocer. He was active in the religious and
social welfare work in the small Indian commun ity in Pretoria. He joined the
Transvaal Indian Congress and became secretary of its Pretoria branch.
During the Second World War, when the Government imposed new measures
to segregate the Indians and restrict their right to ownership of land -culmin ating
in the Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation Act of 1946 (the "Ghetto
Act") -militants in the Transvaal and Natal Indian Congresses, led by Dr. Yusuf
M. Dadoo and Dr. G.M. Naicker, advocated mass resistance. They were able to
defeat the co mpromising leaderships of the Congresses and launch a passive
resistance campaign in June 1946 with the blessings of Gandhiji. The campaign
was directed by the Transvaal and Natal Passive Resistance Councils and over
2,000 people went to jail.
Nana Si ta joined the militants as any compromise with evil was against his
principles. He became a member of the executives of the Transvaal Indian Con -
gress and the Transvaal Passive Resistance Council. He acted as Chairman when
Dr. Dadoo was in prison or on m issions abroad.
He led a large batch of "United Nations Day volunteers" -Indians, Africans and
Coloured people -from the Transvaal in October 1946 and was sentenced to 30
days` hard labour. After release, he went to prison a second time. Almost every
member of his family -he had seven children -went to jail in the campaign. His
daughter -Maniben Sita courted imprisonment twice.
Nanabhai -always wearing the Gandhi cap -became a familiar figure in the
Indian movement. His courageous spiri t was reflected in his presidential address
to the Transvaal Indian Congress in 1948. He said:
"Do we all of us realise the significance, the importance, the heavy
responsibility that has been cast upon each and every one of us when we
decided to chall enge the might of the Union Government with that Grey
Steel, General Smuts, at its head? Are we today acting in a manner which can
bring credit not only to the quarter million Indians in South Africa but to
those four hundred million people now enjoying Do minion Status as the first111fruits of their unequal struggle against the greatest Empire of our times?
"It is for each and every one of us in his or her own way to answer that
question with a clear conscience. But let me say that I have nothing but pra ise
for those brave men and women fellow resisters of mine. History has
ordained that they should be in the forefront in the great struggle for freedom
in this colour -ridden country of eleven million people...
"Over two thousand men and women have sto od by the ideal of Gandhi
and have suffered the rigours of South African prison life and they are
continuing to make further sacrifices in the cause of our freedom. We at the
head of the struggle cannot promise you a bed of roses. The path that lies
ahead of us is a dark and difficult one but as far as I am personally concerned
I am prepared to lay down my very life for the cause which I believe to be
just."152
The Indian passive resistance was suspended after the National Party regime
came to power in June 1948, but only to be replaced by the united resistance of
all the oppressed people.
In June 1952, the African National Congress and the South African Indian
Congress jointly launched the "Campaign of Defiance against Unjust Laws" in
which over 8,000 people of all racial origins were to court imprisonment.
Nanabhai was one of the first volunteers in that campaign. He led a batch of
resisters which included Walter Sisulu, Secretary -General of the African National
Congress. He came out of jai l in shattered health.
The next year, when Dr. Dadoo was served with banning orders, Nanabhai was
elected President of the Transvaal Indian Congress but he was also soon served
with banning orders preventing him from active leadership of the communit y.
Yet, in 1960, during the State of Emergency after the Sharpeville massacre, he
was detained for three months without any charges.
With the banning of the African National Congress and the escalation of
repression, leaders of the ANC decided to undertake an armed struggle, taking
care even then to avoid injury to innocent people. Those who believed in non -
violence as a creed or could not join the military wing of the movement faced a
serious chal lenge as even peaceful protests were met with r uthless repression.
Nana Sita -with his Gandhian conviction that resistance to evil is a sacred duty
and that there is no defeat for a true satyagrahi -was undeterred. Like Chief
Albert Lutuli, the revered President -General of the ANC, he continued to de fy
apartheid -especially the "Group Areas Act", described as a pillar of apart heid,
152Passive Resister , Johannesburg, April 30, 1948.112which enforced racial segregation at enormous cost to the Indian and other
oppressed people.
In 1962, Hercules,the section of Pretoria in which Nanabhai lived, was
declared a "white area" under the "Group Areas Act". He was ordered to vacate
and move from his home -which he had occupied since 1923 -to Laudium, a
segregated Indian location eleven miles away. He defied the order and was taken
to court on December 10th, the United Nations Human Rights Day.
Denouncing the Group Areas Act as designed to enforce inferiority on the non -
white people and cause economic ruination of the Indian community, he told the
court overflowing with spectators:
"Sir, from w hat I have said, I have no hesitation in describing the Group
Areas Act as racially discriminatory, cruel, degrading, and inhuman. Being a
follower of Mahatma Gandhi`s philosophy of Satyagraha , I dare not bow my
head to the provisions of the unjust Act. It is my duty to resist injustice and
oppression. I have therefore decided to defy the order and am prepared to
bear the full brunt of the law.
"It is very significant that I appear before you on this the tenth day of
December, to be condemned and sente nced for my stand on conscience.
Today is Human Rights Day -the day on which the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights was accepted by the world at the United Nations. It is a day on
which the people of the world rededicate themselves to the principles of truth,
justice and humanity. If my suffering in the cause of these noble principles
could arouse the conscience of white South Africa, then I shall not have
strived in vain.
"Sir my age is 64. I am suffering with chronic ailments of gout and arthriti s
but I do not plead in mitigation. On the contrary I plead for a severe or the
highest penalty that you are allowed under the Act to impose on me."
He was sentenced to a fine of 100 Rand or three months in prison, and warned
that if he failed to com ply he would be given twice that sentence. He refused to
pay the fine and spent three months in prison.
The next year, as he and his wife, Pemi, continued to occupy their home, he
was again taken to court and sentenced to six mnonths in prison.
The authorities charged him and his wife again in 1965. He appealed to the
Supreme Court challenging the validity of the Group Areas Act. The matter
dragged on for a year before his appeal was dismissed.
When the trial resumed in 1967, Nanabhai read a 19-page statement on the
background of the Group Areas Act which he described as a "crime against113humanity", and said:
"The Act is cruel, callous, grotesque, abominable, unjust, vicious and
humiliating.
"It brands us as an inferior people in p erpetuity, condemns us as
uncivilized barbarians... "One day the framers of this Act will stand before
a much higher authority for the misery and the humiliation they are
causing....
"If you find me guilty of the offence for which I am standing bef ore you I
shall willingly and joyfully suffer whatever sentence you may deem to pass
on me as my suffering will be nothing compared to the suffering of my
people under the Act. If my suffering in the cause of noble principles of truth,
justice and humanity could arouse the conscience of white South Africa then
I shall not have strived in vain... I ask for no leniency. I am ready for the
sentence."
Many Indians attended the trial and wept when he concluded his statement.
He was sentenced again to six months` imprisonment and served the term,
declining the alternative of a fine of 200 rand. His wife was given a suspended
sentence.
On his release from prison, he said:
"It is immaterial how many other people accept or submit to a law -or if
allpeople accept it. If to my conscience it is unjust, I must oppose it.
"The mind is fixed that any injustice must be resisted. So it does not
require a special decision each time one is faced with injustice -it is a
continuation of one commitment."153
Soon after, on April 8, 1968, Nanabhai and Pemi were forcibly ejected from home
and government officials dumped their belongings on the sidewalk. But they
returned to the home and Nanabhai never complied with the order until he died in
December 1969.
Few others followed Nanabhai`s example of determined non -violent resistance
in the 1960`s. The militants among the Indians, espousing armed struggle, had
been captured, or went into exile, or tried to rebuild underground structures
which had been smash ed by the regime in 1963 -64. The traders, who were
severely affected by the Group Areas Act, had given up resistance after all their
petitions, demonstrations and legal battles had failed. A silence of the graveyard
seemed to have descended over the count ry.
153Jill Chisholm in Rand Daily Mail , April 6, 1968.114But the resistance of Nanabhai was not in vain. It showed that non -violent
defiance need not be abandoned even at a time of massive repression or armed
confrontation. It inspired people in efforts to overcome frustration and apathy.
The Indian Con gresses, which had become dormant, were resuscitated in later
years and helped build the powerful United Democratic Front.
Nana Sita`s children -Maniben Sita and Ramlal Bhoolia, both veterans of the
1946 passive resistance -played leading roles in the resurgent movement, defying
further imprisonment.
As the freedom movement recovered, the Soweto massacre of African
schoolchildren on June 16, 1976, failed to intimidate the people. Thousands of
young people joined the freedom fighters. And many more began to demonstrate
their support of the struggle and defy the regime, making several laws inoperative.
The strug gle entered a new stage.
The mass non -violent defiance campaign, which swelled in recent years like a
torrent encompassing hundred s of thousands of people, has made a great con -
tribution, together with the armed struggle and interna tional solidarity action, in
forcing the racist regime to seek a peaceful settlement. South Africa, the land
where Gandhiji discovered satyagraha , has en riched his philosophy by adapting it
under the most difficult conditions.
Nana Sita -who held up the torch when the movement was at an ebb -was in a
sense the last of the Gandhi ans. The mass democratic movement now derives
inspira tion from many so urces, including the experience of the long struggle of
the African people and the Gandhian tradition cherished by the Indian
community.
Nana Sita is remembered with respect as his col leagues in struggle -Nelson
Mandela, Walter Sisulu, Ahmed Kathra da and others now out of jail -lead the
nation in its continuing efforts to eliminate apartheid and build a non -racial
democratic society.115ARE GANDHIJI`S IDEAS RELEVANT IN A NEW SOUTH AFRICA?154
I must confess that I was surprised when I heard t hat a meeting at this festival
would be devoted to the topic: "Are Gandhi`s ideas relevant in a New South
Africa?"
Gandhiji never wanted to leave a cult and he disliked any talk of "Gandhism"
as an ideology. He practised truth as he saw it from time to time, and evolved
with the times, and his whole life, with all its inconsistencies, is what he left
behind. He represents an approach and that approach -the concept of non -violent
defiance of injustice, for instance -has had a great impact on the th inking and
events in the world. Gandhiji does not represent mere non -violence. Non -violence
without a determination to defy injustice, whatever the sacrifice, is an empty
shell. It can be mere cowardice.
Gandhiji could have become a hermit if he bel ieved only in non -violence or
vegetarianism. Instead, he recognised the duty to become a "political sannyasi " so
long as colonial and racist oppression continued.
Gandhiji`s concept and technique of non -violent defiance originated in South
Africa, on a hill in Johannesburg where he decided in 1906 to defy the Asiatic
Ordinance, whatever the consequences. They have been developed and enriched -
not only by him in the freedom movement in India -but by others in the struggles
in many lands, particularly in the United States in the civil rights movement and
the resistance to the Vietnam War, and, of course, in South Africa since the
1940s.
Non-violent defiance has been a major world phenomenon in recent years and
it is no more possible for oppressive regimes to resort to massacres of the people
when they rise up in non -violent revolt.
The regime of the Shah of Iran, which had armed itself to the teeth, was
defeated by an essentially non -violent resistance. The regime of General Marcos
in the Phi lippines was overthrown by non -violent rebellion.
When people in the West were able to see police violence in South Africa on
their TV screens in 1984 -85, there was rapid progress in non -violent international
action against apartheid so that the Preto ria regime had to change its course.
154Based on a lecture at the Alumni Spring Festival of the University of
Witwatersrand on September 15, 1991.
Published in The Leader , Durban, October 4, 1991, and Mainstream , New Delhi, Annual
Number, October 26, 1991.116The regimes in Eastern Europe, especially in Czechoslovakia and East
Germany, were overthrown by non -violent defiance. And lately, even the coup in
the Soviet Union was defeated by non -violent resistance.
Ther e has, therefore, been a revival of interest in Gandhiji`s ideas around the
world, not only among people interested in political affairs, but also among those
concerned with environment, liberation theology, etc.
Why, then, should there be any questio n of relevance, here in South Africa, the
land where satyagraha was born?
I have heard it said by South Africans that Gandhiji and non -violence had
become irrelevant in South Africa after the Sharpeville massacre and that armed
struggle was the ONLY p ossible means for liberation.
I do not question the role of armed struggle in South Africa but I believe it was
never the ONLY way, perhaps not even the predominant means of struggle. The
struggle has to be seen in its totality -taking into account t he resistance within the
country by all possible means, utilising every possibility for legal and peaceful
action; the steadfastness of those tortured in detention or sentenced to long terms
in prison; the political action by the leadership obliged to go into exile; the armed
actions by liberation forces; and the powerful international solidarity movement
which was developed and sustained over several decades.
The leaders of the ANC have never said that armed struggle was the ONLY
way. Nelson Mandela, in his speech from the dock in April 1964, pointed out that
he and his colleagues had decided to undertake organised underground and armed
resistance in order to avert uncontrolled violence. The ANC abandoned its strict
adherence to non -violence, or its c ommitment to peaceful struggle alone, but it
did not give up means of struggle other than armed struggle, for armed struggle
cannot develop without political struggle. It took great care to avoid loss of
innocent lives. The international campaign for sanct ions was also intended to
avoid undue violence and suffering in the process of the liberation struggle.
That is why all the leading pacifists of the world have continued to support the
South African struggle, even after ANC resorted to sabotage and ar med actions in
1961.
In South Africa, you have had an extraordinary situation of an armed struggle
for over a quarter of a century in which only a few hundred people were killed by
the guerrillas -even many of those perhaps because of accidents or e rrors -and a
few thousand were killed by the police and security forces.155
Compare that with Algeria, where there were only a million white settlers, and
155Regretta bly many more were killed in acts of aggression and destabilisation by
the South African regime in frontline States -especially Mozambique and Angola.117the casualties amounted to nearly two million dead.
Even in the small Central American count ries like Guatemala and El Salvador,
many more people have been killed than in South Africa. Some 75,000 people
have been killed so far in El Salvador and more in Guatemala.
The casualties in combat -I am not referring to the casualties from racial
discrimination -were relatively so low in South Africa because of the humanism
of the liberation movement and the international support it gained.
I have, in mind, for instance, that Nelson Mandela expressed concern even
from inside prison about death s of innocent people, and that Oliver Tambo
showed courage in calling for an end to necklacing, even in the face of brutal
murders by security forces in Matola and Maseru, and the killings in prisons and
in townships.
The sacrifices made by the frontl ine States, India and other countries in non -
violent action in support of the South African struggle -in the form of
international sanctions against apartheid -also saved numerous lives.
Let us not forget the thousands of people who went to prison in Britain,
Australia, New Zealand and the United States, who were assaulted by police or
who risked their careers because of their solidarity with the South African
struggle.
I may ask: Were the students in Soweto and the other African townships, who se
defiance was essentially non -violent, irrelevant? Was Nana Sita, who defied
unjust laws until the end of his life, irrelevant? Were the bishops and archbishops
who marched in defiance of the law irrelevant? And was the mass defiance
campaign of the Mas s Democratic Movement launched in August 1989, which
was followed within a few months by the virtual scrapping of many laws and even
the unbanning of the ANC, irrelevant?
I will leave the question of armed struggle because I doubt if any sane person
wants violence and conflict in a new South Africa.
The question of relevance of Gandhiji`s ideas perhaps also comes up because of
the books and articles critical of Gandhiji which have appeared in recent years.
There is certainly a need for an obj ective and critical study of Gandhiji, instead
of mere adulation. He himself welcomed criticism and changed his views many
times.
But I am afraid that some of the criticism in "scholarly" studies results from
preconceived notions based on ideologies, or looking back at 1906 or 1907 by
hindsight or not studying all that Gandhiji has said or written or done.118There are "Marxist" studies which dismiss Gandhiji as a representative of the
Gujarati merchant class. Communists in India and the Soviet Uni on changed their
attitudes towards Gandhiji in the 1950s but their colleagues in South Africa seem
to be taking a longer time to reassess Gandhiji.
The fact is that when Gandhiji moved from "petition politics" to defiance in
1907, the merchant class -except for a few heroes like A.M. Cachalia, Ebrahim
Asvat and Parsee Rustomjee -could not follow him. Some gave sympathy and
funds; others opposed him. The satyagrahis in the Transvaal from 1907 and the
60,000 people in the Natal who went on strike in 19 13 were mostly working
people from South India and Hindustanis.
In his first speech in London after leaving South Africa in 1914, Gandhiji said:
"These men and women are the salt of India; on them will be built the
Indian nation that is to be. We are poor mortals before these heroes and
heroines."156
The greatest achievement of Gandhiji, after his return to India, is that he
mobilised the poor and illiterate masses of India in the struggle for independence.
There are also critical studies by "armchair revolutionaries" who have not
participated in the liberation struggle. They too sound radical, though not Marxist,
speaking of the "underclass" rather than the "working class".
Maureen (Tayal) Swan is an excellent researcher and writer. I have read her
writings with great interest and have learned from them.
Without in any way criticising her scholarship, I must confess that after I read
her book, Gandhi: the South African Experience , more than once, I asked myself:
Did Gandhiji ever go to jail in South Africa or lead the people in resistance? Who
were the tens of thousands of people who joined him in the struggle? Were most
of them not from the "underclass"? Were they totally ignorant of their own
interests that scholars had to tell them generations later that they were misled?
She writes extensively about the many groups among the Indian South
Africans who were always critical of him, their speeches and their articles -but
there is little on what mass resistance they organise d or what sacrifices they
made.
The most serious criticism of Gandhiji is that he was opposed to the unity of
Indians with Africans.
I saw an article recently on "Gandhi in South Africa: the Ambiguities of
156Indian Opinion, September 30, 1914; Collected Works , Volume 12, pages 523 -26.119Satyagraha " by Les Switzer of the Univ ersity of Houston in a recent issue of the
Journal of Ethnic Studies .157
It is apparently based on very little study of Gandhiji and has many errors of
fact.
He claims that Gandhiji had no contact with Black leaders in South Africa like
John Dube, John Tengo Jabavu, Walter Rubusana and Abdul(sic!) Abdurahman,
and that, unlike them, he had little influence on the history of resistance in South
Africa during the early part of this century. And he comes to this conclusion:
"The history of resist ance to apartheid continues to demonstrate the
ambiguity of the relationship between South Africa's Indian and African
communities."
He is wrong on facts. John Dube had his "Zulu Christian Industrial School" at
Ohlange, very near the Phoenix Settleme nt of Gandhiji. They were good friends
and Gandhiji, like Dube, admired Booker T. Washington.
Gandhiji wrote an article in Indian Opinion congratulating Walter Rubusana
when he was elected to the Cape Provincial Council. He had close contact with
Dr.Abdulla Abdurahman and they respected each other.
Gandhiji had met many African leaders and had many discussions with them:
they had mutual friends in the white community. But these facts apart, I would
like to deal with the main criticism about Gandhi ji`s attitude to the African people
of South Africa.
Attitude toward unity with the African people
Gandhiji`s political activity in South Africa was in connection with specific
grievances of the small Indian community -about breaches of undertaking s or
violations of acquired rights.
The Africans were little concerned with them. Even some white liberals who
were sympathetic to Africans were hostile to Indians.
African political organisations were at a nascent stage and there was little to
unite.
Dr. Abdurahman certainly talked about unity of the oppressed people, but did
little. The APO remained a Coloured organisation.
More important, we need to take two factors into account.
157Journal of Ethnic Stud ies, Volume 14, No.1.120The series of discriminatory measures against India ns came soon after
thousands of Chinese workers were summarily deported from the Transvaal.
There was reason to believe that the intention of the authorities was to make the
life of the Indians so miserable as to force all Indians, except the indentured
labourers, to leave. The Indians were vulnerable.
If they tried to join with the Africans, and seemed to incite Africans, there was
every danger of a hysteria among the whites and summary deportations of
Indians.
Secondly, Gandhiji was not only c oncerned with the grievances of the Indians
but with the honour of India. The spirit of nationalism, which was rising in India
had an impact in South Africa. The satyagraha was a part of the struggle of India
for its dignity, and a moral crusade, though w aged on the South African soil.
Many young Indians who were not directly affected by the discriminatory laws,
went to jail in the satyagraha .
Indians and Chinese could cooperate in the struggle against the Asiatic
Ordinance in the Transvaal. But that w as not of direct concern to the Africans and
the Coloured people.
But already Gandhiji foresaw, according to his first biographer, the Reverend J.
J. Doke, the coming confrontation between the African people and the whites, and
said:
"When the mom ent of collision comes, if, instead of the old ways of
massacre, assegai and fire, the Natives adopt the policy of Passive
Resistance, it will be a grand change for the Colony ..."158
After his return to India in 1914, Gandhiji devoted much of his time to mobilise
Indian public opinion in support of the Indians in South Africa. But he repeatedly
stressed that the Indians should maintain friendly relations with the Africans and
that if Indian rights conflicted with the interests of the African majority, t hey
should not be pressed.
Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, a close colleague of Gandhiji, stressed during her visit to
South Africa in 1924, that the struggles of the Indian and African people were for
a common objective. She was applauded by Dr. Abdulla Abdurah man and
Clemens Kadalie, the trade union leader.
The same message was carried by the Reverend C. F. Andrews, who made
several visits to South Africa at the request of Gandhiji and Poet Rabindranath
Tagore.
In 1928, after the Cape Town agreement b etween South Africa and India, Mr.
158Joseph J. Doke, M.K. Gandhi: An Indian Patriot in South Africa , pages 86 -87.121Habib Motan, the honorary secretary of the Government Indian School
Committee in the Transvaal, protested against arrangements to send Indian
students to the Fort Hare Native College as humiliating and a degradation. He w as
supported by P. S. Aiyar, the publicist who always tried to be more "radical" than
Gandhiji.
The Reverend C. F. Andrews replied in The Modern Review of Calcutta in
March 1928:
"The poet, Rabindranath Tagore, gave me a definite message to the
Indians in South Africa. He stated that if the Indian community could not
win the respect and affection of the Africans (who had the true right to be in
South Africa, as the children of the soil) then they had no place there. They
were imperialist intruders . Mr. Habib Motan`s statement ... must shock
every Indian nationalist who reads it."
Gandhiji, writing in Young India on April 5, 1928, fully supported Tagore. He
said:
"Indians have too much in common with the Africans to think of
isolating the mselves from them. They cannot exist in South Africa for any
length of time without the active sympathy and friendship of the Africans. I
am not aware of the general body of the Indians having ever adopted an air
of superiority towards their African brethr en, and it would be a tragedy if
any such movement were to gain ground among the Indian settlers of South
Africa."159
In 1939, when the Non -European United Front was formed in South Africa and
was supported by several Indian leaders, Gandhiji did not re ceive adequate
information from his correspondents in South Africa and came under criticism for
expressing reservations about an Indo -African united front. His reasoning
deserves attention.
He told the Reverend S. S. Tema, in an interview on January 1 , 1938:
"The Indians are a microscopic minority. They can never be a menace to
the white population. You, on the other hand, are the sons of the soil who
are being robbed of your inheritance. You are bound to resist that. Yours is
a far bigger issue. It ought not to be mixed up with that of the Indian. This
does not preclude the establishment of the friendliest relations between the
two races."160
He added, in an article in The Harijan , July 1, 1939, that the Europeans were
159Collected Works , Volume 36, page 190.
160Harijan , February 18, 1939; Collected Works , Volume 68, pages 272 -73.122"undoubtedly usurpers, ex ploiters or conquerors or all of them rolled into one."161
We may or may not agree with these views which were shared by the
Africanists of 1944 in South Africa, but do they suggest unconcern for the
Africans?
As sentiment for unity grew among the Africans and the Indians, Gandhiji
revised his views.
He wrote in The Harijan of May 19, 1946:
"The slogan today is no longer merely 'Asia for the Asiatics` or 'Africa
for the Africans` but the unity of all the oppressed races of the earth."162
In May 1947, when Dr. Yusuf Dadoo and Dr. G. M. Naicker visited him in
India, he gave them a message in which he said:
"Political cooperation among all exploited races in South Africa can only
result in mutual good if wisely directed."163
I migh t also recall that in 1946 when white gangsters were brutally attacking
Indian passive resisters in Durban, Gandhiji told the All India Congress
Committee that he would not shed a single tear if all the Indian satyagrahis were
wiped out, for they would the reby point the way to the Africans and vindicate the
honour of India.164
The forthcoming centenary
As we approach the centenary of Gandhiji`s arrival in South Africa in 1893, I
hope that the people here will honour the true Gandhiji and not the carica ture
drawn in some supposedly scholarly studies.
Gandhiji repeatedly emphasised until the end of his life that he was an Indian
and a South African. He does not belong to Indian South Africans alone but to all
South Africans.
The spirit of Gandhi ji lives not only in the hearts of Indians struggling against
racism and for a non -violent democratic society, but in those of Nelson Mandela,
Oliver Tambo, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Reverend Beyers Naude and
many, many others.
161Collected Works , Volume 69, pages 376 -79.
162Harijan, May 19, 1946; Collected Works , Volume 83, pages 352 -54.
163Harijan , May 25, 1947; Collected Works , Volume 87, page 492.
164Harijan , July 21, l946.123I hope there will be a study of the South African roots of the ideas of Gandhiji.
For, as early as 1862, Indian indentured labourers resorted to passive resistance on
the estate of Henry Shire at Umhlanga.165Oliver Tambo referred to it as the first
recorded strike in South Afr ica.
Professor R.E. van der Ross points out, in The Rise and Decline of Apartheid ,
that Peter John Daniels organised a passive resistance movement by the Coloured
people when they were denied licences to dig for gold and that he discussed
passive resi stance with Gandhiji before the latter launched the Indian satyagraha .
And in 1913, African women began a passive resistance movement against
pass laws in Orange Free State, a few months before Gandhiji encouraged Indian
women to join the satyagraha .
More important, I hope that South African scholars will study the freedom
movement in this country to see how it has adapted, developed and enriched the
ideas of Gandhiji under extremely difficult conditions.
165L.M. Thompson in Indian Immigration into Natal, 1860 -1872 .