 
Gandhi's Autobiography : 
Moral Lessons  
 
 
By : K. D. Gangrade 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by :  
Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti  
 
Rajghat, New Delhi 11000 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
 
FOREWORD  
MAHATMA Gandhi's autobiography,  My Experiments with Truth , has attracted 
worldwide attention as a classic of modern times fo r the remarkable insights it 
offers into the progression of human soul in its re solute march to relate itself 
to the ever-changing ethos in the course of life's journey. Over the years, this 
record of Gandhi's perception of a part of his own life has become a 
masterpiece winning universal acclaim for the hones ty with which the author 
interprets his life upto the first quarter of this century. Surprisingly, Gandhi did 
not conceive it to be an elaborate treatise. He des cribed it as "My Experiments 
with Truth". 
The big question is: Do the experiments conducted b y Gandhi hold out any 
message or lesson to the present generation or to t he generations to come? 
Were they not personal, about himself?, critics mig ht ask. Is Gandhi, who tried 
to look at men and matters from an ethical, moral a nd spiritual angle, relevant 
in an age conditioned to a large extent by material istic and consumeristic 
considerations and by a generation who is nurtured in the invincibility of the 
power of money?  The contemporary decay of vital human institutions  such as 
religions and the callous indifference with which m orality and ethics are 
viewed by the protagonists of unlimited growth are taking humanity to a cliff 
of what promise and consequence, nobody knows. The computer boys are 
promising humanity such wonders that would set even  the most balanced brain 
on fire. In this jungle of madness and frenzied rus h, which in a different way 
reminds us of the initial stages of colonialism, wh at is the relevance of Jesus, 
the Buddha, Prophet Mohammad or for that matter any  of the teachers of 
humanity? We measure all of them on the basis of ou r own needs, which are 
now by and large material and physical. Ethics, mor ality and spirituality all 
seem to have become things of the past. Still we gl oat over such endearing 
concepts such as 'global human family', 'global vil lage', 'warless world' and a 
'world without boundaries'. Yes, physical boundarie s we have been able to Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  dismantle, but what about the mental and psychic bo undaries which still 
prevent the rich nations from sharing their excess wealth with the less 
privileged humanity? It is estimated that with the diversion of one-third of 
what the rich nations spend on armaments, malnutrit ion could be wiped out in 
several Afro-Asian countries and safe drinking wate r could be provided. But 
who listens? 
Gandhi never took refuge in any scriptures or shastras  blindly and those who 
approach him with closed minds would see only their  own visages and would 
miss the essential Gandhi who was an uncompromising  experimenter. To 
experiment requires great courage, conviction and c lear perception and a 
readiness to court inconvenience or even failure. T he arm-chair critic does not 
have or require any of these attributes. Gandhi des cribed himself to be lost in 
the ivory-tower of contemplation. Like an inspired experimenter he tested his 
ideas in the laboratory of his own life in order to  gain insights and knowledge 
by living it and not repeating what others said or copying from others. The 
freshness of his ideas inspired millions and even t hose who came to scoff at 
him became lifelong associates and admirers. 
He called his autobiography "The Story of My Experi ments with Truth". This 
reveals his readiness to subject his own life as th e testing ground and his 
approach is that of a scientist who will neither co mpromise truth nor forsake 
his efforts to arrive at the truth he is searching for, whatever be the other 
temptations. He looked at the vast vicissitude of p hilosophy not from the 
conventional angles of contemplation but on the har d realities and challenges 
of everyday life, with man at the centre and man as  the prime concern. 
Philosophy for him, as in the Indian tradition, is not a set of formulations, it is 
transformation of the spirit, soul and the whole li fe-style which will elevate 
humankind in order to live happily and shed rays an d lights of happiness 
around. It surely does not mean anything to those w ho want to flourish in 
human misery and to whom individual contribution to  better human life does 
not mean anything. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  "What I want to achieve — and what I have been stri ving and pining to achieve 
these thirty years — is self-realization, to see Go d face to face, to attain  
Moksha. I live and move and have my being in pursuit of thi s goal. All that I do 
by way of speaking and writing, and all my ventures  in the political field, are 
directed to this same end. But as I have all along believed that what is possible 
for one is possible for all, my experiments have no t been conducted in the 
closet, but in the open; and I do not think that th is fact detracts from their 
spiritual value. There are some things which are kn own only to oneself and 
one's Maker. These are clearly incommunicable. The experiments I am about to 
relate are not such. But they are spiritual, or rat her moral; for the essence of 
religion is morality", Gandhi stated in his autobio graphy. While there is some 
substance in the argument that one has to be a Gand hi to understand Gandhi, 
it is an over-simplification and an effort to miss the obvious. 
No major concept or practices of Gandhi could be un derstood fully unless they 
are internalized in the crucible of human life. For  instance, the concepts of 
'Swaraj' as used by Gandhi has many layers of meani ng. Political independence 
could be described to be what it is only at a very superficial level. It means 
mastery over oneself, one's thought and action. The re cannot be any type of 
freedom so long as a person or a society is unable to get rid of fear. The 'inner 
voice' about which Gandhi often talked about and wh ich many of even his 
closest friends and disciples could not comprehend has to be the sole guide and 
consultant in the progression of both mind and soul . Besides mustering 
sufficient courage to stand up and fight for what t he inner voice dictates as 
Gandhi demonstrated with convincing success one has  to be ready to 'walk 
alone'. This will not be possible if our approach i s through our conditioned 
minds. Would it be possible for us to uncondition o ur minds and try to look at 
the achievements of leaders like Gandhi dispassiona tely? Just as the attempts 
to look at Gandhi infallible and god-like is repreh ensible, the attempt to 
describe him in the fashionable parlance 'an enigma ', just because some people 
are not able to comprehend the full import of what he symbolized or what he 
achieved is beyond their understanding, betrays a t ype of intellectual hypocrisy 
or a laboured effort to eminence by dissecting the life of popular icons. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  Gandhi wrote, "I simply want to tell the story of m y numerous experiments 
with truth, and as my life consists of nothing but those experiments, it is true 
that the story will take the shape of an autobiogra phy. But I shall not mind, if 
every page of it speaks only of my experiments. I b elieve, or at any rate flatter 
myself with the belief, that a connected account of  all these experiments will 
not be without benefits to the reader. My experimen ts in the political field are 
now known, not only to India, but to a certain exte nt to the 'civilized' world. 
For me, they have not much value; and the title of 'Mahatma' that they have 
won for me has, therefore, even less. Often the tit le has deeply pained me; 
and there is not a moment I can recall when it may be said to have tickled me. 
But I should certainly like to narrate my experimen ts in the spiritual field 
which are known only to myself, and from which I ha ve derived such- power as 
I possess for working in the political field. If th e experiments are really 
spiritual, then there can be no room for self-prais e. They can only add to my 
humility. The more I reflect and look back on the p ast, the more vividly do I 
feel my limitations." 
Many detractors of Gandhi did not find anything unu sual or great in the work. 
Such iconoclastic efforts did not prevent the  Autobiography  from becoming one 
of the most sought after books which is still being  read with interest in almost 
all continents. 
A comforting thought that would come to anyone in t his connection is the 
simple truth that many of the reformers of humanity  from Aristotle to Martin 
Luther King, Jr. who were either ridiculed, scoffed  at, crucified, burned or 
stoned to death or assassinated, exiled or excommun icated for the 'sins' of 
speaking out truth, did not live and die in vain. T hese 'rebels' as they were 
called are the torch-bearers of human civilization and no amount of 
intolerance, jealousy, ignorance and arrogance coul d efface their importance 
in any manner. These men and women dared the powers  that be to raise 
human life to lofty levels and helped others who di d not allow themselves to be 
blinded by the idiosyncrasies of their times. These  great souls, by whatever 
name you may call them, fearlessly held aloft the l amps of reason and never Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  allowed to blind their reason and it was for this d efiance they had to pay 
dearly. And Gandhi was no exception to this. His ma rtyrdom at the hands of a 
fanatic further illustrates this running streak of lunacy which surfaces 
periodically and unabated. 
Gandhi loved life and looked at life as something p recious. His life offers 
valuable lessons to each one of us who desperately looks for suitable anchors in 
our bid to survive in the mad rush for wealth and p ower which alone appear to 
be the guiding principles of contemporary society. It is here the significance of 
what Gandhi narrates assumes importance. It has bee n pointed out that each 
line in the  Autobiography  is a gem of infinite wisdom. The personal 
experiences of Gandhi ceases to be his own travails  and one could see that 
most of the incidents narrated in the book have uni versal application and 
undoubtedly it emerges as the undiluted and honest record of one of the most 
sensitive humanists who in turn becomes the Univers al Man, notwithstanding 
the other titles such as Mahatma, Saint, Martyr for  Peace, and so on. 
Professor K.D. Gangrade, one of India's widely accl aimed professional social 
work educators and sociologists, and scholar of con siderable repute, looks at 
the autobiography of Gandhi from a refreshingly new  angle to identify the 
lessons Gandhi's experiments offer to each individu al in the moral 
reconstruction of our society along Gandhian lines.  If Gandhi looked at his own 
life like a scientist, Professor Gangrade analyses the autobiography here from 
the angle of an inspired social scientist who is ve ry much aware of the fact that 
at no stage all the teachings of any of the great m en and women of any age 
would have perennial value. Yet the core of their t eachings constitute the 
fulcrum around which human life revolves. 
Professor Gangrade does not look at the autobiograp hy as a sacred text. His 
approach is essentially that of a social scientist He finds the autobiography as 
an ocean of infinite importance in shaping one's li fe. Never before has any 
scholar or admirer of Gandhi looked at the autobiog raphy from this refreshingly 
original angle and it is hoped that this work of Pr ofessor Gangrade would 
encourage readers, particularly the young, to look at the achievements of Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  Gandhi beyond the stereotyped image of the Father o f the Nation and the 
champion of nonviolence and a few other concepts an d practices associated 
with Gandhi. The present work stands out in many re spects as a significant 
contribution to Gandhiana and is a reliable handboo k and a text-book to 
rediscover Gandhi through his autobiography. 
The Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti has great plea sure in presenting this 
work of immense significance as a tribute during th e Fiftieth Anniversary of 
Gandhiji's martyrdom and it is hoped that this will  help the young readers to 
discover the Revolutionary Gandhi who offered a hea lthy alternative vision of 
life and a creative blue-print for the emergence of  a new social order. We 
thank Professor Gangrade for undertaking this work on our behalf. 
Dr B.N. Pande, Vice-Chairman of Gandhi Smriti and D arshan Samiti, encouraged 
us at every stage of this work and we thank him for  his guidance. Sri N. 
Vasudevan, Director of the Gandhi Media Centre, off ered valuable help in 
making this book available in the present format. 
N. Radhakrishnan 
Director 
Gandhi Smriti and Darshan Samiti New Delhi  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
WE GENERALLY BELIEVE that it is beyond us to practi ce Gandhian values and 
principles in our thoughts, speeches and deeds in t he contemporary world in 
general and India in particular. Gandhi in his Autobiography or The Story of My 
Experiments with Truth  writes : 
"I have all along believed that what is possible fo r one  is possible for  all,  my 
experiments have not been conducted in the closet, but in the open; and I do 
not think that this fact detracts from their spirit ual value. ... The experiments I 
am about to relate [in the Autobiography]  are. . . spiritual, or rather moral... I 
claim for them nothing more than does a scientist w ho, though he conducts his 
experiments with the utmost accuracy, forethought a nd minuteness, never 
claims any finality about his conclusions, but keep s an open mind regarding 
them One claim I do indeed make and it is this. For  me they appear to be 
absolutely correct, and seem for the time being fin al. ... So long as my acts 
satisfy my reason and my heart, I must firmly adher e to my original 
conclusions." 
The story includes experiments with nonviolence, ce libacy and other principles 
of conduct believed to be distinct from Truth. But for Gandhi Truth is the 
sovereign principle, which includes other principle s. This Truth is not only 
truthfulness in word, but truthfulness in thought a lso, and not only the relative 
Truth of our conception but the absolute Truth, the  eternal principle, that is 
God. "... I worship God as Truth only. I have not y et found Him, but I am 
seeking after him, I am prepared to sacrifice the t hings dearest to me in 
pursuit of this quest Even if the sacrifice demande d be my life, I hope I may be 
prepared to give it I have faint glimpses of the ab solute Truth, God and the 
daily conviction is growing upon me [Gandhi] that h e alone is real and all else is 
unreal. The farther conviction growing. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  Gandhi also said:"... whatever is possible for me i s possible even for a child, 
and I have a sound reason for saying so. . . . They  may appear impossible to an 
arrogant person. . . . The seeker after truth shoul d be humble than the dust 
The world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth should be 
so humble himself that even the dust could crush hi m..." 
Thus it has been made abundantly clear by Gandhi th at we must give up our 
ego to achieve ultimate Truth. 
That is to see God face to face in the service of p eople. Are our present-day 
leaders ready to sacrifice and shed their narrow se lf-interest and loyalties for 
the good of larger goal of development and building  of the nation to wipe out 
tears from every eye of poor and downtrodden people ? 
The assessment of fifty years of our Independence r eveal that the fruits of 
political independence have not reached all the hut s of people in India 
specially those living in urban slums and rural hut ments. The rise and fall of the 
country essentially depends on the calibre of leade rs who are trust-worthy in 
all respects and honoured by almost all the citizen s of the nation. The leaders 
must cultivate and imbibe the values and principles  pronounced by Gandhi in 
his autobiography. 
In the present book these values and principles hav e been distinctly and clearly 
distilled for ready reference for everybody who is in search of Truth. The 
lessons deduced from each Chapter from the experime nts of Gandhi if adopted 
and followed will provide a clean administration; c reate a social order in which 
everybody gets social justice; prevent exploitation  of poor and weak by the 
dominant and powerful; and stop corruption and scam s in high, middle and low 
places. 
In India of today there is nexus and collusion for corruption and exploitation of 
people between bureaucrats-businessmen-politician t o an unimaginable 
degree. India finds a place in the top most ten cor rupt countries in the world. 
People have lost faith and confidence in their poli tical leaders in whose hands 
their destiny lie. The question therefore arises — and has to be answered — as 
to what kind of values the present generation will focus on and transmit to the Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  future generation. The coming generation do not fin d any model either in their 
parents or teachers or leaders to follow and emulat e. 
In the words of Gandhi, "role models should be pure  as a crystal, meek as a 
lamb, brave as a lion and chivalrous to a fault." 
There is a growing intolerance at all levels — in t he family, society and 
country. Families are breaking up and its effect wo uld be felt by the future 
generations, who will not pardon us. 
I hope and trust the fragrance of the lessons drawn  and deduced from Gandhi's 
autobiography will spread far and wide and will bri ng solidarity, tranquillity 
and lasting peace in the world as we march towards the twenty-first century. 
 
Objective and Purpose of Gandhi's  Autobiography  
The objective of writing this Autobiography in the words of Gandhi is: 
"I am not writing the autobiography to please criti cs. Writing it is itself one of 
the experiments with Truth. One of its objects is c ertainly to provide some 
comfort and food for reflection for my co-workers. 
“. . . It is not my purpose to attempt a real autob iography. I simply want to tell 
the story of my numerous experiments with truth, an d as my life consists of 
nothing but those experiments, it is true that the story will take the shape of 
an autobiography. But I shall not mind, if every pa ge of it speaks only of my 
experiments. I believe, or at any rate flatter myse lf with the belief that a 
connected account of all these experiments will not  be without benefit to the 
reader. My experiments in the political field are n ow known, not only to India, 
but to a certain extent to the 'civilized' world. B ut I should certainly like to 
narrate my experiments in the spiritual field which  are known only to myself, 
and from whom I have derived such power as I posses s for working in the 
political field. If the experiments are really spir itual, then there can be no 
room for self-praise. The more I reflect and look b ack on the past the more 
vividly do I feel my limitations. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  My uniform experience has convinced me that there i s no other God than Truth. 
And if every page of these chapters does not procla im to the reader that the 
only sources for realization of Truth is Ahimsa, I shall deem all my labour in 
writing these chapters to have been in vain. And, e ven though my efforts in this 
behalf may prove fruitless, let the readers know th at the vehicle, not the great 
principle is at fault. After all, however sincere m y striving after Ahimsa may 
have been, they have still been imperfect and inade quate. 
The little fleeting glimpses, therefore, that I hav e been able to have of Truth 
can broadly convey are idea of the indescribable lu stre of Truth, a million 
times more - intense than that of the sun we daily see with our eyes. In fact 
what I have caught is only the faintest glimmer of that mighty effulgence. But 
this much I can say with assurance, as a result tha t all my experiments, that a 
perfect vision of Truth can only follow a complete realization of Ahimsa." 
 
Emphasis on fundamental Duties 
We are currently observing the fiftieth  Puniya Tithi  — Martyrdom Day — of 
Mahatma Gandhi. He was shot dead on 30 January 1948  while on his way to his 
daily communion with the Creator. Godse shot Gandhi  dead, the godly or so he 
thought But he could only liquidate the messiah's m ortal coils — 'worn-out. 
garments' —  Jeernani Vasamsi,  in the language of the Gita.  He is Mahatma, 
whose thoughts, words and deeds are in perfect harm ony with each other. 
According to Gandhi, instead only talking of fundam ental rights, we should lay 
stress on fundamental duties and obligations. The t rue source of right is duty. If 
we discharge our duties, rights will not be far to seek. What we can do and 
what we must do is to imbibe the spirit of Gandhi's  view of life. The Gandhian 
spark should glow in every Indian soul. The Gandhia n ideals should believed up 
to by each one of us in our individual family and i nstitutional life, irrespective 
of what others do or fail to do. This will usher in  transparency, purity and 
probity in public life, which are the basic ingredi ents of clean, efficient and 
democratic governance. [S. Ramakrishnan, "Attend to  Fundamental Duties and 
Obligations,"  The Hindustan Times , 25 January 1998, New Delhi, p. 13.] Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  It is only when the paramount duties are performed that the individual and 
society can exist and flourish. Duties and the perf ormance of duties create the 
conditions in which rights can be exercised. Rights  also imply an external 
authority or power that assures them. In the absenc e of such a power that 
assures or ensures, rights will remain notional and  aspirational. So the assuring 
power and its viability have to be first created or  sustained and that can be 
done only by the performance of the paramount dutie s. In this sense, 
therefore, rights flow from the performance of duti es. It is the performance of 
duties that creates the pool and the power on which  rights depend. Moreover, 
for the performance of one's duties one is not depe ndent on others. For the 
assurance of one's rights, one is dependent. Gandhi , therefore, believed that 
the performance of one's duty in conformity with th e Higher Law is one of the 
basics on which society depends. No society can sur vive or ascend to higher 
levels of achievements if self-indulgence becomes i ts motto. (Ravindra Varma, 
"Gandhian Perception of the Ethical Foundation of S ociety,"  Gandhi Marg,  
October- December 1997, pp. 285-86.) 
 
National Flag and Truth 
Indian tricolour is symbolic of the three universal  concepts of  Satyam  (Truth),  
Sivam  (Godness)  Sundaram (Beauty). The motto of free India is  Satyameva 
Jayate (Truth Alone Triumphs). Thus the ideal of India and  Indian society is 
Truth and Righteousness. 
The National Flag has three colours — scarlet, whit e and green. With Dhartna 
Chakra  inscribed in the middle is in blue colour. The fla g represents the 
idealism of the country. 
The French conjured up the ideals of Equality, Frat ernity and Liberty with their 
tri-colour banner. 
In India and perhaps everywhere else in the world, the white colour is 
associated with purity, knowledge and light. The gr een connotes prosperity and 
plenty. The red signifies smartness and sacrifice a nd brother hood. The wheel 
denotes the concept of Time-Destiny- Existence. The  wheel also signifies Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  comprehensive movement and progress, spiritual as w ell as secular. Thus, the  
Dharma Chakra  is the symbolic epitome of Indian aspirations and ideals. 
The significance of the Flag lies in giving Truth c entral place in the total and 
holistic approach to reach the cherished goal of  Sarvodya  (development and 
welfare of  all). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II 
LESSONS FROM GANDHI'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  
I have drawn some lessons from the Autobiography  of Mahatma Gandhi. I feel 
these lessons are highly relevant and universal and  worth following as we enter 
the twenty-first century. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
INTRODUCTION  
1.  What is possible for one is possible for all. 
2.  Truth is the Sovereign Principle. 
3.  The seeker after truth should be humbler than the d ust. The world crushes 
the dust under its feet, but the seeker after truth  should be so simple that 
even the dust could crush him. 
 
 
PART I  
Chapter I: Birth and Parentage  
1.  Gandhi's father was incorruptible and impartial in family as well as outside 
matters. 
2.  Mother was deeply religious and of saintly qualitie s. She would take the 
hardest vows and keep them unflinchingly. 
Gandhi had model parents. He had imbibed good quali ties from them. 
 
Chapter II: Childhood  
1.  Teacher prompted young Mohan to copy correct spelli ng of 'Kettle' from his 
neighbour's slate. But he would not be prompted. He  thought the teacher 
was there to supervise against copying. He could no t learn the art of 
copying. Elders' wrong advice need not be followed.  However, this did not 
in the least diminish his respect for the teacher. He was by nature blind to 
the fault of elders. 
2.  The book  Shravana Pitrubhakti Natak  (a play about Sharavana's devotion 
to his parents) made an indelible impression on his  mind. That is, to 
respect and serve parents. One has to sacrifice all  happiness and pleasure 
to serve parents. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  3.  Similarly, another play —  Harish Chandra —  had inspired him to go through 
the ordeal, as Harish Chandra did, for upholding th e ideal of Truth. One 
must be ready to face difficulties to follow the pa th of Truth. 
 
Chapter III: Child Marriage  
1.  Marriage among Hindus is no simple matter. It bring s parents of both the 
parties almost to the verge of ruin. 
2.  Child marriage for child does not mean anything mor e than the prospect of 
good clothes, rich dinners and a strange girl or bo y to play with. 
3.  But boys in general immediately assumes authority o ver the wives as 
husbands. This shows male's superiority over female . 
 
Chapter TV: Playing the Husband  
1.  Nothing is impossible for pure love. 
2.  Jealousy does not wait for reasons. 
 
Chapter V: At the High School  
1.  Early marriage generally results in wasting a year in education (Gandhi and 
his immediate elder brother wasted a year. His brot her gave up studies 
altogether. One does not know how many youth are in  the same plight as 
he.) Child marriage must be avoided at all cost. 
2.  Physical and mental training should have equal impo rtance in the 
curriculum. 
3.  A man of Truth must also be a man of care. 
(Gandhi's desire to dislike gymnastics was because of his keen desire to 
serve as nurse to his ailing father. As soon as the  school closed, he would 
rush home and begin serving / ministering him. Comp ulsory exercise came 
directly in the way of this service. Now it happene d that one day Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  (Saturday), when school was held in the morning, he  had to go from home 
to the school for gymnastics at four O'clock in the  afternoon. He had no 
watch and the clouds deceived him. Before he reache d the school the boys 
(students) had all left The next day Mr Gimi — the gymnastic teacher — 
examined the roll, found him marked absent. On bein g asked the reason 
for absence, he (Gandhi) told him what had happened . He (Gimi) refused 
to believe him and ordered Gandhi to pay fine. He w as convicted for lying. 
That pained him deeply. How was he to prove his inn ocence. There was no 
way. He cried in deep anguish. He saw that a man of  Truth must also be a 
man of care. This was the first and last instance o f his carelessness in 
school.) 
4.  Good handwriting is a necessary part of education. Bad handwriting should 
be regarded as a sign of an imperfect education. 
5.  Children should first be taught the art of drawing before learning how to 
write. 
6.  Every Hindu boy and girl should possess sound knowl edge of Sanskrit 
language. 
7.  In all-India curricula of higher education there sh ould be place for Hindi, 
Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic and English, besides of c ourse, the vernacular. 
 
Chapter VI: A Tragedy  
1.  A reformer cannot afford to have close intimacy wit h him whom he seeks 
to reform. 
2.  True friendship is an identity of souls rarely to b e found in the world. 
3.  In friendship there is very little scope for reform . 
4.  Man takes to vice far more readily than virtue. 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
Chapter VII: A Tragedy Continued  
1.  Women is an incarnation of tolerance. 
2.  Man, as soon as he gets his consciousness of right should be thankful to the 
Divine mercy for the escape. 
(A friend once took Gandhi to a brothel. He sent hi m in with the necessary 
instructions. Gandhi went into the jaws of sin, but  God in his infinite 
mercy protected him against himself. Gandhi was alm ost struck blind and 
dumb in this den of vice. He sat near the woman on her bed, but he was 
tongue-tied. She naturally lost patience with him a nd showed him the 
door, with abuse and insults. He could recall four similar incidents in his 
life, and in most of them his good fortune, rather than any effort on his 
part, saved him. From a strict ethical point of vie w, all these occasions 
must be regarded as moral lapses, for the carnal de sire was there, and it 
was as good as the act. But from an ordinary point of view, a man who is 
saved from physically committing sin is regarded as  saved.) 
 
Chapter VIII: Stealing And Atonement  
1.  A clean confession, combined with a promise never t o commit the sin 
again, when offered before one who has the right to  receive it, is the 
purest type of repentance. 
2.  Don't allow lust to overpower you. 
 
Chapter IX: My Father's Death and My Double Shame  
1.  When death is imminent, who can think of the right remedy? The 
inevitable has to be accepted. 
(Every night his hands were busy nursing his father 's legs, but his mind was 
hovering about the bed-room and that too at a time when religion, 
medical science and conscience alike forbade sexual  intercourse with a Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  pregnant woman. He was always glad to be relieved f rom his duty, and 
went straight to the bedroom. 
The dreadful night came. But Gandhi was with his wi fe. The servant 
knocked the door. "Get up", he said, "Father is ver y ill." Gandhi guessed 
what 'very ill 7 meant at that moment. He sprang out of bed. "What is the 
matter? Do tell me!" "Father is no more!" 
The grip of lust did not allow Gandhi at the critic al hour to be with his 
father so that his father could have died in his ar ms. This was a blot he 
had never been able to efface or forget.) 
 
Chapter X: Glimpses of Religion  
1.  Impressions formed at childhood strike roots deep d own into one's nature. 
2.  Morality is the basis of things and that Truth is t he substance of all 
morality* 
3.  Return good for evil. 
 
Chapter XI: Preparation For England  
1.  Blessings of mothers and elders are really matters for Godspeed. 
 
Chapter XII: Outcaste  
1.  Solemn promises made to mother to abstain from wine , women and meat 
will keep one safe from various temptations and lus t 
(A general meeting of the caste was called and Gand hi was summoned to 
appear before it He was told "In the opinion of the  caste, your proposal to 
go to England is not proper. Our religion forbids v oyage abroad. We have 
also heard that one is obliged to eat and drink wit h Europeans!" To which 
Gandhi replied: "I do not think it is at all agains t our religion to go to 
England. I intend going there for further studies. And I have solemnly Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  promised my mother to abstain from three things you  fear most (wine, 
women and meat), I am sure the vow will keep me saf e! I cannot alter my 
resolve to go to England.") 
 
Chapter XIII: In London At Last  
1.  Lawyers should have a long tongue. 
2.  If the word of lawyer is not to be trusted, where i s the use of possessing a 
certificate in the matter. 
3.  Don't touch other people's things. 
4.  Don't ask questions in first acquaintance. 
5.  Don't talk loudly. 
 
Chapter XIV: My Choice  
1. A vow is a vow. It cannot be broken. 
 
Chapter XV: Playing the English Gentleman  
1.  A student ought to go on with studies. Character ma kes a gentleman and not 
dress. 
 
Chapter XVI: Changes  
1.  Make it a point and habit to account for every pie and for everything that 
comes into and goes out of your pocket. 
2.  Long walks may practically free oneself from illnes s and give a fairly 
strong body. 
3.  Latin is very useful to lawyers. 
4.  Knowing and understanding Latin means greater comma nd over the English 
language. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  5.  Plain living will save plenty of time. 
6.  Change should harmonize inward and outward life. 
 
Chapter XVII: Experiments in Dietetics  
1.  Ethically man's supremacy over the lower animals me ant not that the 
former should prey upon the latter, but that the hi gher should protect the 
lower, and there should be mutual aid between the t wo as between man 
and man. 
2.  Man should eat not for enjoyment but to live. 
3.  A vegetarian diet is the least expensive. 
4.  The real seat of taste is not the tongue but the mi nd. 
5.  Nobody can dare do harm a person whom God protects.  
6.  Despite pledge may be very explicit, people will tu rn and twist the text to 
suit their own purposes. This should not be done an d people must adhere 
to the pledge taken by them. 
7.  Selfishness burns people who take pledge blindly, a nd by a use of 
ambiguous interpretation; they deceive themselves a nd seek to deceive 
the world and God. One golden rule is to accept the  interpretation 
honestly put on the pledge by the party administeri ng it. 
8.  A convert's enthusiasm for his new religion is grea ter than that of a person 
born in it. 
 
Chapter XVIII: Shyness My Shield  
1.  One should not be drone. The bees are very busy, th e drone is a thorough 
idler. 
2.  Silence is part of the spiritual discipline of a vo tary of Truth. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22   
Chapter XIX: The Canker of Untruth  
1.  It is never too late to mend. 
 
Chapter XX: Acquaintance with Religions  
1.  Renunciation is the greatest religion. 
2.  Sermon on the mount: The verses say that ye resist not evil: but 
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn  to him the other also. 
And if any man take away thy coat let him have thy cloak too. 
3.  For a bowl of water, give goodly meal. 
 
Chapter XXI: Nirbal Ke Bala Rama  
1.  Prayer is an unfailing means of cleansing the heart  of passions. Prayer 
needs no speech. It is in itself independent of any  serious effort. 
2.  Supplication, worship, prayer are no superstition; they are acts more real 
than the acts of eating, drinking, sitting or walki ng. It is exaggeration to 
say that they alone are real, all else is unreal. 
(In England even in respectable households in play of rubber bridge every 
player indulged in innocent jokes with the landlady  as a matter of course, 
but Gandhi's companion and their hostess began to m ake indecent ones as 
well. Gandhi did not know that his friend was an ad ept in the art. It 
captured Gandhi and he also joined in. Just when Ga ndhi was about to go 
beyond the limit, leaving the cards and the game to  themselves, God 
through the good companion uttered the blessed warn ing: "Whence this 
devil is in you, my boy! Be off quick!" Gandhi was ashamed. He took the 
warning, and expressed within himself gratefulness to his friend. 
Remembering the vow he had taken before his mother,  he fled the scene.) 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
Chapter XXII: Narayatt Hertichandra  
1.  Civilized fellows are generally cowards. Great men never look at a person's 
exterior. They think of his heart. 
 
Chapter XXIII: The Great Exhibition  
1.  The Eiffel Tower (Paris) was a monument of man's fo lly, not of his wisdom. 
2.  Tobacco is the worst of all intoxication inasmuch a s a man addicted to it is 
tempted to crime which a drunkard never dared to do . Liquor made a man 
mad but tobacco clouded his intellect and made him build castles in the 
air. 
 
Chapter XXIV : "Called" - But Then?  
1.  The curriculum of study to the bar is easy, barrist er being humorously 
known as 'dinner barristers'! Everyone knew that ex amination has no value. 
(There are two conditions which had to be fulfilled  before a student was 
formally called to the bar: 'Keeping terms; twelve terms equivalent to about 
three years; and passing examinations. 'Keeping ter ms' means eating one's 
terms, i.e., attending at least six out of about tw enty-four diners in a term. 
Eating did not mean actually partaking of the dinne r, it meant reporting 
oneself at the fixed hour and remaining present thr oughout the dinner.) 
 
Chapter XXV: My Helplessness  
1.  It is easy to be called to the bar but it is diffic ult to practise. Legal 
maxims, "use your property in such a way as not to damage that of 
others", is one of them, but Gandhi was at a loss t o know how one could 
employ this maxim for the benefit of one's client.  Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  2.  A Vakil should know human nature. He should be able  to read a man's 
character from his face. And every Indian ought to know Indian history. 
This has no connection with the practice of law, bu t you ought to have 
that knowledge. 
3.  Honesty and industry are enough to become a success ful lawyer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
PART II  
Chapter I : Raychandbhai  
1.  The outer storm must be considered as a symbol of t he inner. 
2.  There is a great deal of Truth in the doctrine that  true knowledge is 
impossible without a "Guru". 
(An imperfect teacher may be tolerable in mundane m atters, but not in 
spiritual matters). 
3.  Only a perfect  Gnani  (a knowing one, a seer) deserves to be enthroned a s 
a Guru. There must be ceaseless striving after perf ection. For one gets 
the Guru that one deserves. Infinite striving after  perfection is one's right 
It is its own reward. The rest is in the hands of G od. 
 
Chapter II: How I began Life  
1.  The barrister's profession is a bad job — much show  and little knowledge. 
 
Chapter III: The First Case  
1.  For a barrister to vegetate for five to seven years  is not unusual. 
2.  Make a virtue of necessity. 
 
Chapter IV: The First Shock  
1.  Don't compromise principle by any means. 
2.  Selfishness is blind. 
 
Chapter V: Preparing For South Africa  
1.  Power intoxicates to an inordinate extent. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  2.  Petty intrigues between states and intrigues of off icers for power were and 
are the order of the day. 
 
Chapter VI: Arrival In Natal  
1.  Chess is a game in which there is plenty of scope f or the exercise of one's 
intelligence. 
2.  Many a youth, must have fallen into sin by a false sense of shame. This 
must be avoided. 
 
Chapter VII: Some Experiences  
1.  Man may be practically unlettered, but he may have rich fund of 
experiences. He has to be respected and one must le arn from his vast 
experiences. 
 
Chapter VIII: On The Way To Pretoria  
1.  It is cowardice to run away without fulfilling obli gation and resolving 
problem. 
2.  Root out the disease and suffer hardship in the pro cess. 
3.  Redress for wrongs should only be to the extent tha t would be necessary 
for the removal of the prejudice. 
 
Chapter IX : More Hardships  
1.  Don't pocket insults for making money. 
 
Chapter X: First Day in Pretoria  
1.  Some people believe: Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  a)  It is impossible to find eternal peace, unless one accepts Jesus as the 
only Son of God and Saviour of mankind; 
b)  The book of books is the Holy Bible. 
2.  One should learn to respect all religions. 
3.  One should not embrace another religion unless one understands his own. 
 
Chapter XI: Christian Contacts  
1.  The prayers are supplications to God for various th ings, according to each 
person's desire. The prayer for God are to open the  doors of heart. 
 
Chapter XII: Seeking Touch With Indians  
1.  Truth is inconsistent with business. Business is a very practical affair, and 
Truth is a matter of religion. 
(The merchants or businessmen must be awakened from  this fallacy. Their 
responsibility to be truthful is all the greater in  a foreign land because the 
conduct of a few Indians is the measure of that of millions of their fellow 
countrymen.) 
2.  Don't lose patience with pupils. 
 
Chapter XIII: What It Is To Be A 'Coolie'  
1.  Don't go to Court in respect of any personal grieva nce. 
 
Chapter XIV: Preparation for The Case  
1.  Facts are three-fourths of the law. 
2.  If we take care of the facts of a case the law will  take care of itself. 
3.  Facts mean Truth, and once we adhere to Truth, the law comes to our aid 
naturally. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  4.  True functioning of a lawyer is to unite parties.  
 
Chapter XV: Religious Ferment  
1.  God could not but listen to prayer fervently offere d. 
(For example, George Muller of Bristol of England d epended entirely on 
prayer even for his temporal needs.) 
2.  One must learn to follow the inner voice. 
(The Kingdom of God is within you.) 
 
Chapter XVI: Man Proposes and God Disposes  
1.  There can be no fee for public work. 
 
Chapter XVII: Settled In Natal  
1.  One must not accept any salary for public work. 
 
Chapter XVIII: Colour Bar  
1.  When at Rome do as Romans do. 
(Gandhi while practising in the court of Natal did not wear the turban to 
obey the law of the country as it would have been i ll becoming of him to 
disregard a custom of the court in the province of Natal.) 
2.  The very insistence of Truth required that one must  appreciate the beauty 
of truth. This is an essential part of Satyagraha. 
 
Chapter XIX: Natal Indian Congress  
1.  Sustained agitation is essential for making an impr ession on the authority. 
2.  Not to carry public work with borrowed money. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  3.  One could rely in people's promises in most matters  except in respect of 
money. 
4.  Carefully kept accounts are  sine qua non  for any organization. 
 
Chapter XX: Balasundram  
1.  Indentured labour is generally considered the prope rty of his master. 
 
Chapter XXI: The £3 Tax  
1.  The indentured labour could be tolerated as - indep endent agriculturists, 
but their competition in trade could not be brooked . 
2.  Truth will ultimately triumph in the end. 
 
Chapter XXII: Comparative Study Of Religions  
1.  God can be realized through service. 
 
Chapter XXIII: As A Householder  
1.  Howsoever one may want to repair, a rift is a rift 
 
Chapter XXIV: Homeward  
1.  Religion and morality were/ are synonymous. 
 
Chapter XXV: In India  
1.  The authors of Smriti's have laid the greatest emph asis on cleanliness 
both — inward and outward. 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30   
Chapter XXVI: Two Passions  
1.  Service which is rendered without joy helps neither  the worker nor the 
served. 
 
Chapter XXVII: The Bombay Meeting  
1.  A patriot cannot afford to ignore any branch of ser vice to the 
motherland. 
 
Chapter XXVIII: Poona And Bombay  
1.  Leaders should be like river Ganges. 
(Gandhi regarded Sir Pherozeshah Mehta like the Him alaya, the Lokmanya 
Tilak like the Ocean, and Gokhale as the Ganges. On e could have a 
refreshing bath in the holy river. The Himalaya was  unscaleable, and one 
could not easily launch forth on the sea, but the G anges invited one to its 
bosom.) 
2.  There is no barrier that love cannot break. 
 
Chapter XXIX: ‘Return Soon'  
1.  The aggrieved party imagines that the editor of a n ewspaper or a 
magazine is a power in the land. Only he knows that  his powers can hardly 
travel beyond the threshold of his office. 
2.  We win justice quickest by rendering justice to oth ers. 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31   
PART III 
 
Chapter I: Rumblings of The Storm  
1.  A Hindu wife regards implicit obedience to her husb and as the highest 
religion. A Hindu husband regards himself as lord a nd master of his wife, 
who must ever dance attendance upon him. This type of attitude must 
stop. The women must be given right place and statu s in the Hindu 
society. 
2.  All become one in face of the common danger. They f orget their 
differences and begin to think of the one and only one God — Mussalmans, 
Hindus, Christians and all. 
3.  The name of God disappears from the lips of people with the 
disappearance of danger. 
(The momentary mood of earnest prayer gives place t o  maya  as soon as 
fear of death disappears.) 
 
Chapter II: The Storm  
1.  Western civilization, unlike the Eastern is predomi nantly based on force. 
(I [Gandhi] said: "I hope God will give me the cour age and the sense to 
forgive whites for their violent threats and acts a nd refrain from bringing 
them to law. I have no anger against them. I am onl y sorry for their 
ignorance and their narrowness. I know that they si ncerely believe that 
what they are doing today is right and proper. I ha ve, therefore, no reason 
to be angry with them. When truth becomes known the y will be sorry for 
their conduct.") 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
Chapter III: The Test  
1.  It is idle to adjudicate upon the right and wrong o f incidents that have 
already happened. It is useful to understand them a nd, if possible, to 
learn a lesson from them for the future. 
 
Chapter IV: The Calm After The Storm  
1.  It is not good to run public institutions on perman ent funds. A permanent 
fund carries in itself the seed of the moral fall o f the institution. A public 
institution means an institution conducted with the  approval, and from the 
funds of the public. When such an institution cease s to have public 
support, it forfeits its right to exist 
2.  The ideal for public institutions is to live, like nature, from day to day. 
The institution that fails to win public support ha s no right to exist as 
such. 
 
Chapter V: Education Of Children  
1.  The young children should not be separated from the ir parents. The 
education that children imbibe in a well ordered ho usehold is impossible 
to obtain in hostels. The children should not be de prived of the training 
that can be had from contact with the parents. 
2.  A choice has to be made between liberty and learnin g, who will not say 
that former has to be preferred a thousand times to  the latter. 
(The youth whom I [Gandhi] called out in 1920 from those citadels of 
slavery — their school and colleges — and whom I [G andhi] advised that it 
was better to remain unlettered and break stones fo r the sake of liberty 
than to go for a literary education in the chains o f slavery will probably 
be able now to trace my [Gandhi] advice to its sour ce.) 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  Chapter VI: Spirit Of Service  
1.  A careful study of any subject is in estimable help . 
2.  In order to the proper upbringing of children, the f parents ought to have a 
general knowledge of the care and nursing of babies . 
3.  The education of the child begins with conception. The physical and 
mental states of the parents at the moment of conce ption are reproduced 
in the baby. Then during the period of pregnancy it  continues to be 
affected by the mother's moods and temperament, as also by her way of 
life. After birth the child imitates the parents an d for a considerable 
number of years entirely depends on them for its gr owth. 
4.  We labour under a sort of superstition that the chi ld has nothing to learn 
during the first five years of its life. On the con trary, the fact is that the 
child never learns in after life what it does in it s five years. 
5.  It is the height of ignorance to believe that the s exual act is an 
independent function like sleeping or eating. The w orld depends for its 
existence on the act of generation, and as the worl d is the playground of 
God, and a reflection of his glory, the act of gene ration should be 
controlled for the ordered growth of the world. He who realizes this 
controls his lust at any cost, equip himself with k nowledge necessary for 
the physical, mental and spiritual well being of hi s progeny and give the 
benefits of that knowledge to posterity. 
 
Chapter VII: Bhrahmacharya I  
1.  The devotion of a servant is a thousand times more praise-worthy than 
that of a wife to her husband. 
2.  It should be important conviction with the public m an that procreation and 
consequent care of children are inconsistent with p ublic service. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  (In order to devote myself [Gandhi] to the service of community I decided 
to relinquish the desire for children and wealth an d live the life of a 
vanaprastha  — of one retired from household cares.) 
 
Chapter VIII: Brahmacharya II  
1.  The vow is a sure shield against temptations. 
2.  In Brahmacharaya lies the protection of the body, t he mind and the soul. 
3.  The Brahmachari's food should be limited, simple, s piceless and if possible 
uncooked. His ideal food is fresh fruit and nuts. 
4.  The Brahmachari must control his mind as it (mind) is at the root of 
sexuality. Brahmacharaya means control of the sense s in thought, word 
and deed. 
 
Chapter IX: Simple Life  
1.  It is difficult to make friends and people to appre ciate the beauty of self-
help. 
 
Chapter X: The Boer War  
1.  The average Englishman believed that the Indian was  (and is) a coward, 
incapable of taking risks of working beyond his imm ediate self-interest 
(This is evident from the current scams and scandal s prevalent in the 
country. Corruption has become all pervasive. India ns must rise in the 
twenty-first century and prove to the world that no body can match their 
honesty and integrity.) 
2.  Human nature shows itself at its best in moments of  trial and crisis. 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  Chapter XI: Sanitary Reform And Famine Relief  
1.  Indians are not good in keeping their houses and su rroundings clean. Habit 
of cleanliness must be inculcated in people. 
2.  It is very difficult to help the community in getti ng to do its own duty as 
against claiming for its rights. 
3.  One has to have infinite patience to get the people  to do any work. 
4.  It is the reformer who is anxious for the reform, a nd not society, from 
which he should expect nothing better than oppositi on, abhorrence and 
even moral persecution. 
5.  Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more and mo re fruit, the more you 
nurture it The deeper the search in the mine of Tru th, the richer the 
discovery of the gems buried there, in the shape of  opening for an ever 
greater variety of service. 
 
Chapter  XII;  Return to India  
1.  The voice of the people is the voice of God. 
2.  Service has its own reward. 
3.  A public worker should not accept costly gifts. 
4.  For gifts a trust may be created in favour of the c ommunity. 
 
Chapter XIII: In India Again  
1.  Service is no mushroom growth. It presupposes the w ill first and then 
experience. There is no lack of will on the part of  good simple hearted 
young men, but they lack experience. 
2.  The National Congress before the entry of Gandhi wo uld meet three days 
every year and then go to sleep. The organization s hould remain active 
rather than just have a Conference or meeting for t hree days or so in a 
year. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36   
Chapter XIV: Clerk and Bearer  
1.  Always respect elders. 
2.  Work of an organization must be properly rationaliz ed. 
(The Congress secretary in those days was so busy t hat he had no time 
even to button his shirt. There was little regard f or economy of energy. 
More than one did the work of one, and many of an i mportant thing was no 
one's business at all. The work of an organization must be properly 
rationalized and distributed amongst various functi onaries.) 
 
Chapter XV: In the Congress  
1.  Resolution(s) moved by an important leader generall y get unanimously 
passed without understanding or discussing them. 
 
Chapter XVI: Lord Curzon's Darbar  
1.  Heavy is the toll of sins and wrongs that wealth, p ower and prestige exact 
from man. 
 
Chapter XVII: A Month With Gokhale I  
1.  Some leaders private relations and friendship are a ll for public good. 
(Gokhale's private relations and friendship are all  for public good. All his 
talks has reference only to the good of the country  and are absolutely free 
from any trace of untruth or insincerity. India's p overty and subjection are 
matters of constant and intense concern for him. He  is a person whose 
example needs to be emulated.) 
2.  There are some leaders who will spend very little f rom the salary on 
themselves and spend the rest on public purposes. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  (Prof. P. C. Ray (now Sir), who having a monthly sa lary of Rs 800, keeps 
just Rs 40 for himself and devotes the balance to p ublic purposes. He is 
not, and does not want to get married.) 
3.  Attend court in the interest of client(s). 
(There is an example of Mandlik. He once, having mi ssed the train, 
engaged a special train so as to be able to attend the court in the interest 
of his client.) 
4.  There is no reason to suppose that everything what the leaders do is with 
a view to personal comfort. 
(Gokhale used to have a horse-carriage in those day s. Gandhi 
remonstrated him, "Can't you make use of the tram-c ar for going about 
from place to place? Is it derogatory to a leader's  dignity?" Slightly pained 
he (Gokhale) said, "So you also have failed to unde rstand me! I do not use 
my council amount for my personal comforts. I envy your liberty to go 
about in tram-car, but I am sorry I cannot do likew ise. When you are the 
victim of as wide a publicity as I am, it will be d ifficult, if not impossible, 
for you to go about in tram-car.) 
5.  No matter, what amount of work one has, one should always find some 
time for exercise, just as one does for one's meals . It does not take away 
from one's capacity for work, it adds to it.  
 
Chapter XVIII: A Month with Gokhale II  
1.  One must oppose giving alms to sturdy beggars. 
2.  All places are equally good for us. The people are like a flock of sheep, 
following where leaders lead them. 
3.  The killing of animal(s) as a part of religious wor ship is very cruel. 
4.  The life of a lamb is no less precious than that of  a human being. 
5.  The more helpless a creature, the more entitled it is to protection by man 
from the cruelty of man. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
Chapter XIX: A Month with Gokhale III  
1.  There should be an intense desire to know life of p eople to understand and 
work with them. This is possible by living with the m. 
 
Chapter XX: In Benaras  
1.  Third class passengers, in railways, are treated li ke sheep and their 
comforts are sheep's comforts. 
(We have abolished third class, but situation has n ot changed much.) 
2.  The indifference of the railway authorities to the comfort of the third class 
[now second class] passengers, combined with the di rty and inconsiderate 
habits of the passengers themselves make third clas s travelling a trial for a 
passenger of cleanly ways. 
3.  One remedy for awful state of things — that educate d men should make it 
a point of travelling third class and reform the ha bits of the people, as 
also never letting the railway authorities rest in peace, sending in 
complaints wherever necessary, never resorting to b ribes or unlawful 
means for obtaining their own comforts, and never p utting up with 
infringement of rules on the part of anyone concern ed. 
4.  The surroundings of Kashi Vishwanath Temple are ful l of the dirt and the 
noise. Gandhi went in search for God but failed to find Him. He was not in 
a particularly good mood. He had no mind to give an y  dakshina.  So he 
offered a pie. The panda incharge got angry and thr ew away the pie. "Go 
away," he replied. "I (Maharaj) don't care for your  pie." And then followed 
a volley of abuse. "I [Gandhi] took the pie and wen t away my way, 
flattering myself that the Brahmin had lost a pie a nd I had saved one." But 
Maharaj was hardly the man to let the pie go. He ca lled me back and said, 
"All right, leave the pie here. I would rather not be as you are. If I refuse 
your pie, it will be bad for you." I silently gave him the pie and, with a Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  sigh, went away. If anyone doubts the infinite merc y of God, let him look 
at these sacred places. 
5.  God (Sri Krishna) in  Gita  had proclaimed long ago: "Whatever a man sows, 
that shall he reap! The law of Karma is inexorable and impossible of 
evasion. 
 
Chapter XXI: Settled In Bombay  
1.  One should hate as poisonous the use of flattery fo r getting briefs. 
2.  As the elephant is powerless to think in terms of t he ant, in spite of best 
intentions in the world, even so is the Englishman powerless to think in the 
terms of, or legislate for, the Indian. 
 
Chapter XXII: Faith on Its Trial  
1.  It is only during events of crisis that a man's fai th is truly tested. One must 
face the crisis boldly and adhere to one's faith. 
(Gandhi was advised by the doctor to give eggs and other non-vegetarian 
diet, to his ailing son to pick up his health. Gand hi was in a great dilemma 
because he could not ascertain his son's wish as he  (son) was not grown up 
to decide for himself. Gandhi decided against the a dvice of the doctor. He 
felt that there should be a limit even to the means  of keeping ourselves 
alive. Even for life itself we cannot to do certain  things. Religion, as he 
understood did not permit him to use meat, eggs and  the like.) 
2.  The thread of life is in the hands of God. Why worr y and let us entrust it 
to Him, and in His name go on with the treatment on e has thought is as 
the right treatment. 
 
Chapter XXIII: To South Africa Again  
1.  Enterprising youth may immigrate to other countries  if they could not find 
an opening in their own country. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  2.  It is wrong to expect certainties in this world, wh ere all else but God, that 
Truth, is an uncertainty. The quest for Truth is th e  summum bonum of 
life. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41   
PART IV 
 
Chapter I : 'Love's Labour Lost?'  
1.  The rule of might being right or the law of sword. 
 
Chapter II: Autocrats from Asia  
1.  Public departments are maintained for the good of t he people and should 
be responsive to public opinion. 
 
Chapter III: Pocketed the Insult  
1.  One may not look forward to any reward for one's la bours, but one should 
be certain that a good action is bound to bear the fruit in the end. 
 
Chapter TV: Quickened Spirit Of Sacrifice  
1.  Some people go for life insurance due to fear of de ath and want of faith in 
God. 
2.  The spirit of sacrifice is tempered by the desire t o lay by something for the 
future. 
3.  The chief thing about theosophy is to cultivate and  promote the ideas of 
brotherhood. 
 
Chapter V: Result Of Introspection  
1.  The  Gita  can become an infallible guide of conduct and dict ionary of daily 
reference. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  (Gandhi turned to this dictionary of conduct for a ready solution of all his 
troubles and trials. Words like  aparigraha  [non-possession] and  samabhava 
[equability] gripped him.) 
2.  The Gita's teaching of non-possession to mean that those who desire 
salvation should act like Trustee, who though havin g control over great 
possession, regards not an iota of the possession a s his. 
 
Chapter VI: A Sacrifice To Vegetarianism  
1.  One most important way of carrying out missionary w ork is by personal 
example and discussion with searchers for knowledge . 
2.  A man's reforming zeal ought not to make him exceed  his limits. 
 
Chapter VII: Experiments In Earth And Water Treatme nt  
1.  Fresh fruit and nuts are the natural diet of man. 
2.  A writer almost always presents one aspect of a cas e, whereas every case 
can be seen from no less than seven points of view,  all of which are 
probably correct by them. 
 
Chapter VIII: A Warning  
1.  In the legal profession, the Indian proverb says th at as a man eats, so shall 
he become. 
2.  For the seeker of truth who lives on fear of God an d who will see him face 
to face, restraint in diet both as to quality and q uantity is as essential as 
restraint in thought and speech. 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43   
Chapter IX: A Tussle With Power  
1.  In the legal profession, the very intellect sometim es becomes an 
abomination to one inasmuch as it could be prostitu ted for screening 
crime. 
2.  Hate the sin and not the sinner. 
3.  It is quite proper to resist and attack a system an d not its author. 
 
Chapter X: A Sacred Recollection and Penanace  
1.  One should not make any distinction between relativ es and strangers, 
countrymen and foreigners, white and coloured, Hind u and Indians of 
other faiths, whether Mussalmans, Sikhs, Parsis, Ch ristians, Dalits and 
Jews. 
2.  One should not use husband's authority to harass on e's wife out of one's 
blind love for her. 
3.  One should not use taunting language or words which  may pierce wife's 
ears like an arrow. 
4.  A woman having matchless powers of endurance will a lways be the victor. 
5.  One should think that the wife is a helpmate, a com rade and a partner in 
the husband's joys and sorrows. Giving her equal re spect will make 
domestic life more and more graceful, sweet and hap py. 
 
Chapter XI: Intimate European Contacts  
1.  It is extremely difficult to describe and character ize one's belief in God. 
2.  One should follow the sage maxim that nothing once begun should be 
abandoned unless it is proved to be morally wrong. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44   
Chapter XII: European Contacts (continued)  
1.  A person's character should be as clear as crystal and courage that would 
shame a warrior. 
2.  One knows neither night nor day in toiling for a ca use. 
 
Chapter XIII: 'Indian Opinion'  
1.  The sole aim of journalism should be service. The n ewspaper press (media) 
is a great power, but just as an unchained torrent of water submerges 
whole countryside and devastates crops, even so unc ontrolled pen serves 
but to destroy. If the control is from without it p roves more poisonous 
than want of control. It can be profitable only whe n exercising control 
from within. 
2.  Satyagraha would probably have been impossible with out  Indian Opinion  [a 
journal]. 
3.  The aim of the editor has to be to establish intima te and clear bond 
between him and the readers. 
 
Chapter XIV: Coolie Locations or Ghettoes  
1.  People usually migrate abroad in search of wealth a nd trade. 
(But the bulk of the Indians who went to South Afri ca were ignorant, 
pauper and agriculturists. The traders and educated  Indians who followed 
them were very few.) 
 
Chapter XV: The Black Plague I  
1.  If one's heart is pure, calamity brings in its trai n men and measures to fight 
it. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  2.  The indefatigable zeal and fearlessness with which youth work will rejoice 
everyone beyond measure. 
 
Chapter XVI: The Black Plague II  
1.  Once awakened to a sense of their duty, the officia l(s) of any government 
or non-official body will not delay in taking promp t measure(s). 
 
Chapter XVII: Location in Flames  
1.  When people are in a terrible fright, the leader's constant presence is a 
great consolation to them. 
 
Chapter XVIII: The Magic Spell Of A Book  
1.  Anything that appeals to intellect must be translat ed into practice. 
2.  A public worker should not make statements of which  he has not made 
sure of their authenticity. 
3.  A book's influence can be so much upon the reader t hat it can change his 
life in accordance with the ideals contained in it 
4.  The limited reading may help thoroughly to digest w hat one reads. 
5.  A poet is one who can call forth the good talent in  the human breast Poets 
don't influence all alike, for everyone is not evol ved in an equal measure. 
The teachings of  Unto This Last  made Gandhi realize: 
a)  That the good of the individual is contained in the  good of all. 
b)  That a lawyer's work has the same value as the barb er's, inasmuch as 
all have the same right of earning their livelihood  from their work. 
c)  That a life of labour, that is, the life of the til ler of the soil and 
craftsman, is the life worth living. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  Chapter XIX: Phoenix Settlement  
1.  Followers, co-workers follow the leader in his ethi cal experiments without 
much argument and discussion. 
 
Chapter XX: The First Night  
1.  No use of shedding tears if the things don't work t he way we like. We 
should do whatever is humanly possible. 
2.  People cooperate and do respond in an emergency. 
 
Chapter XXI: Polak Takes the Plunge  
1.  It is found by experience that man makes his plans to be often upset by 
God, but at the same time where the ultimate goal i s the search of truth, 
no matter how a man's plans are frustrated, the iss ue is never injurious 
and often better than anticipated. 
2.  There are some persons who are not conscious of the ir own capacities. 
They need be awakened to their capacities. 
3.  There are some who by their sociability win the hea rts of all and soon 
become the members of the family. They take to hard  work like duck 
takes to water. 
 
Chapter XXII: Whom God Protects  
1.  Experience has shown that all experiments involve o bvious risks. 
2.  He who will go in for novel experiments must begin with himself. This will 
lead to quicker discovery of truth, and God always protects the honest 
experimenter(s). 
3.  Common religion is the religion of ethics. 
4.  The distinction between heterogeneous and homogeneo us is discovered to 
be merely imaginary. We are all one family. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  5.  True beauty consists in purity of heart. 
 
Chapter XXIII: A Peep into The Household  
1.  Character building is the bounden duty of every par ent 
2.  Children inherit the qualities of the parents no le ss than their physical 
features. Environment does play an important part, but the original capital 
on which a child starts in life is inherited from i ts ancestors. 
3.  The Indian parents who train children to think and talk in English from 
their infancy betray their children and their count ry. They deprive them of 
the spiritual and social heritage of the nation and  render them to that 
extent unfit for the service of the country. 
 
Chapter XXIV: The Zulu Rebellion  
1.  British and some of their subjects believed that th e British Empire existed 
for the welfare of the world. 
(The Zulu rebellion was against the new rule and th e tax imposed on 
them.) 
 
Chapter XXV: Heart Searching  
1.  Brahmacharaya is necessary for one who aspires to s erve humanity with his 
whole soul. 
2.  Life without Brahmacharaya appears to be insipid an d animal-like. The 
man, brute by nature, knows no self-restraint. Man is man because he is 
capable of, and only is so far as he exercises self -restraint Brahmacharaya, 
which is so full of wonderful potency, is by no mea ns an easy affair, and 
certainly not a mere matter of the body. It begins with bodily restraint, 
but does not end there. The perfection of it preclu des even an impure 
thought A true Brahmachari will not even dream of s atisfying the fleshly Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  appetite, and until he is in that condition, he has  great deal of ground to 
cover. 
3.  There is a key to lock out undesirable thoughts, bu t everyone has to find it 
out for himself. Saints and seers have left their e xperiences for us, but 
they have given us no infallible and universal pres cription. 
 
Chapter XXVI: The Birth of Satyagraha  
1.  Satyagraha ( sat : truth,  agraha  : firmness) is a form of nonviolent struggle 
against exploitation, oppression, subjugation and r epression. It is an 
ethical value. It is of moral pressure, where the v olunteers or activists 
submit to discomfort, suffering, or punishment as a n expression of their 
position and depth of their conviction. 
(Examples will include fasting, lying down in front  of a bulldozer to halt or 
prevent an unwanted project, or blocking a street o r engaging in other 
illegal activities likely to lead to police action. ) This approach emphasizes 
goodwill rather than hostility towards the opponent s. 
 
Chapter XXVII: More Experiments In Dietetics  
1.  Passion in man is generally co-existence with a han kering after the 
pleasures of the palate. One should eat not in orde r to please the palate, 
but just to keep the body going. When each organ of  sense sub-serves the 
body and through the body the soul, its special rel ish disappears, and then 
alone does it begin to function in the way nature i ntended it to. 
 
Chapter XXVIII: Kasturba's Courage  
1.  Kasturba refused to take beef tea despite the advic e of the doctor. This 
shows women's determination. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  (She gave a resolute reply: "I will not take beef t ea. It is a rare thing in 
this world to be born as a human being, and I would  rather die in your 
[Gandhi] arms than pollute my body with such abomin ations.") 
 
Chapter XXIX: Domestic Satyagraha  
1.  Inhibition imposed from without rarely succeed, but  when they are self-
imposed, they have decidedly salutary effect. 
2.  Salt is not a necessary diet for man, that on the c ontrary saltless diet is 
better for the health. 
3.  Self-denial is good for the soul. The diet of a man  of self-restraint must be 
different from that of the man of pleasure, just as  their ways of life must 
be different. 
 
Chapter XXX: Towards Self-restraint  
1.  Milk stimulates animal passion. 
2.  There is an intimate connection between the mind an d the body, and the 
carnal mind always lusts for delicacies and luxurie s. 
3.  Those whose minds are working towards self- restrai nt, dietic restrictions 
and fasting are very helpful. In fact without their  help concupiscence 
cannot be completely rooted out of the mind. 
 
Chapter XXXI: Fasting  
1.  It is better to have always one's co-worker's coope ration in anything that 
appeals to one as being good. 
2.  Fasting and similar discipline is one of the means to the end of self-
restraint, but it is not all, and if physical fasti ng is not accompanied by 
mental fasting, it is bound to end in hypocrisy and  disaster. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  Chapter XXXII: As School Teacher  
1.  Under ideal conditions, 'true education' can be imp arted only by parents 
and that there should be the minimum of outside hel p.’ 
(The Tolstoy Farm in South Africa was a family, in which Gandhi occupied 
the place of father. He therefore assumed so far as  possible the 
responsibility for the training of the young.) 
2.  Character building is the proper foundation for the  education of children. 
If the foundation is firmly laid, the children coul d and would learn all 
other things themselves or with the assistance of f riends. 
3.  Building body should not be underrated as such phys ical labour should 
become an integral part of education system. 
4.  Every youngster must learn at least some useful voc ation. 
5.  As a rule the youngsters should not be asked to do what the teachers did 
not do. 
 
Chapter XXXIII: Literacy Training  
1.  As far as possible mornings should be devoted to ph ysical work and 
domestic duties, so school hours must be kept after  the mid-day meals. 
2.  One should never attempt to disguise one's ignoranc e from one's pupils. 
3.  It is not necessary to load the boys and girls with  the quantities of books. 
4.  The true text book for the pupil is his/her teacher . 
5.  Children learn or take in much more without labour through their ears 
than through their eyes. Reading is a task for them , but listening is 
pleasure. 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51   
Chapter XXXIV: Training Of the Spirit  
1.  All training without culture of the spirit is of no  use and may be even 
harmful. 
2.  The training of the spirit is a thing by itself. 
3.  To develop the spirit is to build character and to enable one to work 
towards a knowledge of God and self-realization. 
4.  It is a matter of common knowledge that those who d efer preparation for 
this invaluable experience until the last stage of life attain not self-
realization but old-age amounting to a second and p itiable childhood, 
living as a burden on this earth. 
5.  It is not through books that one can impart trainin g of the spirit Just as 
physical training is to be done through physical ex ercise, the intellectual 
through intellectual exercise, even so the training  of the spirit is possible 
only through the exercise of the spirit. And the ex ercise of the spirit 
entirely depends on the life and character of the t eacher. It is possible for 
a teacher situated miles away to affect the spirit of the pupils by his way 
of living. A teacher has to be an eternal object-le sson to the boys and 
girls. 
 
Chapter XXXV: Tares among The Wheat  
1.  One should not make one's own children feel that th ey are superior to 
other boys and girls. To put that sense of superior ity into their heads will 
be to lead them astray. The association with other boys and girls will be a 
good discipline for them. They will, of their own a ccord, learn to 
discriminate between good and evil. 
2.  Children wrapped up in cotton wool are not always p roof against all 
temptation or contamination. It is true, however, t hat, when boys and 
girls of all kinds of upbringing are kept and taugh t together, the parents Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  and teachers are put to the severest test. They hav e constantly to be on 
the alert. 
 
Chapter XXXVI: Fasting As Penance  
1.  It is very difficult to bring up and educate boys a nd girls in the right way. 
If one wants to be their real teacher and guardian,  one must touch their 
hearts. One must share their joys and sorrows, one must help them to 
solve their problems that faced them, and must take  along the right 
channel the surging aspirations of their youth. 
2.  The guardian or teacher is responsible, to some ext ent at least, for the 
lapse of his ward or pupil. Teacher may have to tak e to penance for the 
guilt of his boys and girls. 
3.  The guilty party or parties can be made to realize their sin by inflicting 
some penance on the teacher or the guardian. 
(So I imposed on myself a fast of seven days and a vow to have only one 
meal a day for a period of four months and a half. I felt greatly relieved, 
for the decision meant a heavy load off my mind. Th e anger against the 
guilty parties subsided and gave place to the pures t pity for them. My 
penance pained everybody, but it cleared the atmosp here. Everyone came 
to realize what a terrible thing it was to be sinfu l and the bond that bound 
me to the boys and girls became stronger and truer. ) 
4.  Where there is no true love between the teacher and  the pupils, where 
the pupils delinquency has not touched the very bei ng of the teacher and 
where the pupils have no respect for the teacher, f asting is out of place 
and may even be harmful. 
 
Chapter XXXVII: To Meet Gokhale  
1.  In the march towards Truth, anger, selfishness, hat red, etc., naturally give 
way, for otherwise, Truth would be impossible to at tain. A man who is Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  swayed by passion may have good enough intentions, may be truthful in 
word, but he will never find the Truth. A successfu l search for truth means 
complete deliverance from the dual throng such as o f love and hate, 
happiness and misery. 
2.  A man emerging from a long fast should not be in a hurry to regain lost 
strength, and should also put a curb on his appetit e. More caution and 
perhaps more restraint are necessary in breaking a fast than in keeping it. 
 
Chapter XXXVIII: My Part in the War  
1.  There is a world of difference between Indians and the English. We are 
slaves and they are masters. 
How could a slave cooperate with the master in the hour of the tatter's 
need? However, England's need should not be turned into our opportunity. 
That is, one's misery should not become other's opp ortunity. 
(London in those days was a sight worth seeing. The re was no panic, but 
all were busy keeping to the best of their ability.  Able bodied adults began 
training as combatants, but what were the old, the infirm and the women 
to do? There was enough work for them, if they want ed. So they employed 
themselves in cutting and making clothes and dressi ngs for the wounded. 
One can draw a good lesson from the experiences of London people to 
face the situation boldly.) 
 
Chapter XXXIX: A Spiritual Dilemma  
1.  A votary of Truth is often obliged to grope in dark . 
2.  Ahimsa is a comprehensive principle and the unity o f all life. 
3.  When two nations are fighting, the duty of a votary  of Ahimsa is to stop 
the war. He who is not equal to that duty, he who h as no power of 
resisting war, he who is not qualified to resist wa r, may take part in war, Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  and yet wholeheartedly try to free himself, his nat ion and the world from 
war. 
4.  A votary of Truth may not do anything in defence to  convention. He must 
always hold himself open to correction, and wheneve r he discovers himself 
to be wrong he must confess it at all costs and ato ne for it. 
 
Chapter XL: Miniature Satyagraha  
1.  A Satyagrahi is born to be deceived. But ultimately  a deceiver only 
deceives himself. 
2.  One should not be surprised if one of these days on e has to go to the 
gallows for the sake of truth. 
 
Chapter XLI : Gokhale’s Charity  
1.  One should decide for oneself according to the dict ates of one's inner 
voice. 
 
Chapter XLII: Treatment Of Pleurisy 
1.  The treatment of pleurisy [Gandhi suffered from thi s disease] and cure lay 
not in taking medicine internally but in dietetic c hanges assisted by 
external remedies. 
 
Chaptter XLIII: Homeward  
1.  There is always a difference between the ruler and the subject or ruled. 
2.  It is a joy to get back to the homeland after an ex ile of long years. 
 
Chapter XLIV: Some Reminiscences of The Bar  
1.  It is generally believed that the lawyer's professi on is a liar's profession. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  (This had no influence on Gandhi. He had no intenti on of earning either 
position or money by lying. He warned every client at the outset that he 
would not take up a false case or coach the witness es. The result was that 
no false case used to come to him.) 
 
Chapter XLV: Sharp Practice  
1.  It is important to practice law without compromisin g truth. 
2.  Do not vitiate truthfulness. 
 
Chapter XL VI: Clients Turned Co-workers  
1.  One's devotion to truth enhances one's reputation a mong the members of 
the legal profession. 
2.  The object of all professions should be service to the community and not 
conspiracy against laity. For this purpose winning the confidence of the 
people is an indispensable condition. 
(In South Africa hundreds of Gandhi's clients becam e his friends and real 
co-workers in public life.) 
 
Chapter XLVII: How a Client Was Saved  
1.  To save or not to save anybody from the wrong done by one can be saved 
by means of confession. 
2.  The shame lies not so much in going to jail as in c ommitting the offence. 
(The deed of the shame has already been done. Impri sonment should be 
regarded as penance. The real penance lies in resol ving never to do wrong 
or commit crime again.) 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56   
PART V 
 
Chapter I: The First Experience  
1.  The reception given to strangers in foreign land by  local people make them 
at home. 
2.  It is necessary to enter protest against establishe d practices to make 
people conscious of their mistakes. 
 
Chapter II: With Gokhale In Poona  
1.  As a rule, as a Satyagrahi, one must understand the  view-point of the 
party he proposes to deal with. 
2.  It is faith in people that sustains the Satyagrahi.  
3.  In order that workers concentrate on work they must  be made free from 
financial responsibility. 
4.  One may commence work from one's familiar place. 
 
Chapter III: Was It A Threat?  
1.  There are some youths who do not think before speak ing. 
2.  No reform is possible unless some of the educated a nd the rich voluntarily 
accept the status of the poor. 
3.  A nation that wants to come into its own ought to k now all the ways and 
means to freedom. Usually they include violence as the last remedy. 
Satyagraha, on the one hand, is an absolutely nonvi olent weapon. It is the 
duty of the leader to explain to people its practic e and its limitations. 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  Chapter IV: Shantiniketan  
1.  Self-help experiment contains the key to Swaraj. 
2.  Before understanding and gaining experience, one mu st not express 
opinion on public questions. 
 
Chapter V: Woes Of Third Class Passengers  
1.  The face of truth is hidden behind the golden vein of  maya.  
 
Chapter VI: Wooing  
1.  Physical relationship divorced from spiritual is bo dy without soul. 
 
Chapter VII: Kumbha Mela  
1.  Life based on disciplinary resolutions will add a f ew years to life and will 
save one from many an illness. 
 
Chapter VIII: Lakshman Jhula  
1.  Hinduism must purge itself of untouchability. 
2.  So long as there are different religions, everyone of them may need some 
outward distinctive symbol. But when the symbol is made into a fetish and 
an instrument of proving the superiority of one's r eligion over others', it is 
fit only to be discarded. 
3.  One will be charmed with the natural scenery about Rishikesh and the 
Lakshman Jhula, and one's head will bow in reverenc e to ancestors for 
their sense of the beautiful nature, and for their foresight in investing 
beautiful manifestations of nature with a religious  significance. 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  Chapter IX: Founding Of the Ashram  
1.  Our creed is devotion to truth, and our business is  the search for and 
insistence on truth. 
2.  Service without humility is selfishness and egotism . 
 
Chapter X: On the Anvil  
1.  Do not return abuse with abuse. The man showering a buses will become 
ashamed and will cease to bother. 
2.  Trust in management and good work will bring money.  
 
Chapter XI: Abolition of Indentured Emigration  
1.  People tolerate the wrong system through sheer negl igence. They must be 
awakened to agitate and fight the system. 
2.  Patience is rewarded. 
3.  God does send help when needed. 
 
Chapter XII: The Stain of Indigo  
1.  Leader must take the rein in his own hands rather t han expect guidance 
from elsewhere. 
 
Chapter XIII: The Gentle Bihari  
1.  Where the ryots are so crushed and fear-stricken, l aw courts are useless. 
The real relief for them is to be free from fear. 
 
Chapter XIV: Face To Face With Ahimsa  
1.  People yield obedience to the power of love. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  2.  One should aim at work and not name, substance and not shadow. 
 
Chapter XV: Case Withdrawn  
1.  The disinterested service of the people in any sphe re ultimately helps the 
country politically. 
(This has been amply proved by the Champran struggl e.) 
 
Chapter XVI: Methods of Work  
1.  Method of inquiring must be a bold experiment with Truth and Ahimsa. 
Each peasant (case) must be closely cross-examined,  and whoever failed 
to satisfy the test may be rejected. 
 
Chapter XVII : Companions  
1.  One must have capacity — specially an outsider to m erge oneself in the 
province (state) of his adoption. 
2.  Work of a permanent nature is impossible without pr oper village 
education. 
3.  In order to involve villagers and to get their acti ve participation in 
education they (villagers) must provide teachers wi th board and lodging. 
4.  Don't entrust children to commonplace teachers. The ir literacy 
qualifications is not so essential as their moral f ibre. 
5.  Teacher is expected to teach the children not gramm ar and the three Rs so 
much as cleanliness and good manners. 
6.  Villagers must be made conscious and aware of clean liness and sanitary 
work. 
7.  One must penetrate in every department of villagers ' lives. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  Chapter XVIII: Penetrating the Villages  
1.  Sanitation is a difficult affair. Even in the field  labourers are not ready to 
do their own scavenging. 
2.  Sanitation must be made integral part of all works in villages. 
 
Chapter XIX: When A Governor Is Good  
1.  The recommendations of the committee cannot be acce pted and 
implemented without the cooperation and firmness of  a person of the 
status of Governor. 
 
Chapter XX: In Touch with Labour  
1.  One must not dare to give advice on any issue or pr oblem without proper 
inquiry on the spot. 
2.  Conditions for a successful strikes are: 
a)  Never to resort to violence. 
b)  Never to molest black legs. 
c)  Never to depend upon alms. 
d)  To remain firm, no matter how long the strike conti nues, and to earn 
bread during the strike period, by another honest l abour. 
3.  One must recognize the principle of arbitration in a dispute between two 
parties. 
 
Chapter XXI: A Peep into The Ashram  
1.  Human language can imperfectly describe God's ways.  They are 
indescribable and inscrutable.  
2.  As a rule one should not kill snakes. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  Chapter XXII: The Fast  
1.  The fast can touch the hearts of people in authorit y. They may set about 
discovering some means to settle the strike. 
(The fast by Gandhi touched the hearts of mill owne rs. They set about 
discovering some means for a settlement to call off  the strike.) 
2.  The grinding poverty and starvation with which our country is afflicted is 
such that it drives men and women every year into t he ranks of the 
beggars, whose desperate struggle for bread renders  them insensible, to 
all feelings of decency and self-respect And our ph ilanthropists, autho-
rities, instead of providing work for them and insi sting on their working for 
bread, give them alms. 
 
Chapter XXIII: The Kheda Satyagraha  
1.  One has to suspend or give up splendid and growing practice at the bar to 
join the struggle. 
(This was done by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel to join the Kheda Satyagraha.) 
 
Chapter XXIV: The Onion Thief  
1.  The Gujaratis are deeply interested in the fight. T hey are ready to pour 
forth their riches for the success of the cause. It  is not easy for them to 
see that Satyagraha cannot be conducted simply by m eans of money. 
Money is the thing that it least needs. The Satyagr ahi has to learn the new 
lesson of simplicity. 
2.  The main thing is to rid the agriculturists of thei r fear by making them 
realize that the officials are not the masters but the servants of people, 
inasmuch as they receive their salaries from the ta x payers. 
3.  The most difficult part in Satyagraha is to fully l earn the lesson of civility. 
Civility does not mean the mere outward gentleness of speech cultivated Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  for the occasion, but an inborn quietness and desir e to do the opponent 
good. 
4.  When the fear of jail disappears, repression puts h eart into the people. 
 
Chapter XXV : End Of Kheda Satyagraha  
1.  It is the people's right to determine who is poor. 
2.  The end of a Satyagraha campaign can be described a s worthy, only when, 
it leaves the Satyagrahi stronger and more spirited  than he was in the 
beginning. 
3.  The Kheda Satyagraha marks the beginning of an awak ening among the 
peasants of Gujarat and the beginning of their true  political education. 
4.  The successful completion of Kheda Satyagraha indel ibly imprinted on the 
public mind that the salvation of the people depend  upon themselves, 
upon their capacity for suffering and sacrifice. 
5.  The people have found Satyagraha the true and infal lible method for 
redressal of their grievances. 
 
Chapter XXVI: Passion for Unity  
1.  One should not miss a single opportunity to remove obstacle in the Hindu-
Muslim unity. 
2.  The young men and women have to be ready to become fakirs for the 
service of the motherland. 
3.  In matters of religion beliefs differ, and each one 's is supreme for himself. 
(If all will have the same belief about all matters  of religion, there will be 
only one religion in the world.) 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  Chapter XXVII: Recruiting Campaign  
1.  There is no trust between the government and the pe ople. 
2.  There are times when optimism may receive rude shoc k. 
3.  Distress may disappear by rendering voluntary help to government in the 
hour of its trial. 
4.  No government can afford to disregard the leaders, who represent the 
large masses of the people. 
5.  Educated classes do influence the masses. 
6.  Disappointment of hope means disillusion. 
 
Chapter XVIII: Near Death's Door  
1.  To eat too much butter is to injure one's health. 
2.  One loses interest in living when one is in that he lpless state, doing 
nothing, receiving the service of friends and co-wo rkers and watching the 
body slowly wearing away. 
3.  One should not be hasty in arriving at certain conc lusions. 
4.  Some people believe eggs are as harmless as milk. 
 
Chapter XXIX: The Rowlatt Bills and My Dilemma  
1.  Some people are liked and admired for the instantan eous capacity to take 
decisions. 
2.  The ideal of truth requires that vows taken should be fulfilled in letter 
and spirit. 
 
Chapter XXX: That Wonderful Spectacle  
1.  One can wake a man if he is really asleep; no effor t will produce any 
effect upon a man who is pretending to be asleep. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  2.  Satyagraha is a process of self-purification. 
 
Chapter XXXI: That Memorable Week I  
1.  Civil disobedience can be offered in respect of suc h laws as easily lent 
themselves to being disobeyed by the masses. 
2.  All is not gold that glitters. 
3.  One should not worry much about paucity of attendan ce in meetings. 
 
Chapter XXXII: That Memorable Week II  
1.  People by nature are peaceful and not violent. 
2.  Satyagraha is essentially a weapon of truthful. A S atyagrahi is pledged to 
nonviolence and unless people observe it in thought , word and deed one 
cannot offer mass Satyagraha. 
3.  One must suspend Satyagraha so long as people have not learnt the lesson 
of peace. 
4.  Those leaders who want to lead the people to Satyag raha ought to be able 
to keep the people within the limited nonviolence e xpected of them. 
 
Chapter XXXIII:  'A  Himalayan Miscalculation'  
1.  Ideally it is only when one sees one's mistakes wit h a convex lens and does 
just the reverse in the case of others, that one is  able to arrive at a just 
relative estimate of the two. A scrupulous and cons cientious observation 
of this rule is necessary for one who wants to be a  Satyagrahi. 
2.  A Satyagrahi obeys the laws of society intelligentl y and of his own free 
will, because he considers it to be his sacred duty  to do so. It is only when 
a person has thus obeyed the laws of the society sc rupulously that he is in 
a position to judge as to which particular rules ar e good and just and Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  which are unjust and iniquitous. Only then does the  right accrue to him of 
the civil disobedience of certain laws in well defi ned circumstances. 
 
Chapter XXXIV: 'Navajivan' and 'Young India'  
1.  The journals will help to expound the inner meaning  of Satyagraha to the 
reading pubic. 
 
Chapter XXXV: In the Punjab  
1.  One's self-confidence must be infectious. 
2.  In inquiry reports there should not be a single con scious exaggeration in it 
anywhere, and every statement made in it must be su bstantiated by 
evidence. The aim of a report should be solely with  a view to bringing out 
the truth and nothing but the truth. 
 
Chapter XXXVI: Die Khilafat against Cow Protection?  
1.  Non-cooperation or to withhold cooperation from gov ernment is 
inalienable right of the people. 
 
Chapter XXXVII: The Amritsar Congress  
1.  The reforms, though may be defective, may still be acceptable as a 
strategy. 
2.  One will find it extremely difficult, out of respec t, to differ from 
seasoned, well tried and universally revered leader s. In such case(s) one 
must hear the inner voice. 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66   
Chapter XXXVIII: Congress Initiation  
1.  One's capacity as a draftsman and a faculty for con densed expression will 
be generally found useful in seminars and conferenc es for drafting 
resolutions and writing proceedings. 
2.  One may have to be satisfied in the work of committ ees with the 
nominated members of the leaders for want of time a t their disposal. 
 
Chapter XXXIX: The Birth of Khadi  
1.  The objective of Khadi set before all Indians is to  be able to clothe 
ourselves entirely in cloth manufactured by our own  hands. 
(We should forthwith discard the use of mill- woven  cloth, and all the 
Indians should wear hand-woven cloth made from Indi an yarn only.) 
 
Chapter XL: Found At Last  
1.  One becomes so much self-possessed of the spinning wheel that one gets 
lost in it and it is difficult to distract one's at tention, and even much more 
difficult to draw one's eyes from one's beloved cha rkha (spinning wheel). 
 
Chapter XLI: An Instructive Dialogue  
1.  The price of an article is governed by the demand f or it. Who can check 
the law of demand and supply? 
2.  Khadi can provide work to semi-starved women of Ind ia and to clothe the 
people of India with Khadi woven out of it. 
3.  One has to think very hard and ask a question as to  whether the spinning 
wheel can weave its way in the age of power-driven machines. 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67   
Chapter  XLII:  It’s Rising Tide  
1.  Once people are convinced and are able to overcome their scepticism they 
throw themselves heart and soul into the movement o r any task. 
2.  Death of an esteemed leader leaves a deep void as p eople are deprived of 
his wise counsel very much needed in that hour of c risis in the nation's 
history. 
 
Chapter XLIII: At Nagpur  
1.  We should not be obsessed with numbers. The partici pants in a conference 
should be manageable to get better output. 
2.  The goal of the Congress was the attainment of Swar aj within the British 
Empire if possible and without if necessary. 
3.  The means for attainment have to be peaceful and le gitimate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68   
FAREWELL  
1.  One must know and understand that there is no other  God than Truth. The 
only means for realization of Truth is Ahimsa. 
2.  To see the universal and all pervading spirit of Tr uth face to face must be 
able to love the meanest of creatures as oneself. A nd a man who aspires 
after that cannot afford to keep out of any field o f life. 
3.  People who say that religion has nothing to do with  politics do not know 
what religion means. 
4.  Identification with everything that lives is imposs ible without self-
purification; without self-purification the observa nce of the law of Ahimsa 
must remain an empty dream; God can never be realiz ed by one who is 
not pure of heart. Self- purification, therefore, m ust mean purification in 
all the walks of life. And purification being highl y infectious, purification 
of oneself necessarily leads to the purification of  one's surroundings. 
(The path of self-purification is hard and steep. T o attain perfect purity 
one has to become absolutely passion-free in though t, speech and action; 
to rise above the opposing currents of love and hat red, attachment and 
repulsion. One must reduce oneself to zero. So long  as a man does not of 
his free will put himself last among his fellow cre atures, there is no 
salvation for him. Ahimsa is the farthest limit of humility.) 
5.  One must pray to the God of Truth that He may grant  us the boon of 
Ahimsa in mind, word and deed.   
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69   
 
 
 
 
 
 
III 
GIST OF LESSONS 
 
The lessons scattered in different Chapters have be en brought together at 
one place as Gist of Lessons under the following fo ur broad sections: 
 Section I : Workers and Public Service  
 Section II : Education  
 Section III: Legal Profession and Practice 
 Section IV : Parents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70   
Section I 
Workers and Public Service  
1.  Workers working with people have to be humbler than  the dust. The world 
crushes the dust under its feet. But the worker has  to be so simple that 
even the dust could crush him. 
2.  There can be no fee or charge for public work. 
3.  One must not accept any salary for public work. 
4.  Not to carry public work with borrowed money. 
5.  Carefully kept accounts are  sine qua non  for any organization. 
6.  Service which is rendered without joy helps neither  the worker nor the 
served. 
7.  It is not good to run public institutions on perman ent funds. A permanent 
fund carries in itself the seed of the moral fall o f the institution. 
8.  It is difficult to make friends and people to appre ciate the beauty of self-
help. 
9.  The voice of the people is the voice of God. 
10.  Public service has its own reward. 
11.  A public worker should not accept costly gifts. 
12.  For gifts a trust may be created by the public work er. 
13.  The work of public institutions must be properly ra tionalized and duties 
and responsibilities be distributed amongst various  functionaries. 
14.  One most important way of carrying out public work is by personal 
example and discussion with searchers for knowledge . 
15.  A worker's reforming zeal ought not make him exceed  his limits. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  16.  A worker should not make any distinction between re latives and strangers, 
countrymen and foreigners, white and coloured, Hind u or of other faiths — 
whether Mussalmans, Sikhs, Parsis, Christians, Dali ts or Jews. 
17.  A worker's character should be as clear as crystal and courage that would 
shame a warrior. 
18.  A worker knows neither day nor night in toiling for  the cause. 
19.  If a worker's heart is pure, calamity brings in its  train men and measures 
to fight it. 
20.  A worker's constant presence with people when they are in a terrible 
fright is a real consolation to them. 
21.  A public worker should not make statements without getting proof of their 
authenticity. 
22.  In order that worker(s) concentrate on work they mu st be made free from 
financial responsibility. 
23.  Worker may commence work from one's familiar place.  
24.  Service without humility is selfishness. 
25.  Trust in management and good work will bring money.  
26.  Worker should aim at work and not name, substance a nd not shadow. 
27.  A worker—specially an outsider—must have capacity t o identify with 
people. 
28.  A worker(s) should not worry about thin attendance in meetings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72   
Section II  
Education  
1.  Physical and mental training should have equal impo rtance in the 
curriculum. 
2.  Good hand-writing is a necessary part of education.  
3.  Children should first be taught the art of drawing before learning how to 
write. 
4.  Every Hindu boy and girl should possess sound knowl edge of Sanskrit 
language. 
5.  In all India curricula of higher education there sh ould be place for Hindi, 
Sanskrit, Persian, Arabic and English, besides of c ourse, the vernacular. 
6.  Don't lose patience with pupils. 
7.  The education that children imbibe in a well- order ed household is 
impossible to obtain in hostel(s). 
8.  The education of the child begins with conception. 
9.  One should not remain under the impression that the  child has nothing to 
learn during the first five years of its life. On t he contrary, the fact is that 
the child never learns in after life what it does i n its first five years. 
10.  Character building is the proper foundation for the  education of children. 
If the foundation is firmly laid, the children coul d and would learn all 
other things themselves or with the assistance of f riends. 
11.  Building body should not be underrated as such, phy sical labour 
(education) should become an integral part of educa tion system. 
12.  Every youngster must learn at least some useful voc ation. 
13.  As a rule the youngsters should not be asked to do what the teachers 
cannot do. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  14.  As far as possible mornings should be devoted to ph ysical work and 
domestic duties, so school hours must be kept after  the mid-day meals. 
15.  One should never attempt to disguise one's ignoranc e from one's pupils. 
16.  It is not necessary to load the boys and girls with  the quantities of books. 
17.  The true text-book for the pupil is his / her teach er. 
18.  Children learn or take in much more without labour through their ears 
than through their eyes. Reading is a task for them , but listening is 
pleasure. 
19.  All training without culture of the spirit is of no  use and may be even 
harmful. 
20.  The training of the spirit is a thing by itself. 
21.  To develop the spirit is to build character and to enable one to work 
towards a knowledge of God and Self-realization. 
22.  It is not through books that one can impart trainin g of the spirit Just as 
physical training is to be done through physical ex ercise, the intellectual 
through intellectual exercise, even so the training  of the spirit is possible 
only through the exercise of the spirit. And the ex ercise of the spirit 
entirely depends on the life and character of the t eacher. It is possible for 
a teacher situated miles away to affect the spirit of the pupils by his way 
of living. A teacher has to be an eternal object-le sson to the boys and 
girls. 
23.  It is true that when boys and girls of all kinds of  upbringing are kept and 
taught together, the parents and teachers are put t o the severest test. 
They have constantly to be on the alert. 
24.  It is very difficult to bring up and educate boys a nd girls in the right way. 
If one wants to be their real teacher and guardian,  one must touch their 
hearts. One must share their joys and sorrows, one must help them to 
solve their problems that faced them, and must take  along the right 
channel the surging aspirations of their youth. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  25.  The teacher or guardian is responsible, to some ext ent at least, for the 
lapse of his pupil or ward. 
26.  Where there is no true love between the teacher and  the pupils, where 
the pupils' delinquency has not touched the very be ing of the teacher and 
where the pupils have no respect for the teacher, f asting is out of place 
and may even be harmful. 
27.  Don't entrust children to commonplace teachers. The ir literacy 
qualification is not so essential as their moral fi bre. 
28.  Teacher is expected to teach the children not gramm ar and the three Rs 
so much as good manner and cleanliness. 
29.  In order to involve villagers and to get their acti ve participation in 
education they must provide teachers with board and  lodging. 
30.  Education system must meet the needs of the society , family, pupil and 
teacher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75   
Section  III 
 
Legal Profession and Practice 
1.  Lawyers should have a long tongue. 
2.  If the word of Lawyer is not to be trusted, where i s the use of possessing a 
certificate in the matter. 
3.  Latin is very useful to lawyers. 
4.  The curriculum of study to the bar is easy. (Joking ly barristers are called 
'dinner barristers'! Everyone knew that examination  has no value). 
5.  It is easy to read the law, but it is difficult to practise at the Bar. 
6.  A lawyer should know, human nature. He should be ab le to read a man's 
character from his face. And every lawyer ought to know Indian history. 
7.  Honesty and industry are enough to become a success ful lawyer. 
8.  The barrister's profession is a bad job — much show  and little knowledge. 
9.  For a barrister to vegetate for five to seven years  is not unusual. 
10.  Don't compromise principle by any means. 
11.  Selfishness is blind. 
12.  Facts are three-fourths of the law. 
13.  If we take care of the facts of a case the law will  take care of itself. 
14.  Facts mean Truth, and once we adhere to Truth, the law comes to our aid 
naturally. 
15.  True functioning of a lawyer is to unite parties. 
16.  The very intellect of a lawyer sometimes becomes an  abomination to one 
inasmuch as it could be prostituted for screening c rime. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  17.  The value of lawyers' work is the same as that of t he barber's, inasmuch as 
all have the same right of earning their livelihood  from their work. 
18.  It is generally believed that the lawyer's professi on is a liar's profession. 
19.  It is important to practice law without compromisin g truth. 
20.  One s devotion to truth enhances one's reputation a mong the members of 
the legal profession as well as in clients. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77   
Section IV 
Parents  
1.  Character building is the bounden duty of every par ent. 
2.  Children inherit the qualities of the parents no le ss than their physical 
features. Environment does play an important part, but the original capital 
on which a child starts in life is inherited from i ts ancestors. 
3.  The Indian parents who train children to think and talk in English from 
their infancy betray their children and their count ry. They deprive them of 
the spiritual and social heritage of the nation and  render them to that 
extent unfit for the service of the country. 
4.  Under ideal conditions, 'true education' can be imp arted only by parents 
and that there should be the minimum of outside hel p. 
5.  Education must encompass relationship between the s chool and the 
society, and between the teachers and the parents. 
6.  Unless parents step forward and regularly interact with teachers, the end-
product — the development of the child as a citizen  — would be pretty 
lopsided. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78   
IV 
MORAL INTEGRATION  
(Plea for a Peaceful Society in the Twenty-first Ce ntury) 
 
The Tribute  
Among the tributes received in New Delhi within hou rs of Mahatma Gandhi's 
assassination on 30 January 1948 was one from Saroj ini Naidu who said: "May 
the soul of my master, my leader, my father, rest n ot in peace. Not in peace — 
my father — do not rest. Keep us to our pledge. Giv e us strength to fulfill our 
promises — to our heirs, your descendants, guardian s of your dreams, fulfillers 
of India's destiny." 
The force of her words reminds us that we should no t rest till we are able to 
internalize in ourselves the twin principles of Tru th and Nonviolence in our 
thought and action. We should be optimistic and hop e that we would be able to 
overcome the present crises facing the world. 
This chapter has been divided into six sections. Th e first deals with the present 
malaise in the international community. The second is devoted to the Gandhian 
concept of human behaviour. The third is devoted to  the Indian scenario 
related to some of the specific cases of moral dege neration. Though only one 
section has been devoted to India, the chapter as a  whole mostly draws from 
the Indian situation. The fourth section examines s ome of the problems of 
communal harmony and integration. The fifth gives a  multiple-factor theory of 
integration to bring unity in diversity. 
And the sixth section critically evaluates the poli tician's role which he can play 
in moving his own self from the 'ego-centre' to the  'decentre' level in order to 
make him feel concern for others and to develop an ideal society to keep 
peace and tranquillity in the national and internat ional community. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79   
Contemporary Social Data  
The contemporary social data of the international c ommunity indicates 
increasingly a decline in its ability to hold and m aintain its order and stability. 
The charismatic nonviolent integrative clan of the founding fathers of modern 
society, which had remarkably succeeded in welding varieties of 
heterogeneous groups, communities and ethnic groups  together into a single 
humanity of indifferent countries, is under a serio us process of erosion. The 
unifying moral imperatives of social and cultural v alues are being replaced by 
division and disintegrative forces in almost all co untries of the world. 
Something vital is missing today. 
There seems to have emerged a great divide within s ocial settings such as 
family, village, town, ethnic groups, and communiti es, creating splits in them 
despite liberalization and globalisation of economy . Collectivities are being 
individualized, and jointness and communal values a re getting broken and 
privatised. Such a social divide tends to place ind ividual against individual, 
group against group. Such horizontal and vertical c leavages are further 
enhanced and accentuated by the monopoly of all the  resources enjoyed by 
the so- called "elite" who show a tendency to amass  wealth and power at the 
cost of ethics and morality. A thinker once said th at truth is a scarce 
commodity but its supply has always outstripped its  demand. While truth does 
not seem to be triumphing all around us — somehow, somewhere, some way, 
something is working which is bringing the human ra ce to say about truth and 
nonviolence : "Truth alone will endure, all the res t will be swept away before 
the tide of Time. Nonviolence is the law of our spe cies, as violence is the law 
of the brute. Non-violence is the greatest force at  the disposal of mankind. It 
is mightier than the mightiest weapon of destructio n devised by man." 
The present political and development processes are  acting as a catalyst of a 
collective decadence. A society, which lays emphasi s more on the 
accumulation of power than on the restraints, on we alth than on morality, on 
knowledge than on humanism, and on demagogy rather than on authentic Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  sharing and participation in the process of change and development, is bound 
to pay a heavy price for its lack of collective wis dom. 
The disturbing social data of violence all over the  world do not make the earth 
worth living despite man's ability to conquer space . The recent assassination of 
the Sri Lankan President, Rupasinghe Premadasa, and  the recent suicide 
committed by the former Prime Minister of France, M r Pierre Beregovo who 
felt anguished by an attack on his integrity and pr opriety over an interest- free 
loan taken from a friend businessman and the conseq uent collapse of his 
socialist party in the general election are no insi gnificant developments. The 
aftermath of the developments in Ayodhya on 6 Decem ber 1992 engulfed the 
whole country in communal riots. The country also w itnessed an 
unprecedented series of brutal blasts in March 1993  in Bombay. 
These series of violence and unrest show decadence of higher moral and 
ethical values. The lack of spirit, of trust, faith , and interpersonal and inter-
group involvement and concerns for each other is su ggestive of the fact that 
the tested path of tolerance, justice, morality, an d trusteeship shown by the 
former leaders has forsaken by the present leaders all over the world. 
According to Gandhi, real democracy should have mea ning not for a few but 
for all including the poorest and even for the maim ed, the blind, and the deaf. 
He did not believe in mere lip sympathy for the ide al which comes so easily to 
most present day politicians and leaders. The entir e social order should be 
such that this ideal should be achieved in practice . A genuine democracy calls 
for a higher degree of seriousness of purpose and a  sense of urgency. Gandhi 
realized that once people are awakened, they would become a revolutionary 
force. Their minimum expectations would have to be satisfied, otherwise they 
would explode. This explosion could take many unple asant and ugly forms. 
Today one of the basic questions is whether the 'ru lers and political parties 
have a high level of seriousness or a sense of urge ncy. The answer is obviously 
"no" Despite many laws, the whole electoral process  and system in India is 
becoming less and less an honest mirror of public o pinion. [Sadiq Ali, "A Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  Gandhian Approach to Current Problems",  Gandhi Marg,  Vol. 14, No. 4, 
January-March 1993, p. 550]. 
This is true of all other parts of the world as wel l. Even criminals are acquiring 
political respectability. This power is assuming mo re and more credible forms. 
The situation in other countries is not bright eith er. The voters are bribed and 
often elections are rigged. The candidates are merc handised rather than 
elected. One of the saddest aspects of election tim es is that politics overrides 
all human considerations. 
Of course, in order to come out of the present mala ise and dilemma, the only 
remedy lies is in adopting Gandhian path to resolve  conflicts. Arnold Toynbee 
has rightly observed: "At this supremely dangerous moment in human history, 
the only way of salvation for mankind is the Indian  way — Emperor Ashok's and 
Mahatma Gandhi's principles of non-violence and Sri  Ramakrishna's testimony 
to the harmony of religions. Here we have an attitu de and spirit that can make 
it possible for the human race to grow together int o a single family — and in 
the Atomic Age this is the only alternative to dest roying ourselves." [Arnold 
Toynbee, Quoted by N. A. Palkhivala in his book,  We, the People, Bombay: 
Strand Book Stall, 1986]. 
 
Nonviolent Behaviour  
The nonviolent behaviour on the part of humanity re quires the highest from of 
civilization. Civilization is an act of the spirit.  Ancient India was far more 
civilized than modern India with its satellites in space. The recurrent looting of 
banks in broad daylight arouses as little public at tention as the going down of 
the sun in the evening. Our legal system has made l ife too easy for criminals 
and too difficult for law-abiding citizens. The cou ntry has forgotten that crime 
is not a problem to be handled by the police only b ut by the whole society. The 
two basic lessons which we are to learn from Indian  history and from the  Gita  
are: (i) Indian people have always taken their mora l standards from their rulers 
and people have risen to great heights whenever the y have followed in the 
glow of noble kings or leaders; and (ii) regions an d kingdoms have been Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  destroyed not by adversity but by abasement, and co rruption is the greatest 
solvent of public institutions, and poverty poses a  far smaller threat [Ibid., p. 
45-50.] 
Politicians in India, instead of giving moral leade rship for which people are 
yearning and waiting, are only occupied in maintain ing a system which is 
poisoned by collective bad faith and polluted by in dividual self-interest People 
are served by deception and craftiness instead of b y vision and imagination. 
The duty of a citizen is not merely to vote but to vote wisely. He must be 
guided by reason and by reason alone. He must vote for the best man, 
irrespective of any other consideration and irrespe ctive of the party label. The 
right man in the wrong party is any day preferable to the wrong man in the 
right party. Time has gone when 'Congress' was a wo rd to conjure with. [Ibid., 
p. 51-52.] 
Late N. G. Goray, a socialist leader, was fond of s aying that reason was more 
important to him than emotion and action more impor tant than thought. That 
is why he considered Shivaji greater than Ramdas, J yotibai Phule greater than 
Justice Ranade, and Mother Teresa greater than J. K rishnamurti. [Vidyadhar 
Date, 
"N.G. Goray: A True Humanist's Obituary",  The Sunday Times , New Delhi, 2 May 
1993, p. 2.] 
Indians by and large, are "low arousal" people. The y tolerate injustice and 
unfairness with feudalistic servility and fatalisti c resignation. On 15 August 
1947 India achieved Independence. But Gandhi was no t present in New Delhi. 
At that time, he was working among the poor people of Bengal. The reason for 
his absence was simple. He had two dreams in his li fe. The first dream was 
liberation of India from the British rule, while th e second was liberation of 
Indians from oppression and injustice, from inequit y and inequality, from 
discord and disharmony. [N. A. Palkhivala,  We, the People,  p. 268.] 
To quote his own words: "I shall work for an India in which the poorest feel 
that it is their country in whose making they have effective voice, an India in 
which there should be no rich class and no poor cla ss of people, and an India in Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83  which all communities shall live in perfect harmony . This is the India of my 
dream." [Ibid., p. 268.] 
His first dream was fulfilled but the second was no t. According to the 
Mahatma, the true time for celebration would be whe n the second dream is 
fulfilled. 
Gandhi was a leader of his people, unsupported by a ny authority; a politician 
whose success rested, not upon craft or guile, but simply upon the moral 
grandeur of his soul; a fighter who pushed back the  mightiest empire on earth 
without the use of force; a spirit of profound wisd om and captivating humility, 
armed with only an iron will and inflexible resolve ; and a frail man who 
confronted the brutality of military strength with the dignity of a simple 
human being. [Ibid., p. 269.] 
To the Mahatma, Truth was God and non-violence was religion. At his 
memorable trial for sedition in 1922, he said: "Non -violence is the first article 
of my faith. It is also, the last article of my cre ed. In non-violence bravery 
consists of dying, not in killing" His compassion a nd humanity were as 
boundless as the universe. "Gather together," He sa id, "under one banner all 
men from all religions and races of India and infus e into them the spirit of 
solidarity and oneness to the utter exclusion of al l communal and parochial 
sentiments." And again: "My Hinduism is not secular ism. It includes all that I 
know to the best of Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, and Zoroastrianism. Truth is 
my religion and ahimsa (the principle of nonviolenc e) is the only way of its 
realization." [Ibid., p. 270]. 
Gandhi held the view that the life of a good citize n was the life of Karma — 
action in the service of the country. "My writings should be cremated with my 
body," he said. "What I have done will endure, not what I have said or written." 
[Ibid., p. 271.] 
The hatred and fanaticism which consumed the body o f the Mahatma did not 
touch his great soul. Indian systems and ideologies  may be relevant at one time 
and irrelevant at others. But teaching of this grea t and benign lamp of wisdom Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  and humanity are for endless time. He gave us the p riceless gift of self-respect 
and the sense of dignity as a nation. [Ibid., p. 27 2.] 
The last interview which the Mahatma gave was in th e early afternoon of 30 
January 1948 to Margaret Bourke — an American from the  Life  Magazine. She 
asked him whether he would persist in his theory of  nonviolence in the event 
of a nuclear attack on a city. The Mahatma's reply was that if the defenceless 
citizens died in a spirit of nonviolence, their sac rifice would not go in vain. 
They might well pray for the soul of the pilot who thoughtlessly sprayed death 
on the city. This was his last message of compassio n to mankind. [Ibid., p. 
275.] 
He completely identified himself with the Indian ma sses. He observed: "We 
must first come in living touch with them by workin g with them and in their 
midst, we must share their sorrows, understand thei r difficulties and anticipate 
their wants. With the pariahs we must be pariahs an d see how we feel to clean 
the closets of the upper classes and have the remai ns of theirs to be thrown at 
us. We must see how we like being in the boxes, mis called houses, of the 
labourers of Bombay. We must identify with the vill agers who toil under the 
hot sun beating on their bent back and see how we w ould like to drink water 
from the pool in which the villagers bathe, wash th eir clothes and pots, and in 
which their cattle drink and roll. Then and not til l then shall we truly 
represent the masses and they will, as surely as I am writing this, respond to 
every call." [Ibid., p. 278.] 
The Indian masses responded to the Mahatma's call i n a spirit of total 
surrender. He said to them that "real Swaraj will c ome not by the acquisition 
of authority by a few but by the acquisition of the  capacity by all to resist 
authority when it is abused." [Ibid., p. 279.] 
He repeatedly used to mention that through realizat ion of freedom for India, 
we would try to carry on and fulfill the mission of  the universal brotherhood. 
He was really involved in achieving the broadest go od of humanity at large. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  Indeed in India  
Indeed in India, the manner in which intolerance ha s begun to manifest itself is 
obvious. Disagreement is no longer reflected in a m ere angry letter to the 
editor or a cross-table debate, violence has become  the fashionable way to 
settle "disputes" and "conflicts". So, Narmada Bach ao Andolan activists are 
beaten up in Gujarat, B. D. Sharma (a retired IAS o fficer, who was 
Commissioner of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Trib es and Vice-Chancellor of 
an Indian University as well as Secretary in the Go vernment of Madhya Pradesh) 
is assaulted in Madhya Pradesh, theatres are storme d and journalists are 
attacked all over the country. The ruthless constri ction of the liberal temper 
and its replacement by authoritarianism has not occ urred overnight It is 
apparent that with the euphoria guaranteed by relig ious mobilization of the 
majority community, a more violent from of physical  and psychological 
intimidation is upon us. [Rajdeep Sardesai, "The Ne w Vigilants Breed 
Intolerance",  The Times of India,  5 May 1993.] 
The rising tide of tolerance has forced even those committed to free speech to 
look over their shoulders every time they say or wr ite anything. The intolerant 
streak is not confined to the Hindus as is evident from a recent incident in 
which an attempt was made to burn down the office o f a newspaper,  Urdu 
Times,  because it had carried an article critical of a fe w local Muslim leaders. 
The nation appears gripped by the worst cynicism wh en the nexus between 
criminals and politicians is dismissed as a global phenomenon. The Union and 
the State governments are not called upon to accoun t for communal carnage 
nor do voter exercise their right to recall defecti ng politicians. A Member of 
Parliament splitting a party with alleged forged si gnature and hoodwinking the 
anti-defection law receives the indirect blessings of the highest placed people. 
Hypocrisy, the hated sign of a morally drained soci ety, is still the trademark of 
India's political parties. [Ibid.] 
Insincerity and sycophancy are the hallmark of Indi an politics. Is there any 
political party which can claim steadfastness to it s politics. 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  The Basic Difficulty  
The basic difficulty has been that people have not yet integrated themselves 
with either local, regional, or international commu nity. The ruthless 
competition and globalisation has made everybody co mpete with each other 
rather than cooperate. This has often led to violen ce to eliminate the 
competitor rather than to improve over his technolo gy, goods and services or 
skills. 
Communal harmony and community integration are esse ntially two aspects of 
the same process to develop among each member love and affection for each 
other. These two essential aspects of working toget her at various levels are 
inseparable parts of one and the same process — in fact, one can say that only 
when these aspects are interlocked and merged with one process, we will have 
a community at various levels which ultimately must  become a global 
community to resolve conflicts, not by violence but  by peaceful methods. 
This, however, does not mean that it is a community  in which all norms, 
beliefs, values, and ways of life are standardized.  What it means is that 
community should be viewed as "common life" of some  kind and that there is 
value in identifying oneself with and sharing in th is common life. Implicit in 
this has also been the assumption that association with, and feeling "part of", 
the common life is not an experience. It provides t he individual certain 
psychological security. It gives his life certain m eaning which it might not 
otherwise have. It makes a community capable of dea ling common problems 
which, if they were not solved, would lead to deter ioration of physical or 
social community or both. It may be well to stress that this process should not 
lead to eradication of differences among sub-groups  and sub-cultures in the 
community. What is important is an understanding of  these differences, 
acceptance of them by all in the community, but at the same time, 
development of common frame of reference within whi ch all can work, 
together for common ends. This is very much evident  from the "concern" of the 
Union of Concerned Scientists, comprising about 1,6 00 scientists including a 
majority of Nobel Laureates who recently signed a " Global Warning to Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  Humanity" which describes the damage done to the Ea rth as "too great if 
warnings go unheeded in which case no nation can es cape injury." Continued 
environmental and economic instabilities would caus e mass migration that 
would be unsustainable. 
In fact, there is no single factor which, by itself , makes for a community. It is a 
complex whole, all parts of which are related, inte ract, and influence one 
another. To select one part of this whole and to id entify it as the primary 
cause of integration or disintegration is not possi ble. The greater the mixture 
of races, ethnic groups, and nationalities, the mor e difficult is the task of 
integration. The economic factor is unimportant for  integration. The mobility 
score increases as the integration score falls. Soc ial problems tend to multiply 
not only absolutely but relatively, with the size o f the community increasing all 
the time. We have to recognize that while there are  many factors which make 
for or prevent community integration, we can only g eneralize loosely about 
these and can say only in specific situations, and after careful study, which of 
the forces in a given situation at local, regional,  national, ( international level 
is more important than another. There are clusters of factors that interlock 
and reinforce one another and influence the degree of community integration. 
Thus an economic system may stimulate great differe nces in terms of rigid 
class and caste structure. A particular kind of edu cational system may also 
cause disparity amongst members of a community. It is difficult to separate 
linked factors in a community. All these factors ar e so inextricably linked 
together that change in one will affect the other. [Ibid.] 
The problem of identifying forces which will work f or community integration at 
the global level is one of considerable complexity.  The global community 
divided into developed and underdeveloped communiti es must learn to live 
together on the principle of interdependence. 
There are many Third World countries which are in n o position to pursue an 
independent path of development They do not have th e necessary capital and 
skills nor, for that matter, the appropriate politi cal environment Many are 
already involved in debt trap. Quite a few have bee n ruined by civil wars. The Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  poor can never hope to catch up. The technological lag grows bigger every 
year. The poor are expected to provide sites for po lluting industries, markets 
for surplus goods and arms. 
 
The Present Problems  
The present problems, according to former Prime Min ister P. V. Narasimha 
Rao, can be traced to a single source: the near com plete alienation between 
the political establishment, the bureaucracy, and t he money elite on the one 
hand and civil society on the other. The former see ks self-aggrandizement: the 
politician through the electoral system and the bur eaucrat through 
manipulating rules, regulations and procedures, and  the moneyed elite, thanks 
to a promiscuous relationship it built up with form er in the exploitative 
system. 
Citizens find the state has progressively abandoned  its writ to goons and 
hoodlums. The district collector, the corporator, t he MLA, the MP, and the 
minister no longer command the respect they once di d. In the eyes of the 
common citizen, courts and Parliament serve merely to lend a measure of 
legitimacy to fraud and crookedness and profligate wheeling-dealing. [Srilekha 
Bose, "Moral Dilemma", A Letter to Editor,  The Times of India,  5 May 1993.] 
The leaders of the ruling as well as of other parti es, out of their self-interest, 
fail to understand the basic fact that no party in the country can survive, let 
alone thrive, if politics is merely a matter of vot e banks. In India the political 
situation has become so grave that politics has bee n criminalised to such an 
extent that crime is becoming politicized. [Robert C. Angele, "The Moral 
Integration of American Cities",  American Journal of Sociology , Vol. 5, No. 1, 
July 1951, pp. 15-21.] 
There are three factors responsible which have dist orted a rational 
development of citizenship in India. One is poverty , creating the need for 
economic security at any price and its corollary, t he widening gap between the 
rich and the poor; the second is the galloping popu lation growth; and the third Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  is the conflict between ethnicity and the doctrine of unity. In reconciling the 
implications of these pressures upon the public psy che, a self-centered society 
has emerged. This society seems unable to look fart her than narrow self-
interest, self- promotion, and selfish ambition. Th is is the rule rather than the 
exception which leaves a particularly heavy burden on all disinterested 
citizens who are acutely aware that we shall have n o nation worth the name in 
the near future unless we can do something to resto re the confidence of the 
people in a life-style that shows concern for other s. [Shamlal, "Life and 
Letters: Where do We Go from Here?" (a review artic le based on  Social 
Register 1992 , edited by Leo Panitch, Merlin Press,  The Times of India,  8 May 
1993.] 
A moral person is one who is concerned with the wel fare and happiness of his 
or her fellow beings. He subordinates his individua l goals in the larger interest 
of society. He is expected to move from the ego-cen tric self to a decentering 
activity, leading to the formation of a harmonious and reciprocal relationship. 
These ideals and values are inculcated and transmit ted into an individual by 
the society in which he lives. [Dileep Padgaonkar, "A Review About Rao: 
Knowing Where He Stops",  The Times of India,  15 May 1993.] 
There is not a single one of us that is not enriche d by our composite culture, 
whether it be in music, food, or dress, to take a f ew everyday examples. For 
example, the image of the unseen thread in the garl and is an excellent 
metaphor for what nationality or inter- nationality  can be linked to. If the 
thread is cut at one point, the garland ceases to e xist How is the thread to be 
safeguarded? I suggest that we need to shift to a l anguage of a different kind 
in order to answer this question. The nation of wor ld can only survive if there 
is a new socio-economic order where the biggest gul f of all, that is, the one 
between the rich and poor, is removed to cease the yawning gap between one 
citizen and another. [Ibid, and see K D. Gangrade, "Our Preset Malaise" in P. C. 
Charterjee (ed.)  Self-images, Identity and Nationality,  Indian Institute of 
Advance Study in association with Allied Publishers , New Delhi, pp. 1-4 and p. 
262.] Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  The defeat of the impeachment motion against former  Mr Justice Ramaswami 
not very long ago was the defeat of the last vestig e of ethics in India's public 
life. We have systematically devalued and debased o ur noble Constitution. In 
fact, we have abused and debased it beyond recognit ion. The motion was lost 
because the Congress party issued an oral whip that  its members should 
abstain from voting. This amounted to a travesty of  the Constitutional 
mandate, inasmuch as MPs were prevented from discha rging their quasi- 
juridical function of adjudication. [Tara Ali Baig,  "Essence of Citizenship: 
Social and Moral Values in India", in S. R. Gupta, Urs Schottli, and Jurgen Axer, 
eds.,  Citizen, Development Society  (Friedrich-Naumann Stiftung, Mandira, 
1990), pp. 4-5.] 
We must have moral courage to take action based on our individual and 
collective conscience. Peace, stability, and unity cannot be bought. They have 
to be nurtured by promoting a sensitivity to human needs and respect for the 
rights and opinions of others. And when attitudes h ave been allowed to harden 
to the point that otherness becomes a sufficient re ason for nullifying person to 
be treated as a fellow human being, the tapering of  modern civilization 
crumbles with a frightening speed. As the twentieth  century draws to a close, 
it has become obvious that material yardsticks alon e cannot serve as an 
adequate index of human, well- being. [K. D. Gangra de, "Youth in Conflict with 
Society in Citizenship in India", S. R. Gupta et al ,  Citizen Development Society,  
p. 66.] 
If what happened in the Ramaswami case is repeated,  it is clear that the 
politicians will find soon that they are living on a borrowed time. The venality 
of the political class is now so transparent that n o attempt to camouflage it 
under high moral principles will work anymore. [Mar garet Chatterjee, 
"Epilogue", in P. C Chatterjee, ed.,  Self-images, Identity and Nationality, 
Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, in assoc iation with Allied Publishers, 
New Delhi, 1989, p. 262.] 
The moral authority of most of the politicians has almost disappeared, since 
they are seen as opportunists, in league with crimi nals and crooked Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  businessmen. It is, therefore, not possible for pol iticians to impose discipline 
in a society which sees them as examples of indisci pline. The common man is 
alarmed at the moral sickness that is enveloping th e world and lowering our 
ethical standards. Money power seems to have an all - pervasive effect. One 
hopes that we do not reach a level where indifferen ce by contagion or where 
lassitude slowly engulfs the nation and after a cer tain point of conditioning 
violence becomes acceptable, scandal becomes routin e, and militant 
resistance turns into a film script. 
Education must be shaped as a potent weapon to reve rse the process from 
seeking pleasure, acquisition, and violence to self -control, sharing, and 
compassion. [Aung San Suu Kyi, "What Economies Cann ot Provide: Light for a 
Troubled World",  The Titties of India,  20 May 1993.] 
We Indians must first integrate ourselves to achiev e our ultimate motto of  
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam  (the world is one family). 
Political parties ought to work for the unity and i ntegrity of India. 
Unfortunately, all parties with rare exception have  used caste, religion and 
language to their electoral advantage. If the Congr ess fomented the Punjab 
problem, the BJP was responsible for large scale co mmunal violence and V. P. 
Singh and his JD minions sowed the seeds of caste a ntagonism. The allocation 
of Rs 5 million by V. P. Singh government for Jama Masjid was described by the 
BJP as Muslim appeasement. But a grant of Rs 67 mil lion to the Dargah of 
Ajmer by the BJP government in Rajasthan was hailed  as proof of secularism. 
The administration should not be a monastic practic e but a temporal exercise 
holding the scales even between all men to whicheve r persuasion they may 
belong. 
Charles Krauthmamer quotes "statistics to show that  since 1960 the incidence 
of single parenthood has more than tripled in Ameri ca, and that almost more 
than 30 per cent of all American children are now b orn to unmarried mothers. 
We have become totally inured to levels of criminal ity that would have been 
considered intolerable years ago. In America, child  abuse is nineteen times 
more prevalent today than it was 30 years ago. Fort y seven per cent of women Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  are victims of rape. [Krauthmamer Charles, "Definin g Deviancy Up: The New 
Assault on Bourgeois Life", in  The New Republic, Vol. 209, p. 20, November 22, 
1993. Quoted by Haldar Dipak in his article "Will D eviance Overgrow Develop-
ment",  IASSl Quarterly , Vol. 16, No. 1, July-September 1997, p. 154.] 
Unfortunately, during the last five years or more, a situation has emerged, 
particularly in India, wherein it is difficult to s ay whether a particular offence 
or misdemeanour is opposed or tolerated. The space of economic offenders 
and scamsters opposed now, — but the very fact that  they had been allowed to 
accumulate over the years proves that they were not  only tolerated, but 
perhaps encouraged as well. [Haldar Dipak in his ar ticle "Will Deviance 
Overgrow Development", IASSI Quarterly , Vol. 16, No. 1, July-September 1997, 
pp. 155-57.] 
According to a study in South Africa, a woman is ra ped every 83 seconds and in 
the United States every three minutes. It is well k nown that a large number of 
such cases go unreported because of the social stig ma associated with it and 
also threat to the victim's life. Furthermore, wors e is the growing trend of child 
rape (paedophilia) in the country. An average of tw o such cases are reported 
everyday in the country. Child rape victims account ed for 5.4 per cent of the 
total rape victims in 1995. At the national level, the number of rape victims 
has soared from 10,425 to 13,774 between 1991-95. T here has been 4.2 per 
cent growth over 1994 with 13,218 cases. About 7,75 2 victims of rape were in 
the age group of 16-30 years, accounting for 56.3 p er cent of the total victims 
in 1995. [Shailendra, "Soaring Rape Graph, Blot on Human Dignity",  The Times 
of India, 23 February 1998.] 
Though the problem of marital rape is serious in In dia as in many other 
countries in the world, there is no state law to pr otect women. In the 1990s, 
several countries had enacted legislations so that spousal and non-spousal 
rapes are differentiated. These states are Australi a, Canada, Israel, Italy, 
Holland, the United States, New Zealand, Sweden, Sw itzerland and the United 
Kingdom. [Ibid.] Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  In West Bengal, which the leftists claim to be a ba stion of peace and 
lawfulness, the following incidents occurred last J une among many others, as 
reported by The Statesman  on 6 June 1997. 
1.  In early June, a woman and her child were murdered in Free School Street 
Hotel in Calcutta. 
2.  In the same week of June, four armed men robbed a N ew C. I. T. Road 
house in Calcutta of ornaments and cash amounting t o Rs. 37 lakhs. 
3.  The same week, a 62 year- old women was murdered at  her Lansdown 
Terrace home. 
4.  In the middle of June, a girl was raped and strangl ed in an engineering 
college campus. 
5.  In the third week of June, passengers of a city min ibus were robbed by 
armed men in the afternoon. 
6.  In the last week of June, a Maruti Car was stopped in Calcutta and Rs 27 
lakhs snatched. 
7.  On 30 June, a gang robbed an oil godown of almost R s 45,000. 
In Calcutta again, on June 29, a young women coming  to join her new 
assignment was raped by her would be employer withi n her office itself at 
revolver point, in broad daylight. He has been arre sted, of course, and has 
been medically examined. But does that deter future  rapists? 
These are only a few zonal incidents. Collected nat ionwise, their number as 
already stated is a hundred times or even thousand times more. 
But what is the reason of the abnormal rise in the level of present-day crime 
and its tolerance. The reason is simple. It is the increase of population, 
coupled with the increase of wealth, — which reduce s fellow-feeling and 
group-wise single-mindedness, as individual selfish ness increases. In the 
present circumstances, there is no adequate remedy immediately visible, 
unless one goes in for drastic changes in the legal  system, providing ways and Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  means of certainty of detection and severity of pun ishment, or both, and 
removing the legal lacunae. 
The other factor which is responsible for the malai se quite obviously is that of 
rapid economic growth which alters 'social equation s'. When those close to the 
bottom of the social hierarchy benefit from the gro wth, they threatened those 
who dominated the traditional hierarchy. Once the c onflict has broken out, it 
is easy to point fingers at politicians, particular ly, since each of them is 
pointing a finger at the other. But the cynical pol iticians can only exploit 
opportunities that are presented to them. 
The primary remedy lies in paying attention to "cha racter building" in the 
education system and adopting Gandhian values of li fe. 
 
Failed Social Order  
We must understand that we have now reached the end  of our resources in 
speech making, and it is not enough that our ears a nd eyes are feasted with 
these speeches and declarations but it is necessary  that our hands and acts 
have got to move towards a society which will reall y feed, clothe and provide 
shelter to everybody and treat everybody in the wor ld as equal and pave the 
way to live in peace. We should move towards a soci ety where everyone will 
live in harmony with his neighbour, where everyone will be treated with equal 
respect, will feel secure, self-respect and self-co nfidence and feels he/she is 
wanted. Everyone realizes that it is the global pea ce that makes the human 
race feel safe and happy. 
In the new social order human race will not be dete rmined and divided by 
caste, class, religion, race, colour, and the rich and the poor. Towards that 
social order, we have to march through in a peacefu l way without hating and 
without killing anybody. This society will then hav e sustainable economy. 
People will participate in planning and executing. It is from the bottom to the 
top and people to government, not top to bottom. Th is is the nonviolent 
approach to achieve a new social order. Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  This should be the cherished goal of International Community to march towards 
the twenty-first-century. 
 
Three Great Leaders  
The twentieth century has seen three great leaders — Mahatma Gandhi of India 
in the East, Martin Luther King in the United State s, and President Nelson 
Mandela in Africa — who advocated and followed the nonviolent method to 
attain freedom. Anything attained through nonviolen t means will have 
permanency and will sustain forever, not when attai ned through force. 
Strength does not come from physical capacity. It c omes from an indomitable 
will. Possession of arms implies an element of fear , if not cowardice. Gandhi 
believed that nonviolence was not a resignation fro m all real fighting against 
wickedness. On the contrary non-violence is more ac tive and more real fighting 
against wickedness or evil that retaliation whose v ery nature is to increase 
wickedness. It will not be a nonviolent approach if  we merely love those who 
love us. It is nonviolent only when we love those w ho hate us. Nonviolence is 
not only a personal virtue but also a social virtue . Nonviolence is infinitely 
superior to violence. Nonviolence springs from love  and it always suffers, 
whereas cowardice springs from hate and it always i nflicts suffering. Love is 
synonymous with nonviolence, but the nonviolence is  not the same as pacifism. 
Gandhi was inspired by Thoreau's civil disobedience  and King was inspired by 
Gandhi's action of civil disobedience which created  a revolution in India 
without guns. By using love, the Indians did not de feat the British. Instead, 
they changed them from their evil ways and saved th em. Fighting hatred will 
make hatred stronger. We should never be bitter to our enemies. Nelson 
Mandela had to suffer in jail for almost twenty-sev en years to get civil rights 
for the citizens of in South Africa. This long suff ering and nonviolent struggle 
could get them their rights as India did from Briti sh after a prolonged 
nonviolent struggle. King won the right of the Afri can-American to sit anywhere 
in the bus, secured their right to vote, and to sta rt and invest their own 
business through the civil rights movements. King's  steps to nonviolent Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  campaigns were: (i) collection of facts to determin e whether injustice exists; 
(ii) negotiation; (iii) self-purification; and (iv)  direct action. 
Gandhi believed, as Ruskin has putin his book  Unto This Last,  that "good of the 
individual is contained in the good of all." The on ly real and dignified human 
doctrine is the greatest good of all and this can b e achieved by uttermost self-
sacrifice. Inequality is evil but to eradicate an e vil from the human breast by 
force or violence does not bring permanent results.  What is gained by the 
sword will also be lost by the sword. Means and end s are convertible. If he 
takes care of the means, the end will take care of itself. Trusteeship is the 
answer to the issue of classless society where the wealth of an individual is 
shared by all. He is a trustee to preserve the weal th and willing to share with 
others who need it. 
 
'Million Men March' 
This is exactly what was expressed by the young peo ple of the United State 
who participated in the 'million men march' — a mar ch towards the twenty-first 
century. They reaffirmed that the sense of material ism in the United States 
should be killed. A community living in a state of chronic poverty does itself no 
good lusting after a luxury car that families canno t afford. It is actually killing 
the people. We need to persuade each other not to p ut value into a pair of 125 
sneakers as a measure of our worth. We need to thin k in new ways. If we think 
of a suit and see our brother sleeping in the open even without a blanket, then 
we have failed. We should not go for a second set o f dress or costly suit until 
the day everyone can have a suit or a dress to wear . Money spent on war 
anywhere in the globe should be spent to relieve po verty at home and 
elsewhere. 
Scientists should realize their social responsibili ty. They should focus on the 
global issues threatening mankind like population e xplosion, the environment, 
and control of biological chemical and conventional  weapons, and should stop 
the race against human race. Peace does not mean ab sence of wars. To 
millions of people it means satisfaction of these b asic needs — food, shelter, Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  health, education, and a place to live. It means th at there is justice, freedom 
of opportunity for education, employment, recreatio n. We need to have a 
dynamic, democratic leader who could guide the peop le towards this new 
social order. We need a living and vibrant leader w ho is fearless. 
There is a story of the drowning boy and the philos opher. When the philosopher 
was lecturing him, the boy cried "take me out of th e water first". Similarly, our 
people and of the world cry: "We have had lectures enough, societies enough, 
papers and books enough; where is the man who will lend us a hand to drag us 
out? Where is the man who really loves us? Where is  the man who has sympathy 
for us?" Ah! That man is wanted. 
 
To Sum Up  
The generalizations which are examined in various s ections of this chapter can 
be seen as diagnosis of conflict or of social peace . If conflict arises from 
divergence and opposition, accommodation and cooper ation arise from 
complementary, balance of power, and consensus. Com plementarity means 
the possibility of mutual advantage and cooperative  interdependence is likely 
to be highly advantageous. The more integrated into  the society are the 
parties to conflict, the less likely will be the ch ances of conflict being violent. 
This is the Gandhian way to create a peaceful socie ty. 
Power can be political or economic in its nature, i t may emerge from the 
sword or the pen, or from the common voice of a col lective people. Power can 
also come out of faith, one's conviction that one's  way is the right or righteous 
way. It is this belief in oneself that we see at wo rk in the mission of Mahatma 
Gandhi, in his practice of satyagraha —  satyaagraha,  insistence on truth. 
Ethical values, however sound they are, must have a  backing of  samarthya,  
power; otherwise they are like a bow and arrow with out an archer to use 
them. The weapon has neither strength, nor accuracy , nor purpose by itself. A 
leader of the nation has the responsibility of unit ing the people. He must 
constantly remind himself of his responsibilities a s a ruler. He should not be Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98  engrossed in his own life and in the pursuit of sel f-gratification. He must not 
become an uncaring and callous leader towards citiz ens. He must turn power 
from a gratification into a responsibility. This is  expected of all leaders from 
top to bottom, or bottom to top, to serve people an d build the nation to 
achieve world peace. 
At a Washington meeting some years ago, Peter Druck er, the Management 
Guru, was asked who would make an ideal Chief Execu tive Officer. Several 
possibilities had been suggested, by earlier speake rs. Why not an accountant, 
said one; and what about a marketing expert, asked another. What 
corporation needs is an efficient manager, said a t hird. Drucker disagreed with 
them all. His vote went for a Doctor of Divinity. A  man such as that, argued 
Drucker, would stand for values. 
We need a man of values at the head of a government . We need a philosopher 
king, whose head is clear and whose heart is in the  right place. 
The twenty-first century is coming with this challe nge before voter(s) and 
people of India. If right type of leaders or repres entatives come to powder 
they will be able to accept the challenge and lead the nation. If India accepts 
the challenge as a nation to give a lead, it will e merge as a world leader of 
peace. 
Gandhi had set for himself two objectives. First, p roximate or immediate 
objective was to get political independence of Indi a following the path of 
ahimsa and satyagraha. Second, ultimate or long-ter m objective was economic 
independence of teeming millions based on social, e conomic, environmental, 
equity and ethical considerations. While we have ac hieved the former in his 
life time, the latter is still a dream after 50 yea rs of Independence of the 
country. 
Khoshoo, T. N. writes: "According to Gandhi the eth ical commandments 
relating to human behaviour in relation to other hu mans and living creatures 
and nonliving Resources are the five: 
1.  Nonviolence ( ahimsa ) towards animals and inanimate creations; Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  2.  Truth  (satya);  
3.  Shunning the materials obtained by illegitimately m eans and avoiding 
destruction and vandalism (asatya);  
4.  Celibacy ( brahmacharya)  because human needs keep the numbers in 
check, otherwise demand on resources will increase;  and  
5.  Not converting or amassing material and wealth beyo nd requirements 
(aparigraha ). The five principles enunciated by him are self-b ased codes 
of conduct. These prescribe what a human being shou ld do, and relate to 
cleanliness, sanitation (shaucha)  of one's mind, body and the surroundings. 
Human being is essentially a dirty animal which unl ike other animals 
generates considerable waste and garbage, often non -biodegradable in 
character and as such pollutes the environment. 
Shaucha  also includes ridding oneself of undue lust includ ing sexual desire 
(karna ), anger  (krodha), greed ( lobha ), undue attachment ( moh ), and conceit 
and vanity  (ahankar).  Gandhi believed that there is divinity in all life , and that 
there is thus fundamental unity in diversity. 
The Gandhian model envisaged that development and g overnance should be 
bottom-up and not top- down; goal should be self-de fined and not stranger- 
defined; production should be aimed at basic goods to fulfill basic needs with 
use values, and not at non-basic and greed-oriented  luxury goods; the process 
of production should be by masses and not through m ass production; and the 
whole approach should be holistic and not sectoral.  The Nehruvian (Western) 
Model of industrial development is relevant primari ly to the industrial 
economic sector. This model needs refinement and ha s to be made sustainable. 
The Gandhian Model in the words of J. C. Kumarappa,  leads to decentralized 
economic planing and actually 'Economy of Permanenc e', while in the 
Nehruvian or Western Model of industrial economy th ere is the danger that the 
rich becomes richer, and poor becomes poorer. 
India's success will be measured not by homogenizin g a heterogeneous 
situation, but by the success with which diverse so cieties can be harmonized Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  and co-exist and become mutually reinforcing and su pportive. Where traditions 
and modernity are appropriately blended, and where man-made capital does 
not become destructive of the natural capital. Both  models have their specific 
constituencies in India. Thus, following a democrat ic path, there is a need for a 
creative synthesis of the Gandhian and the Nehruvia n Models (see the Table). 
The leaders of the ruling as well as other parties,  out of their self-interest, fail 
to understand that no party can survive, let alone,  thrive, if politics is merely a 
matter of getting into the driver's seat and runnin g after material wealth. The 
moral authority of most of the politicians has almo st disappeared since they are 
seen as opportunists. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhi's Autobiography : Moral Lessons 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101   
Table : The Two Models 
The Gandhian Model The Nehruvian or Western Model 
1.  Intensification and Diversification 
of agriculture, animal husbandry 
and forestry, i.e. bio- mass 
production, processing and 
utilization, i.e. Renewable 
Resources. 
2.  Photo-synthetic /Solar Model: Use 
of solar energy and some non-
renewable energy. 
3.  Labour Intensive. 
4.  Caters to over 76 per cent of the 
population. 
5.  Poverty alleviation at subsistence 
level. 
6.  Governance at village level 
through Panchayat: Bottom -up 
Approach. 
7.  Economy of Permanence : 
Sustainable. 
8.  Rural Development 
2.   
 1.  Intensification and Diversification 
of industrial development using 
mostly nonrenewable resources. 
2.  Man-made Industrial Economic 
System: Use of nonrenewable 
resources and energy. This model 
should not be accepted without 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
and Environmental Management 
Plan. 
3.  Labour Displacing 
4.  Cover hardly 10 per cent of the 
population. 
5.  Gap between rich and poor 
widening: rich become richer and 
poor become poorer. 
6.  Government Centralization: Top-
down Approach. 
7.  Economy of Impermanence: 
Unsustainable. 
8.  Industrial Development. 
Source:  T.N. Khoshoo, "Gandhian Environmentalist!  
— An Unfinished Task",  IAS SI, Quarterly,  Vol. 16, July-Sept. 1997, pp. 1-16. 