 
GANDHI – A Biography for 
children and beginners 
 
[ A BIOGRAPHY FOR CHILDREN AND BEGINNERS ] 
 
 
By: Ravindra Varma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 60/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91-79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 
E-mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To 
My Grandchildren 
And 
All Children in the World 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
FOREWORD 
Ravindra Varma is a learned scholar, who has been r unning the Institute of 
Gandhian Studies at Gopuri, Wardha for several year s. He has been introducing 
the youth, especially the college students and post graduates to the life and 
message of Gandhiji. I have had the privilege of ad dressing a number of such 
audiences at his Institute in Gopuri, and I have al so heard him there and in 
other places talking about Gandhiji. His knowledge and study of Gandhian 
ideology is deep, and to the best of my knowledge h e has been trying his level 
best to live according to the Gandhian ideology. Th is gives depth to whatever 
he says or writes. 
He has written three books on Gandhiji or I might s ay that he has written one 
book which is divided into three parts. Part one gi ves a narrative of Gandhiji's 
life story describing a shy mediocre student at Raj kot, who goes to England and 
comes back as a Barrister. 
Circumstances take him to South Africa. He goes as a young man to earn 
money, and to find name and fame, and also to see a  new country. This first 
book describes Gandhiji's struggle to establish him self in which he makes 
outstanding success as a lawyer. As a seeker of tru th, and full of love for the 
oppressed Indians and black population in the midst  of racial prejudice, he has 
to fight and overcome many hurdles to preserve the self-respect of Indians and 
also to serve the blacks in every way he can. He al so serves the whites during 
the Boer War. 
His fight against colour prejudice starts from the day of his arrival in South 
Africa and continues throughout his stay in that co untry. Discovery of the 
mighty weapon of Satyagraha which can enable the do wntrodden and the weak 
also to stand up for their own rights, is the first  great achievement which 
makes the shy young man a great leader. He shows to  the Indians the way of 
fighting prejudice by bringing about a change of he art among the oppressors 
through self-suffering. His experiments and his stu dies in non-violence lead him 
to establish his first Ashram at Phoenix. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  He fought many battles against racism. His struggle  was based on truth and 
non-violence, and he worked to bring about a change  of heart among the 
oppressors who were the white rulers in South Afric a. 
He had gone to South Africa for one year, but he wa s there for almost 25 years, 
and at last left in 1914 after signing an agreement  with General Smuts, the 
Prime Minister of South Africa, which ensured minim um justice for the Indians 
in that country. 
The First World War started while he was nearing En gland where he had gone to 
meet Gopal Krishna Gokhale his political Guru, who in the meantime had gone 
to France. He returned to India early in 1915. In E ngland he got Pleurisy. The 
cold climate did not suit him. 
Gandhiji landed at Bombay in mid January 1915 with Kasturba, and had a 
rousing reception. His reputation had reached India  before him. He decided to 
go to Pune to meet Gopal Krishna Gokhale and from t here he went to Shanti 
Niketan where his party had arrived in the meantime  from South Africa. He 
introduced many healthy changes in self-help at Sha nti Niketan. 
Gokhale's death soon afterwards led to Gandhiji fou nding the Satyagraha 
Ashram at Ahmedabad from where he spread the messag e of Satyagraha and 
provided leadership for the struggle, first in Biha r for justice to Indian Indigo 
planters and then in Khera and Bardoli regarding la nd revenue, and finally for 
India's freedom struggle. 
It was a new way of fighting for justice, and for o ne's rights in which the 
physically weak could have as much opportunity to s how their valour as the 
physically and intellectually strong. High and low,  rich and poor, men and 
women all joined him, and a new moral and spiritual  awakening was seen in 
India which finally led to the end of foreign rule in India. 
But unfortunately the British agreed to the partiti on of India before they quit 
India, which resulted in endless suffering to milli ons of people in India and 
Pakistan. If the last Viceroy Lord Mountbatten had listened to Gandhiji's advice, 
and the British had left India to Indians, or God a nd Indians were allowed to 
settle the Hindu-Muslim question by themselves, His tory might have been quite GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  different. Much suffering and bloodshed could have been avoided. But 
Mountbatten wanted to be the hero, who solved the I ndian problem, and the 
result was the dead line of 15th August 1947. Parti tion of India became a 
reality, and the creation of Pakistan with mass mig ration led to bloody riots and 
terrible suffering for millions on both sides. 
Gandhiji stood like a beacon light bringing peace a nd sanity wherever he went. 
Instances of his work in Calcutta, Noakhali and Bih ar illustrated his ability to 
bring about change of heart among the fighting Hind us and Muslims through his 
own self-suffering, and establishment of peace betw een the two communities. 
His effectiveness, and total dedication to peace an d non-violence to bring 
about sanity and change of heart among the fighting  Hindus and Muslims 
through his own self-suffering, was not acceptable to certain communal-minded 
Hindu sections, and as a result of that Gandhiji be came the victim of the three 
bullets of Godse while on his way to prayers on 30t h January 1948. With God's 
name on his lips he made a perfect exit and thus en ded a perfect life. 
The youth of India will greatly benefit by reading Ravindra Varma's book which 
is in three parts — Part-I gives the narrative of G andhiji's life. Part-II consists of 
a series of anecdotes from Gandhiji's life. Part-Il l concentrates on his 
philosophy of life, the development of his concept of Satyagraha based on truth 
and non-violence as the law of life. The discovery of Satyagraha provided the 
remedy to the weak and strong alike to fight injust ice and get back their 
legitimate rights from the oppressor without causin g bitterness or enmity. 
Satyagraha he showed, leads to winning over the opp onent so that he willingly 
gives up the path of injustice, and mutual differen ces are settled by change of 
heart. 
Gandhiji's death of January 30th, 1948, shocked the  whole world and sanity 
prevailed in India for quite some time. There were no reprisals or killings by 
Hindus or Muslims of one another as was feared. His  martyrdom made India and 
Pakistan to turn the search light inward at that ti me. 
Gandhiji's teachings, however, are still to become a part and parcel of India's 
way of thinking and solving the problems of communa lism, poverty and GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  unemployment. The downtrodden are still to get just ice, and peace and 
prosperity have yet to reach all. We need opportuni ties for development for all 
and there has to be an end to the exploitation of t he weak by the strong. 
We have a long way to go to eradicate poverty, unem ployment, illiteracy and 
exploitation. We can do so only by going back to Ga ndhiji's message of 
Satyagraha and sustainable development by using hum an hands and tools to 
supplement their strength. 
May God give us the wisdom to choose the right path . Pursuit of power by itself 
is not going to end our problems. Pursuit of servic e of the weak by the strong 
and putting an end to corruption and exploitation o f the weak by the strong 
with a firm hand alone can and will do so. Similarl y we must avoid machines 
which make human hands mere cogs in the machine and  take away all joy of 
creativity which is the reward of making things wit h one's own hands making 
use of tools where necessary. Gandhiji's favourite example was the Singer 
Sewing machine which takes away drudgery but not th e joy of creativity. 
A study of Gandhiji's message can show us the right  path, and Ravindra Varma's 
three books can prove very helpful to the youth of India. I have narrated above 
the message of the 1st book. Book 3 concentrates on  the implications and 
application of Gandhian technique and the ideology of Satyagraha, non-
violence, non-cooperation and the importance of bri nging about change of 
heart in the opponent through self-suffering. 
Book 2 narrates several anecdotes that illustrate t he way Bapu dealt with 
problems, which are very interesting. 
I congratulate Ravindra Varma for the service he ha s rendered to the younger 
generation in India by writing these three books an d hope they will be widely 
read and their message understood and accepted by o ur people. 
Sevagram 
June 19, 2000       Dr. Sushila Nayar  
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7   
PREFACE 
It is not easy to list the number of books that hav e been written on the life or 
message of Mahatma Gandhi. They have appeared in al most all the main 
languages of the world. 
The first of these was written while Gandhi was sti ll finding himself in South 
Africa. This was written by a South African mission ary, Rev. Doke. Since then 
many outstanding biographies have been written by p hilosophers like Romain 
Rolland, and illustrious authors like Louis Fischer . Biographies written by D.G. 
Tendulkar and Shri Pyarelal span many volumes and a re invaluable mines of 
information. They will continue as classic sources of inspiration. 
I do not attempt to cite other books and authors fo r fear of exposing myself to 
the charge of being invidious. But I have learned m uch from many of them. 
This small book does not lay claims to being compre hensive or exhaustive. It is 
meant only to serve as an introduction, particularl y to benefit children and 
beginners, and to inspire them to make a deeper stu dy, and to instil the desire 
to know more, and to benefit from the life and mess age of Mahatma Gandhi. 
Ravindra Varma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I am deeply grateful to all those who have helped m e to revise the manuscript 
of this book by making valuable suggestions and cor recting errors. I must make 
particular mention of Shri Shailesh Bandopadhyaya, Secretary of the Gandhi 
Smarak Nidhi, Dr. Siby Joseph of the Gandhi Vichar Parishad, Wardha, Ms. Maya 
Joshi, Ms. Anshu Priya and my son Harshawardhan Var ma. I am also grateful to 
Shri S. K. Dubey, Shri Venu and Shri Sivan for the pains they took in typing and 
preparing the manuscript for the press. 
I do not know how to thank Dr. Sushila Nayar for gr aciously finding time to go 
through the manuscripts of the three books in these  series, making invaluable 
suggestions, and writing a foreword to them. I was amazed at the care and 
meticulousness with which she went through the manu scripts even in the midst 
of the many demands on her time. 
New Delhi         Ravindra Varma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
1 
Einstein was not the only one to see that Gandhi wa s a unique and incredible 
kind of human being. All those who came in contact with him including those 
who were ranged against him perceived that there wa s something unique about 
Gandhi. General Smuts whom he 'fought' in South Afr ica, successive 
representatives of the British Crown whom he 'fough t' in India, the planters in 
Champaran, the mill-owners, the landlords, the orth odox fundamentalists 
whom he 'fought', on the question of untouchability  or communalism,—all saw 
this uniqueness. He fought, but he loved even those  whom he fought. He did 
not fight them out of anger or hatred or jealousy; he fought them because he 
loved them, and did not want them to persist in doi ng what was harmful and 
injurious to themselves as to others. 
Yet, he was felled down by an assassin, by one of h is own countrymen, one of 
his co-religionists. On hearing that Gandhi had bee n assassinated, George 
Bernard Shaw, the well-known British playwright and  litterateur said that the 
assassination showed how dangerous it was to be too  good. Gandhi wanted to 
be wholly good. To be wholly good one not only has to renounce what is not in 
the good of all, but also be active in the defense of what is in the good of all, 
through means that were consistent with the good of  all. 
How can one be wholly good? Ours is a world of attr actions and temptations. 
One sees and experiences suffering, and wants to se ek freedom from suffering. 
One feels tempted to believe that the easiest way t o escape suffering is to seek 
pleasure; to possess what can give pleasure: to see k the power that can enable 
one to acquire and retain possessions; to dominate so that one may forestall 
and thwart possible challenges to one's possessions . 
Yet, Gandhi wanted to be wholly good, wholly truthf ul, wholly loving. He did 
not seek possessions. He did not seek power. What h e wanted to do in life, 
what he wanted to do with life was to "realize" the  power that was latent in all 
human beings — the power to know or see god, or the  law that governs the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  universe, or the truth of the universe. He learned that he could see truth only 
by divesting himself of ego- centricity, or by 'red ucing oneself to zero', as he 
said. One could move out of ego-centricity only whe n one began to love all else 
in the universe — animate and inanimate. It is only  when one loves all that one 
sees in the universe that one learns to identify on eself with 'creation', and the 
Law or Truth or God that rules 'Creation'. 
Gandhi never claimed uniqueness. In fact, he protes ted against being described 
as unique. He insisted that he was a common man; th at there was nothing 
uncommon about him. He was not a prophet, not a Mah atma. He believed, and 
said again and again that there was nothing he had done which other human 
beings could not do. He often said that he had noth ing new to teach the world. 
The principles of Truth and Love that he had placed  before humanity were "as 
old as the hills". All that he had done was to try to prove their value, the need 
for them and their validity in every field of human  activity — in personal life or 
social life. 
It is easy to see that Truth and love are the laws on which the Universe, and 
human society are built. The laws of nature are una lterable. Since they are 
unalterable and sovereign, what is in conflict with  them will not endure. One 
has to conform to the laws if one wants to build so mething that may endure, to 
achieve something beneficial or enduring. The ident ification and pursuit of the 
law or truth were therefore essential in all fields  of life. It was the quest for 
this truth, and the desire to live in the light of this truth that made Gandhi 
what he became. 
Gandhi felt the call of truth even in his childhood . But it took many years and 
many ordeals and experiments before he could learn to discover and apply it in 
all walks of life. The story of his life is the sto ry of his "experiments with 
Truth". It reflects the way he grew with his experi ments in his personal life, 
and in the life of the society of which he was a me mber. 
Gandhi claimed to be a common man; the common man w as at the centre of his 
concern. He wanted to show what the common human be ing could achieve, and 
how. He wanted the common human being to be free, s ince he believed that GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  without freedom there could be no self-fulfillment.  He wanted a social, 
economic and political order — national and interna tional order — that provided 
the opportunity for self-fulfillment, and preserved  the right and power of the 
common man to defend his freedom. It is this transp arent love for the common 
human being that made Gandhi what he meant to the c ommon man. It was, 
therefore, no wonder that when Gandhi died, human b eings all over the world 
felt that something had been wrenched off from them , that something in them 
had ceased to exist, something for which they had y earned, and would continue 
to yearn. 
How did Gandhi, the shy young child from Porbander and Rajkot become the 
symbol of the hope of the common man everywhere? 
That is the story we will read in the chapters that  follow. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
2 
Gandhi was born in Porbandar, on the 2nd of October  1869. Porbandar is one of 
the many princely States in Kathiawad (Saurashtra) which is now in the state of 
Gujarat. Gandhi's father belonged to a family that was well known and highly 
respected in Porbandar as well as in neighbouring s tates like Rajkot and 
Junagarh. The family was not known for its wealth o r scholarship. But two of 
the members of the family had occupied the high pos ition of "Dewan" or Chief 
Minister of the state of Porbandar. They had earned  a high reputation for their 
honesty and wisdom, and their knowledge of the arts  of administration and the 
affairs of the court of the Ruler. They were also k nown for their loyalty as well 
as their tact in handling citizens and situations. They were men of culture and 
high principles in public and private life. 
These principles sometimes got them into trouble wi th the Ruler or highly 
placed members of the royal family and court. But t hey conducted themselves 
with such exemplary courage and rectitude that thei r views and acts were 
vindicated, and the reputation of their rectitude s pread to other parts of 
Saurashtra. 
Gandhi's grandfather, Uttamchand Gandhi was an able  administrator. But he 
ran into trouble with the Queen-mother-Regent becau se he refused to do what 
her maids asked of him. The Regent then dispatched the army and got 
Uttamchand's house shelled. But Uttamchand did not budge. He preferred to 
leave her service and move to Junagarh. There he ha d the audacity to salute 
the Nawab with his left hand. 
He was asked to explain why he had shown such disre spect to the Nawab. He 
explained that his right hand had been pledged to P orbandar. The Nawab was 
pleased to see such loyalty, and tried to get Uttam chand reinstated as Diwan of 
Porbandar when the Queen-rnother passed away, and t he successor ascended 
the throne. But Uttamchand declined, and his son Ka ramchand was appointed 
Diwan at the young age of 24. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  Karamchand too was a man of high principles and cou rage. He too incurred the 
displeasure of the Ruler of Porbandar, and moved to  Rajkot. He was appointed 
Diwan in Rajkot. There, he could not bear the conte mptuous manner in which 
the British Political Agent talked of the Ruler. He  protested, and the British 
officer retaliated by ordering his arrest and deten tion. But Karamchand refused 
to relent or apologize, and the Political Agent had  to retract and release 
Karamchand Gandhi. 
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who later came to be kn own as Mahatma 
Gandhi, was born as the son of this Karamchand Gand hi and his wife, Putlibai. 
Putlibai also came from the trading community. She had not received much 
education. But she was very knowledgeable about soc ial affairs and matters of 
court, and could participate intelligently in the t alks and discussions that took 
place among the ladies of the Royal Court. She was a devout Hindu, and used to 
visit the Haveli or temple regularly. Gandhi used t o accompany her to the 
temple, although, he admitted, he was not attracted  by the pomp and show 
and the goings on in the temple. But what left a la sting mark on Gandhi's mind 
was the genuine piety of his mother, her profound f aith in God, and her 
unswerving determination to take and adhere to even  the hardest of vows in 
the pursuit of her religious beliefs. To cite an in stance, in the rainy season, she 
would vow not to take her meals till she saw the su n, and would often have to 
go without food because the sun disappeared behind clouds by the time her 
children who had spotted the fugitive shouted to he r, and she came out to see 
the sun herself. 
Both Karamchand Gandhi and Putlibai were deeply rel igious although they were 
not scholars. They were Hindus, perhaps orthodox in  many respects. But  sadhus  
and religious men of many faiths (Hindu, Jain, Musl im and Parsi) visited their 
house and engaged in religious discussions. All the  members of the family and 
the children including young Mohandas listened to t hese discussions with deep 
interest and reverence. These discussions and the a tmosphere of piety in the 
house must have sown the seeds of faith and toleran ce in the mind of young GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  Mohandas. In later years, they became the foundatio n of Gandhi's firm belief 
that all religions deserved equal respect. 
There were also days on which the family listened t o readings from the great 
Hindu devotional classics like the Bhagavata and th e Ramayana. Mohandas 
came under the spell of the devotion and dedication  to God that throbbed in 
these verses. He learned to look upon Tulsidas's re ndering of the Ramayana as 
the most moving devotional classic in Hinduism, — p erhaps in any religion. 
Around this time, Gandhi chanced to see a copy of t he  Shravana Pitribhakti 
Nataka  on his father's table. Though he was not given to reading books, this 
book attracted him. He read it with great interest,  and the picture of Shravana 
carrying both his blind parents on his shoulders im printed itself on young 
Gandhi's mind. The thought arose in him that he sho uld be as loyal to his 
parents as Shravana was, and should serve them with  as much dedication and 
self- surrender as Shravana. The visit of a travell ing troupe that exhibited 
pictures from Shravana's life intensified this desi re to serve his parents with 
devotion and joy. 
Another portrayal that created a lasting impression  on Gandhi's mind was that 
of Raja Harishchandra who had dedicated his life to  truth. The ordeals through 
which the king had to pass and the agony, sacrifice s and suffering that he had 
to undergo to stick to Truth melted Gandhi's heart.  
He could not banish the picture of Harishchandra fr om his mind. 
Gandhi had always felt a great fascination for Trut h. The story of Harishchandra 
reinforced this attraction and the determination to  cling to Truth at any cost. 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
3 
Gandhi started going to school in Porbandar. Later when the family moved to 
Rajkot, he joined the Alfred High School at Rajkot.  He was conscientious, but 
not fond of studies. He was shy. He would hardly mi x with other students in 
school, and the moment school was over, he would ru n back home. He was not 
fond of games but liked to go for long and brisk wa lks. He had the highest 
respect for his teachers, and never wanted to do an ything that would give them 
pain. 
Yet, there were occasions in school (and outside) w hen his innate loyalty to 
truth was put to test. Once when he was in the clas s, the Inspector of Schools 
visited his school. The English teacher was keen to  prove that his students had 
been taught well. He gave the students a dictation test in the presence of the 
Inspector. Young Gandhi could not spell the world ' kettle' correctly. The 
teacher saw this. He tried to prompt Gandhi to look  at what the student next to 
him had written and to correct himself. But Gandhi could not bring himself to 
do this. He could not believe that his teacher who should have been concerned 
with the truthfulness and character of his students  was himself prompting him 
to cheat or engage in untruth. 
On another occasion Gandhi had to experience the ag ony of being taken for a 
liar. Most students of his school used to go home a fter the end of regular 
classes and return for the period of gymnastics. Ga ndhi too used to do this. One 
day, by the time Gandhi arrived for gymnastics, the  period was over, and boys 
had gone home. He was marked absent, and was hauled  up before the 
Headmaster, Eduljee. Gandhi explained that he had b een nursing his ailing 
father. Besides, the clouds too had misled him in j udging the time. But the 
headmaster did not believe Gandhi, called him a lia r, accused him of lying and 
imposed a fine. It was not the fine that hurt him, but the thought that he had 
been looked upon as a liar. That day, Gandhi learnt  the lesson that those who 
wanted to be truthful, and taken as truthful, had t o be vigilant and mindful of 
everything. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  There were other experiences that taught Gandhi eve n more bitter lessons. He 
became friendly with a boy who had earlier been a f riend of his elder brother. 
Gandhi had been warned against coming under the inf luence of this boy, Sheikh 
Mahtab. But he persisted in the belief that he woul d be able to reform Mahtab. 
But Mahtab's pleasant ways and persuasive tongue be gan to lead Gandhi astray 
in one field after another. 
Gandhi's family was strictly vegetarian. But Mahtab  convinced Gandhi that no 
one could be strong and muscular without eating mea t, and the Indians would 
never be able to free themselves from the British u nless they took to eating 
meat, which was the secret of the strength of the B ritish. The argument 
appealed to Gandhi. Though hesitant, he agreed to t ry. So a day was chosen. A 
deserted place was located, and Gandhi shared a non -vegetarian meal with 
Mahtab. At night, however, Gandhi had strange dream s and nightmares. He felt 
he could hear the goat bleating from within his bel ly. In spite of this first 
experience which had made Gandhi restless, his comp anion persisted in 
tempting him, and Gandhi went along. But soon it be came clear that the habit 
was expensive. Neither Gandhi nor his friend had an y income of their own to 
have such special meals at special places. Moreover , it involved lying and 
deceiving his parents and other members of the fami ly. Gandhi could not 
reconcile himself to a life of deceit. So he decide d to give up the experiment 
and wait till he had his own income. 
Mahtab introduced Gandhi to other habits. He began to smoke. Cigarettes were 
hard to come by. But once one is in the grip of a h abit, one looks for ways of 
getting what one wants. So Gandhi too started picki ng up cigarette butts 
thrown away by his uncle and smoking them secretly.  But this did not assure a 
steady supply. So Gandhi began to pilfer small coin s from the bags of his 
servants. When this too became difficult or inadequ ate he felt frustrated. He 
was overcome by deep despair. Sheikh Mahtab shared his feelings, and they 
both decided that they would end their lives rather  than live in agony and 
despair. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  They had heard that Dhatura seeds could help them i n their design. So they 
collected these seeds from the jungle and met at a temple to end their lives by 
consuming the seeds. Gandhi even swallowed two or t hree seeds. But then 
courage failed, and he decided that it was better t o live and improve his 
condition rather than to end his life. 
To raise some money, Gandhi and his elder brother m ade bold to clip off a tiny 
bit from his brother's golden bracelet. This was to o much for Gandhi's 
conscience. He began to see where he was going and where he would reach if 
he did not turn back. He was not only living a life  of untruth but also deceiving 
his father who had unquestioning faith in him. He c ould not continue to steal 
and cheat and deceive his father. He would choke if  he did. There was only one 
way out. He had to confess to his father and regain  a clear conscience. He 
decided to write out a confession, admit his guilt,  assure his father that he 
would never repeat the crime and ask to be punished  for what he had done. 
Gandhi's father was on his sick bed when Gandhi han ded over the letter to him 
and sat near him waiting to be admonished, and perh aps punished. Karamchand 
sat up in bed, read the letter. Tears rolled down h is cheeks, and he lay down. 
Gandhi too was in tears. He felt that his father's tears of forgiveness and faith 
had cleansed him. He learned a lesson that he never  forgot. When one realises 
that one has committed a mistake, one should lose n o time in accepting or 
confessing one's mistake, declaring one's firm reso lve not to repeat such 
mistakes, relinquishing whatever one had gained, an d cheerfully suffering any 
punishment that the mistake calls for. It is this l esson and Gandhi's faith in the 
power of confession that prompted Gandhi to make pu blic confessions of his 
shortcomings and mistakes in later life. 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
4 
Gandhi's father was not in good health, and was gro wing old. He was keen to 
see his two young sons married before he passed awa y. So he decided that the 
younger son, Mohan's marriage should also take plac e at the same time as that 
of the elder son. 
Gandhi's marriage took place when he was thirteen y ears of age. He was still a 
student in the Alfred High School at Rajkot. Kastur ba to whom he was married 
was also of the same age. She had never been to sch ool. Both of them were too 
young to understand or take up the responsibilities  of married life. In later 
years, Gandhi saw this, and spoke of how thoughtles s and dangerous it was to 
push young children into marriage or for young chil dren to enter into marital 
life. But at the time Gandhi married, he only knew that his father wanted him 
to marry, that there would be much pomp and many fe stivities; that he would 
be at the centre of all these, and would have an en joyable experience that he 
would remember all his life. He also knew that he w ould, acquire a new 
playmate or companion, a companion of the other sex  with all the mysteries, 
attractions and social prestige that it held. 
On the very first night that he spent with his youn g bride he experienced the 
stirrings and attractions of the body. In later yea rs, he wondered who had 
coached whom in how to cope with what happens to th e mind and the body 
when a young bride and bridegroom are thrown togeth er at a tender age. He 
realised that he was greatly attracted by the pleas ures that the body could 
give. He found that he was in the grip of lust, and  would eagerly wait for 
nightfall and seek joy in the company of his young wife. 
Sheikh Mahtab, who was still close to Gandhi, perha ps divined these new 
stirrings in Gandhi. He nearly got Gandhi to embark  on a life of lust. He took 
him to visit the lodgings of prostitutes. But Gandh i was saved by something 
within him. He sat dumb and frozen on the bed till the prostitute herself rained 
abuses on him and drove him out. Gandhi was saved. Yet later in life he 
confessed that even though there was no action on h is part, the intention to sin GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  was present, and so he should confess that he was g uilty in terms of morality. 
However, he decided that he would never betray or d eceive his wife. 
Gandhi was devoted to his wife, Kasturba. But he al so believed that as her 
husband, he had unquestioned authority over her. He  would take decisions for 
her. She could not go anywhere, not even to the tem ple, without his 
permission. He was her master. But Kasturba showed that she also had a mind 
and will of her own. She would go to the temple and  visit her friends without 
seeking Gandhi's permission. Gandhi was jealous, an d therefore suspicious. It 
was only much later in life, after he ceased to be a slave of the body and bodily 
attractions, that he realised that a wife was not a  piece of property to be 
possessed by him. He then realised that a woman had  all the rights that a man 
had. She was, therefore, entitled to a personality and will of her own. The wife 
was a companion and an equal partner of the husband , and not a toy or slave. 
Later in life, Gandhi even said that he had learnt many lessons from his wife, 
Kasturba — especially in Ahimsa (non-violence) and the way to resist with love. 
But that was where Gandhi reached many years later.  While in school, and in 
the years immediately after his marriage, Gandhi wa s attracted to the bodily 
pleasures of married life. He would wait for classe s to end to run back to his 
wife. This affected his studies. Worse still, it be gan to distract his mind even 
when he was serving his sick father, keeping vigil at his bedside or massaging 
his feet, before he fell asleep. 
One night, the inevitable happened. Gandhi was mass aging the feet of his ailing 
father while his mind was full of the thoughts of K asturba and the pleasures of 
their bed. Karamchand's brother, young Gandhi's unc le, offered to massage 
Karamchand's feet so that Gandhi could go and sleep . Gandhi agreed and ran to 
his room. He had hardly bolted the room when someon e knocked on the door 
and asked Gandhi to hurry back to his father's bed since he was 'seriously' ill. 
He knew what it meant, and hurried back into his fa ther's room only to find 
that his father had breathed his last during the fe w minutes that had taken him 
to go to the side of his wife. Gandhi was overcome with remorse and shame. 
There was no way of making amends. He had hoped tha t he would be serving GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  his father even when his breath departed from the b ody. He had missed the 
opportunity because of his desire for bodily pleasu res. He let the bitter lesson 
sink in. 
His father's death raised many questions for the fa mily. Gandhi had completed 
his education in the High School at Rajkot. There w as no college in Rajkot then. 
So he had moved on to the Samaldas College at Bhavn agar. But there he found 
studies very difficult. All subjects were taught in  English. He found that his 
knowledge of English was not adequate. He did not k now what to do. The 
family needed his support. He had his own wife. One  suggestion was that he 
should look for work or go to Bombay to study. Some  friends of the family had a 
different idea. It would be good if someone from th e family could maintain the 
tradition of serving as the Diwan of Rajkot or Porb andar. Only young Gandhi 
could attempt this. But times had changed. No one c ould aspire to be Diwan 
unless he had sound education. So why should not Ga ndhi go to England and 
qualify for the Bar ? It would be a prestigious qua lification, and would open new 
avenues. The idea appealed to Gandhi. It was an opp ortunity and an escape. 
England had its own attractions at that time. To be  educated in England was to 
receive a passport to the circles of the elite. 
But there were many hurdles. The money had to be fo und. Elders, particularly 
Gandhi's mother, had to give her consent. His uncle  said he would not stand in 
the way if his mother agreed. His brother agreed to  make the money available, 
if necessary by raising a loan. 
The harder task was to get his mother's consent. Af ter much persuasion from 
many well-wishers and friends of the family Gandhi' s mother agreed to let 
Mohandas go to England, provided he took three sole mn vows — to keep away 
from meat, wine and women. Gandhi took these vows i n all solemnity, and 
went to Bombay on his way to England. 
Gandhi's troubles were not over. At Bombay, he was summoned by the elders of 
the caste. He was about to cross the seas and go ab road. This was forbidden by 
tradition. So he should desist or face being expell ed from the caste and made 
an outcaste (denied all social contact with members  of his own caste, including GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  his own family). Gandhi was hardly 18. But he disco vered that he was not the 
man to be cowed down. He did not reply with anger o r bitterness. He remained 
calm, and told the elders of the caste that he had made up his mind to go. He 
respected them. But he would not obey their order, and would readily face the 
consequences of his disobedience. In later years, G andhi cited this as the first 
occasion on which he resorted to Satyagraha, though  he did not know then his 
was an act of Satyagraha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22   
5 
Gandhi set sail for England on the 4th of September  1888. He had managed to 
get a berth booked for himself in the same cabin in  which Mazmudar of 
Jamnagar (Saurashtra) had booked his berth. Gandhi was aware of the big 
challenge that he was facing as well as the opportu nities that were opening 
before him. He began to keep a diary, and meticulou sly recorded all that he 
observed, all that he felt, all that he thought, al l that he did and all that he 
learned. He was shy and found it very difficult to converse in English. He kept 
to himself except when someone engaged him in conve rsation. Those who did, 
tried to convince him that he would not survive wit hout a non-vegetarian diet. 
He had hardly eaten anything from the ship's kitche n. He did not know what the 
items of the menu contained. Nor could he bring him self to enquire from the 
waiters or others. So he had survived on the snacks  and sweets that he had 
brought from home. He never felt sea-sick, and surv ived rough seas and 
reached England. 
He booked a room in the Victoria Hotel. It was enor mously expensive. The 
problem with his diet persisted. He had brought som e notes of introduction 
with him. One of them was for Dr. P. J. Mehta. Dr. Mehta introduced him to the 
basics of British etiquette. He advised Gandhi to m ove out of the hotel and live 
with a private family. Gandhi followed his advice. But his problems continued 
to dog him. He could not get the vegetarian food he  wanted. So he hardly ate 
what he was given. Yet he had to pay for his food. He was miserable. 
Everything seemed strange, — the people, their ways , their habits. He felt 
homesick, and longed for all that he had left behin d in India, — his wife and 
child, his mother, his brother, food and so on. The  thought of going back 
crossed his mind. But he recalled his responsibilit ies, and decided that he 
would stay on and qualify as a barrister before he went back. 
Dr. Mehta recommended that Gandhi stay with a famil y he knew till Gandhi 
could get acclimatized to his environment. But even  here, Gandhi found it 
hard. Food was one of the main problems. One day a friend took him to a highly GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  considered restaurant to induct him into the ways a nd manners of the British. 
He ordered soup. Gandhi summoned the waiter to enqu ire whether it had any 
element of meat or fish in it. His friend was so of fended at Gandhi's persistence 
in his vegetarianism and in his "awkward" ways that  he told Gandhi that he was 
free to go out and eat where he pleased and meet hi m later. Gandhi was 
thankful, and left the restaurant. But he could not  find any vegetarian 
restaurant, and so went without food that night. 
He started a search for vegetarian restaurants. One  day, on one of his walks he 
came across a vegetarian restaurant in Farringdon S treet. He was as delighted 
as a child that suddenly gets what it has been cryi ng for. He entered, and had 
his first good meal after he left India. In the res taurant, his eye fell upon a 
book, Plea for Vegetarianism,  written by Salt. He bought it and read it from 
'cover to cover'. The book brought about a change i n his attitude which can only 
be described as revolutionary. It convinced him tha t vegetarianism was no fad 
or superstition. He found, accepted and relished st rong arguments in favour of 
a vegetarian diet and against living on other anima ls. He became a vegetarian 
by choice, by conviction. It restored his self-conf idence. He was no longer 
apologetic or embarrassed. He read other books on d ietetics and began to see 
the relation between one's diet and the health of o ne's body and mind. From 
then, experiments in diet took an important place i n his life. He began to 
distinguish between what was necessary to maintain one's health and what was 
necessary to please one's taste buds. At this time,  health was the primary 
concern of these experiments. In later life, the ne eds of spiritual life became 
the supreme motive. 
To please his friends and to protect himself, Gandh i decided to make up for his 
vegetarianism by acquiring accomplishments that wer e regarded as essential 
for a socially acceptable gentleman. He equipped hi mself with suits tailored in 
the most fashionable area of London — Bond Street. A single suit cost him ten 
pounds. He obtained a double gold chain and a pocke t watch, learned to tie a 
tie, spending ten minutes before the mirror to adju st it, began to take lessons GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  in French, dancing and elocution. He bought a violi n and started taking lessons 
"to cultivate an ear for Western music". He bought a book on elocution. 
But the cumulative effect of all this on his meagre  resources and on his mind 
soon made him examine his own motives. He was not g oing to spend his life in 
England. His ambition was not to become a faint and  fragmented copy of an 
Englishman. He had come to England to study, and he  should go back to his 
studies, — it is not externals that made a gentlema n, but character. 
As soon as Gandhi arrived at this conclusion, he wr ote to his elocution teacher 
and dance teacher setting out these thoughts and ap ologizing for discontinuing 
his studies. He went to the violin teacher and requ ested her to help him 
dispose of the violin. He told her how he had disco vered that he was following a 
false ideal. She encouraged him in his determinatio n to make a complete 
change. 
The introspection also extended to other areas. He became conscious of the 
way he was spending his money and time. He began ke eping an account of 
every penny he spent and insisted on tallying his b alance before going to sleep. 
This habit stayed with him all through his life and  stood him in good stead when 
he had to keep accounts of the large sums of money that he collected for public 
causes. 
The daily scrutiny of expenses also led to the real ization that he could lead a 
far simpler and more, frugal life. So he moved to a  single room apartment, 
walked to his places of business to save on bus far es; and cooked as much of his 
food as he could. All this helped him to live at an  incredibly low expenditure. 
The change helped Gandhi to harmonize his "inward a nd outward life". 
In his new found enthusiasm for vegetarianism, Gand hi began contributing 
articles on vegetarianism. He joined the Vegetarian  Society, took part in its 
deliberations, opened a branch in the area in which  he lived and worked as the 
secretary of the society. This gave him an opportun ity to learn how institutions 
are run and how societies transact their business i n meetings. It also enabled 
him to think dispassionately and precisely, and for mulate his independent GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  views. He had not yet overcome his shyness to speak . Even when he had 
prepared himself or had a prepared text, the moment  he stood up he would 
start feeling that his head was reeling. His mouth would dry up. Someone else 
would have to read out his speech for him. 
There was an occasion on which the Vegetarian Socie ty had to consider a 
proposal to remove an important member from members hip. The ground was 
that the member was in favour of birth control. The  proposal had the backing 
of the Chairman. But Gandhi had a different view. H e was much younger, and 
inexperienced. Yet he felt that he should not sit s ilent when something wrong 
happened in his presence. He felt that since the so ciety was concerned with 
vegetarianism, it could remove a person only for vi ews or action inconsistent 
with vegetarianism, and not for a matter that was o utside the concern of the 
society. He was on the losing side, but that did no t deter him. Nor did the 
stature of other members overwhelm him. 
His activities in the Vegetarian Society brought hi m in touch with many well-
known men who had become vegetarians. Among them we re men of all 
religions including Theosophists. They introduced h im to Theosophy, Madam 
Blavatsky and Dr. Annie Besant who later became ver y famous in India. Two of 
the theosophists wanted him to help them to study t he Gita. Gandhi had not 
read the Gita in Sanskrit or Hindi while he was in India. He confessed this to 
them. But he thought his acquaintance with Sanskrit  would help him to explain 
the meaning of the stanzas. It was thus that he cam e across Edwin Arnold's 
English translation of the Gita, entitled  The Song Celestial.  Its message, 
particularly the description of the man of abiding wisdom (Sthitaprajna)  made 
a deep impression on Gandhi's mind. The verses echo ed in Gandhi's mind. He 
also read Edwin Arnold's  The Light of Asia,  the life and message of the Buddha 
with even greater interest than he did the Bhagawad  Gita. Once he began 
reading he could not leave the book. The renunciati on and compassion of the 
Buddha left a lasting impression on his mind. A goo d Christian friend suggested 
that he should read the Bible. He was not attracted  by the Old Testament. But 
the New Testament produced a different impression. The Sermon on the Mount GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  went straight to his heart, and reminded him of a v erse of Shamal Bhatt which 
said 'For a bowl of water give a goodly meal'. 
He also read Carlyle's chapter on the Hero as a pro phet and learnt of the 
Prophet's greatness and bravery and austere living.  All these readings left him 
with the impression that much was common in the rel igions, and that 
renunciation was the highest form of religion. 
Vegetarianism was not the only field in which Gandh i's vow was put to test. At 
least on one occasion he was on the verge of succum bing to the temptation of 
intimacy with women. But as he was sliding, he was alerted by the friend who 
was with him. He withdrew himself in time and left the scene, literally fleeing 
to save himself. He believed that it was God who ha d saved him from the brink. 
His truthfulness saved him from leading a life of d eceit as many Indian students 
did. Many who had left their wives in India pretend ed that they were 
unmarried, and enjoyed the company of unmarried Eng lish girls. When Gandhi 
found that an old lady was interested in giving him  an opportunity to meet and 
befriend young girls, he promptly wrote to the lady  telling her that he was 
married, and he should not have left her in the dar k about it. He asked her to 
forgive him if she felt that he had abused her hosp itality. 
In the midst of all this, Gandhi had made use of hi s time to get through the 
Matriculation examination of the University and to keep terms and qualify for 
the Bar. He learned Latin, and did as much reading of the books of Law as was 
necessary to qualify for the tests. He passed his e xaminations and was called to 
the Bar on the 10th of June 1891. He enrolled in th e High Court on the 11th, 
and sailed for India on the 12th of June. 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
6 
When Gandhi landed in India he was shocked to learn  that his mother had 
passed away while he was in England. His brother ha d hidden the news from 
him for fear of the effect that it would have on Ga ndhi's mind and studies in 
England. Gandhi was deeply devoted to his mother. B ut he absorbed the shock 
and wanted to return to Gujarat to start work as a barrister. His brother, 
however, took him to Nasik to have a holy dip, — to  wash off the sin of having 
crossed the seas. On his return to Rajkot his broth er also organised a dinner to 
pacify the elders of the caste who had declared tha t Gandhi had lost caste. 
Gandhi himself had no remorse, and saw no reason fo r these 'Amends'. 
However, he bowed to his brother's wishes. 
It was not easy for Gandhi to set up legal practice  at Rajkot. Though he had 
passed the Bar Examination in England, he had not s tudied Indian laws. There 
was acute competition. He would not be able to earn  what he wanted. The 
British Political Agent had turned down his request  for help. He decided to 
move to Bombay. He enrolled in the Bombay Courts, b ut could not get clients 
because he strictly refused to take the help of tou ts. Finally, he got a client 
and appeared in the Small Causes Court. 
But when the time for cross-examination came, he st ood up, but could not find 
words to speak. His head reeled. He sat down and re turned his fees to the 
client. He then tried to teach English in a school.  The headmaster told him that 
he could not be appointed since he did not have a d egree from a University. 
Gandhi was disappointed. It seemed to him that all doors were closed to him. 
How would he earn enough to look after the family, and help his brother to 
repay the loan that was taken to send him to Englan d? 
He returned to Rajkot and started to earn a pittanc e by drafting petitions and 
memorials. This did not give him enough income. Nor  was it in keeping with the 
status that he had acquired as a barrister who had returned from London. He 
was at his wit's end, and could not see the way for ward. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  Quite unexpectedly, he received an offer from a Mus lim firm of Kathiawar that 
had an established business in South Africa. They h ad a legal dispute with 
another Indian Muslim's firm. They wanted Gandhi to  go to South Africa and 
help their Chief Counsel. They offered terms that a ppeared quite attractive. 
Gandhi decided to accept the offer and go to South Africa to try his luck and to 
make some money through the practice of law. 
Gandhi landed at Durban in May 1893. Abdullah Seth,  who was the head of the 
firm that had engaged his services, was there to re ceive him. Gandhi had 
landed on an unknown continent. He had no idea of w hat was in store for him. 
But he did not have to wait for long to discover th at he was going to face the 
severest ordeals of his life. 
Gandhi was very conscious of his status as a barris ter and had insisted on 
travelling by first class in the ship. He had to be  accommodated in the Captain's 
Cabin since there were no berths available in the f irst class. 
Within two or three days of his arrival at Durban, Sheth Abdullah took him to 
the Court. Gandhi was wearing an Indian turban as h e sat in the Court. The 
Magistrate stared at him, and ordered him to remove  his turban. Gandhi 
considered that an insult. He declined to remove hi s turban and left the Court. 
This was his first personal experience of the insul ts and discrimination that 
Indians had to face in South Africa. 
Both South Africa and India were part of the Britis h Empire in the 19th Century. 
The white population of South Africa wanted to deve lop their plantations. They 
wanted labourers who would do hard work for nominal  wages. They did not 
want to use black African labour. So they decided t o recruit labour from India. 
These labourers were recruited on a system that cam e to be known as the 
Indenture System. Under it, Indians were recruited to work for a few shillings in 
the year. They had to sign a bond that they would s erve for five years. They 
would not be permitted to return earlier. At the en d of five years, they could 
renew their contract to work for five more years or  return to India. The South 
African Government did not want them to stay back a s free citizens. They were 
afraid of the industriousness and enterprise and fr ugal ways of Indians. They GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  wanted Indians in South Africa only as bonded labou rers living in conditions of 
semi-slavery, not as free citizens and competitors.  So the Government of South 
Africa discriminated against Indians and humiliated  them at every turn. Those 
who wanted to stay back after serving their term of  indenture had to pay a poll 
tax of three pounds every year. This was far beyond  the means of the labourers 
whose wages were too meagre even to make both ends meet. Most of these 
labourers were from Tamil Nadu, Andhra, Bihar and U P. They were illiterate, 
innocent about rights, "and helpless and leaderless . 
Indians had to put up with many other humiliating r estrictions. They could not 
reside where they wanted. They had to carry identit y cards and subject 
themselves to scrutiny by the police. They had to t ake licences to be vendors. 
In some States, they could not walk on the pavement s, or be out of their houses 
after nightfall. Some Indians had gone to South Afr ica to trade. Some of them 
had built up wealthy firms. But in most States, Ind ians were kept outside the 
pale of social or political life. 
A few days after his experience in the Durban Court , Gandhi continued his 
journey to Pretoria where the legal suit was being heard. He had to travel by 
train. A ticket was booked for him in the first cla ss, and Gandhi commenced his 
journey. 
When the train reached Petermaritzburg, a white pas senger who entered the 
compartment, objected to a 'coloured man' travellin g in the first class 
compartment. He wanted the coloured man, Gandhi, to  be removed to the 'van 
compartment', which was meant for coloured passenge rs. Gandhi protested. He 
had a first class ticket, and he was entitled to tr avel in the first class. Gandhi 
refused to leave the compartment voluntarily. A con stable was summoned. He 
took Gandhi by the hand, and pushed him out. Gandhi 's luggage was taken out. 
He firmly refused to go to the van compartment. The  train steamed away 
leaving Gandhi on the platform. 
Gandhi went and sat in the waiting room. It was nig ht, and it was bitterly cold. 
The railway authorities had taken charge of his lug gage. His overcoat was in the 
baggage. But he had no mind to ask for it. There he  sat alone shivering in the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  biting cold, on the dark and deserted platform, far  away from home, bereft of 
all succor, facing the biggest challenge of his lif e. He had been insulted and 
humiliated. What was being violated was his dignity  as a human being. What 
was being asked of him was to acquiesce in the deni al of his human dignity, to 
cooperate in the conspiracy (and effort) to down gr ade him into a slave or 
lesser human. Was he to cooperate in his own undoin g? Was he to let cowardice 
or greed snuff out his inherent birthright to be a human being? Or was he to 
stand up and resist? If he does not fight for himse lf, who will fight for him ? Was 
he to accept the dictum "discretion is the better p art of valour", and return to 
India, leaving the field of battle? Will he save hi s self-respect and dignity by 
doing so? Or will he lose respect in his own eyes? The answer became clear to 
Gandhi. He would not be the cause of his own undoin g. He would not cooperate 
in his own undoing. He would fight, not flee or acq uiesce. The forces ranged 
against him may be mighty. But he had his own stren gth; the strength of his 
spirit, of his will; of his ability to non-cooperat e with his 'enemy'. That night 
Gandhi discovered himself. That night Gandhi shed h is fear. He discovered a 
way that • anyone who could overcome fear, and was determined, could use. 
That was the night Gandhi emerged from his shell, a nd came into his own. He 
himself recalled it as the most creative experience  of his life. The discovery of 
the power within one and the power of non-cooperati on had set Gandhi free. 
Gandhi continued his journey the next day. He had t o take a stage-coach from 
Charlestown to Standerton. The experience of the tr ain was repeated. He had a 
ticket but was asked to sit outside, by the side of  the coachman. The 'leader' or 
conductor of the coach sat inside, in his place, an d when he wanted to smoke 
he came out and asked Gandhi to vacate his perch by  the coachman, and sit on 
a piece of jute matting on the foot rest. Gandhi re fused. The burly coachman 
pushed him and pummelled him. Gandhi clung on to th e railings, but did not 
give up his seat. He was being beaten and pushed do wn when some passengers 
felt ashamed at the scene and asked the 'leader' to  leave Gandhi alone. 
Gandhi arrived in Johannesburg, and went on to Pret oria. At Pretoria he 
established contact with the lawyers who were in ch arge of Abdullah's suit. The GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  next thing he did was to get a leading Indian merch ant to convene a meeting of 
all the Indians in Pretoria. He said he wanted to g et in touch with every Indian. 
The meeting saw a Gandhi who was very different fro m the one who had sat 
tongue-tied in meetings and court rooms. Gone was G andhi's shyness, 
nervousness, and hesitancy. He said he wanted to st udy the condition of Indians 
and help them improve their situation. He placed th ree ideas before them. 
Firstly, they should forget distinctions of religio n and language and consider 
themselves Indians. They should achieve unity. Seco ndly, they should look into 
their own actions and remove all shortcomings and w eaknesses that could cause 
prejudice against them. Neglect of sanitation, illi teracy, unconcern for 
truthfulness and the like weakened them. They shoul d overcome them. Thirdly, 
they should form an association that could voice th eir views and protect their 
interests. Gandhi created an impact. Those who atte nded promised to 
cooperate. Gandhi offered to teach English to those  who wanted, and to give as 
much time as he could find for the common effort. 
Meanwhile, Gandhi made many friends among people of  all persuasions. His 
letters to journals espousing the Indian cause or d rawing attention to specific 
instances of injustice and the transparent absence of bitterness, untruth and 
exaggeration in his writings drew appreciation from  many, even among the 
white population. 
Gandhi busied himself with the legal work for which  he had gone to South 
Africa. He studied the facts of the case. He discov ered that truth could be 
sifted and put forward only if he had a good grasp of accounting and book 
keeping. So he set himself to the task and acquired  mastery over the intricacies 
of accountancy. But he always felt that the true se rvice that a lawyer could 
give was to secure justice without acrimony and hos tility and the spirit of 
vengeance. Justice did not require a demand for the  pound of flesh. He, 
therefore, believed in using law and common sense t o find a settlement outside 
the court, avoiding the acrimony that litigation br ought. 
He had succeeded in securing the confidence of his client Sheth Abdullah. The 
other party to the suit was also an Indian Muslim m erchant from Gujarat. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  Ultimately, Gandhi's persistent efforts succeeded, and the case involving a huge 
sum of money was settled out of court to the satisf action of all. The arbitrator's 
award went in favour of Sheth Dada Abdullah, but th e other party was not in a 
position to pay the awarded dues in one installment s. If he had to do so, he 
would have become bankrupt. Gandhi persuaded Abdull ah to permit Tyeb Sheth 
to pay the money in installments. 
Now that the assignment on which Gandhi had gone to  South Africa had ended, 
Gandhi prepared to return to India. A farewell meet ing was arranged. At the 
meeting, as Gandhi was about to speak, his eyes fel l on a copy of the  Natal 
Mercury.  It carried a report about the impending passage of  a Bill to 
disenfranchise all Indians in Natal. Gandhi saw thi s as the thin end of the 
wedge. He said that if the Bill was passed, and the  Indians acquiesced in it, 
they would be driving the first nail into their own  coffin. Everyone felt 
concerned, and wanted that the Bill should be oppos ed. But who was to take 
the lead? 
Who was to organize public opinion and bring pressu re on the legislature? The 
younger Indians who were educated could perhaps tak e up the cause. But they 
had other interests. Everyone at the farewell meeti ng turned to Gandhi. They 
told him he was the man who could save the Indian c ommunity in the hour of 
trial. Gandhi was reluctant. He was anxious to go h ome. But the persistent 
demand of the leading Indians and his own sense of duty made him agree to 
postpone his return by a month. He declined to take  any remuneration for 
public service. He would stay back and serve them f or a month. Thus began a 
commitment that kept Gandhi in South Africa for two  decades. 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33   
7 
Gandhi got to work that very evening. He drafted a petition to the Legislature 
and submitted it with the signature of 500 Indians.  The Bill was passed in spite 
of the petition. But the Indian cause and the India n action in support of it, 
drew public attention. Gandhi was not overwhelmed b y the failure of the 
petition to secure redress. He drafted another peti tion, this time to the 
Secretary of State for Colonies in Britain. He secu red 10,000 signatures within a 
fortnight. Copies were distributed in England as we ll. Sections of the British 
press took sympathetic note of the case that Gandhi  presented in the petition. 
Gandhi left no stone unturned. He tried to create p ublic opinion in South 
Africa, in England, in the Parliament, in the press , among public personages. He 
wrote to Dadabhai Naoroji, who was a member of the British Parliament. He 
had met Dadabhai once when he was in London. Now he  wrote to Dadabhai 
asking him to use his great influence to seek redre ss for the Indian community 
in South Africa. He told the doyen of Indian leader s why he was praying for his 
help. "I am yet inexperienced and young, and theref ore, quite liable to make 
mistakes. The responsibility undertaken is quite ou t of proportion to my ability. 
I may mention that I am doing this without any remu neration. So you will see 
that I have not taken the matter up, which is beyon d my ability, to enrich 
myself at the expense of the Indians. I am the only  available person who can 
handle the question. You will, therefore, oblige me  very greatly if you will 
kindly direct and guide me and make necessary sugge stions which shall be 
received as from a father to his child." 
Gandhi's campaign had its effect. The British gover nment vetoed the Bill passed 
by the Natal Legislature. But Natal got round the v eto with another Bill. What 
more, the Government of Natal decided to impose a p oll tax of 3 pounds on all 
indentured labourers who wanted to stay back in Sou th Africa without renewing 
their indenture agreement. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  This was an inhuman measure, and was meant only to bring pressure on the 
poor labourer who earned only 14 shillings a month.  Many other restrictions 
were imposed on Indians. 
Gandhi saw that the fight would be long and hard. H e formed an organization of 
Indians, and called it 'The Natal Indian Congress'.  He built up the organization 
with members w'ho paid a subscription, and with bra nches and rules for the 
conduct of business. He plunged into the task of cr eating opinion with frequent 
articles and letters in journals, memorials, petiti ons, and meetings of the 
Indian community. 
But all this took many months. Gandhi had refused t o take remuneration for his 
public work. But he had to find money to meet his o wn expenses. He decided to 
accept fees for the legal work for which Indian fri ends might use his services. 
To enable him to practise in the courts, he had to enroll himself. He applied for 
registration. His application was opposed by the La w Society, but upheld by the 
Supreme Court of Natal. He enrolled himself as an a dvocate. 
The month for which Gandhi had agreed to stay on ha d stretched to years, and 
it looked as though he would have to spend many mor e years fighting 
discrimination in South Africa. He decided to take leave for six months to go to 
India and bring his family with him. He also wanted  to use the opportunity to 
inform the people and leaders in India about the ne ar slavery that Indian 
labourers were reduced to in South Africa, and the indignities that were heaped 
on all Indians. He visited the main cities, — Bomba y, Poona and Madras. His 
visit to Calcutta was cut short by urgent summons f rom his colleagues in South 
Africa. At Bombay, Poona and Madras he met the tall est leaders of the time, 
and addressed meetings of opinion makers. Among tho se whose support he 
secured were Sir Pheroze Shah Mehta, Lokmanya Bal G angadhar Tilak, Gopal 
Krishna Gokhale and others. 
He received sympathy and supports everywhere. He de scribed the humiliation 
of Indians and said that submission to insults was reconciling with one's own 
degradation. He urged public opinion in India to br ing pressure on the Indian 
Government to protect the honour and dignity of Ind ian citizens. He urged the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  Government of British India to suspend the recruitm ent of indentured labour if 
it could not protect Indian citizens or ameliorate their conditions. He also 
wrote and published a booklet on the conditions of Indians in South Africa. He 
had stated facts, and that too with his customary m oderation… 
When Gandhi received the urgent summons, he decided  to cut short his stay in 
India and return to South Africa with his family. H e and his family boarded the 
s.s.  Courland,  a ship that belonged to Dada Abdullah. Another shi p of 
Abdullah's, the Naderi,  was also sailing at the same time. There were 800 
indentured labourers travelling by these ships. Mea nwhile, the white population 
of Natal was in a state of mad fury. They had been infuriated by a news agency 
report that Gandhi had published a scurrilous and h ateful leaflet against the 
whites of South Africa, and was bringing shiploads of Indian labourers to flood 
South Africa. Whites held meetings and declared tha t they would teach Gandhi 
a lesson. The flames of fury were fanned by leaders  and officials. Thus, when 
the ships arrived at the port, they were not allowe d to dock. 
They were kept at sea. Even when they were allowed to dock, the ships were 
quarantined, and passengers were not allowed to dis embark. Agents of the 
white infuriated men were waiting at the dock to de al with Gandhi. After 23 
days of quarantine, on the 13th of May, 1897, the p assengers were allowed to 
disembark. There were fears about Gandhi and his fa mily. The family managed 
to leave and reach the house of Parsi Rustomji safe ly. Gandhi received a 
message from Mr.Escombe, the Attorney General, warn ing him about the mood 
of the whites. He asked Gandhi to wait till night-f all, and leave the ship after 
darkness had fallen. Gandhi had nearly decided to a ccept Escombe's advice 
when he received a message from Mr. Laughton, the a dvocate of Dada Abdullah 
advising him against accepting Escombe's suggestion , and informing him that he 
himself was going over to the ship to accompany Gan dhi. 
Gandhi left the ship and walked down with Laughton,  with the intention of 
walking to the house of his colleague, Parsi Rustom ji. Kasturba and the family 
had already reached the house. Soon after Gandhi an d Laughton set out, those 
who were holding vigil spotted Gandhi by his turban . Alerted by them, a crowd GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  collected and moved menacingly towards Gandhi. Laug hton tried to hail a 
rickshaw to take them to the house. The rickshaw pu ller was scared away. The 
crowd started closing in on Gandhi. In the pushing and pulling, Laughton got 
separated from Gandhi. Now the crowd began to rain blows, and throw stones. 
They were intent on lynching Gandhi. Gandhi walked on. He was hit by a rain of 
stones. He was injured, and started bleeding profus ely. Swathed in blood, he 
was still hauling himself forward when he got dizzy  and swooned. The crowd of 
lynchers and persecutors was in hot pursuit. Gandhi  held on to the railings on 
the side of the road and kept crawling while more s tones landed on his bleeding 
body. It is difficult to say what would have happen ed if, at that crucial 
moment, Mrs. Alexander, the wife of the Police Supe rintendent had not 
chanced to come from the opposite direction. She wa s a white woman, and 
much respected in the community. Seeing Gandhi blee ding and crawling with 
tormentors in hot pursuit, she went to Gandhi, open ed her parasol to protect 
him from the stones, and chastised the crowd. In th e meanwhile, Alexander, 
the Police Superintendent himself arrived on the sc ene with a posse of Police 
and rescued Gandhi, and escorted him to Parsi Rusto mji's house. 
Hearing that Gandhi had reached Rustomji's house, a  crowd collected there, 
asking that Gandhi be handed over to them. They thr eatened to burn the house 
down, along with all the inmates, if Gandhi was not  handed over. The Police 
Superintendent acted with great tact in holding the  crowd at bay, and 
meanwhile persuading Gandhi to leave through the ba ck door dressed as a 
policeman, and go to the safety of the police stati on. 
When the news that white crowds had attempted to ly nch Gandhi and had 
inflicted injuries on his body reached London and o ther capitals of the world, 
there was widespread revulsion and sorrow. The Secr etary of State for Colonies 
sent a telegram to the Government of South Africa a sking them to track down 
and punish the culprits. The Police Superintendent informed Gandhi of these 
orders and asked for his co-operation in identifyin g the culprits and punishing 
them. Gandhi had no bitterness whatsoever. He told the Government that he 
did not want the Government to prosecute any of his  assailants. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  He could perhaps identify many. But he did not beli eve in retaliation. It was 
against his Dharma. They were the victim's of preju dice, and had to be weaned. 
There was neither bitterness nor anger nor hatred i n his heart. Moreover, it 
would serve no purpose if small fries were prosecut ed while those who incited 
them went scot free. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
8 
As Gandhi was settling down in Johannesburg with hi s family, and building up 
the Natal Indian Congress as the spearhead of the s truggle for the rights of the 
Indian Community, other developments took place. So uth Africa had to go 
through the ordeal of a civil war. The two sides wh o were ranged against each 
other were the descendants of the original Dutch se ttlers who had colonized 
large areas of South Africa, and the descendants of  the whites who came later, 
particularly from Great Britain. They had their dif ferences in attitudes and 
beliefs. The descendants of the Dutch were called B oers. They spoke 'Afrikaans' 
which was very similar to Dutch. They were tough fa rmers. They looked down 
upon the Indians and wanted only to use them as sla ve labour, confined to their 
locations. The attitudes of other whites were not v ery different. 
Gandhi was in a quandary. What attitude should the Indians adopt in the war 
between these two white groups fighting for suprema cy? Were they to side with 
the Government or with those who were challenging t he Government that they 
were fighting? Or were they to remain neutral? 
Gandhi believed that rights and duties were related . If Indians asked for equal 
rights they should be prepared to accept equal resp onsibility for discharging the 
duties of citizenship. A primary duty of the citize n was to defend the state 
when it was in danger. They could not claim exempti on on the ground that they 
believed in pacifism or non-violence unless their f aith in non-violence was well 
known even before the war. Moreover, even a symboli c participation by the 
Indian community would raise their standing in the eyes of the whites. 
Gandhi therefore offered to raise a Corps of stretc her bearers to serve with the 
Army. His offer was accepted. With characteristic e fficiency he recruited and 
trained an Indian Ambulance Corps. The members of t he corps won admiration 
and praise for the exemplary courage they displayed  on the field of battle 
carrying out their duties even in danger zones that  they were not bound to 
enter. They surprised the Army and civilians with t heir feats of endurance, 
trudging through rough terrain, often doing more th an 25 miles a day. All this GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  compelled the white population to revise their view  about the Indians whom 
they had written off as feeble and cowardly, and co ncerned only with eking out 
an existence. At the end of the war, the Indian cor ps was mentioned in the 
despatches of the General, and its members and Sgt.  Gandhi were praised for 
their contribution, and awarded medals of recogniti on. Gandhi had put the 
bona fides of the Indian community beyond question.  
The war with the Boers was over in 1901. Gandhi fel t that he had put the Indian 
struggle on course. He had created awareness and de termination. He had 
brought different sections of the community togethe r. He had built up an 
organization. He felt that the time had come for hi m to return to India and 
work among his people there. The Indian community w as sad, and did not want 
to let him go. But they could not dissuade him. So they arranged a farewell and 
showered him and Kasturba with gifts in gold and ge ms and jewellery. Kasturba 
herself was presented with a necklace worth more th an fifty sovereigns of gold. 
Gandhi was deeply perturbed. How could he accept th ese costly gifts for 
services he rendered in answer to the call of his c onscience? He had a sleepless 
night. He was deeply agitated, and paced up and dow n in his room. By the 
morning he had taken the decision to make a trust a nd donate all the gifts he 
had received from the community the day before, and  five years ago, on the 
eve of his return to India. The Trust and income fr om it were to be used for the 
service of the community. It was not easy for him t o persuade Kasturba to part 
with the golden necklace and diamonds gifted to her . She demurred and was in 
tears. Gandhi was harsh, and reminded her that the gifts were for the service 
he had rendered. 
On his return to India, Gandhi wanted to set up pra ctice in Rajkot. But he was 
persuaded to settle down in Bombay, since Bombay ha d more opportunities for 
public work as well as for his work as a barrister.  He spent some time in Pune 
with the great Gopal Krishna Gokhale, and visited C alcutta, Varanasi and other 
places on his way back to Rajkot. He was shocked an d appalled to see the river 
of blood flowing from the goats that were sacrifice d at the Kali temple at 
Calcutta, and the filth and ungodly atmosphere at V aranasi. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  He had hardly settled down in Calcutta when South A frica summoned him 
again, to lead a delegation of Indians to meet Cham berlain, the British 
Secretary of State for Colonies. Great hopes were e ntertained from the visit. 
Gandhi (and the Indians) believed that the Imperial  Government would be more 
responsive and fair to the Indians because of the s ervice that Indians had 
rendered in the cause of the Crown, and because Tra nsvaal had now become a 
Crown colony after the defeat of the Boers. But the y were shocked and sorely 
disappointed. Chamberlain was more interested in ra ising funds from the whites 
than in doing justice to the coloured or the blacks . The memorial that Gandhi 
had drafted was brushed aside saying that the colon ies had self-rule. 
Worse humiliation was awaiting Gandhi and the India ns in Transvaal where too 
the Indian community wanted to wait on Chamberlain.  After the war, 
conditions in the Transvaal were not normal. An Asi atic Department had been 
set up. The declared aim of the Department was to p rotect the Asians, but the 
real purpose was to harass them and drive them out.  They insisted that Asians 
from outside Transvaal could enter Transvaal only w ith a permit. The system of 
permits had led to corruption. Gandhi found it hard  to get a permit to enter 
Transvaal, and when he managed to do so, he was not  permitted to join the 
Indian delegation that Chamberlain received. This w as an eye opener. Gandhi 
was insulted and excluded. He realized what the new  policy of the Government 
meant. The odds would now be heavier. They would ha ve to start afresh. He 
would not be able to return to India as he had plan ned to do. He would have to 
make Johannesburg (Transvaal) his headquarters. He got his colleagues to agree 
to his moving from Durban, and enrolled in the Supr eme Court at Johannesburg. 
He found a house in the legal quarters of the city.  Since he now anticipated a 
prolonged stay in South Africa, he asked his family  to return to be with him. 
He knew that the struggle was going to be long and hard. The whites had 
already hardened their attitude. It might harden fu rther and might become 
ruthless when their interests were in real danger. Rights will not be granted for 
the asking. They will have to be wrenched from unwi lling hands. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  For this, two things were necessary. The Indian com munity should be united. 
Their organization should be strengthened. They sho uld be willing to back their 
petitions with action, if that became necessary. Ac tion was not possible 
without readiness to suffer its consequences, witho ut sacrificing narrow self-
interest, without readiness to pay the price of fre edom and equality. The 
Indian community had to shed its fear; know its goa ls; understand the means 
that they were to employ, cooperate in the strategy  of action. All this meant 
constant communication between him and all sections  of the Indian community 
living in all the states of South Africa. Gandhi de cided to start a journal for this 
purpose. The journal was published in English, Hind i, Gujarati and Tamil. Week 
after week he wrote on all issues, all aspects of t he ideology behind the 
struggle, all problems before the community. It was  the life line of his 
communication with the people, and with all sympath isers and adversaries. He 
continued to edit it till he returned to India in 1 914. 
The second need related to himself. He should becom e a fit instrument to lead 
his people in such a struggle, — the struggle in wh ich the weak who were in the 
right were pitted against the mighty who were defen ding injustice. Gandhi had 
already shed his shyness. His diffidence had melted  in the fire of his 
commitment to the cause. The cause was not self- gl orification but the 
vindication of the dignity and equality of the huma n being. He had discovered 
the power of the spirit, of the will. This is prese nt in all. But everyone has to 
be helped to discover it and to use it against evil . Gandhi had to help them to 
discover this treasure house of power that they hel d within themselves. But he 
could do so only if he became the selfless transpar ent manifestation of this 
power within. He could do so only if he purified hi mself, overcame, and 
became immune to, all temptations. In his own words , a leader had to be 
immune to all temptation, and be in command of his desires. 
In the midst of all his public activity, he therefo re embarked on a ruthless and 
relentless exercise of introspection and self-purif ication. He delved deep into 
the life and message of every great human being who  had set out to discover 
the power and ways of the spirit. He embarked on a respectful study of all the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  main religions of the world, — Christianity, Hindui sm, Islam and others. He had 
studied something of these religions earlier. But n ow it became urgent, and was 
based on his commitment to find and tread the path of the spirit for himself 
and for his colleagues. 
He had many friends among the Christians. Many of t hem had been impressed 
by his respect for Christianity. They had hoped tha t Gandhi would accept the 
Christian faith. Some of them had urged Gandhi to d o so. Gandhi was greatly 
attracted by the life of Jesus. Tears welled in his  eyes when he thought of the 
crucifixion of Jesus, or the Sermon on the Mount, a nd its message of love and 
renunciation. But he had difficulties. He could not  accept Christianity as 
explained by his followers. He could not believe in  miracles. He could not 
believe that Jesus was the only Son of God. In his view, all human beings were 
the children of God. He could not subscribe to the belief that only those who 
accepted 'His great redemption' could find eternal peace. He replied, "I do not 
seek redemption from the consequences of my sin. I seek to be redeemed from 
sin itself, or rather from the very thought of sin.  Until I have attained that end, 
I shall be content to be restless." 
He could not accept many of the superstitions and r ituals that had come to be 
identified as an essential part of Hinduism. He cou ld not accept that God or 
religion could ordain human beings to be treated un touchables. He had revolted 
against this even while he was a young boy, and his  mother had asked him not 
to touch the young Ulaka who belonged to a caste th at was considered 
untouchable. He would touch Ulaka to show that the belief was a myth and was 
indefensible. There were many questions in his mind  about human life, death, 
the soul, rebirth and so on, and he engaged in disc ussions and correspondence 
with Raichandbhai, a well-known religious thinker a nd practitioner in Gujarat. 
He delved into a study of the Gita, and discovered a veritable 'spiritual 
dictionary' in it. It had an answer for every occas ion, every difficulty. Many of 
its stanzas brought tears to his eyes. To him the b attlefield of Kurukshetra was 
metaphorical. There was an incessant fight going on  within us between good 
and evil. Lord Krishna had shown us the path that c ould lead to the victory of GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  the good. It did not lie through violence and war, but through the renunciation 
of attachment to desires and the fruits of action. A human being cannot escape 
action. He should wear himself out in action, not w ith attachment to the fruits 
of his action, but by dedicating them to all, by re nunciation. He called the Gita 
the yoga of the non- attachment. He also saw in the  Gita the message that all 
human beings had to earn their bread by their own w ork, looking upon all such 
work as a link in the sacrificial effort that maint ained society and sustained 
nature. This he called the spirit of Yajna. He acce pted the Gita's idea that one 
who wanted to serve others or even himself should c ontrol his desires and 
emotions and become a  Sthitaprajna  or a man of abiding wisdom. He had to 
overcome his ego and the temptation of the senses, and live by the sweat of his 
brow. 
All these thoughts and beliefs were surfacing and m illing in his mind when, on 
one of his journeys from Johannesburg to Durban, hi s friend and colleague, 
Polak gave him a book to read on the train. It was Ruskin's  Unto This Last.  He 
started reading, and found that he could not lay th e book down. The book 
confirmed many of his thoughts: 
1.  The good of the individual is contained in the good  of all, — since all human 
beings are interdependent. 
2.  All socially useful work, — whether that of the law yer or barber has the same 
value. 
3.  A life of labour, particularly productive labour re lated to basic needs — like 
agriculture or handicrafts - was the life worth liv ing. 
Gandhi believed in practising whatever he accepted as true or desirable. So, he 
decided to lead the life of a farmer and craftsman,  while devoting his life to 
the struggle for justice. He bought a farm near Pho enix, 14 miles from Durban, 
and moved to this farm which was named the Phoenix Settlement. This was in 
1904 when he was 35 years of age. He often trekked from Durban to Phoenix 
and back. He invited his colleagues - Indian, Europ ean, Chinese and others to 
go and settle in the Phoenix Settlement. The printi ng press of the  Indian 
Opinion  was shifted there. The Settlement became Gandhi's laboratory to GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  discover the transformation that the individual and  the community needed to 
lead a life free from exploitation and dedicated to  the realization of high 
ideals. Among the members of the community were Pol ak and his wife Millie, 
Maganlal Gandhi and many others. 
The experiments that Gandhi conducted at the Settle ment related to all 
aspects of life. He had to discover what helped to tame the body and mind, — 
to acquire mastery over the senses, to overcome the  ego that stood in the way 
of the mind, and an order that worked for the welfa re of all that he described 
later as Sarvodaya. 
So there were experiments with food or diet; experi ments aimed at self-
sufficiency in the production of essentials; experi ments on the extent to which 
an individual could go in achieving self-sufficienc y consistent with 
interdependence; experiments in new methods of educ ation through manual 
work or craft, supplementary study, character-build ing and community living. 
Gandhi was the example that inspired these experime nts and monitored the 
evolution towards truth, love, sacrifice and non-ex ploitative values. The 
community also witnessed experiments aimed at acqui ring control over 
emotions like anger and jealousy, and problems aris ing from boys and girls 
living in each other's constant company. 
In the meanwhile South Africa was rocked by a rebel lion of the Zulus. There 
were large-scale military operations against the Zu lus. Again Gandhi offered to 
raise an Indian Ambulance Corps to tend the wounded  and remove the dead. 
Gandhi's experiences during the Rebellion were harr owing and excruciating. He 
saw barbarism at its worst. Zulus were whipped till  their skins peeled off. They 
were left in a pool of blood. Whites refused to ten d the wounded Zulus. They 
wanted the Zulus to bleed and die, and be fed upon by birds of prey or wild 
beasts. The Indian Ambulance Corps looked after the  Zulus - wounded and 
dead. Again the courage and forbearance of Gandhi a nd his colleagues were 
commended, and they were honoured with medals. But Gandhi's mind was 
restless and in remorse for what he had seen of the  cruelty of man against man. 
The physical sufferings that he had seen had draine d his mind of all desire for GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  the momentary pleasures of the body. He had already  been thinking of a vow to 
give up the life of the flesh, and the attractions of the flesh. The conviction 
grew in him that he could not do public work withou t leading a life of  
brahmacharya  or celibacy. So, when he returned from the field o f battle, he 
talked the matter over with his wife. She had no ob jection. He was happy to 
receive her consent. He took the vow of  brahmacharya  (celibacy) in 1906. He 
was 37 years of age. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46   
9 
Even as Gandhi was preparing himself for the strugg le ahead, the Government 
of the State of Transvaal notified the draft of a n ew Ordinance on the 22 nd  of 
August 1906. The new law made it compulsory for all  Indians, even children, to 
register themselves with their finger prints. Every one would have to carry a 
certificate on his person at all times. Those who d id not would lose the right of 
residence, and would face prison or deportation fro m Transvaal. The Indian 
community was incensed at the thought of their wome n being stopped and 
searched for certificates. So great was the indigna tion that some Indians 
threatened to shoot policemen who stopped or submit ted their women to 
search. 
Gandhi was clear that if the Ordinance became law a nd the Indians acquiesced, 
they and their honour would be wiped out. The Ordin ance had to be resisted. 
But resistance would bring unprecedented suffering.  Would his people stand up 
and fight? He convened a meeting of all Indians at the Empire Theatre, 
Johannesburg. On the 11th of September 1906, when t he time of the meeting 
came, the hall was overflowing with people. Haji Ha bib read out the resolution 
drafted by Gandhi. It declared that Indians would n ot submit to the Ordinance. 
They would suffer the penalties that would result f rom defiance, but would not 
submit. Gandhi did not want them to pass the resolu tion without full knowledge 
of the consequences. He told them they might be arr ested. They may have to 
spend several months in dark and dingy prisons. The y might not be able to eat 
the food that they would be given. They would be at  the mercy of African 
warders. They should expect no mercy. They might be  assaulted, handcuffed. 
They might take ill and die in prison. Their famili es might suffer. Would they 
still pass the resolution and pledge resistance? 
At this time, the Chairman suggested that they shou ld pass the resolution with 
God as witness. Gandhi's ears stood up. In a flash,  he saw a great opportunity. 
He asked for permission to speak again. He explaine d to the listeners what it 
meant to take a pledge or vow in the name of God. T he resolution ceased to be GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  an ordinary resolution. It became a pledge or vow b efore God. There could be 
no going back from a vow taken with God as witness.  It became a spiritual 
obligation. Would they still take the pledge and pa ss the resolution? There was 
still time for those who were not sure, to desist. But for him, the leader, "only 
one course is open to me ... to die rather than sub mit to the law". The listeners 
were electrified. Some were in tears. All of them r ose and took the pledge or 
vow in the name of God. 
Gandhi said that at that moment, he did not underst and all the implications of 
the new method of resistance that the vow symbolize d. "I only knew that some 
new principle had come into being, which was capabl e of revolutionizing 
individual and social life." This was the birth of Satyagraha. To begin with he 
called it passive resistance; but this did not clea rly convey the inspiration 
behind the fight or the nature of the fight. So the  term 'Satyagraha' was coined 
on the basis of suggestions that came from Indian f riends. 
Many Indians refused to register. Gandhi was ordere d to leave Transvaal. He 
refused. He was arrested on the 10th of January 190 8. As was to become his 
custom later, he asked the magistrate to award him the heaviest sentence that 
the law prescribed, since he was the main culprit. He was sentenced to two 
months in prison. By the end of January many Indian s were in jail. General 
Smuts who was the Prime Minister was perplexed. He sent Mr. Cartright, the 
editor of a journal and a friend of Gandhi's, with a proposal for a compromise. 
Cartright met Gandhi in prison and gave him the Gen eral's message. The 
Government only wanted to prevent further immigrati on of Indians into 
Transvaal. So, if the Indians in Transvaal register ed themselves voluntarily he 
would withdraw the Ordinance. Gandhi was taken to m eet the General. 
Gandhi believed in the General's intentions and his  promise to repeal the Act, 
and agreed to the compromise. Gandhi was released. But he found it hard to 
convince many of his followers who had no faith in the government. Gandhi 
explained his reasons and announced that he would b e the first to register. 
On the appointed day, Gandhi was proceeding to the office of the Registrar to 
register voluntarily. He was surrounded by his frie nds and followers. Suddenly, GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  a Pathan who had taken the pledge of resistance ste pped forward, asked 
Gandhi what he was about to do, and felled him with  severe blows. Gandhi 
exclaimed 'Hai Ram' and fell unconscious. He was re moved to the house of a 
Christian missionary, Rev. Doke. When he regained h is consciousness, Gandhi 
made two requests. One was that Mir Alam and his as sistant should not be 
prosecuted, but should be forgiven. The other was t hat he (Gandhi) should be 
taken to the Asiatic Registrar so that he might be the first to register. But his 
physical condition was such that he could not be ta ken to the office of the 
Registrar. Gandhi then wanted that the Registrar sh ould be requested to go to 
his bed side. The Registrar came, but advised Gandh i to wait till he was well 
enough. But Gandhi would not agree. He had to be th e first to register as he 
had promised to do. But he could not lift his swoll en and bruised hand. His hand 
was lifted up and placed on the spot, and he signed  and gave his finger prints. 
Mr. Channey, the white Registrar, wiped his tears a s he saw Gandhi sign. This 
was not the last time Gandhi brought tears of affec tion and admiration to the 
eyes of his adversaries. 
But Gandhi's Indian critics were proved right. Gene ral Smuts betrayed Gandhi. 
As soon as he found that a large number of Indians had registered voluntarily, 
the General brought in a Bill to validate voluntary  registration in the eyes of 
the law, and announced that the Black Act (on regis tration) would not be 
repealed. Gandhi was truly tricked. The honour as w ell as the future of the 
Indian community was in danger. It seemed as though  they had defeated 
themselves. 
Gandhi rose to the occasion. He found a dignified w ay of exposing the General's 
perfidy and vindicating the honour, intentions and courage of the Indians. He 
declared that the Indians would stop registering an d would publicly burn the 
certificates of registration that had been issued t o them, thus voluntarily 
defying the Government and inviting them to take ac tion against them under 
the Act. A mammoth meeting was arranged at the grou nds of the Hamidia 
mosque, and a cauldron was set up near the dais. An  ultimatum was sent to the 
Government. From suffering in silence and petitioni ng, Gandhi had led the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  people to a position of fearlessness and defiance. It was they who were now 
issuing an ultimatum to the Government. "We regret to state that if the Asiatic 
Act is not repealed in terms of the settlement, and  if the Government's desire 
to this effect is not communicated to the Indians b efore a 'specific date', the 
certificates collected by the Indians would be burn t, and they would humbly 
but firmly take the consequences." 
The response was tremendous. There was high drama, open rebellion of the 
kind the world had never witnessed. The world press  had assembled to witness 
the bonfire. The Government did not relent. It repl ied in the negative. As its 
telegram was read out at the meeting, there were ch eers. Again, Gandhi 
declared that anyone who was afraid of consequences  could take back his 
certificate before it was burnt. There was only one  shout that rent the air : 
"Burn them." And as the certificates in the cauldro n were about to be set fire 
to, Mir Alam who had been released from prison step ped forward and hugged 
Gandhi, and apologized for mistaking Gandhi's inten tions and suggesting that he 
had been bought over by the whites. 
The struggle against the Black Act was intensified.  Gandhi found many 
ingenious ways of defying the Act. He inducted prom inent and respected 
leaders of the community like Parsi Sorabji and Ada jania from Natal into the 
struggle of defiance, to court arrest and imprisonm ent. 
The Government had to act. They arrested Gandhi and  imprisoned him. This 
was in 1908. He was sent to Volksrust prison. It wa s there, in the prison, that 
Gandhi read Thoreau's book on Civil Disobedience. H e was happy to find that 
the book vindicated his views and plan of action. B y now, many Indians had 
courted arrest through defiance or Satyagraha. They  were lodged in prison. 
Their courage and determination were exemplary. 
When Gandhi was released from prison after his thir d stint, in 1909, 
constitutional issues relating to the Union of Sout h African states were before 
the British Parliament. Many Indians felt that Gand hi should use the opportunity 
to present the Indian point of view to the Governme nt and Members of 
Parliament. He proceeded to London in the compay of  a colleague. He had GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  great faith in the fair play and sense of justice o f the British nation. But he was 
disappointed. Indian demands met with a negative an d cynical response. The 
visit to England, however, gave him an opportunity to secure sympathy and 
support from many leaders of public opinion in Engl and. It also gave him an 
opportunity to meet and exchange views with many In dian revolutionaries who 
were advocating violent means to seek India's indep endence. This saddened 
him. He felt that they had not thought out the mean ing of independence or the 
impact that one's methods would have on the attainm ent or distortion of one's 
goals. He was also saddened by their unthinking acc eptance of Western 
Civilization and the cult of industrialism. He was convinced that the philosophy 
of greed and indulgence would destroy human civiliz ation. To him Satyagraha 
was the answer. These thoughts were very much in hi s mind, and so, on his way 
from England to South Africa, he put his views down  in the form of a dialogue. 
This book was published first in Gujarati as  Hind Swaraj.  It was later translated 
into English, and is often looked upon as a basic e xposition of Gandhi's political 
and economic views. 
It was during this visit to London that Gandhi firs t started corresponding with 
Tolstoy, the great Russian thinker and litterateur.  Gandhi had read his books. 
To him Tolstoy was a sage, a revolutionary thinker.  He had been greatly 
influenced by Tolstoy's spiritual perceptions as we ll as his thoughts on social 
and economic matters. 
On his return from London, Gandhi was confronted wi th the need to intensify 
his struggle. Many Satyagrahis were in prison. Many  more would have to serve 
terms in prison. He had to find a way of looking af ter their families while they 
were in prison. He could not depend only on public funds. So he conceived the 
idea of setting up a farm where the families could live, work on land or crafts 
and produce what was needed for the community. One of his close associates, 
Herman Kallenbach, an architect of German stock off ered him a plot of 1000 
acres which had already been acquired. On this plot  was set up the Tolstoy 
Farm. The object of the farm was to train Satyagrah is and their families to lead 
a life of simplicity, love and truth, and to depend  on one's own labour. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  Kallenbach and other colleagues of Gandhi — Indian as well as Western — joined 
him. Everyone had to do manual work including the g rinding of corn. The 
community baked its own bread; had its tannery and shed for shoe-making. 
Inmates had wooden pillows and two blankets each. L ife was rigorous, but it 
was lived on the high plane on which the Satygrahi was expected to function. 
Gandhi also dealt with the need to provide educatio n to the children of the 
families. His own children were part of the young c ommunity that Gandhi tried 
to teach and guide. Gandhi conducted his experiment s with education and 
dietetics both at the Phoenix settlement and the To lstoy Farm. 
Meanwhile, a new King was ascending the throne of E ngland, and the British 
wanted to create an atmosphere of good will. They d ecided to amend and 
soften the Black Act, to make it look as though it was not specifically 
discriminatory against Indians. They released the S atyagrahis who were in jail. 
The Satygraha movement had gone on for four years o r more. It was now 
decided to suspend Satyagraha and review the next m oves. 
At this time, the British Government in India encou raged the great Indian 
patriot Gopal Krishna Gokhale to visit South Africa . He was a highly respected 
figure in the Empire as a great scholar, man of int egrity, wisdom, moderation 
and high values. He had espoused the cause of South  African Indians for many 
years, and done so with great force and effect. Gan dhi looked upon him as his 
political Guru. He, therefore, saw a great opportun ity in the visit of Gokhale. 
He took personal responsibility for all arrangement s and for attending to 
Gokhale's needs and serving him in every way. The G overnment of South Africa 
treated Gokhale with great respect. He was received  by General Botha, General 
Smuts and other ministers. Gokhale got the impressi on that General Botha had 
agreed to repeal the Black Act and abolish the 3 po unds tax. But Gandhi knew 
the South African leaders better. He expressed his disbelief. 
During the visit, Gokhale got an opportunity to obs erve Gandhi at close 
quarters. On his return to India, he said that Gand hi "has in him the marvellous 
spiritual power to turn ordinary men around him to heroes and martyrs. In 
Gandhi's presence one is ashamed to do anything 'un worthy', indeed afraid of GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  thinking anything 'unworthy'." Gokhale expressed th e hope that Gandhi would 
now be able to return to India since the struggle i n South Africa was nearly 
over. 
But soon, it was seen that Gokhale had been misled by the South African 
Leaders. General Smuts regretted that the proposal to abolish the 3 pounds tax 
and withdraw the Black Act had to be given up becau se of opposition from the 
whites. 
A new challenge had been flung at the Indian commun ity. Gandhi decided to 
respond with swift and decisive moves. He moved his  family to Phoenix, and 
decided to clear the Tolstoy farm and induct all in mates into the battle. Upto 
now, there were two issues that had rallied the com munity, namely the 
withdrawal of the Back Act or ban on Asian immigrat ion, and the abolition of 
the 3 pounds tax. 
A third was now added by a judgement delivered by J udge Searle. With one 
verdict the Judge declared all marriages solemnized  by rites outside the 
Christian Church invalid. By this stroke, all marri ages of Hindus, Muslims, Parsis 
and Sikhs became invalid in the eyes of law, thus u ndermining the legal status 
of families, wives and children. This infuriated wo men and men alike. Women 
became as keen to fight the government as men. Gand hi realized that this one 
act of the government had awakened women and made s oldiers and militants of 
them. He wanted to give women equal opportunity to take part in the struggle. 
He knew they were capable of great heroism and powe rs of endurance. These 
were qualities that the Satyagrahi needed. So he fo rged a plan of action. 
But to implement that he had first to persuade his own wife Kasturba to join 
the struggle, offer Satyagraha and court imprisonme nt and prosecution. This 
was done without difficulty. Kasturba was ready to show Gandhi that she too 
was willing to suffer imprisonment or work for the sake of justice. 
Gandhi formulated new plans. He would send women Sa tyagrahis including 
Kasturba across the borders of the two states. If a rrested, they would gd to 
prison. If left free, they would go to the coal min es at New Castle, where GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  Indian indentured labourers were working. They woul d tell the workers of the 
struggle and the government's undermining of Indian  marriages and families. 
Gandhi's plan worked. Women Satyagrahis crossed the  frontiers. Some including 
Kasturba were arrested and sent to prison. Others w ho were allowed to go free 
reached the mines. Their story sent the miners into  a fit of indignation. They 
downed their tools and came out of the pits. The re sponse was overwhelming. 
Gandhi came to know of the strike and rushed to New  Castle. He cautioned the 
miners. They were staking their all. They would los e the huts that the 
employers had given them. They would lose their job s and incomes. Their 
families would suffer. They should leave the mines only if they were prepared 
for all these possibilities. 
The struggle might be long. All that he could promi se was that he would "live 
and have my meals with them as long as the strike l asted". 
The workers reaffirmed their determination and arri ved in their thousands, 
with their women and children. Gandhi had a big pro blem on his hands. Surely, 
the workers added a new dimension to the force at h is command. But where 
was he to house them? How was he to feed them? How was he to use them in 
the struggle? They had to be housed under the roof of the sky. Some Indians 
helped in finding grains and other requirements. On e of them, Lazarus looked 
after their needs with all that he had, housing the m in his compound and 
putting his stocks of grain at their disposal. But how long could thousands be 
fed that way? 
Gandhi hit upon a plan that would meet many of his objectives. He would take 
the workers to the Tolstoy Farm where they could wo rk and wait to participate 
in the struggle. If they were arrested at the front ier of the State, Government 
would take responsibility for them. 
It was no easy task to take thousands of hungry ill iterate men, women and 
children on a long march. They had to get food on t he way. A white baker came 
to the rescue. He agreed to make bread available at  the stages of the march on 
the appointed days. Everyone would get Vi lbs. of b read and half an ounce of GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  sugar. That was all. Gandhi himself had to serve th e rations, since no one else 
could deal with the men who were angry and hungry. The rules of the march 
were read out. The marchers had to be disciplined. They should be non-violent. 
They should do nothing to provoke the white men in the areas through which 
they passed. They should observe good sanitary habi ts. Otherwise they may 
cause epidemics. 
They would cover the 200 miles from Charlestown to the Tolstoy Farm in eight 
days, walking 24 miles a day. Kallenbach, Polak and  others helped him to 
organize and conduct the march. The long march was perhaps the first long 
march in recorded history. It started on the 6th of  November 1913 at the break 
of dawn. It bore witness to the heroism and determi nation of the Indians. While 
the marchers forded a river at one point, a child p erched on the hip of a 
mother slipped into the swirling waters of the rive r. The mother did not wait to 
wail and mourn, but kept up the march with others. 
There were no incidents involving the white populat ion or the Police till the 
marchers reached the frontier. There Gandhi was arr ested at night and 
removed, but released on bail. He and his leading c olleagues were arrested, 
released on bail and rearrested when they resumed t he march. 
At Balfour, three special trains were waiting. The marchers were arrested. But 
now something unexpected happened. The workers were  not taken to prison. 
Instead they were taken back to the mines. The mine s were declared part of 
the premises of the prisons of New Castle and Dunde e. The white managerial 
staff of the mines were vested with the powers of j ailors. Workers refused to go 
down the pits. They were whipped. They refused. The y were forced down and 
beaten with iron chains. They refused to pick up to ols and work. They persisted 
in their defiance. Wherefrom did these indentured l abourers who were 
condemned as cowards and slaves get the iron will t o resist without raising 
their arms? 
The news of the atrocities that followed shocked th e capitals of the world, and 
sparked off 'hartals' and strikes by Indians all ov er South Africa. The 
Government inducted mounted military police. They w ere ordered to shoot at GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  sight. There were many scenes of heroic nonviolent defiance all over South 
Africa. 
Gandhi went on a fast. This was the first of his ma ny fasts for public causes. In 
utter identification with the indentured labourer, who was derisively called a 
'Coolie', Gandhi gave up his European dress. He cut  his hair short like the 
coolie, wore a lungi and discontinued the use of fo otwear. 
When reports reached England, there were a deep sen se of shame and waves of 
indignation. In India, people were shocked and enra ged. Gokhale and other 
Indian leaders wanted an immediate end to atrocitie s and discrimination. India 
was on fire. The British Viceroy himself was moved to make a speech at Madras, 
in support of the Satyagrahis and their cause. Gokh ale sent two prominent 
Englishmen to help Gandhi and to act as intermediar ies. One of them was the 
great leader, educationist and missionary, Rev. C. F. Andrews. 
The British Government was in a quandary. They brou ght pressure on the South 
African Government to appoint a commission to enqui re into Indian grievances 
and demands. Gandhi was not satisfied. There was no  Indian on the 
Commission. The Commission might turn out to be an eye wash. He, therefore, 
prepared to restart the struggle. 
But an unforeseen development took place. The worke rs of the South African 
Railway System went on a nation-wide strike. This c aused great hardship to all 
South Africa. Gandhi immediately suspended Satyagra ha, explaining that it was 
against the tenets of Satyagraha to exploit the dis tress of the adversary. 
This had a disarming effect on General Smuts and th e whites. They did not 
know how to fight and hate Gandhi in the face of su ch love and generosity. 
They realised the truth of what Gandhi had claimed from the very beginning : 
that he had nothing against the white population of  South Africa; all that he 
wanted was the removal of injustice. Love and suffe ring had melted the 
intransigence and resistance of the whites. The Gov ernment decided to accept 
all the three demands of the Indians, — abolition o f the poll tax, validation of 
marriages and abolition of restrictions on travel a nd residence. The Satyagraha 
came to a successful close. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  Gandhi had discovered a new weapon. He had demonstr ated the power of the 
weapon — a weapon or power that every human being h ad within himself. He 
had shown the power of love and suffering. He had t aken his people from the 
depths of helplessness to the peaks of victory: fro m contempt and ridicule to 
respect; from fear to fearlessness and bravery. 
He felt he had completed his work in South Africa. He decided to return to the 
wider theatre of the motherland to serve his people  and to further demonstrate 
the power of Satyagraha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57   
10 
In July 1914, Gandhi and his family left the shores  of South Africa to return to 
India. Gandhi first went to England in the hope tha t Gokhale would be in 
England, and he would be able to meet him. But as G andhi's ship neared 
Britain, the First World War broke out. 
Gandhi was concerned about what he should do as a c itizen of the British 
Empire. He still believed that the Empire stood for  values that would benefit 
the people of India. Moreover, as long as he enjoye d the benefits of being a 
citizen, he could not neglect or ignore the duties that were attached to 
citizenship. Since he believed in Ahimsa, he could not take to arms. But there 
were other ways in which he could serve. He, theref ore, offered to raise an 
Ambulance Corps and started training. But he contra cted pleurisy. He was 
advised that the cold of England would make recover y difficult. So he decided 
to leave for India. 
He was given a rousing reception when he arrived in  Bombay. Gokhale himself 
was at the dock to receive him. He was keen to meet  Gokhale because he 
wanted to learn more about conditions in India befo re he plunged into public 
work in India. Gokhale had asked him to spend one y ear observing and learning. 
That would help him to understand men and issues, a nd to feel the pulse of the 
Indian nation. 
Gandhi first went to Rajkot and other places in Guj arat. From there, he went to 
Shantiniketan in Bengal. The great poet Rabindranat h Tagore had set up 
Shantiniketan to serve as the centre of his small v ersatile  sadhana,  and as an 
instrument for the transmission of his vision to su cceeding generations. When 
Gandhi decided to leave South Africa, he had to fin d a new home for his 
colleagues in the Phoenix Settlement and the Tolsto y Farm who had joined him 
to live as members of the spiritual community and p articipate in his  sadhana.  
Though Gandhi and Tagore had never met each other, both knew each other as 
kindred spirits, though following different paths o f  sadhana.  Rabindranath was 
the first leader to describe Gandhi as 'the Mahatma ' — "a great saint in a GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  beggar's attire", and to Gandhi, Rabindranath was G urudev, or the Great 
sentinel of Shantiniketan. It was, therefore, natur al for Gandhi to think that 
Shantiniketan would be a good temporary home for hi s colleagues, till he 
decided where to set up his own Ashram or permanent  abode in India. Gandhi's 
visit to Shantiniketan was a landmark. A new stream  of consciousness flowed 
from him, and even though his stay was short, Gandh i left an imprint on the 
students and teachers of Shantiniketan. Gandhi's so journ was, however, 
interrupted when news came of the passing away of G okhale. 
Gandhi rushed to Poona which was the headquarters o f the Servants of India 
Society and Gokhale himself. Since he had looked up on Gokhale as his political 
Guru, he offered to work for the Servants of India Society which Gokhale had 
set up. But he knew that his ways of thinking were not identical with those of 
Gokhale's main colleagues like Srinivasa Sastri. Ga ndhi did not want to 
embarrass anyone. So, he withdrew his application f or the membership of the 
Society. 
In the meanwhile, after much thought, Gandhi decide d to set up his Ashram at 
Ahmedabad, in his native province. He set up his As hram first at Kochrab in the 
town itself. Later he moved to the outskirts of Ahm edabad, and set up an 
Ashram on the banks of the river, Sabarmati. 
Gandhi's Ashrams were different from those of the a ncient sages. He was a 
seeker after Truth. To him, Truth was God. So he wa s a  Sadhak.  But he did not 
believe that one had to withdraw from the world or society to seek Truth or 
God. Truth could be and should be sought in all fie lds of human activity. He did 
not believe in dividing life into 'this worldly' an d 'other worldly'. There was only 
one world. Whether it was the inner world of the hu man being or the external 
world in which he lived, — society and environment.  Truth ruled both the 
worlds. So the path to Truth or the  sadhana  for truth had to be identical. 
He identified this common  sadhana  as Satyagraha — life and action based on 
Truth, a way of life that would enable one to find and cling to Truth in personal 
and social life. "Such a way of life had to be base d on Truth, love,  
brahmacharya  or total consecration of oneself to the pursuit of  truth; non- GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  stealing; non-possession (non-acquisitiveness) and freedom from the slavery of 
the palate; bread-labour: equal respect for all rel igions: Swadeshi; respectful 
tolerance of differences of opinion, fearlessness a nd humility. On the basis of 
these beliefs he formulated eleven vows that every member of the Ashram had 
to observe. He looked upon the Ashram as a spiritua l community of social 
activists. 
Gandhi went to attend the session of the Indian Nat ional Congress at Calcutta. 
He had been present at an earlier session of the Co ngress. But then Gokhale 
was there. He was not on his own. Since then, thing s had changed. The Indian 
struggle in South Africa had made Gandhi known all over India. He had acquired 
the reputation of a man who was both a saint and a militant. India is a land 
that venerates saints. So Gandhi had his first tast e of the veneration of people 
who were eager for his  darshan.  
At this session, a young man from Champaran in Biha r, Rajkumar Shukla, met 
him and talked of the woes of the peasants of Champ aran and their exploitation 
by the British. The planters were forcing them to c ultivate Indigo on their lands 
and imposing and extracting many illegal levies fro m them. 
The poor peasants were compelled to make offerings of poultry, meat and the 
like, whenever there were celebrations in the house  of the planters. Gandhi 
was touched by these accounts, but told Shukla that  he would be able to go to 
Bihar only after some days. Shukla persisted, follo wing him from place to place. 
Finally, a date was fixed, and Gandhi went to Champ aran. There, his 
preliminary enquiries confirmed all that Shukla had  said. Gandhi decided to 
stay and make a detailed enquiry before deciding on  a course of action. He was 
assisted by eminent lawyers like Brij Kishore Babu,  and Dr. Rajendra Prasad, 
who, later became the first President of India. 
The news of Gandhi's arrival spread to the villages . 'A Mahatma had come to 
save the starving and exploited poor peasant.' Thou sands of villagers flocked to 
see Gandhi. The town was overflowing. The British C ollector got nervous. He 
ordered Gandhi to leave the district. Gandhi refuse d saying that he had gone to 
Champaran to help the poor, not to challenge the Go vernment. He was arrested GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  and produced in Court. But the trial had to be post poned because the 
Magistrate did not know whether the massive crowds that had thronged to the 
premises of the court would remain peaceful. He pos tponed the trial and 
sought Gandhi's help to control the crowds. 
In the meanwhile, the Viceroy and the Governor orde red that the case against 
Gandhi should be withdrawn, and he should be allowe d to proceed with his 
enquiry. Gandhi was set free. Gandhi resumed the wo rk of collecting evidence. 
He, and his colleagues interviewed thousands of pea sants and recorded their 
evidence after questioning the witnesses, to be sur e that what was being 
recorded was nothing but unvarnished truth. Even th e British officers of the 
Indian Civil Service were impressed by Gandhi's rel entless and dispassionate 
concern for truth. The Government received reports that the evidence was 
overwhelming and indisputable. They appointed a Com mission of enquiry, and 
made Gandhi a member of the Commission. After a car eful assessment of the 
evidence, the Commission upheld Gandhi's case in ev ery respect. The system 
that compelled plantation of Indigo was given up, a nd it was agreed that the 
peasants would be paid reasonable compensation. Thi s was the first victory of 
Satyagraha in India. 
While taking evidence, Gandhi had also been appalle d by the poverty, illiteracy 
and shocking sanitary conditions in the villages. H e set up schools and centres 
of popular education, and called his friends from B ihar, Gujarat, Bombay and 
elsewhere to go to Champaran and work for the bette rment of the conditions of 
the villagers. Acharya Kripalani was then working a s a Professor in Muzaffarpur. 
He joined Gandhi, and became one of his closest ass ociates. 
Gandhi was still in Champaran when he was informed about the serious trouble 
that was brewing in Ahmedabad. The workers of the t extile mills were restless. 
It was feared that they might go on strike, and the  city might be in the grip of 
violent disturbances. Anasuyaben Sarabhai, who was working with industrial 
labour sought his help. So did the mill-owners who were led by Anasuyaben's 
brother, Ambalal Sarabhai. Even the Collector, who was the representative of 
the British Government, asked Gandhi whether he cou ld not step in to save the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  city from violent disturbances. Gandhi studied the case of the workers. It was 
mainly for the restoration of some allowances that they were drawing. Nearly 
80% of these had been cut down. Meanwhile the cost 
of living had gone up. Mill-owners were making high er profits. Gandhi pleaded 
with the mill-owners to settle the matter through n egotiations or arbitration. 
They agreed, but went back on a flimsy and technica l excuse. Gandhi had no 
alternative but to advise labourers to strike. But he got workers to take a 
solemn pledge not to go to work till their demands were met, not to resort to 
violence under any circumstance. The workers took t he pledge, and Gandhi 
took up their leadership. 
It was an uncommon struggle. There was no bitternes s and no hatred. The 
leaders of the owners as well as the employees met Gandhi every day. Gandhi 
was continuing his efforts to persuade the employer s. Everyday all workers 
assembled at a prayer meeting, and Gandhi advised t hem on the state of the 
strike and the duties of workers. Twenty days passe d. Workers began to get 
restive. Someone whispered that it was the workers who suffered by the 
prolonged strike, not Gandhi who ate his meals and went about in cars. This cut 
Gandhi to the quick. At the prayer meeting of the d ay, he announced that he 
was giving up food. He would fast till the workers reiterated their 
determination to stand by the pledge they had taken . It was not a fast against 
the employers, to make them accept the demands of t he workers. It was meant 
to make workers realize the need to stand by the pl ighted word. Gandhi's 
announcement resulted in a wave of repentance. Men and women were in 
tears. They implored Gandhi to give up his fast. Th e fast also brought pressure 
on the owners, though Gandhi did not want to influe nce 
them with a fast. A compromise was arrived at. An a rbitrator was appointed. 
His award totally vindicated the demands that Gandh i had formulated, Gandhi 
called the struggle a "Dharma Yuddha", because it w as waged for justice, and 
with the pure means of persuasion, love and volunta ry suffering. 
Gandhi was elected President of the Gujarat Sabha. His attention went to the 
plight of the peasants in the Kheda district of Guj arat. Peasants were reeling GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  under the impact of one of the worst famines in mem ory. Crops had failed, but 
the Government was insisting that land revenue shou ld be paid in full. Gandhi 
told the peasants that since their case was just an d indisputable, they should 
be prepared to fight non-violently. They should ref use to pay the land revenue, 
unless it was reassessed in the light of the failur e of crops. If the government 
retaliated by confiscating their property, farms an d bullocks they should not 
surrender or take to violence. Peasants were ready,  and Gandhi started 
preparing them for the hard struggle that lay ahead . 
It was then that Gandhi made the acquaintance of Sa rdar Vallabhbhai Patel, a 
barrister who had returned from England and was pra ctising in Ahmedabad. 
Vallabhbhai became a lifelong colleague of Gandhi, attracted by his courage 
and dynamic methods of struggle for justice. The Sa rdar himself was of peasant 
origin. He was one of the ablest organisers the cou ntry had ever seen. People 
stuck to their determination even at the cost of th e forfeiture of their property 
and the harassment and suffering that the Governmen t inflicted. Finally, the 
Government yielded in the face of the heroic, nonvi olent and unflinching 
struggle of the peasants. There was a compromise on  the agreement that only 
those who felt they could afford would pay the reve nue imposts. 
Gandhi had taken up the causes of peasants and work ers in different parts of 
India, and proved that Satyagraha was a practical a nd effective method, and 
was in tune with the genius of the people of India.  
Gandhi was invited by Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya t o attend the foundation 
ceremony of the Benaras Hindu University at Benaras . The Viceroy delivered 
the inaugural address. A galaxy of British official s, political leaders and the 
princely Rulers had assembled. Dr. Annie Besant was  in the Chair. When 
Gandhi's turn to speak came, the great assemblage g ot a taste of the 
revolutionary in Gandhi. He began by regretting tha t he had to speak in a 
foreign language to his own people. He went on to t alk of the poverty of the 
starving millions and the glittering jewellery of t he princes; how the poor farm 
labourer toiled and sweated in the sun to produce t wo blades of paddy, where 
there was only one, while the British and the princ es lived in luxury and GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  opulence. "Whenever I hear of a great palace rising  in any great city of India, 
be it in British India or be it in India which is r uled by our great chiefs, I 
become jealous at once and I say: 'Oh, it is the mo ney that has come from the 
agriculturists'." He said that tears rose in his ey es when he thought of the 
starving toilers who produced all wealth, but did n ot get two square meals a 
day. India would have no peace or progress till the  poor came into their own. 
The Chair tried to stop Gandhi, but he was undaunte d. Finally, bowing to the 
Chair, he sat down. But he had sounded the bugle of  revolt and revolution, and 
sent a message of hope to the people who were groan ing under exploitation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64   
11 
The World War-I ended in 1918. It was hoped that wh en the war ended the 
British Government would take steps to meet the asp irations of the Indian 
people for self-government. Gandhi himself had grea t faith in the intentions 
and fair play of the British. But he, as well as th e country, received a rude 
shock. It was incredible. Instead of transferring m ore power and freedom to the 
people, the Government proposed to make the severe restrictions on freedom 
imposed during the war a part of the regular laws o f the country. The new Bill 
that was to be introduced would give the Government  powers to detain citizens 
without trial, to search premises, to prevent meeti ngs, to suppress newspapers 
and publications, and so forth. This was deceit, be trayal, a tightening of 
chains. The Bill called the Rowlatt Bill could not be allowed to become law. It 
had to be resisted. But how ? By whom ? 
Upto now, the Congress and the national movement ha d seen only two 
alternatives. One was the method of praying and pet itioning to the 
Government. The other was the cult of terrorism, th e bomb and assassination. 
Of these, the first depended on the Government's go odwill. The other was an 
unequal fight, because an unarmed people could not match the forces of the 
Government through sporadic acts of indignation or revenge. The masses of the 
people were not involved in either. Gandhi believed  that the Government could 
be defeated only if the masses entered the battle. They could do so only if the 
fight was waged with means that they had access to.  These were the methods 
of non-violent Satyagraha. He had seen the masses u se this method with 
courage and success in South Africa. If it could be  done by Indians in South 
Africa, why could it not be done by Indians in thei r own motherland ? 
He formed Satyagraha Sabhas in which members took t he Satyagraha Pledge. 
He began a campaign to educate people in the meanin g and methods of 
Satyagraha. He had tried Satyagraha in Champaran, A hmedabad and Kheda. He 
believed that the time had come for him to place it  before the whole of India, 
and to use it to resist the Rowlatt Bill. The strug gles that he had led had been GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  in the North and West of India. He had to explain S atyagraha to the people of 
the South as well. He went to Madras on this missio n. It was there that he made 
the acquaintance of Rajagopalachari who later becam e one of his chief 
lieutenants. 
The situation called for immediate action. One coul d not wait — even to 
convince the Indian National Congress. He had to ap peal to the people. It was a 
battle for  Dharma  or Truth. He was confident that the people of Indi a would 
respond to the appeal of  Dharma.  He was turning these thoughts over in his 
mind. While still at Madras, he decided to appeal t o the people of India to 
observe a  hartal,  to voluntarily desist from all work and spend the day in prayer 
and self-purification for the battle. "Last night, the idea came to me as if in a 
dream, that we should call on the country to observ e a general  hartal"  He 'Said 
that the appeal was also a serious risk. If people were roused, but went out of 
control, the struggle would suffer a grievous setba ck, and result in more 
ruthless repression. But Gandhi was confident. "The  step taken is possibly the 
most momentous in the history of India. It constitu tes an attempt to 
revolutionize politics and to restore moral force t o its original station." 
It was a gamble. The inert people of India might no t have responded. He would 
then have become a laughing stock. But he was vindi cated. The response 
proved that he had understood the masses of India. He had discovered the key 
to their hearts and minds. 
He had asked that the  hartal  be observed on the 30th March. But later the date 
was shifted to the 6th of April. The postponement c aused some confusion. Delhi 
observed the  hartal  on the 30th of March. There was unprecedented 
enthusiasm and public response. But there were also  incidents of violence. 
Gandhi went to Delhi and wanted to go to Punjab whe re the cauldron was 
brewing. But he was arrested at the outskirts of De lhi and put on a train that 
carried him back to Bombay. At Bombay he learned th at there were violent 
incidents in Ahmedabad and Viramgam in Gujarat, inv olving the death of 
innocent Englishmen. He was shocked. He decided to postpone his journey to 
Punjab and atone. He confessed that he had made a ' Himalayan miscalculation' GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  about the ability of the people to remain non-viole nt in the face of provocation 
or in the thick of the fight. He issued pamphlets t o explain the meaning and 
discipline of Satyagraha. 
But events did not wait in the Punjab. People were deeply agitated and 
indignant at the arrest of Gandhi. Local leaders li ke Kichlew and Satyapal were 
struggling to see that the crowds did not go astray . But when the Government 
arrested and removed them on the 10th of April, the  crowds lost control. They 
attacked Government offices, cut telephone lines, b urnt down the Town Hall 
and attacked and injured Europeans. Even European w omen were attacked. 
The Government brought in troops under General Dyer . There was a lull. It was 
the calm before the storm. On Baisakhi day, the 13t h of April, a peaceful 
meeting was announced at the Jallianwalla Bagh. Tho usands of unarmed men, 
women and children assembled. There was only one na rrow passage through 
which people could enter or leave the ground. It wa s walled in on all sides by 
buildings. The General brought armoured cars and se aled the passage that 
provided entry and exit. He declared the meeting un lawful, and ordered the 
troops to fire into the unarmed crowd. 1650 rounds were fired. According to 
the Government itself, 379 people were felled down with bullets. 1137 were 
injured. Martial Law was proclaimed. Orders were pr omulgated compelling 
Indians to crawl on their stomachs, on the road on which English people had 
been attacked. It was some time before the rest of the country came to know 
of these events. India was aghast. General Dyer boa sted that he had exhausted 
his ammunition, otherwise he would have fired more rounds. He had wanted to 
teach Indians a lesson they would never forget. 
The Government appointed a committee under Lord Hun ter. Their task was to 
enquire into the incidents. But most Indians felt t hat the committee was an 
eyewash. A citizens' committee was appointed. This included Gandhi and 
leaders like Motilal Nehru and Jayakar. It is in th e course of his tour with the 
committee that Gandhi came to know the gruesome det ails of what had 
happened. In the meanwhile, the British nation was engaged in making a hero 
of Dyer. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  What he saw in the Punjab and what he saw of the Go vernment's attitude 
began a process of disillusionment in Gandhi. He be gan to lose faith in the 
professions and the fair play of the Government. He  began to see the Imperial 
Government as a force of evil. A Satyagrahi had to non co-operate with evil. 
The acts and attitudes of the Government thus force d Gandhi, who was once 
proud to be a citizen of the Empire, to become a co nfirmed non-co-operator. 
Gandhi placed the idea of non-co-operation before t he people. He asked the 
Congress to accept the programme of non-co-operatio n. The Muslims of India 
too were angry with Britain and the Government for the way in which they had 
treated the institution of the Caliph of the Turkis h Empire — Khilafat, as it was 
called. They had sought Gandhi's advice. He was inv ited to their conferences. 
He proposed a programme of non-co-operation. It too k the participants by 
surprise. But by 1920 they had realized that there was no alternative method of 
action. The Khilafat Committee of which Maulana Aza d was a respected leader, 
unanimously decided to accept the programme, and au thorized Gandhi to start 
the programme on their behalf. Gandhi placed the pr ogramme before the 
Congress. The Congress too accepted the programme a nd authorized him to 
lead the non-co-operation movement. 
The aim of the movement was to withdraw all coopera tion from the 
Government. People were asked to boycott schools an d colleges, the courts of 
law and all other institutions of the Government. I n response to the call, 
students left educational institutions, and promine nt lawyers like Motilal 
Nehru, C. R. Das and others gave up their practice.  People were asked to give 
up approaching the Government Courts for justice. T hose who had received 
titles and honours from the Government returned the m. Rabindranath Tagore 
returned his Knighthood. Many others returned their  titles. Gandhi returned the 
medals he had received for his services in the wars . The moral objective was to 
non- co-operate with evil. The political objective was to paralyze the 
Government and make it evident that it had lost the  respect and recognition of 
the people. No Government could go on without the c ooperation of the people. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  Non-co-operation also meant reprisals from the Gove rnment. Many moderates 
in the Congress found non-co-operation distasteful,  and left the Congress. 
Among them were known leaders like Mohammed Ali Jin nah who later became 
the founder of Pakistan. But Gandhi won the day. A tidal wave swept the 
country. Students, Lawyers, Government servants and  all sections of the people 
responded. National educational institutions were s et up in many places to 
provide education to those who boycotted the Govern ment schools. Gandhi 
himself set up the Gujarat Vidyapeeth. People's cou rts were set up to settle 
disputes outside the British courts. Bonfires of fo reign goods lit up the sky as 
part of the programme to boycott foreign goods. 
Gandhi started three weeklies,  Young India  in English, and  Navajivan  in Hindi 
and Gujarati, to spread the message of Satyagraha a nd non-cooperation, and to 
explain his concept of Swaraj, and the individual a nd collective  Sadhana  that 
was needed for it. His message reached every nook a nd corner in India. 
Thousands of Indians had been arrested, and were in  jail. There was an 
insistent demand that Gandhi should launch a Civil Disobedience movement. He 
promised at the Calcutta session of the Congress (1 920) that India would have 
Swaraj within a year if it took to non-violent non- co-operation. He decided to 
start mass Civil Disobedience in one district and e xtend it to others if it proved 
successful and remained non-violent. He chose Bardo li in Gujarat, and wrote to 
the Viceroy on the 1st of February 1922, telling hi m of his intention to start 
mass Civil Disobedience from Bardoli. 
The country was on flash point. Within three days o f the despatch of the letter, 
something happened in Chauri Chaura in Eastern U. P . which upset all plans and 
assessments. A crowd of demonstrators was passing a  Police Station. The Police 
waited till the tail of the crowd appeared. They th en ridiculed and provoked 
the participants of the procession. Some of the pro cessionists responded and 
the Police opened fire. The crowd returned and set fire to the Police Station. 
The constables who tried to escape from the burning  building were hacked to 
death. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  Gandhi was shocked. How could he start a mass Civil  Disobedience after Chauri 
Chaura showed that people had not understood the di scipline that the 
Satyagraha army should observe ? He promptly suspen ded the plan to launch 
mass Civil Disobedience. Many of his followers and colleagues like C. R. Das, 
Jawaharlal Nehru and others were indignant and nonp lussed. How could one 
bring a people's movement to the white pitch of rev olutionary action and then 
withdraw? Gandhi's answer was clear. He was the gen eral. If the general could 
not rely on the discipline of the Army, how could h e conduct the campaign ? If 
soldiers took what action they pleased, how could t here be a concerted, well-
directed deployment of the force of the Army? He ha d no alternative but to 
disengage, regroup and return to the charge. 
The Government was in two minds ever since Gandhi l aunched non-co-
operation. Were they to leave him free or to arrest  him and risk a flare up? It 
seemed to them now that the time had arrived. Gandh i seemed to have lost the 
support of many colleagues. People were demoralized  that Gandhi had called 
off the fight. It appeared to the Government that G andhi was isolated, 
despondent and 'played out'. This was the moment to  strike. He was arrested on 
the 10th of March and put on trial at Ahmedabad in the court of Mr. 
Broomfield. 
Then followed an extrardinary trial, which perhaps has no parallel. The court 
was overflowing with citizens, — Gandhi's followers  as well as others. The Judge 
came, and before taking his seat, bowed to the pris oner at the bar. Before him 
was a man who had been charged with sedition, tampe ring with the loyalty of 
His Majesty's servants and subjects, spreading disa ffection among the people 
and the Army. The charges were based on three artic les that Gandhi had 
written in the  Young India.  Gandhi and his colleague Shankarlal Banker were 
the accused. Gandhi made it easy for the Judge by p leading guilty. He said he 
had preached disaffection. He was once a loyal subj ect and co-operator. He 
then described how from a loyal citizen he had been  forced to become a rebel. 
Sedition had now become a moral and spiritual duty for him. But non-violence 
was the first and the last article of his creed. He  knew he was playing with fire GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70  and running a mad risk. But if he were discharged, he would do the same thing 
again. He knew he was guilty in the eyes of the law  that the British Government 
had promulgated. But there was a higher law by whic h a human being is 
judged, and he was acting in accordance with that h igher law. The Judge had 
only one option — to resign and join Gandhi if he b elieved in the higher law, or 
award him the highest punishment prescribed by the Government's laws, since 
there was nothing to extenuate the gravity of his a ction. 
The Judge was not to be outdone. He too knew it was  a historic trial. He 
addressed the accused with great courtesy and respe ct, and said : "Mr. Gandhi 
you have made my task easy by pleading guilty to th e charge of sedition; it 
would be impossible to ignore the fact that in the eyes of millions of your 
countrymen you are a great patriot and great leader . Even those who differ 
from you in politics look upon you as a man of high  ideals and of noble and of 
even saintly life. It is my duty to judge you as a man subject to the law. There 
are probably few people in India who do not regret that you should have made 
it impossible for any Government to leave you at li berty. But it is so." Then the 
Judge placed him in the category of a great patriot  who had been sentenced 
earlier, Lokmanya Tilak, and sentenced Gandhi to si x years of imprisonment. 
He also added that if the course of events made it possible for the Government 
to release Gandhi earlier, "none would be happier t han I". Gandhi thanked the 
Judge for the courtesy he had received. His friends  and followers in the court 
were overcome with emotion. Many wept unashamedly. Gandhi was taken to 
the Yervada prison to serve the term. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71   
12 
Gandhi settled down to his six-year term in prison.  He was lodged in the 
Yervada jail near Poona. He believed that the disci pline of the Satyagrahi 
wanted him to spend every minute in the pursuit of truth, in making himself a 
better instrument, and in showing others how they c ould do likewise, and work 
for the reign of truth and justice in society. 
He followed his regular routine of praying, spinnin g, reading and reflecting. 
While in the Yervada prison, he read about 150 book s. These included classics 
and the works of well-known authors. Gandhi brought  his full attention to bear 
on whatever he read. He studied, reflected, digeste d, and absorbed whatever 
seemed logical to him. 
The jail authorities had deputed an African prisone r, to work as his attendant. 
Neither could talk to the other because neither kne w the other's language. But 
one day the African was stung by a scorpion. Gandhi  promptly made an incision, 
sucked the poison out, and cleaned and bandaged the  area. The African 
prisoner became a devoted and loyal attendant. 
In a few months, Gandhi developed acute appendiciti s. In January 1924, he had 
to be removed to the Sassoon Hospital in Poona. The  condition of the patient 
needed immediate surgical treatment. Col. Maddock, an English surgeon, was 
to perform the surgery. Gandhi summoned his friend Srinivasa Sastry of the 
Servants of India Society. He sat doubled up in bed , being in acute pain, and 
wrote a statement, saying that he was undergoing th e surgery of his own will. 
He was being treated with great courtesy; he had fu ll faith in the surgeon, and 
whatever happened would be the will of God. He want ed to ensure that if 
something untoward happened, the country did not bl ame the surgeon or the 
Government. As it happened electricity failed durin g the operation. The 
surgeon had to continue with the light of a hurrica ne lantern. The operation 
was successful. Gandhi recovered. The Government de cided to remit the 
unexpired period of the prison term and release Gan dhi. Gandhi felt sad that he 
had to be released due to ill-health. He went to Bo mbay to recuperate. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  In the meanwhile, he became fully acquainted with w hat was happening in the 
country. The exhilaration of the days of non-co-ope ration had waned. The 
country was in a state of depression. Congressmen w ere divided on what was to 
be done. Some well- known leaders like C. R. Das, M otilal Nehru, Vitthalbhai 
Patel and others were in favour of entering the new  Councils and Assemblies 
that would come into existence as a result of the B ritish Government's decision 
to set up such bodies (Minto- Morley Reforms). Othe rs like Rajagopalachari and 
Vallabhbhai Patel felt that the reforms did not tra nsfer real power, and 
participation in the councils would only give them respectability. It would only 
enable the British Government to misguide world opi nion to believe that they 
had set up self-governing bodies in India. These le aders, therefore, felt there 
should be no change in the policy of non-cooperatio n. Others argued that one 
should use entry into the councils to expose and ch eckmate the Government. 
In spite of two sessions of the Congress, one at Ga ya, and the other at Delhi, no 
compromise could be reached. Those who wanted chang e in the policy of non-
co-operation had formed a Swaraj Party, and fought the elections to the 
councils. Gandhi wanted to give the Swarajists free dom to try and see whether 
they could succeed in "wrecking the reforms from wi thin". He presided over the 
Congress at Belgaum in 1924 and prevented a split i n the Congress. 
Both the representatives of the Khilafat Committee and the Indian National 
Congress had been unanimously behind the Non-co-ope ration and Civil 
Disobedience movements. They had received powerful support from Maulana 
Azad, the Ali Brothers and others. But in the year during which Gandhi was in 
prison, things had changed. The issue of the Caliph ate was dead when Kamal 
Ataturk came to power in Turkey. The issue that had  roused Muslims had 
ceased to exist. The British Government was keen to  woo the Muslim leaders 
and drive a wedge between the two communities. They  seemed to have 
succeeded. There were ugly and barbarous riots in w hich the two communities 
had fought each other in many parts of India. Gandh i could not bear this 
estrangement of brothers and the readiness to sink to the level of brutes. He 
felt that such acts had nothing to do with religion . In fact one who had the love GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  of God in his heart should have the love of man, of  all men, in his heart. Gandhi 
decided to appeal to the conscience of both communi ties. He went on a 
twenty- one days' fast. His fast and the attendant suffering and penance melted 
hard hearts and rekindled the spirit of tolerance a nd human affection. A 
national unity conference was held in Delhi. Leader s of all communities pledged 
to maintain peace and friendship. 
Gandhi now threw himself into a nation-wide campaig n to build the foundations 
of a new nation and to educate people on the essent ials of Satyagraha. He had 
already inspired a change in the constitution of th e Congress. From a forum for 
speeches and debates, it had been transformed into an instrument of 
democratic action, with membership, elected committ ees, rules of procedure 
and so on. The objective had been defined as Swaraj . The means that it would 
use would be "peaceful and legitimate". The Congres s had found it difficult to 
accept the word 'non-violent' since many in the Con gress had accepted non-
violence 'only as a policy', and 'not as a creed'. Gandhi had reconciled himself to 
presenting his non-violence through an imperfect me dium. 
There were other aspects of nation building that ne eded immediate attention: 
Communal Unity, regeneration of spinning and weavin g and organizing the 
production of khadi to provide self-employment to h undreds of thousands of 
villagers; working to ; ensure equal status and opp ortunities to women; working 
to organize kisans, workers, and students; working against discrimination and 
untouchability, and to establish social equality; w orking for the eradication of 
evil habits like drinking; working for the welfare of tribals and so on. Gandhi 
wanted to reach and serve all sections of people. 
It is only when everyone received justice that the nation would become united 
in its will to seek freedom and build a new society . Gandhi set up organizations 
to undertake these programmes and travelled the len gth and breadth of the 
country in intensive tours to promote what he descr ibed as the constructive 
programme, — the constructive aspect of the non-vio lent revolution which was 
aimed at creating a new man and a new society. Gand hi also wrote every week GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  in the  Young India  and other weeklies to explain the implications of the 
philosophy and methods of Satyagraha. 
In 1927, the British Government appointed ^a Royal Commission to review the 
working of the Reforms that had been introduced in 1919. This Commission was 
headed by Sir John Simon. There was no Indian on th e Commission. The people 
of India looked upon the Commission as an insult to  the nation, and the 
Congress decided to boycott the Commission. Everywh ere the Commission met 
with black flags and deafening cries of "Simon Go B ack". 
The British Government challenged the Indian leader s to produce an agreed 
proposal for Constitutional Reform. In answer, a Co mmittee set up by an All 
Parties Conference under the Chairmanship of Motila l Nehru formulated a set of 
proposals. But the younger leaders like Jawaharlal and Subhash Bose were not 
satisfied with the demand for 'Dominion Status'. Th ey wanted complete 
Independence. It looked as though there would be a break. At the Calcutta 
Congress, Gandhi suggested a compromise. The Nehru report should be 
accepted with the condition that if the British Gov ernment did not grant 
Dominion Status, within one year, the Congress woul d accept complete 
Independence as its goal, and would lead a movement  of non-violent, non-co-
operation to achieve the objective. 
For five years after his release in 1924, Gandhi bu ried himself in all these 
activities. Meanwhile many changes were taking plac e in the political field. 
In 1928 Gandhi got another opportunity to demonstra te the power of non-
violent Satyagraha; to show how even 'unlettered' p easants could use the 
weapon to bring mighty Governments to their knees. The British Government of 
the Bombay Presidency decided to increase land reve nue by 22% in the Bardoli 
Taluk. The area was already suffering from the fail ure of crops, and the poor 
peasant found it beyond his competence to pay the t axes, even if he lived on a 
starvation diet. When all efforts to persuade the G overnment failed, Gandhi 
felt that the poor peasant could secure justice and  save himself only through 
Satyagraha. But Satyagraha demanded firm determinat ion, effective 
organization, unflinching courage and readiness to suffer. Gandhi deputed his GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  trusted colleague, Sardar Patel to organize the str uggle in Bardoli. The British 
Government decided' to crush the movement with ruth less repression. The huts 
and pots and pans of the poor peasants were confisc ated. Their oxen and 
buffaloes were impounded and removed. Their ploughs  were taken away. The 
Government announced that the lands that had been c onfiscated would be sold 
in auction. Peasants starved; hid their belongings;  dismembered their carts and 
buried the parts to hide them from the eyes of the police. But no one yielded. 
Reports of the atrocious repression and the courage ous resistance of the people 
spread all over India. Contributions started pourin g in from all over India. 
Gandhi announced that he would personally take over  the leadership of the 
campaign if the Sardar was arrested. He moved to Ba rdoli. Meanwhile, the 
Governor of Bombay went to consult the Viceroy. He told the Viceroy that the 
question was whether the writ of the Government was  to run in the District. 
But in a few days, the Government decided to climb down. 
It revoked the increase in taxes; released all pris oners; returned confiscated 
lands and property; and returned the cattle, or pai d compensation for their 
loss. People agreed to pay taxes at the old rates. Th6 peasants of Bardoli and 
their leaders Sardar Patel and Gandhi had set an ex ample that other districts in 
India could follow. 
Meanwhile, there was increasing scepticism about th e Governments' talk of 
constitutional reforms. Hardly anyone believed that  the Government was ready 
to transfer power. Even moderate Congressmen were d isillusioned. The younger 
leaders in the Congress were no longer prepared to countenance British rule in 
India. They, therefore, wanted the Congress to decl are that it was no longer 
satisfied with "Dominion Status" within the British  Empire. Nothing short of total 
Independence could satisfy Indian aspirations. They  felt that the time had come 
to demand complete Independence, and the ending of the chapter of Imperial 
presence in India. Young leaders like Jawaharlal Ne hru and Subhash Chandra 
Bose were for complete Independence. Gandhi had beg un as a loyal subject, 
but turned a rebel. He too had been in support of D ominion Status. But he too 
had begun to feel that the economic, political and moral ruin of India that had GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  resulted from British rule could end, and a new Ind ia be built only on the basis 
of complete Independence. The annual session of the  Indian National Congress 
at Lahore therefore turned out to be the beginning of a new chapter. In a 
historic resolution, the Congress adopted the goal of complete Independence, 
and adopted a pledge to launch a struggle for compl ete Independence. It 
authorized Gandhi to lead the struggle, and prepare  for a countrywide 
Satyagraha. Gandhi accepted the responsibility. He realized that the struggle 
for complete Independence had to be different from the earlier struggles that 
he had led. They had been struggles to achieve limi ted and local objectives. An 
objective that encompassed the whole nation could n ot be achieved without 
full and enthusiastic co-operation from the masses.  He had, therefore, to find 
an issue that would enthuse the masses and make the m understand the relation 
between Independence and their daily lives. They sh ould know what was at 
stake, and why they should pay the price for the fr eedom that they needed and 
demanded. 
Gandhi could not easily think of a form of struggle  and an issue that could 
attract the widest and most enthusiastic participat ion of the people. After days 
of thought he lighted on the issue — salt. 
There was a tax on manufacture, on stocking, on tra nsporting, and on selling 
salt. The purpose was to make salt manufactured in India many times more -
expensive than the salt that was imported from the United Kingdom. It was 
similar to the case of the textiles. Destroy Indian  industry to benefit British 
industry. Render Indians unemployed to keep British  labour employed. 
Everyone, — even children and animals needed salt. It was part of the poorest 
man's diet. So the fight against the Salt Laws coul d show the common man the 
cause and price of slavery. It could also give him an opportunity to participate 
in the fight. 
Gandhi announced his plans. He wrote to the Viceroy  on the 3rd of March to 
give him notice of what he proposed to do. It was a  classic example of how 
Gandhi always ensured that his case was just and un answerable. He asked the 
Viceroy to look at the poverty of India and the cau se of the poverty. He pointed GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  to the salary the Viceroy drew. It was seven hundre d times the income of the 
ordinary Indian peasant. The Viceroy perhaps did no t need his salary since he 
was a Lord. Perhaps he could spend more than the am ount of his salary in 
charity. But the disparity was shocking and unjust.  England had ruined India 
politically, economically and morally. They should make amends. But they 
would not do so unless forced to do so. So it becam e a question of matching 
forces. The people in India had the force of justic e, the force of the spirit of 
Satyagraha. It could overcome the force of arms. An d then he went on to spell 
out his plan. 
Along with a band of tried and tested followers he would march from 
Ahmedabad to Dandi on the sea to manufacture salt o n the sea shore, from the 
waters of the sea, thus defying the laws of the Bri tish Government. He asked 
people all over India to wait till he had broken th e law first. 
The Viceroy and his colleagues ridiculed Gandhi's p lan, and said that Gandhi 
would drown in a pool of ridicule. They said it was  the maddest of all Gandhi's 
mad plans. Many Indians too were sceptical. 
They wondered how the mighty British Government cou ld be brought down by 
picking up a pinch of salt on the sea shore. 
On the day appointed for the march to start from Ga ndhi's Ashram at 
Sabarmati, the whole country was agog and expectant . The air quivered with 
excitement. The world press which had learnt of Gan dhi's plans was at 
Sabarmati to report the great event to the world. G andhi told them that his 
was a fight of right against might, and he wanted t he sympathy of the world in 
the fight. 
He had selected 78 of his colleagues — indeed a sma ll army — from the Ashram 
to set out on the march. There were strict rules to  ensure that there would be 
no violence. It was declared that they would let th emselves be cut to pieces, 
rather than raise their hands against anyone. They would go forward. They 
would die on the way rather than return without fre edom. They would not 
return even if the Ashram was on fire or their near  ones were on their death 
beds. As they marched, the people of India were on tip toe. At every village GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  people turned out with folded hands and knelt befor e the Mahatma. There 
were arches and flowers and shouts of victory to Ma hatma Gandhi all the way. 
The British Government did not know what to do. The y had started by ridiculing 
Gandhi. But the response that he was receiving ratt led them. Could they allow 
this to go on? Was it not putting the Viceroy and t he King Emperor's 
Government in ridicule? The District Collectors wro te to the Governor of the 
State that the writ of the Government had ceased to  run in their Districts. 
Village officials were resigning from the service o f the Government. It seemed 
as though the King Emperor's Government had ceased to exist. Will they let 
Gandhi go on? Will they not arrest him? The Governo r wrote to the Viceroy. The 
Viceroy consulted His Majesty's Government in Londo n. Governors were 
summoned. They could not make up their minds. If Ga ndhi was arrested, he 
would become a hero, and there would be outbursts a ll over the country. 
If he were left free, it would be the British Gover nment that would come into 
ridicule. Meanwhile Gandhi began to taunt the Gover nment in his own gentle 
way. The Government should not think of merely arre sting him. His guilt was 
far greater. The punishment that he deserved was ha nging. 
Gandhi reached Dandi on the shores of the sea. On t he 6th of April, as the sun 
rose after the morning prayer, Gandhi stooped down and picked up salt from 
the sea, and said that he was shaking the foundatio ns of the mighty British 
Empire with a pinch of salt. 
This was the signal the country was waiting for. Al l over India, thousands of 
leaders and 'volunteers' marched to the sea front a nd broke the law by 
manufacturing salt. Where there was no sea or lake,  as at Allahabad, the 
people boiled salt water in public and made "illega l" salt. On that day, 
according to the British Government, 5 million peop le in over 5000 meetings in 
towns or villages all over India broke the salt law  by making, selling, 
transporting illegal salt. The writ of the Governme nt had truly ceased to run. 
The Government itself was surprised by the massive participation of women in 
the struggle. The secret reports of the Government said "Gandhi's appeal to GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  women is a clever move, and whatever may be its pra ctical effect in the field 
of action, it is likely to have considerable effect  on social life." 
On the 4th of May, Gandhi again wrote to the Vicero y asking him to see the 
writing on the wall, and accept the demand of the p eople. If the Government 
did not do so, the people of India would move to th e next stage and take over 
Government depots of salt. Gandhi was arrested on t he 5th of May. The Civil 
Disobedience went on unabated. Thousands were impri soned. The people of 
India demonstrated exemplary discipline. They were calm and non-violent in 
the face of the barbarous assaults of the police. T hey demonstrated the cool, 
chilling courage and forbearance of the Satyagrahi.  At Dharasana, Wadala, and 
many other places, the police rained lathi blows on  non-violent volunteers 
sitting in prayerful postures. 
Skulls and bones were broken. Limbs were fractured.  Blood was streaking down 
from the bodies of the volunteers. Volunteer stretc her bearers came and 
removed the bodies of the wounded and dying, and th e next batch that was 
watching the courageous defiance of the first moved  forward and took their 
place. The world press was reporting these feats of  courage and the barbarous 
repression that the Government had let loose. It wa s clear to the world that 
the people of India had repudiated British authorit y. They were being held 
down by sheer brute force. At Peshawar, the Gorkhas  and the Garhwal Rifles 
refused to fire on unarmed, peaceful demonstrators.  They were sentenced to 
imprisonment for 10 or 14 years. 
There were moves for negotiations initiated by Sapr u and Jayakar. Gandhi 
wanted to consult the members of the Congress Worki ng Committee. He was 
released on the 26th of January 1931. There were pr olonged discussions with 
the Viceroy that lasted many days. 
In the end, an agreement was arrived at. It was kno wn as the Gandhi-Irwin 
Pact. There were two signatories, — Viceroy represe nting the Emperor, and 
Gandhi representing the people of India. Gandhi cou ld not get the Viceroy to 
agree to all demands, particularly the appeal to sp are the lives of the great GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  patriot — Bhagat Singh and his colleagues who had b een sentenced to death for 
causing death with bombs and pistols. 
Gandhi was subjected to harsh criticism. He explain ed why his effort did not 
succeed. But the Gandhi-Irwin Pact had proved that the people of India had 
claimed and asserted their right to be regarded as equal. There was a new 
pride, and the feeling that India had vindicated it s right to independence. 
In Britain, some were shocked that the Viceroy had agreed to talk to Gandhi on 
equal terms. Winston Churchill, who later became th e Prime Minister of Britain 
during the Second World War, decried the "nauseatin g and humiliating 
spectacle of this one-time Inner Temple Lawyer, now  seditious  fakir  striding 
half-naked up the steps of the Viceregal Palace, th ere to negotiate and to 
parley on equal terms with the representative of th e King Emperor." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81   
13 
Many leaders of the Congress were not happy with th e Gandhi-Irwin Pact. Nor 
were the British Officers who were against Irwin's effort at compromise. There 
were differences in the interpretation of the Pact.  It looked as though it would 
break down. Meanwhile, the British Government decid ed to hold another Round 
Table Conference with Indian Leaders to evolve agre ement on further 
constitutional reform. The First Round Table Confer ence was a failure. The 
Congress was not there. It could not, therefore, be  presented as being 
representative. There were serious objections to th e way the Government had 
selected participants. Yet, the Congress decided to  attend. It also decided that 
Gandhi would be its sole representative at the Conf erence. This was a very 
heavy responsibility, especially because there were  some differences within the 
Congress itself. Another reason that made the task difficult was the 
composition of the Conference. The Government had p acked it with Rulers and 
people selected from many groups from which the Gov ernment expected 
support. On the eve of his departure to attend the Conference at London, 
Gandhi, therefore, warned the nation that he might return empty handed. 
He sailed from Bombay with his personal entourage t hat included his 
Secretaries, Mahadev Desai and Pyarelal, Miraben an  English disciple, and 
Devdas Gandhi. Miraben was the daughter of an Engli sh admiral, but had 
become Gandhi's disciple and co-worker, and taken t he Indian name, Mira. 
Gandhi travelled by the second class and spent most  of his time on the deck. 
He spent the day as he would have done in his Ashra m with prayer, spinning, 
reading, talking to visitors. He was very popular w ith the children on the ship. 
Many fellow passengers attended the prayer or talke d to him on matters of 
religion, human problems and politics. He radiated warmth and love. 
In London, he decided to stay in the East End, wher e the poor and the families 
of the working class lived. He did not want to stay  in luxurious hotels or areas 
where the rich and privileged lived. Every day he w ent to the St. James Palace 
where the Conference met, worked till late into the  evening, and returned to GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  his lodge in East London. He stuck an instant rappo rt with the workers and their 
families. They looked upon him as one of them. Ethn ic differences and 
differences in nationality and political views neve r stood between Gandhi and 
the common people. He wanted to go to Lancashire wh ere textile workers had 
been hit by unemployment as a result of his movemen t for the boycott of 
foreign goods and the adoption of Swadeshi. He answ ered their questions with 
calm and understanding. He told them they had three  million people who were 
unemployed. He had in his country three hundred mil lion people who were 
unemployed, whose average daily income was not even  one-tenth of their dole. 
Should he not ask that they should get employment a nd incomes? Even God 
dare not appear before them except in the form of b read. Those who had 
questioned Gandhi agreed with him, and said that in  his place they would do 
what he was doing. He had conquered their hearts. 
At the Conference itself, Gandhi saw through the pl an of the British. They 
wanted to create the impression that the Indians we re quarrelling among 
themselves; they had conflicting interests which th ey pursued with mutual 
hostility; they would be at each other's throat if Britain was not there to hold 
them together and protect every one's interest. Tra nsfer of power, therefore, 
was unthinkable. Some made no secret of their belie f that Indians were unfit 
for self- government. And the Government had select ed participants to ensure 
a deadlock. 
Gandhi, therefore, was forthright. He spelt out the  objectives of the Indian 
nation, said that the British Government had create d an unreal situation. It was 
they who were creating and promoting differences to  use them as an excuse to 
deny freedom. It is this attitude that should chang e. There were no conflicts of 
interests in India. All artificial interests that w ent against the interests of the 
common man should go. Every legitimate interest whe ther British or Indian that 
would not be in conflict with the interests of the masses could remain. 
Independent India would scrutinize all such claims and annul whatever was 
against the interests of the poor. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83  He was against the plan of the British Government t o create permanent 
divisions in India through a "Communal electorate" in which Muslims, Hindus and 
people of other communities would elect their own r epresentatives separately. 
There would be no common electorate. This would mea n that there would be 
no union of hearts and no common vision. India woul d never evolve a common 
image. This was the surest way of breaking up India  and continuing in 
command. He said that for the same reasons he was a lso against the creation of 
separate electorates for the so-called untouchables . 
Great Indians like Srinivasan Sastry, Akbar Hydari,  Dr. Ambedkar and others 
were present. But the Conference could not come to common conclusions. That 
was what the British Government wanted. But nationa list India felt thwarted. 
While the Conference was going on, Gandhi had the o pportunity to meet 
leading figures in British society. He spoke at Oxf ord, at the London School of 
Economics and at Eton. 
At the house of Lindsay, the master of Balliol, he met the leading professors 
and intellectuals of Britain — Dr. Gilbert Murray, Gilbert Salter, Prof. Coupland, 
Edward Thomson and others. They were amazed ai the calm and clarity with 
which Gandhi answered every question, however profo und or provocative it 
was, without so much as a frown or twitching of the  skin on his face. He met 
leaders in other fields like Charlie Chaplin and th e great playwright, Bernard 
Shaw. All these visits and talks enabled the people  of Britain to see Gandhi 
through their own eyes and to feel the impact of hi s uncommon personality. 
On his way back to India he decided to spend a few days with the great French 
writer and philosopher, Romain Rolland who had writ ten a biography of Gandhi 
even before meeting him. They spent many days at Vi llanenue exchanging their 
perceptions and sharing apprehensions and aspiratio ns. 
Gandhi was invited to a 'Tea Party' that the King- Emperor of England held for 
the delegates to the Conference. Representatives of  the Government tried to 
press Gandhi to dress in a three-piece suit for the  occasion. Gandhi refused. He 
said that he had come to the Conference as a repres entative of the poor people GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  of India. He had, therefore, no right to wear anyth ing more than what they 
were. He met the King clad in his loin cloth and sh awl. 
The visit to Lausanne in Switzerland was memorable.  It was there, at a meeting 
of religious practitioners, philosophers and intell ectuals that Gandhi first 
explained the profound significance that he attache d to the fine distinction 
between the two statements : God is Truth and Truth  is God. He used to say 
God is Truth. But now after many years of experienc e and reflection, he had 
come to realize that it was more correct to say Tru th is God than to say God is 
Truth. Gandhi himself did not believe that God was a person. God or Truth was 
the law, and the law giver rolled into one. 
He visited Italy. He could not meet the Pope. But h e was overcome by the 
figure of the Christ on the Cross that he saw in th e Pope's Chapel. He met the 
Fascist dictator Mussolini. There were fears that t he dictator might exploit 
Gandhi's visit. Gandhi told Mussolini that he was b uilding a house of cards. 
Gandhi landed at Bombay on the 28th of December, 19 31. He was candid. He 
told the people that he had returned empty handed. He did not believe that 
Britain would accept the demand for Independence wi thout further struggle. He 
was apprehensive of what lay ahead. In the meanwhil e Irwin's successor, 
Willingdon, had already destroyed whatever good wil l had been created by the 
Gandhi- Irwin Pact. While Gandhi was in Europe or o n the high seas, many 
leaders of the Congress including Khan Abdul Ghaffa r Khan had been arrested. 
Jawaharlal Nehru had been arrested while he was on his way to receive Gandhi 
at Bombay. Willingdon had promulgated new orders re stricting freedom. Lathi 
charges and firings were the order of the day. Thou sands had been put in jail. A 
war of repression had been launched. The Congress W orking Committee had 
come to the conclusion that the Congress had no alt ernative but to revive Civil 
Disobedience. 
Gandhi still wanted to meet the Viceroy and persuad e him to see reason and 
not push the country into another holocaust. But he  was rebuffed. The 
Government had decided to teach the Congress and Ga ndhi a lesson. Congress 
was declared an unlawful association. Its offices w ere sealed. Its funds were GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  confiscated. Its workers were arrested and treated with harshness and cruelty, 
both inside and outside prison. Women became specia l targets since the 
Government wanted to prevent a repetition of the Sa lt Satyagraha. Newspapers 
were not allowed to publish reports of Congress act ivities, meetings and 
arrests. Efforts were made to suppress the publicat ion of journals and to 
prosecute journalists. The Government had decided t o crush the movement. 
Gandhi himself and the members of the Working Commi ttee were arrested on 
the 4th of January, hardly one week after his arriv al from London. He was sent 
to the jail at Yervada. His Secretary, Mahadev Desa i and Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel were detained with him. 
Gandhi got back to the usual routine that he follow ed in prison. This time he 
had to attend to a voluminous mail from India and a broad, seeking his views 
and advice on many matters. He himself was keen to remain in touch with the 
inmates of his Ashram and his colleagues in the var ious States. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86   
14 
In August 1932, while Gandhi was still in jail, the  British Government 
announced its 'Communal Award'. The award decreed t hat henceforth the 
'untouchables' or depressed classes of Hindus would  have separate electorates. 
They would elect their representatives in the Legis latures from among 
themselves, and other Hindus (so-called caste Hindu s) would have no say in -
determining who would represent people belonging to  the depressed classes. 
This would mean a permanent separation and isolatio n of the so-called 
untouchables. Gandhi had some inkling of the Britis h plan even during the 
Round Table Conference in London. He had then decla red that this was a 
sinister plan to create a permanent division among the Hindus, and he would 
resist it with his life. It would not only be anoth er exercise to divide Indian 
society and to continue to rule in the name of irre concilable differences in 
Indian Society. It would also cut the depressed cla sses out of Hindu society. 
This would only perpetuate untouchability. Untoucha bility is an unmitigated 
evil. It has no sanction in Hindu religion. It must  go root and branch. But it will 
go only when the so-called caste Hindus recognize t he sinfulness and 
indefensibility of this practice, repent and make a mends. There will be no 
incentive for the so- called caste Hindus to do so if the 'untouchables' are 
removed from Hindu society. The British proposal wo uld therefore result in the 
perpetuation of 'untouchability' as well as the div ision of Hindu and Indian 
society. This was a diabolical plan and should be r esisted. 
On the 13th of September, Gandhi announced that he would go on fast to 
arouse the conscience of the Caste Hindus as well a s the British Government. 
He would commence his fast from the 20th of Septemb er, and would give it up 
only when there was agreement to give up what was c ontemplated in the 
Award. The country, particularly the Hindu communit y was shocked, and 
shaken into excruciating introspection. Was it not their sinful and inhuman 
practices that had forced Gandhi, the Mahatma, to s take his life to arouse their 
conscience, and given the British Government an exc use to create and GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  perpetuate divisions? Many orthodox Hindus were mov ed to give up their 
orthodox attitude to the untouchables. Jawaharlal N ehru's aged mother who 
was an orthodox Brahmin took  prasad  from the hands of 'untouchables'. 
Temples, roads and wells were thrown open to the so -called untouchables. 
India's great poet, Rabindranath Tagore described i t as the Mahatma's 'sublime 
penance'. He said the penance was "a message to all  India and to the world. It 
should be accepted through a proper process of real ization. The gift of sacrifice 
should be received in the spirit of sacrifice". 
Gandhi himself explained the reason for his fast. H e was "only against separate 
electorates, and not against statutory reservation of seats". He did not want to 
be misunderstood. He had identified himself with th e "untouchables" from the 
time he was about 10 or 12 years of age. In South A frica he had turned his wife 
Kasturba out of 'his' house because she had shown r eluctance to clean the 
commode of a guest who was from the so-called "unto uchable" community. He 
had threatened to close down his Ashram if its inma tes dragged their feet on 
welcoming 'untouchables' as equal members of the As hram community. " I am a 
'touchable' by birth but an 'untouchable' by choice ; and I have qualified myself 
to represent, not the upper ten among the 'untoucha bles'; but my ambition is to 
represent and identify myself with the lowest strat a of untouchables, namely 
the 'invisibles' and 'unapproachables' whom I have always before my mind's eye 
wherever I go; (I) am convinced that if they are ev er to rise, it will not be by 
the reservation of seats, but will be by the strenu ous work of Hindu reformers 
in their midst, and it is because I feel that this separation would have killed all 
prospect of reform that my whole soul has rebelled against it ... let me make it 
plain that the withdrawal of separate electorates w ill satisfy the letter of my 
vow but will never satisfy the spirit behind it. Wh at I want, what I am living for, 
and what I should delight in dying for, is the erad ication of untouchability root 
and branch. My life I count of no consequence... if  it (the fast) wakes up caste 
Hindus from their slumber, and if they are roused t o a sense of their duty, it 
will have served its purpose." GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  There was intense anxiety in the country. It turned  into agony as days went by 
without a solution. Gandhi was already in poor heal th. He was exhausting the 
slender reserves in his body. The response and amen ds had to be quick. 
On the eve of the fast, on the 19th of September, " caste Hindu leaders" and the 
leaders of the "depressed classes" met at Bombay. P andit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya had taken the initiative for the Conferenc e. Dr. Ambedkar was present 
at the Conference. So were leaders like Rajendra Pr asad, Rajagopalachari, Dr. 
Moonje, Sapru and Jayakar, Kunzru, Hansa Mehta, Ana suyabai Kale, M. C. Rajah 
and many others. Everyone was keen that Gandhi's li fe should be saved. An 
acceptable solution must be found. There followed a  series of discussions and 
drafting of formulae. The leaders assembled in Bomb ay shuttled between 
Bombay and Yervada (Poona) to find a formulae that would be acceptable to 
Gandhi. Dr. Ambedkar repeatedly insisted on "full c ompensation" to his 
community. 
The debates centred around separate electorates; re servation of seats in the 
legislatures; the number of seats to be reserved; t he number of years for which 
the system of reservations should last. These were most relevant for an 
agreement that could bring pressure on the British to withdraw the 'communal 
award'.  
Gandhi had nothing against the reservation of seats . The number should be fair 
and just. The difficulty about separate electorates  was overcome by the 
suggestion that in reserved constituencies the comm on electorate should elect 
its representative from a panel of four chosen by t he voters belonging to the 
depressed classes. But there could be no agreement on the number of years for 
which reservations were to last. Dr. Ambedkar propo sed that there should be a 
referendum to decide the question after ten years. Gandhi would not agree to 
ten years. He wanted it to be after one year or 5 y ears. Otherwise the long 
period might be used to canvass reservation in perp etuity, thus frustrating the 
very purpose of joint electorates and the effort to  achieve total integration on 
the basis of equality. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  While the debate was going on Gandhi's condition wa s deteriorating by the 
hour. He could hardly lift himself up in bed. His v oice was nearly inaudible. He 
lay for long stretches with his eyes closed. The do ctors who examined him 
declared that he had entered the danger zone. Even if he now gave up his fast, 
he ran the risk of paralysis. People everywhere wer e in unspeakable agony. 
Hundreds of thousands of people swore that they wou ld never again entertain 
or countenance the thought of untouchability. 
Finally there was an agreement that the question of  when the referendum 
would be held would be decided later. Since the dra ft formulations were now 
acceptable to the 'caste Hindu' leaders as well as Dr. Ambedkar and his 
followers, Gandhi decided to end his fiery ordeal. At a meeting to ratify the 
Pact, Dr. Ambedkar said that the Pact had saved the  life "of the greatest man 
in India". "It had safeguarded the interests of the  Depressed Classes. I must 
confess I was surprised when I met him, to find tha t there was so much in 
common between the Mahatma and myself. In fact my d isputes whenever they 
were carried to him, I was surprised to see that th e man who held such 
divergent views from me at the Round Table Conferen ce came immediately to 
my rescue and not to the rescue of the other side."  
The agreement was communicated to the British Gover nment. They announced 
their acceptance of the 'Yervada Agreement'. Among scenes of great jubilation, 
Gandhi broke his fast in the yard of the Yervada pr ison by sipping a glass of 
orange juice that Kasturba gave him. Many great lea ders — Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel, Mahadev Desai, Kasturba, Rabindranath Tagore , Sarojini Naidu and many 
others were present. Rabindranath sang a prayer son g from the Gitanjali. The 
great poet had visited Gandhi frequently and shown his complete identification 
with the cause as well as the penance that Gandhi h ad undertaken. Gandhi 
declared that the depressed classes, whom he began to call the children of God 
or 'Harijans', might hold his life as a hostage for  the fulfilment of the pact and 
the total abolition of untouchability. 
This was the beginning of a massive and momentous m ovement that Gandhi 
launched for the abolition of untouchability, root and branch. He started a new GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  weekly called  Harijan,  established an organization with the specific purp ose of 
working for the abolition of untouchability and for  the welfare of the 'Harijans'. 
Leaders of the so-called high castes took up the wo rk of this organization in all 
States of India. 
But Gandhi was still in prison. The Government was not keen to give him 
facilities for public contact even to carry on the compaign against 
untouchability that he had launched. So he went on another fast — a 21-day 
fast to quicken the conscience of the caste Hindus and to convince the 
Government of his earnestness to work for the cause  of the Harijans. He let it 
be known that he had no intention of taking up prog rammes of Civil 
Disobedience in the immediate future. 
Gandhi was released in August 1933. He went on a wh irlwind tour of the 
country to persuade people to root out untouchabili ty and to make amends for 
the evil practice. Thousands of temples were thrown  open. Other restrictions 
were given up. Wells, roads and other public places  were opened to the 
Harijans. But his task was not easy. He was challen ged and obstructed by the 
orthodox in many places. They demonstrated with bla ck flags and abuse. There 
was an attempt to blow up his motorcade. But they h ad not reckoned with the 
fighter in Gandhi. Gandhi confronted them as perhap s no other social reformer 
or religious leader had done in the past. He challe nged them to prove that 
untouchability was a part of the Hindu religion. Ho w could a religion that 
believed in Advaita, or oneness, treat anyone as un touchable? No scriptural text 
could take the place of reason, morality and consci ence. Nor was there any 
scriptural text that justified untouchability. Ther e may be interpolations. 
Anyway, who were these so- called Sanatanists to in terpret religious texts? The 
texts themselves defined the qualifications of one who had the right to 
interpret. Only a person who kept the five basic vo ws of Truth, Ahimsa, 
Brahmacharya, Non-possession, and Non-stealing, in letter and spirit, had the 
right to interpret. It was almost like the saying " let one who is without sin cast 
the first stone". In his gentle but firm way he ove rcame the resistance of 
religious persons. Even a Shankaracharya had to sta nd aside. It was only the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  combination of the saint and the militant in Gandhi  that could accomplish this. 
His fast and whirlwind tour accomplished more than what anyone had achieved 
in the past. He succeeded in breaking the hold of c aste and untouchability on 
the minds of the caste-Hindu. He transferred the on us and the feeling of guilt 
to those who defended or practised untouchability. That was the death-knell of 
untouchability, and thereafter, the end was only a matter of time and 
persistence. 
Gandhi's tour took him to towns and villages in eve ry part of India. He was 
overcome by the sight of persistent poverty. He rea lized that the problems of 
the villages could never be solved without reforms in the ownership of land, 
agricultural practices, and the revival of village industries. He knew that village 
industries could hold their own only if the skills of the artisans were improved, 
and their technology was improved. He was not again st science or technology 
or machinery. But to him, the test was not only wha t it did for the human 
being, but also what it did to the human being. He was not against machinery. 
He was only against the kind of machinery that allo wed a man to ride on the 
back of other human beings and exploit them. Gandhi  realized the need for 
finding an appropriate technology that would bring the craftsman or worker 
into his own, and meet the demands made on him. Wit h all these thoughts in 
mind, he inspired the setting up of a Village Indus tries Association, similar to 
the All India Spinners' Association and the Khadi i nstitutions that he had set up 
earlier. 
Education was another subject that was uppermost in  Gandhi's mind. He had 
experimented with the kind and methods of education  that a new society 
needed, even in South Africa, — in the Phoenix Sett lement and the Tolstoy 
Farm. He had continued the effort in his Ashrams in  India. He had come to the 
conclusion that the problems and needs of primary e ducation could be met only 
by making education craft and community centred. Th e craft should become 
the medium of education. He convened a conference o f educationists in 
Sevagram, and placed his ideas before them. They we lcomed the proposal and 
gave practical shape to the idea. An organization n amed Hindustani Talimi GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  Sangh was set up to carry on the work of "Nayi Tali m" or new education through 
the medium of crafts. Thus Gandhi spent the years i ntensifying the constructive 
programme and extending it to new fields. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93   
15 
Meanwhile, there were developments in the field of constitutional reform. The 
Simon Commission which had been appointed to review  the Act of 1919 had 
submitted its report. But no action had been taken.  In 1935 the British 
Parliament passed a new Constitution for India, and  it came into force in 1937. 
Nationalist India was totally disappointed. There w as no real transfer of power 
even in the States, (then called Provinces) not to speak of the Centre. Some 
powers in the States were transferred to a Council of Ministers. But even these 
were subject to the veto of the British Governor. I mportant subjects were 
reserved for the Governor. Franchise was limited. A ll the same, the State 
Assemblies were to be elected. It gave the Congress  an opportunity to prove its 
public support. If the Congress kept away from the polls the Assemblies and 
Governments would be formed by elements that were k eeping away from the 
national struggle. 
The Congress was in a dilemma. Though Gandhi was no t a member or office 
bearer of the Congress, his advice was important fo r the Congress. He was the 
one who had his finger on the pulse of the masses. He alone could lead the 
country if the experiment failed, and it came to a struggle again. Gandhi was 
not against participation in the Assemblies if the Congress could use them to 
solve the crying problems of the people, like drink ing water, sanitation, 
welfare of the Harijans and tribals, primary and se condary education, 
alcoholism and so on. The Congress decided to conte st the elections. It won 
massive majorities in many States, and was in a pos ition to form Governments 
in seven out of the eleven States. But it would for m Governments only if the 
Governor gave an assurance that they would not inte rvene or use his overriding 
powers to thwart the policies and decisions of the people's representatives. 
After long discussions, the Congress felt assured t hat the Governors would act 
as constitutional heads. Congress Ministries were f ormed in most States, with 
leaders like Rajagopalachari, Govind Ballabh Pant, B. G. Kher, Srikrishna Sinha, 
Gopinath Bordoloi, Dr. Khan Saheb and others becomi ng "Prime Ministers" in the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  States (Chief Ministers were called Prime Ministers  at that time). The 
Governments set examples in probity, accountability , austerity and concern for 
the problems of the people. 
But the Governments could not remain in office for long. On the 3rd of 
September 1939, the Second World War broke out. As soon as Britain declared 
war on Germany, the Viceroy too declared that India  was at war with Germany. 
There was not even the semblance of consultation wi th the Prime Ministers in 
the States or the representatives of the people. Th e Congress Ministries 
resigned declaring that the hollowness of the claim s of the new Constitution 
had been exposed. 
What was the Congress to do during the war? Were th ey to help actively in the 
war effort? Prominent leaders of the Congress like Jawaharlal Nehru, Maulana 
Azad, Rajagopalachari and others were supporters of  the Allies. They were 
totally against Hitler and Mussolini, against Nazis m and Fascism. They 
supported Britain and the Allies because they were fighting for democracy— 
against dictatorship. They wanted India to take ful l part in the fight for 
democracy. But how could India do so, how could the  leaders enthuse the 
people of India to cooperate in the war, if democra cy was meant only for 
Britain, and not meant for India as well. They want ed the Congress to tell the 
Viceroy that the Congress would support Indian part icipation in the War effort 
if the British Government would declare that at the  end of the war, India would 
attain full freedom. They would participate in a na tional Government if it was 
set up on these terms. 
Gandhi himself supported the Allied cause. He met t he Viceroy. He could not 
help shedding tears when he thought of the destruct ion of the historic city of 
London or of the woes of the people. But he was aga inst all wars. The British 
attitude to India had disillusioned him. Yet his sy mpathy for the Allied cause 
and people who had to suffer the terrible consequen ces of the war came from 
his heart. However he was a votary of non-violence.  He believed that all wars 
were ruinous. They would cause suffering, but would  not solve any issue. He 
wanted to work for a world without wars. Only non-v iolence could save GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  humanity and secure justice. He could act as an adv isor of the Government and 
of the Congress if they wanted him to lead them to a world without war. 
The Congress was not willing to accept this positio n. It had not accepted 
'pacifism'. It had never accepted the view that Ind ependent India would have no 
army, and would not use arms in self-defence. It, t herefore, reluctantly and 
respectfully decided to differ from Gandhi and offe r co-operation to the 
Government in its war effort if a provisional Gover nment was set up. 
The Government did not care to accept the offer of the Congress. It made a 
statement which was a virtual incitement to communa l and obstructive 
elements to persist in obstruction. It virtually as sured them that the progress 
towards self-government would depend on their conse nt. 
Congress felt insulted and humiliated. The country too felt that its hand of 
friendship and co-operation had been rejected. Some  kind of protest was called 
for, even to protect national honour. They did not want to disrupt the war 
effort. Nor did Gandhi want to embarrass the Govern ment when it was fighting 
for the survival of Britain and the Allies. Congres s turned or returned to Gandhi 
and asked him to resume leadership. 
Gandhi hit upon a new form of Civil Disobedience, —  Individual Civil 
Disobedience. Individuals chosen or approved by Gan dhi would defy the orders 
of the Government by notifying the Government of th eir intention to do so. 
They would address the public and declare that Indi a had not been consulted 
before the Government proclaimed that India was at war. 
Vinoba Bhave was chosen as the first Satyagrahi. In  phases, members of the 
Working Committee, Legislators, Office bearers of t he party and others offered 
Satyagraha in this manner. Tens of thousands were l odged in prison. 
Meanwhile, the war was going against the Allies. Co untry after country had 
been overrun in Europe. The soldiers of the Axis po wers — Germany and Italy — 
were on the shores of the Mediterranean. Britain wa s fighting a heroic battle 
for survival. Japan had entered the war, and had ma de spectacular gains, 
sweeping down the Asian coast. America had rallied to the defence of the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  Allies. President Roosevelt of America felt that so me move should be made to 
solve the "Indian problem" and induct the Indian le aders into the struggle 
against the Axis powers. The pressure of circumstan ces was too much even for 
Churchill, the war time Prime Minister of Britain, who was a known opponent of 
Indian independence. The British War Cabinet drafte d its proposals for future 
constitutional change in India, and sent Sir Staffo rd Cripps, a well-known friend 
of India, to persuade Indian leaders to accept the proposals. 
The proposals were in two parts. The long-term prop osals visualized that after 
the war, India would acquire the right to be a full  Dominion (with the right to 
opt out of the Empire). But the States or provinces  and the Rulers would be 
free to remain out of the new Dominion and retain d irect relationship with the 
British Crown. In the immediate present, there woul d be a new Executive 
Council to assist the Viceroy, but it will not have  the rights of a cabinet of the 
type that ruled in England. 
Gandhi who was summoned by Sir Stafford looked at t he proposals and advised 
Sir Staffard to take the next plane home as the pro posals were not acceptable 
to India. He returned to his Ashram at Wardha. 
The Congress leaders had long discussions with Sir Stafford, and finally rejected 
the proposal because it would pave the way for a fr agmentation of India. In the 
immediate present, it would only enable the Governm ent to put up a facade 
that Indians were part of the Government. 
Sir Stafford's mission was a failure. He returned t o England, and blamed 
Gandhi, although Gandhi had taken no part in the ne gotiations between the 
Congress and the British Government. 
India felt frustrated. There was a mood of indignat ion and anxiety. The war was 
no longer distant for India. The Japanese had overr un the entire Asian coast 
and Singapore. They had occupied Burma and were kno cking at the door of 
India at Manipur. It looked as though British invin cibility was a myth. The British 
Army was being forced to withdraw from country afte r country. It was 
withdrawing after destroying crops and other materi als to ensure that the 
Japanese did not have access to them. What was to h appen to the people of GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  these countries? They could not run away. Even thei r food was being destroyed. 
How would they survive? Who would defend them? Brit ain had surrendered its 
responsibility. 
Who would defend India? What would happen if people  lost the will to defend? 
The situation called for a drastic remedy. Britain might leave India and go as it 
had left other countries, leaving people defenseles s and hopeless. 
India had to be taken out of this morass of helples sness and fear. No people can 
become free or remain free without the will to resi st. India should discover its 
will to resist. Who can help the country to do this , without losing time? The 
Congress and the country turned to Gandhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98   
16 
Gandhi found the answer, — Britain must quit India.  It is not for them to think 
of what would happen if they left, when they left. India was there before they 
came. India would look after itself when they left.  For heaven's sake, quit. 
Leave the country to God, or anarchy. But go. The c ountry pricked its ears. 
Here was the voice of revolution, a non-violent rev olution. 
Some leaders of the Congress were baffled. Even Jaw aharlal and Azad were not 
sure of the wisdom of the proposal. They thought th at it might help the 
enemies of democracy. Some Britishers condemned Gan dhi as a fifth columnist, 
an agent of the Axis powers and Japan. But Gandhi's  erstwhile adversary against 
whom he had fought for 20 long years in South Afric a, General Smuts, said "It is 
sheer nonsense to talk of Mahatma Gandhi as a "fift h" columnist. He is a great 
man. He is one of the great men of the world." 
Gandhi wrote and spoke explaining the reasons behin d his proposal. He 
explained it to the world through the interviews he  gave to outstanding 
columnists like Louis Fischer. His message echoed t hroughout the length and 
breadth of the country. Faint hearts picked up cour age. The nonplussed saw 
that there was a way. In the course of a few weeks the country was electrified. 
Students, young men and women, workers, villagers, — every section of the 
people felt that the hour had come. The country dep ended on them. The future 
depended on them. Gandhi told them that the hour ha d come to "do or die". It 
was only when individuals went forth to seek death that nations lived. In a few 
weeks, Gandhi had set the country on fire. 
The Working Committee of the Congress met at Sevagr am, and took the 
momentous decision on the 14th of July. The resolut ion asking Britain to Quit 
India was adopted by the All India Congress Committ ee at the Gowalia Tank 
grounds at Bombay, on the 8th of August 1942. Gandh i had told the meeting 
that he would meet the Viceroy and try to convince him. If he failed, he would 
tell the country what to do. It would be an unprece dented mass upsurge, — 
revolution, but strictly non-violent. Anything else  will misfire and lead to a GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  rout. He asked the country to wait for his signal a nd the programme of Civil 
Disobedience and Non-cooperation, if his talks with  the Viceroy failed. 
The country was waiting for his signal when the Gov ernment struck. Soon after 
midnight on the morning of the 9th of August, Gandh i was arrested. So were all 
the members of the Congress Working Committee and a ll the known leaders of 
the Congress at the Central, State and District lev els. The papers were 
muzzled; so no one knew what had become of Gandhi o r the leaders. Rumours 
spread that Gandhi had been taken to Africa. It was  after a day or two that 
people came to know that Gandhi had been taken to P oona, and lodged in the 
Aga Khan's Palace which had been converted into a s pecial prison. The leaders 
in the Working Committee including Jawaharlal Nehru , Maulana Azad, Sardar 
Vallabhbhai, and others were lodged in the Fort at Ahmednagar which was 
protected by a moat that encircled it. All the lead ers who could speak or guide 
authentically were taken away and isolated from the  people. 
A tidal wave of fury swept the country. It seemed a s though all restraints gave 
way. It seemed as though there was only one objecti ve. Hit back and give the 
Government a taste of the fury of the people. Since  most of the older leaders 
had been removed from the scene, the leaders of the  younger generation took 
over. No instructions had been formulated or left b ehind since Gandhi was 
waiting to know what would transpire in his talks w ith the Viceroy. 
Hundreds of thousands of processions were taken out  in all the States, almost 
all towns and villages, in defiance of prohibitory orders. Attempts were made 
to hoist the National Flag on the offices and build ings of the Government, and 
in public places. The country echoed with the cry " Mahatma Gandhi Ki Jai", 
"Britain, Quit India". Attempts were made to disrup t communications. Fish 
plates and rails were removed. Bridges were blown u p. Government buildings 
were set on fire. Telephone wires were cut off. Eff orts were made to prevent 
rail traffic. Students and young men and women were  in the forefront of 
action. They forced the closure of schools and coll eges for months. Many young 
men and women were shot down while hoisting the Nat ional Flag. There were 
indiscriminate arrests, and detention without trial . Those who attempted to GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  lead processions or hold meetings were mercilessly lathi charged or shot at. 
Machine guns were used. Unarmed crowds were fired u pon from the air. A reign 
of terror was launched. Collective fines were impos ed. Villagers were forced to 
patrol tracks at night, on penalty of arrest and co llective fines. Women were 
maltreated. At many places, police entered villages  and indulged in orgies of 
rape and shooting. Prisoners were treated with crue lty. Many were tortured. 
Even leaders like Jayaprakash Narayan were subjecte d to torture. 
There was unprecedented, deliberate, barbarous repr ession. In some States like 
Bengal, Bihar and Maharashtra, parallel governments  were set up in villages and 
Tahsils, and the supporters and henchmen of the Gov ernment were subjected 
to corporal 'punishment'. Gandhi came to know of al l this only much later. In 
the meanwhile, the Government launched an intense c ampaign to malign 
Gandhi and the Congress leaders. They blamed Gandhi  for the violent 
demonstrations and 'sabotage', and accused Gandhi o f having sanctioned them 
or connived at them, if he had not plotted them. Th ey suggested that he had 
given up his faith in nonviolence. Some implied tha t his non-violence was a 
ploy, and that he was indulging in downright hypocr isy when he talked of non-
violence. They tried to spread these stories all ov er the world. 
Gandhi was in prison. He had no way of answering th ese allegations in public 
and countering the calumny that was put out. He wro te to the Viceroy and the 
Government on these allegations. He charged the Gov ernment with having 
precipitated the struggle, isolating the leaders fr om the people with a midnight 
sweep; provoking the people and unleashing a reign of "leonine violence" 
against the people. If he had not been arrested and  isolated, he would have 
appealed to the people to stick strictly to the pat h of non-violence. It was most 
likely that he would have succeeded. His faith in n on-violence was the breath 
of his life. It was no ploy. He had often declared that he did not care for an 
independence that was won through violence, because  it would not signify the 
freedom of the common man. It seemed as though the Government had lost all 
sense of propriety, fair play or justice. How else could they level such grave 
allegations against him and yet not give him a chan ce to answer the GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  allegations? If they had a shred of evidence they s hould put him on trial. If 
found guilty, he would bear the consequences. Time was of the essence in 
meting out justice. His correspondence with the Gov ernment only brought long 
and tortuous replies, but not acceptance of the cha llenge to prove him guilty in 
a court of justice. 
Even before Gandhi settled down in the prison in th e Aga Kkhan's Palace, he 
was shaken by a tragic blow. Mahadev Desai, who had  worked as his secretary, 
almost from the beginning of his public work in Ind ia, died of a sudden heart 
attack on the 15th of August. Desai had served Gand hi and the cause dutifully, 
— recording Gandhi's interviews and speeches, helpi ng him answer his 
voluminous mail, writing continuously in the Young India and Harijan, and 
helping Gandhi in the work of editing these journal s, keeping accounts, 
regulating appointments, keeping in touch with Cong ress workers and the 
organisation for constructive work that Gandhi set up, maintaining contacts 
with the high officials of the British Government a nd so on. Mahadev Desasi's 
death was a truly irreparable loss for Gandhi. 
As on the previous occasion when he was in prison G andhi kept himself busy 
with daily prayers, spinning, writing to the Govern ment and detailed 
discussions with his prison mates on matters of rel igion, political philosophy, 
economic programmes, techniques of revolution, the ideal of a classless and 
stateless society, and similar subjects. The Govern ment had lodged some of his 
colleagues with him, Kasturba was with him. Others who were with him at the 
Aga Khan's palace included Sarojini Naidu, Mirabehn , Pyarelal Nayyar and 
Sushila Nayyar. He read many books and discussed th em with his colleagues. It 
was during these days that he first read Marx's Das  Capital. There were, 
therefore, incisive and extensive discussions on Ma rx and Marxism, the Soviet 
experiment, and the superiority of techniques and g oals based on non-violence. 
By February 1943, Gandhi felt that he had waited lo ng enough for a reply from 
the Government on his demand for an opportunity to clear himself of the 
charges that the Government had levelled against hi m. He should do something 
to vindicate himself. He decided to go on a fast of  21 days. It began on the 10th GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  of February. The Viceroy dismissed it as political black mail. But as Gandhi 
embarked on his fast there was deep agony in India.  He was in poor health, and 
in no condition to undergo the rigours of a 21-day fast. Soon he entered the 
'danger zone'. The doctors who attended on him said  that he would suffer an 
irretrievable breakdown, and would die if he did no t take glucose. Every 
moment seemed crucial. None of his Indian colleague s could dare suggest to 
Gandhi that he should take glucose in the water he was drinking. Yet they too 
knew that nothing else could save him. They were di sconsolate. The Surgeon-
General who was an Englishman was so moved and so k een to try to save 
Gandhi that he decided to try and persuade Gandhi. He broached the subject. 
Gandhi managed a smile, and signalled that he was i n the hands of God. When 
Gandhi's colleagues entered the room, they found th e Surgeon-General wiping 
his tears on the verandah. The nation was on an anx ious vigil. The British 
Government, on its part, had made up its mind to le t Gandhi die. They 
assembled a pile of sandal-wood inside the precinct s of the Aga Khan's Palace 
for the funeral pyre. But the miracle occurred. Gan dhi came back from the 
brink of death, much to the surprise of the doctors , much to the chagrin of the 
Government, and much to the joy of the Indian peopl e. There was a spurt in 
programmes of defiance all over the country. The na tion's agony was so intense 
that three Indian members of the Viceroy's Executiv e Council disassociated 
themselves from the policy of the Government, and r esigned. 
Kasturba Gandhi had been in indifferent health from  1943. The illness did not 
respond to treatment. In February 1944, she breathe d her last with her head in 
Gandhi's lap. A few days earlier, she had told Gand hi : 'Now, I am going.' As 
Gandhi said, 'They were indeed a couple out of the ordinary.' She had been his 
partner for over sixty years in a saga of ordeals, suffering, discovery of self, 
and sadhana for truth and nonviolence. It was anoth er irreparable loss that he 
sustained while in the Aga Khan's Palace. 
All these began to tell on Gandhi's health. He was laid low with malaria. He had 
also contracted amoebiasis. As reports of his healt h came to be known, and his 
condition deteriorated, there were increasing and i nsistent demands for his GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  release, from India and outside. The fortunes of th e war had turned in favour of 
the Allies. The Government was no longer in a state  of panic. They decided to 
release Gandhi. 
On his release streams of visitors began to converg e at Gandhi's residence. He 
found that he was too weak even to talk. He had to conserve his energy by 
observing silence. But he rallied soon, and began t o pick up the threads of his 
preoccupations. 
The members of the Working Committee were still in prison. So were most 
others who had been detained. A way had to be found  to lead the country out 
of the deadlock. He wrote to the Viceroy and the Pr ime Minister Churchill 
offering his services "for the sake of your people and mine, and through them 
those of the world". He met with a rebuff. 
He saw that political progress was being blocked by  the persisting differences 
with Jinnah and the Muslim League. He decided to tr y to reassure Jinnah and 
narrow down differences. He sought a meeting with J innah. Gandhi and Jinnah 
parleyed at Jinnah's residence at Mount Pleasant Ro ad in Bombay for nearly two 
weeks. But the ice could not be broken. Jinnah refu sed to relent or even 
specify his demands. In 1940 the Muslim League had met at Lahore and passed a 
resolution demanding the partition of the country a nd the creation of a new 
State (to be called Pakistan) consisting of the are as in which Muslims were in a 
majority. 
Jinnah was not willing to concede the right that he  demanded for the Muslim 
minority in India to the non-Muslim minority in the  areas that he claimed as 
part of the projected Pakistan. The talks broke dow n. 
The phase of defiance had quietened down. But the o ther part of the 
programme, the constructive programme which, in Gan dhi's eyes, was as 
essential as Civil Disobedience could be carried ou t, had to be carried out. 
Many new ideas had occurred to him while in prison.  He, therefore, convened 
meetings of workers who were engaged in the fields of Khadi and Village 
Industries, Nayi Talim or Basic Education, Harijan Seva, Tribal Welfare, 
Hindustani Prachar, organizations of women, student s and labour and so on, GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  and chalked out plans to deepen and revolutionize t hese activities, with the 
objective of working for a new human being and a ne w society. He had also 
revived the morale of the workers of the Congress a nd organizations of 
constructive work. He travelled to the different St ates of the country, meeting 
workers and people, rebuilding morale, revitalizing  programmes, trying to 
kindle new hope. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105   
17 
Tables had turned in the War. Hitler and Mussolini were on the verge of defeat. 
The Japanese Armies had been pushed back, and many countries in the East 
liberated. A new Viceroy had come to India, Lord Wa vell. He wanted to find a 
way out of the deadlock in India. The leaders of th e Congress or the members 
of the Working Committee were released. As the firs t step he wanted to 
reconstitute his Executive Council and include lead ers of the people. He 
convened a Conference at Simla, and put forward his  proposals. The Congress 
and the Muslim League under Jinnah participated in the Conference. But Lord 
Wavell's efforts failed when Jinnah insisted that t he Muslims should have as 
many members in the Executive Council as the 'Caste  Hindus' had, and the 
Muslim League should have the sole right to nominat e Muslims for inclusion in 
the Executive Council. The Congress could not accep t either of these demands 
without giving up its claim to be a national organi sation representing all 
communities. The Conference failed. 
In the meanwhile, the war ended in Europe, and elec tions were held in Great 
Britain. Churchill and the Conservatives were defea ted, and the Labour party 
came to power. Labour had sympathy for the Indian c ause. In March 1946, the 
new Prime Minister Clement Attlee decided to send a  Cabinet Mission to India. 
It consisted of three of his eminent colleagues. Tw o of them, Lord Pethick 
Lawrence and Sir Stafford Cripps were known to Gand hi, and were known as 
friends of India and Indian leaders. 
The Mission held discussions with the leaders of th e Congress and the Muslim 
League and many other public figures. They took cou nsel with Gandhi too. 
When they failed to find a consensus, they presente d a proposal of their own. 
The Constitution would have three tiers. The Union of India at the top would 
have control of foreign affairs, defence and commun ications. The rest of the 
powers would vest in the States. There would be thr ee sections of States, each 
of which would decide whether they should function as a group and if so, what 
subjects should be delegated to the government at t he group level. The GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  elaborate proposals were an answer to the question:  should India remain one or 
should the country be divided. It seemed as though the Labour Government 
preferred a United India. Jinnah declared that he c ould never accept a Union of 
India. From 1940 or earlier he had held that India consisted of two nations, the 
Muslims, and the Hindus and others. His contention was that each nation had a 
right to have its own state. The two nations, Hindu s and Muslims could not live 
together. The Congress rejected 'Pakistan'. Gandhi had termed it as vivisection, 
and said that if it took place it would take place over his dead body. He could 
never look upon religion as a dividing force nor as  the basis of nationhood. To 
him there was only one nation in India, and it comp rised of and would always 
comprise of people of different faiths. 
Gandhi and the Congress believed that religion was not the basis of nationhood. 
There were many other factors including history, la nguage, culture and so on. 
India had been a nation though it had different lan guages and sub-cultures in 
different areas. There had always been a cultural p ersonality of India which 
was based on, and evolved from its diversities. Ind ia had never smothered 
pluralism. 
It had thrived on it, and evolved its distinct cult ure of tolerance and pluralism. 
This nation could not be split on the basis of reli gion. People of both Hindu and 
Muslim religions and other religions resided in all  parts of India. It was not 
therefore possible to create a state on the basis o f religion without uprooting or 
annihilating large masses of people belonging to ot her faiths. This would only 
result in carnage and misery. 
But Jinnah was adamant. He insisted that there were  two nations, and that 
they could not live together in one State — India. A new state had to be created 
by the British before they left. He had already wor ked his followers up to a 
white pitch. He was not satisfied with the Cabinet proposals. 
The Cabinet Mission had also proposed the setting u p of a National Government. 
They did not succeed in setting up one before they went back to England. Now 
Lord Wavell tried again. He asked Nehru to form one . Jinnah was in a fit of 
fury. He called the Congress a Caste Hindu fascist organisation, and refused to GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  be a party to their "campaign to dominate the Musli ms and other non-Hindus". 
He would now discard constitutional methods and tak e to "Direct Action" to 
achieve Pakistan. He appealed to the Muslims to obs erve the 16th of August 
1946 as Direct Action Day. 
Against whom was the Direct Action planned? The Bri tish Government? The 
Congress? The Hindus? What would be the means? The answer came in Calcutta 
on the 16th of August. On that day, Muslim 'hooliga ns' went on a rampage, 
killing hundreds of Hindus, raping Hindu women and killing innocent children. It 
looked as though elaborate preparations had been ma de, and arms had been 
collected and stockpiled. For two days the Hindus w ere dazed. But then they 
rallied, killed, looted, raped and set fire to prop erty as Muslims had done. The 
casualties were high on both sides. Many houses and  buildings lay in embers. 
The reprisals by the Hindus resulted in further rep risals by the Muslims in areas 
where they were in absolute majority. One of these areas was the district of 
Noakhali in East Bengal. It became the scene of an unprecedented carnage. 
Hardly a handful of Hindu huts and families could s urvive the onslaught. Hindu 
men, women and children were slaughtered. Some were  forcibly converted to 
Islam. Women were subjected to repeated rape and hu miliation. Some were 
kidnapped and subjected to forcible "marriages". So me committed suicide to 
escape rape or capture. The charred remains of hous es stood as reminders of 
the insanity and inhuman cruelty that had ravaged t he fair green land where 
Hindus and Muslims had lived like blood brothers fo r centuries, speaking the 
same language, singing the same songs, sowing, and reaping the same harvests 
and sharing each other's joys and sorrows. 
Gandhi heard of the great Calcutta Killing when he was in his Ashram at 
Sevagram. He rushed to Delhi to proceed to Calcutta . At Delhi, he, as well as 
the country, came to know of the holocaust in Noakh ali. For nearly a week the 
Government of Bengal, under Suhrawardy, had censore d and suppressed the 
news. When the reports of the carnage and rape in N oakhali reached Bihar 
where Hindus were in a majority there was a deafeni ng and stunning echo. 
Muslims were killed and raped. Their houses were gu tted by arson, and looted. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  The Hindus in Bihar vied with the Muslims of Noakha li in repudiating the values 
of humanness and mutual love that had characterized  and sustained Indian 
society for centuries. They descended to levels tha t would have shamed the 
most barbarous tribes and animals. 
Gandhi 'had reached Calcutta on his way to Noakhali , when reports of the Bihar 
outrage reached him. He was overcome with sorrow an d shame. What was 
happening to India which had set an example to the world in tolerance and 
mutual love? What had happened to all the lessons t hat people had learnt: 
about the power of love and Satyagraha? Were we des tined to destroy each 
other in fratricidal strife and kill each other as animals, or even as animals will 
not do? He had special affection for Bihar. It was there that he had started his 
first Satyagraha in India and served the exploited,  starving people. He decided 
to live on "the lowest diet possible" a semi-fast, and announced that he would 
go on a fast unto death, if the people of Bihar did  not immediately halt the 
madness and turn a new leaf. Gandhi's semi-fast and  the timely measures taken 
by the Government had their effect, and the madness  abated in Bihar. 
Gandhi proceeded to Noakhali. He wanted to go alone . But a Minister and 
Parliamentary Secretaries of the Government of Beng al accompanied him. He 
had to travel by train and car and boat. He was alm ost besieged by people who 
had flocked for his darshan. 
As Gandhi approached Noakhali he saw the havoc that  communal madness had 
wrought, — the charred remains of houses, the skull s and skeletons that were 
strewn beside huts and houses; the vacant and lifel ess looks of women whose 
honour and self- respect had been looted, the livin g dead who were haunting 
the villages that had become charnel grounds. They had seen their husbands or 
children or fathers being butchered before them. Me n had seen their mothers 
or wives or sisters being raped before being killed . Gandhi did not know how to 
console them. Who could give back to them what they  had lost forever? Gandhi 
said that he had not come to console, but to give c ourage. He would stay with 
them. No, he would stay alone in the hut of any Mus lim who would house him, 
living on whatever he could get to eat, sleeping on  the mud floor, at the mercy GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  of hooligans and would-be murderers for the twenty- four hours of the day. He 
would share their agony and risks. He would try to bring back sanity through his 
courage and his appeal to the sense of humanness an d compassion in the 
Muslims. He decided that he would send the members of his entourage to live 
alone in far dispersed areas, as he lived, instilli ng courage in the minds of the 
Hindus and compassion and human kindness in the min ds of the Muslims. 
He himself would set up his headquarters in the vil lage of Srirampur. It was a 
typical site. Only three of the hundreds of Hindu f amilies living there had 
survived. Gandhi had with him his Bengali Secretary , Nirmal Kumar Bose, and 
his stenographer. His granddaughter Manu too was wi th him. The madness that 
he saw launched Gandhi into intense and ruthless in trospection. He had tried to 
place the law of love before the people, in South A frica, in India. He had tried 
to practise it incessantly. He had passed through f ire many times to purify 
himself and his people. Yet today what he could see  all around him was untruth 
and hatred and brutal violence. It appeared as thou gh he had failed. Why did 
he fail? Was there something lacking in him? 
Was there something lacking in his understanding of  the law of love? Had he 
been too frail and too broken an instrument to be t he medium of an invincible 
power? He should purify himself even further. He sh ould reduce himself to zero 
and rid himself of his impurities. The moment deman ded that he pass through 
fire to rid himself of his impurities so that the p ure ore of love would shine 
through him and bring people to their senses. 
He decided to disband his camp at Srirampur and to walk alone from village to 
village. He would go alone, entrusting himself to* God, — the God of love and 
Truth. The district was crisscrossed by rivulets, a nd was marshy. Paths were 
overgrown with thorny bush. Rivers had to be crosse d by walking along bamboo 
poles that had been stretched above the waters to s erve as bridges. He was old 
and weak. He might slip and fall into the flowing w aters or eddies. He 
discarded the use of footwear. He would walk on bar efoot, braving thorns and 
quagmires. He was willing to leave a trail of blood , — his own blood — to mark 
his quest for compassion and love. He was at the me rcy of the very people who GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110  had gone on rampage and killed and looted and raped . He would expose himself 
to their fury, Gandhi was not- far wrong. They stoo d sullen and furious as he 
wended his way on barefeet. At some places, they pl aced thorny bushes on the 
narrow footpaths through which he had to pass, or p laced nightsoil along the 
footpaths that he had to take. He bent down and rem oved the nightsoil with 
dried leaves and placed his feet on the path. The l ooks of many showed their 
unrepentant anger. Some taunted Gandhi, and asked h im if he was not going to 
Bihar. Was he only concerned with the safety of Hin dus? He replied that he 
made no distinction. The sins of the Hindus of Biha r were as black as the sins of 
the Muslims of Noakhali. 
He would go to Bihar and Punjab as soon as some san ity was restored in Bengal. 
To him Allah and Ishwar were one. There were some w ho harkened to his call, 
and vowed to work for the return of sanity and huma nness. 
After two months of this 'pilgrimage' in Noakhali, in March 1947, Gandhi decided 
to go to Bihar to spread the message of sanity and love. Here, it was the Hindus 
who had gone mad and done all that the Muslims had done in Noakhali. Gandhi's 
task here was to bring solace to the Muslims who ha d been the victims of the 
holocaust, and bring Hindus to the path of sanity. Here, the response that 
Gandhi received was far more warm and reassuring. M any who had been guilty 
of perpetrating atrocities on the minorities confes sed their guilt, and promised 
to turn a new leaf. Moved by Gandhi's words on the miseries of Muslim women 
who had suffered, many Hindu women gave Gandhi thei r jewellery to give help 
to their 'sisters'? Gandhi was unsparing in his con demnation of what the Hindus 
had done in Bihar and what the Muslims had done in Noakhali. 
 
 
 
 
 
 GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111   
18 
Gandhi was in Bihar when a new Viceroy Lord Mountba tten took over at Delhi. 
He had been sent to India with a specific mandate t o find a solution and 
implement it before the end of June 1948. The Musli m League had decided to 
boycott the Constituent Assembly. The new Viceroy w anted to seek Gandhi's 
advice before he came to his own assessment. Gandhi  told him that the best 
course would be to ask Jinnah to take over as Prime  Minister and run the affairs 
of the country. If Jinnah declined, the Congress sh ould be asked to shoulder the 
responsibility. Gandhi thought that his proposal wo uld ensure the survival of a 
United India, and there would be no partition. The Viceroy was baffled, Jinnah 
said it was too good to be true. The Congress was w ary about the Mahatma's 
proposal. 
Mountbatten came to the conclusion that there was n o alternative to the 
partition of the country, and on the same grounds d ividing or partitioning the 
Muslim majority states in the North-West and North- East to keep the areas with 
Hindu majority in India. He was able to convince th e Congress that this was the 
only solution to save the country from Civil War, a nd to protect the rest of 
India from fratricide. It is difficult to say what argument clinched the issue with 
the leaders of the Congress, — saving the rest of t he country; fear of civil war, 
desire for the immediate end of British rule and in dependence; the sheer 
impossibility of working with the representatives o f the Muslim League or fear 
of continued paralysis if they were to work with th e representatives of the 
League. 
Gandhi was firmly against partition. He did not see  any good coming out of it. 
Rivers of blood would flow. There would be carnage.  Millions would be 
uprooted. It would mean the surrender of all that h e and the Congress had 
stood for and struggled for, — the unity of India, the belief in pluralism and 
tolerance on which, Indian society was based, the b elief in secular nationalism 
that refused to make religion the basis of nationho od. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  He advised the Congress leaders, — implored them, n ot to accept partition in a 
hurry. The worst that could happen was that they wo uld have to wage another 
struggle to obtain independence without losing the unity of the country. Even if 
partition was to come, let it come after the Britis h left. Their presence created 
an artificial situation. But Gandhi could not convi nce the leaders of the 
Congress. They had made up their minds. They did no t want to sail with him. 
They went through the ritual of consulting him. But  they did not lay all the 
cards on the table. They did not let him know that they had conveyed their 
acceptance of partition to Mountbatten. It was from  others that Gandhi came 
to know that they had accepted partition. 
As one irreversible step after another was taken on  the path towards partition, 
Gandhi cautioned and implored the Congress and the Government at every 
step. He asked them not to be in a hurry, not to ab dicate the claim of the 
Congress to represent the nation; not to accept any thing which would reduce 
Congress to the position of a representative of the  Hindus or Caste Hindus; not 
to accept the partition of the Punjab or Bengal on grounds that were based on 
religion; not to accept the partition of the countr y. At every point, the 
Congress either disagreed with Gandhi or circumvent ed Gandhi. Mountbatten 
brazenly told the Mahatma, 'The Congress is not wit h you; it is with me.' 
As the negotiations progressed the Congress was not  keen to keep Gandhi in the 
picture. Two leaders of the Congress, Sardar Patel and Jawaharlal Nehru told 
the Viceroy not to worry too much about what Gandhi  said. Often Gandhi was 
kept in the dark, and came to know of the decisions  of the Congress only after 
they had been conveyed to the Government or arrived  at in consultation with 
the Government. He was unwanted. From the beginning  of the negotiations, 
Gandhi was clear that he wanted independence for un ited India. If the 
Government were not prepared to accept that positio n, he felt the Congress 
should not agree to the partition of India, but sho uld be prepared for another 
non-violent struggle to achieve independence for an  undivided India. 
The Congress leaders particularly Nehru, Azad and P atel had decided that 
immediate independence was more important than the unity of India. They GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  might have had their reasons. The British Governmen t wanted partition. Jinnah 
wanted partition. Gandhi was isolated. His colleagu es had deserted him. 
He was still prepared to fight. But he knew that he  had no time to build up a 
new alternative leadership. He told his attendants : "Today I find myself all 
alone. Even the Sardar and Jawaharlal think that he  was wrong, and peace was 
sure to return if partition was agreed upon. Nevert heless, I must speak as I feel 
... we may not feel the full impact immediately, bu t, I can see clearly that the 
future of independence gained at this price is goin g to be dark. Should the evil I 
apprehend overtake India ... let posterity know wha t agony this old soul went 
through, thinking of it.... Let it not be said that  Gandhi was party to Indian 
vivisection." It was a Monday, his weekly day of si lence on which Mountbatten 
met Gandhi to talk of the Congress's acceptance of partition. Mountbatten was 
astonished by Gandhi's 'self-effacement' and 'self- control'. 
It seemed to him that his colleagues and the Govern ment had no need of him, 
anymore. He decided to leave Delhi, and go where he  was needed. He was 
needed in Calcutta, in Noakhali, in Bihar, in the P unjab, — everywhere where 
people were in anguish, where they had been blinded  by anger and had sunk to 
the level of brutes. He had to assuage their suffer ing, give them solace, atone 
for their sins, cool their passions, teach them to live with each other. Hatred 
could not quench hatred. Only love could. So the lo ne pilgrim, the messenger of 
peace and love set out for Noakhali where he had le ft his work uncompleted. 
On the way when he was in Calcutta, trouble broke o ut in the city. The former 
premier Suhrawardy and many others requested Gandhi  to stay and restore 
peace. He agreed to do so if Suhrawardy would stay with him under the same 
roof and work with him. 
A house was chosen in a locality that had been badl y affected. On the day on 
which Gandhi moved in, an angry mob of youngsters s urrounded the house, 
pelted stones, broke panels, forced their way in, a nd confronted him with 
blood-shot eyes, brandishing lathis. Gandhi stood i n their midst with arms 
folded, fearless, — cool in his courage and compass ion, ready to be set upon, 
and lynched. The anger abated. The assailants retre ated. It appeared as though GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  there was a change of heart. A few days later, on t he 14th of August, on the 
eve of Independence, the two communities jointly wa ved the national flag and 
celebrated the coming of Independence. But the peac e was fragile. Anger 
welled up again. The desire for retaliation asserte d itself; on the 31st August a 
menacing mob of Hindus, armed with lethal weapons a pproached and 
surrounded the house. They were looking for Suhrawa rdy. But Suhrawardy had 
left a few minutes ago. Their quarry had escaped. B ut their fury did not abate. 
The missiles that they had brought flew past Gandhi . They were in no mood to 
listen to him. 
Gandhi saw that he could salvage the situation only  with an appeal to the 
highest in man. He had always believed that man had  both the beast and the 
super human in him. The way to enter their hearts a nd tap the springs of 
divinity or 'humanness' was through a fast. He went  on a fast on the 1st of 
September. It worked the miracle. It melted hearts.  The leaders of all 
communities gathered and assured him that the chapt er of hatred and violence 
would be closed forever. Hindus and Muslims danced on the streets with joy 
and embraced each other. The world hailed his succe ss as a miracle. He had 
accomplished what many divisions of the army could not accomplish elsewhere. 
Lord Mountbatten hailed him as 'the one man Peace B rigade'. 
Gandhi now felt that his work in the East was done,  and he should hurry to the 
Punjab from where harrowing tales of misery and car nage were pouring in. 
Meanwhile the day that had been set for the transfe r of power arrived. On the 
15th of August, India and Pakistan were to emerge a s two Independent states, 
after nearly three centuries of foreign domination.  The day for which the 
people of India had longed and struggled and suffer ed had arrived. But the man 
who had taken them from the wilderness to the thres hold of power and 
independence was himself struggling in the wilderne ss, carrying his cross on his 
shoulders. He was far away from the jubilation and revelry of the capitals. The 
new Government asked him for a message. He said he had no message — no 
new message to give. GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  Gandhi reached Delhi on his way to the Punjab. But at Delhi, he found that the 
flood of human misery that had gathered in the Punj ab and Sind had reached 
Delhi. Millions of people who had been uprooted fro m their homes and lands 
and lost their all had arrived at Delhi on their tr ek to safety. It was undoubtedly 
the biggest exodus that history had seen. 
Their misery, agony, bitterness and anger were beyo nd description. 
There were among them people who had seen the gory murder of their parents 
or spouses, their sisters and brothers and children . Many women had been 
raped. Many had been abducted and kept as slaves or  forcibly married. Children 
had been picked up by their feet and killed by bein g dashed on the ground. 
Houses had been burnt and looted in village after v illage, city after city. People 
had escaped detection and fled from their homes and  lands, carrying whatever 
they could salvage, not knowing where to go, not kn owing where they could 
find safety. Caravans of those who sought refuge fo rmed themselves; husbands 
were missing; wives were missing: parents and child ren were missing. There 
were also orphans and helpless old people who had l ost their grown up 
children. Aerial surveys showed that some caravans were sixty miles or more in 
length. They had no rations to survive on. Many die d on the way. Those who 
came later had to wade through corpses. The stench of corpses and swarms of 
vultures were in the air. Worse still, sometimes ca ravans were ambushed, and 
subjected to murder, loot, rape and abduction. At s ome places, those who 
sought water were given poisoned water, and they di ed on the way. The 
caravans had no assurance of security, even when th ey survived. They had to 
start life again in refugee camps, living on ration s, living in squalor. How could 
they resume their lives and find their human dignit y again? All this happened to 
columns that moved from one country to the other. 
To Hindus who poured into India from what had becom e Pakistan, and to 
Muslims who were fleeing for safety to Pakistan. 
What else could one find in the camps and concentra tions of refugees except 
anger, misery and the spirit of revenge? They were angry with the leaders 
whose actions had brought them to a state of misery  and despair. Gandhi felt GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  that it was his duty to visit these camps and to do  whatever could be done to 
bring solace to them, trace their kin and rehabilit ate them. The Government 
was looking after the problems of rehabilitation. B ut he had to apply the balm 
to their wounded and embittered minds and hearts. H e stood in their midst, 
unprotected, listening to their woes and trying to comfort them. He visited one 
camp after another, of arriving Hindus as well as f leeing Muslims. He felt sad 
and ashamed at the depravity that had engulfed the minds of his people. Then 
came another blow that shocked him. The Government of India had decided to 
withhold the 55 crores of rupees that were Pakistan 's share of the common 
assets at the time of Partition. Gandhi thought tha t this was immoral. The 
money was part of what belonged to both at the time  of partition. At partition, 
assets too were partitioned as happened in every fa mily. Both had agreed on 
what would constitute Pakistan's share. How then co uld it be held back, merely 
because the treasury happened to be in Indian hands ? 
If a family partitioned its assets and two brothers  had agreed on each other's 
share, how could the elder brother refuse to pay wh at was agreed to be the 
younger brother's share? This would be too immoral a beginning for Independent 
India. He asked Mountbatten for his view. Mountbatt en said that his personal 
opinion was similar to Gandhi's. 
Gandhi decided to go on a fast to appeal to the con science of his colleagues 
who were now in Government, and also to restore san ity and love to the minds 
of his people. 
As the fast progressed and Gandhi's health started sinking, the country began to 
realize that it was running the risk of losing the Mahatma forever. Intransigence 
gave way to introspection. The Government decided t o release the 55 crores. 
Hardened hearts began to melt. Waves of penitence a nd high sentiments swept 
the country. There was a sense of imminent pathos. Once again, the leaders of 
communities assembled, expressed their deep sorrow and promised to live in 
peace and love. Gandhi had triumphed yet again. 
But there were some in India who looked upon Gandhi 's successes as an 
anathema. There were such people among supporters o f the British as well as GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  among Hindu and Muslim extremists. But Gandhi's wor k in Bihar, Calcutta and 
Delhi had brought about a change in the attitude of  his Muslim critics. They 
now looked upon him as the saviour of Muslims in In dia. Even the people and 
leaders in Pakistan had begun to hail Gandhi as 'th e great man of India', the 
Mahatma. 
However, fanatics and extremists among the Hindus h ad become more bitter 
about Gandhi. They accused him of being soft to the  Muslims. They thought he 
was anxious to please Muslims, and was willing to s acrifice the interests of 
Hindus to protect the Muslims. Many of them were op posed to the virtues of 
tolerance and non-violence that Gandhi propagated a s characteristics of the 
Hindu tradition. During his campaign against untouc hability, and at other times, 
they had accused him of betraying Hinduism. Many of  them believed that Hindu 
interests should rule in India, that India was Hind u India. Partition and the riots 
that occurred in its wake had given them an opportu nity to inflame communal 
hatred and openly advocate aggression and retaliati on. Gandhi believed that 
retaliation would imprison the country in a cycle o f mutual hatred and efforts 
at mutual annihilation. This was not sane or humane ; nor was it consistent with 
what he understood of Hinduism and Indian nationali sm. 
His Hindu detractors knew that he had immense influ ence with the 
Government; even more intense influence with the ma sses. The masses looked 
upon him as the incarnation of the soul of India; a s a demigod. 
Some looked upon him as the avatar of Vishnu. They began to feel that the evil 
influence of such a person should be removed, if ne cessary, by doing away with 
him. 
There were enough reports with the Government, and in the press, to indicate 
that these forces might try to assassinate Gandhi. The Government offered 
police protection. Gandhi declined it, saying that his life was in the hands of 
God. Moreover, as he had already said when Mir Alam  had tried to assassinate 
him in South Africa, "To die by the hand of a broth er, rather than by disease. It 
cannot be for me a matter of sorrow. And if, even i n such case, I am free from GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  the thought of anger or hatred against my assailant , I know that that will 
rebound to my eternal welfare." 
Of late, it had appeared that he had a premonition.  He had lost his desire to 
live for the full span of human life — which he bel ieved was 125 years. He often 
said that he would like God to take him away if he could not serve his people, 
but only be a witness to fratricidal strife and inh umanity. He had no desire to 
live to see this misery and madness if he could not  end it. Every day in the 
evening he sat with the people in common prayer to God who was Ishwar to 
some, Allah to some. He never missed his prayer. On  the 20th of January, while 
he was at prayer, there was an explosion and commot ion in the audience. 
Gandhi sat through the prayer motionless, without e ven a muscle twitching. 
When Lady Mountbatten congratulated him on his esca pe and utter equanimity, 
he said, "If somebody fired at me point blank and I  faced the bullet with a 
smile, repeating the name of God in my heart, I sho uld indeed be deserving of 
congratulations." On the 29th of January, a day bef ore the end, he told his 
granddaughter that if he were a true Mahatma he wou ld face the bullet of an 
assassin with love in his heart and God's name on h is lips. 
On the 30th of January at 5 p.m. as on every preced ing day, the crowd was 
waiting for Gandhi in the prayer ground. Sardar Val labhbhai Patel had come to 
meet him, perhaps to talk of differences that had s urfaced between the 
Mahatma and him, and Jawaharlal and him. Gandhi was  talking to him when his 
granddaughter Manu pointed out that he was getting late for prayer. He could 
not bear being late, least of all, for prayer. He g ot up in a hurry, took leave of 
the Sardar and walked briskly to the prayer ground,  leaning on the shoulders of 
Manu and Abha, his granddaughter and granddaughter- in-law. As he neared the 
raised ground, someone tried to edge forward, osten sibly to touch the 
Mahatma's feet. Manu tried to push him away. But he  managed to reach the 
Mahatma. In a second, he bowed to the Mahatma, and as he rose pumped three 
bullets into him from a pistol that he had hidden i n his dress. The shots were 
fired point blank. Two pierced the Mahatma's chest and went out, one was 
lodged in his lung. The Mahatma seemed to flounder.  He slipped down with GANDHI – A Biography for children and beginners 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  folded hands and the cry "Hai Ram" on his lips. For  a minute, the crowd did not 
know what had happened. Then they were stunned and speechless. The 
Mahatma was dead. He had been killed before their e yes, by an Indian, a 
Hindu. In life, he was known as Bapu, the Father. B apu was no more. India felt 
orphaned. 
The country was plunged in gloom. No one could find  words to talk to anyone. 
They could only sob. Everyone felt that something w ithin him had died, 
something which he had cherished, which was linked to his pride as an Indian 
and as a human being. Wherever the news of Gandhi's  death reached, life came 
to a standstill, and a pall of gloom and shame desc ended. When the news 
reached the United Nations, there was stunned silen ce. Human beings 
everywhere moaned the loss of something they cheris hed. 
In India, Pandit Nehru spoke on the radio and said:  "The light has gone out of 
our lives.... Yet I am wrong, for the light that sh one in this country was no 
ordinary light.... And a thousand years later, that  light will still be seen in this 
country, and the world will see it.... For that lig ht represented the living 
Truth." 
Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad said that he had woken up from a dream, feeling 
that his hands were blood-red. He saw that his hand s as well as the hands of all 
others in the country had been stained with the blo od of Gandhi. A few days 
later, addressing Gandhi's associates in Gandhi's A shram at Sevagram, Dr. 
Rajendra Prasad said, "We have betrayed him before the cock crew thrice in 
the morning." 
Gandhi is no more. But, as he himself foresaw: "Whe n I am dead and buried, I 
will speak from my grave." Gandhi's body has been c remated, but not his 
message. That message will continue to be the messa ge of hope for humanity. 
 
 
 