 
Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
Selected and Compiled with an Introduction by 
 
Divya Joshi 
 
GANDHI BOOK CENTRE  
Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal 299 Tardeo Road,  
Nana Chowk Mumbai 400007 INDIA  
Tel.: 2387 2061   Email: info@mkgandhi.org    www.m kgandhi.org 
MANI BHAVAN GANDHI SANGRAHALAYA MUMBAI  
 
Published with the financial assistance received fr om the Department of Culture, 
Government of India.  
Published with the permission of The Navajivan Trus t, Ahmedabad - 380 014 
First Edition 1000 copies : 2002 
Set in 11/13 Point Times New Roman by Gokarn Enterp rises, Mumbai 
Invitation Price  : Rs. 30.00 
Published by  
Meghshaym T. Ajgaonkar, Executive Secretary Mani Bh avan Gandhi Sangrahalaya  
19, Laburnum Road, Gamdevi, Mumbai 400 007 Tel. No.  2380 5864, Fax. No. 2380 6239 
E-mail: info@gandhi-manibhavan.org and Printed at M ouj Printing Bureau, Mumbai 400 004. 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
PREFACE 
Gandhiji's life, ideas and work are of crucial impo rtance to all those who want a 
better life for humankind. The political map of the  world has changed dramatically 
since his time, the economic scenario has witnessed  unleashing of some disturbing 
forces, and the social set-up has undergone a treme ndous change. The importance 
of moral and ethical issues raised by him, however, remain central to the future of 
individuals and nations. Today we need him, more tha n before. 
Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya has been spreading i nformation about 
Gandhiji's life and work. A series of booklets pres enting Gandhiji's views on some 
important topics is planned to disseminate informat ion as well as to stimulate 
questions among students, scholars, social activist s and concerned citizens. We 
thank Government of India, Ministry of Tourism & Cul ture, Department of Culture, 
for their support. 
Aloo Dastur  
President Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya 
Usha Thakkar  
Hon. Secretary Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya 
6Ih  April 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
INTRODUCTION 
Divya Joshi 
Gandhiji firmly believed that self-reliant villages form a sound basis for a just, 
equitable and non-violent order. This can be a guid ing principle for all citizens, 
constructive workers and policy makers in India. 
After returning from South Africa Gandhiji developed  his ideas on villages from his 
direct experiences. He was convinced that "If the vil lages perish, India will perish 
too. It will be no more India. Her own mission in t he world will get lost." 1 For him 
rebuilding of the nation could be achieved only by reconstructing villages. He 
himself initiated such efforts at certain places li ke Champaran (1917), Sevagram 
(1920) and Wardha (1938). With the passage of time,  he visualised an elaborate 
programme of constructive work, which included econo mic self-reliance, social 
equality and decentralized political system. 
Gandhiji wanted to rebuild India from the lowest le vel with the poorest and the 
weakest. So he gave a call to the people to go back  to villages for village 
reconstruction. He had visualized self-reliant villa ges, free from exploitation and 
fear, as an important part of the decentralized sys tem. According to him, life will 
not be a pyramid with the apex sustained by the bot tom. But it will be an oceanic 
circle whose centre will be the individual always re ady to perish for the village, 
the latter ready to perish for the circle of villag es, till at last the whole becomes 
one life composed of individuals, never aggressive in  their arrogance but ever 
humble, sharing the majesty of the oceanic circle o f which they are integral 
units. 2\ 
Now is the time to listen to Gandhiji's voice caref ully, which says, "We are 
inheritors of a rural civilization. The vastness of o ur country, the vastness of the 
population, the situation and the climate of the co untry have, in my opinion, 
destined it for a rural civilization... To uproot it  and substitute for it an urban 
civilization seems to me an impossibility." 3 
 
REFERENCES  
1.  Harijan, 29-8-1936; 63:241. 
2.  Harijan, 28-7-1946; 85:33. 
3.  Young India, 7-11-1929; 42:108. 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
IDEAL VILLAGE 
"That village may be regarded as reformed, where eve rybody wears khadi, which 
produces all the khadi it needs, in which every inh abitant spends some of his time 
in one or more processes relating to cotton, which uses only oil produced in 
indigenous oil-presses, which consumes only jaggery  manufactured in the village 
itself or in its neighbourhood and only hand-milled  flour and hand-pounded rice; 
the village, in other words, where the largest possi ble number of village industries 
are flourishing, in which nobody is illiterate, whe re the roads are clean, there is a 
fixed place for evacuation, the wells are clean, the re is harmony among the 
different communities, and untouchability is comple tely absent, in which 
everybody gets cow's milk, ghee etc., in moderate qu antities, in which nobody is 
without work, and which is free from quarrels and t hefts, and in which the people 
abide by the sevak's  advice in all matters. This is possible in the exi sting 
conditions. I cannot of course say about the time r equired." 
(Letter to Munnalal Shah, 4-4-1941; 73:421) 
* * *  
"The villagers can make great progress if they work like this in co-operation 
with one another. Ours is a small village. We should  inquire and find out in which 
spheres of activity and to what extent we can work on a co-operative basis. Even if 
all villagers are not inclined to follow the co-ope rative method we must find out 
those who are prepared to give it a trial. . . 
"We should produce all the other necessities in the  village itself. Then we 
should also find out what other industries we can s et up here. We ought to press 
oil and make shoes locally. Similarly we can think of other industries also. . . 
"We have to think about education in Sevagram. Thoug h you have not asked 
me any question on this, I may at least tell you th at in my opinion there should not 
be a single illiterate person in Sevagram. I put for ward the concept of basic 
education very late in my life but all the same I at tach great importance to it. I 
had put the following question before the Gujarati Sahitya Parishad : What kind of Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  literature are the writers bringing out for the cro res of illiterate villagers? This 
task is as huge as it is difficult. 
"Let me also tell you that our own life, if it is s imple and pure, is bound to 
have its impact on the villagers without our having to  tell them in so many words." 
(Speech at the prayer meeting, Sevagram, 22-10-1941 ; 75:43.44.) 
* * *  
"My idea of village swaraj is that it is a complete  republic, independent of its 
neighbours for its own vital wants, and yet interdep endent for many others in 
which dependence is a necessity. Thus every village's  first concern will be to grow 
its own food crops and cotton for its cloth. It sho uld have a reserve for its cattle, 
recreation and playground for adults and children. Then if there is more land 
available, it will grow  useful  money crops, thus excluding  ganja,  tobacco, opium 
and the like. The village will maintain a village th eatre, school and public hall. It 
will have its own waterworks, ensuring clean water supply. This can be done 
through controlled wells or tanks. Education will b e compulsory up to the final 
basic course. As far as possible every activity wil l be conducted on the co-
operative basis. There will be no castes such as we have today with their graded 
untouchability. Non-violence with its technique of satyagraha and non-co-
operation will be the sanction of the village commu nity. There will be a 
compulsory service of village guards who will be sele cted by rotation from the 
register maintained by the village. The government o f the village will be 
conducted by a Panchayat of five persons annually e lected by the adult villagers, 
male and female, possessing minimum prescribed qual ifications. These will have 
all the authority and jurisdiction required. Since there will be no system of 
punishments in the accepted sense, this Panchayat w ill be the legislature, 
judiciary and executive combined to operate for its  year of office. Any village can 
become such a republic today without much interfere nce even from the present 
Government whose sole effective connection with the vi llages is the exaction of 
the village revenue. I have not examined here the qu estion of relations with the 
neighbouring villages and the centre if any. My pur pose is to present an outline of 
village government. Here there is perfect democracy b ased upon individual 
freedom. The individual is the architect of his own government. The law of non-Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  violence rules him and his government. He and his vill age are able to defy the 
might of a world. For the law governing every villager  is that he will suffer death 
in the defence of his and his village's honour. 
"The reader may well ask me—I am asking myself whil e penning these" lines—
as to why I have not been able to model Sevagram afte r the picture here drawn. 
My answer is: 1 am making the attempt. I can see di m traces of success though I 
can show nothing visible. But there is nothing inher ently impossible in the picture 
drawn here. To model such a village may be the work of a lifetime. Any lover of 
true democracy and village life can take up a villag e, treat it as his world and sole 
work, and he will find good results. He begins by b eing the village scavenger, 
spinner, watchman, medicine man and schoolmaster al l at once. If nobody comes 
near him, he will be satisfied with scavenging and spinning." 
(Harijan , 26-7-1942; 76:308-9.) 
* * *  
"My idea of self-sufficiency is that villages must b e self- sufficient in regard to 
food, cloth and other basic necessities. But even th is can be overdone. Therefore 
you must grasp my idea properly. Self-sufficiency d oes not mean narrowness. To be 
self-sufficient is not to be altogether self-contai ned. In no circumstances would we 
be able to produce all the things we need nor do we  aim at doing so. So though our 
aim is complete self-sufficiency, we shall have to g et from outside the village what 
we cannot produce in the village; we shall have to pr oduce more of what we can in 
order thereby to obtain in exchange what we are una ble to produce. Only nothing 
of our extra produce would be sent to Bombay or far  off cities. Nor would we 
produce things with an eye to export to those citie s. That would run counter to my 
conception of swadeshi. Swadeshi means serving my im mediate neighbour rather 
than those far away. 
"Our outlook must be that we would serve the village  first, then the 
neighbourhood, then the district and thereafter the  province." 
(Discussion with Shrikrishnadas Jaju, 10-10-1944; 7 8:171.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  "My ideal village still exists only in my imaginatio n. After all every human 
being lives in the world of his own imagination. In this village of my dreams the 
villager will not be dull—he will be all awareness. He will not live like an animal in 
filth and darkness. Men and women will live in freed om, prepared to face the 
whole world. There will be no plague, no cholera an d no smallpox. Nobody will be 
allowed to be idle or to wallow in luxury. Everyone will have to do body labour. 
Granting all this, I can still envisage a number of things that will have to be 
organized on a large scale. Perhaps there will even  be railways and also post and 
telegraph offices. I do not know what things there will be or will not be. Nor am I 
bothered about it. If I can make sure of the essent ial thing, other things will follow 
in due course. But if I give up the essential thing,  I give up everything." 
(Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru, 5-10-1945; 81:320.) 
* * *  
1.  The crucial question according to you, is how to en sure man's mental, 
economic, political and moral development. That is my position too. 
2.  And in doing so every individual should have equal r ight and opportunity. 
3.  From this point of view there should be equality bet ween villages and cities. 
And therefore their food and drink, their way of li fe, their dress and their 
habits should be the same. If such a condition is t o be brought about people 
should produce their own cloth and food and build t heir own houses. So also 
they should produce their own water and electricity . 
4.  Man is not born to live in the jungle; he is born t o live in society. If we are 
to make sure that one person does not ride on an ot her's back, the unit 
should be an ideal village or a social group which will be self-sufficient, but 
the members of which will be interdependent. This c onception will bring 
about a change in human relationship all over the wo rld." 
(Letter to Jawaharlal Nehru, 13-11-1945; 82:72.)  
* * *  
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  "Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every  village will be a 
republic or panchayat having full powers. It follow s, therefore, that every village 
has to be self-sustained and capable of managing it s affairs even to the extent of 
defending itself against the whole world. It will b e trained and prepared to perish 
in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaug ht from without." 
(Harijan , 28-7-1946; 85:32.) 
* * *  
"A village unit as conceived by me is as strong as th e strongest. My imaginary 
village consists of 1,000 souls. Such a unit can giv e a good account of itself, if it is 
well organized on a basis of self-sufficiency. Do n ot, therefore, think that unless 
you have a big union you will not be able to give a good account of yourself. . . 
"... I have conceived round the village as the centr e a series of ever-widening 
circles, not one on top of the other, but all on th e same plane, so that there is 
none higher or lower than the other. Maine has said  that India was a congerie of 
village republics. The towns were then subservient to  the villages. They were 
emporia for the surplus village products and beautif ul manufactures. That is the 
skeleton of my picture to serve as a pattern for Ind ependent India. There are many 
faults in the ancient village system. Unless they a re eradicated, there will not only 
be no hope for the untouchables in a free India but  for India in the comity of 
nations." 
(Harijan , 4-8-1946; 85:79.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9   
VILLAGE AND NON-VIOLENCE 
"I expect to convert the zamindars and other capital ists by the non-violent 
method, and therefore there is for me nothing like an inevitability of class 
conflict. For it is an essential part of nonviolence  to go along the line of least 
resistance. The moment the cultivators of the soil r ealize their power, the 
zamindari evil will be sterilized. What can the poo r zamindar do when they say 
that they will simply not work the land unless they  are paid enough to feed and 
clothe and educate themselves and their children in  a decent manner? In reality 
the toiler is the owner of what he produces. If the  toilers intelligently combine, 
they will become an irresistible power. That is how  I do not see the necessity of 
class conflict. If I thought it inevitable I should  not hesitate to preach it and teach 
it." 
(Harijan , 5-12-1936; 64:73.) 
* * *  
"Cast off the cloak of foreign thoughts and ideals,  identify yourselves with the 
villagers. The Western world is giving us destructive knowledge; we want to impart 
constructive education through non-violence." 
(Harijan,  30-4-1938; 67:36.) 
* * *  
"If the worker going to the village has no faith in nonviolence, our work must 
fail. If he concerns himself with economics alone a nd disregards ethics and 
morality, all our efforts are of no avail. Non-viole nce is the basis on which our 
work is to be built. It will not do to ignore it. I n the initial stages people might 
achieve something even without it but ultimately th e edifice of swaraj will not be 
raised without the foundation of ahimsa. 
(Speech at All India Spinners' Association meeting,  Sevagram, 1-9-1944; 78:63.) 
* * *  
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10   
"There are some big men who hold this view. They thi nk that the teaching of 
non-violence has proved disastrous. They believe tha t the way of the spinning-
wheel would only take us back to the medieval ages.  They think the same of 
village industries and Nayee Talim. Could it not be that there was something 
basically wrong with me which led me to have a misg uided view of things all 
through? However, my views are the same as they have always been." 
(A letter, 14-4-1947; 87:278.) 
* * *  
"Whatever effect is produced there will be the fruit  of ahimsa. Without ahimsa 
village uplift seems impossible to me." 
(Letter to Manibhai Desai, 11-12-1947; 90:210.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11   
EXPLOITATION OF VILLAGES BY CITIES 
"The half a dozen modem cities are an excrescence a nd serve at the present 
moment the evil purpose of draining the life-blood o f the villages. Khaddar is an 
attempt to revise and reverse the process and establ ish a better relationship 
between the cities and the villages. The cities wit h their insolent torts (sic) are a 
constant menace to the life and liberty of the villa gers. 
"Khaddar has the greatest organizing power in it be cause it has itself to be 
organized and because it affects all India. If khad dar rained from heaven it would 
be a calamity. But as it can only be manufactured b y the willing co-operation of 
starving millions and thousands of middle-class men and women, its success means 
the best organization conceivable along peaceful lin es." 
(Young India,  17-3-1927; 33:166.) 
* * *  
"I have believed and repeated times without number th at India is to be found 
not in its few cities but in its 7,00,000 villages. But we who have gathered here are 
not villagers. We are town-dwellers. We town-dwelle rs have believed that India is 
to be found in its towns and that the villages were created to minister to our 
needs. We have hardly ever paused to inquire if those  poor folks get sufficient to 
eat and clothe themselves with and whether they have a roof to shelter 
themselves from sun and rain. Now I do not think any  Congress worker has 
travelled through the length and breadth of India as  much as I have done during 
the past twenty years. That in itself is hardly a t hing to be proud of. I, however, 
humbly claim, as a result of those peregrinations, to know the Indian villages more 
than any other Congress worker or leader. I have fou nd that the town-dweller has 
generally exploited the villager, in fact he has liv ed on the poor villager's 
substance. Many a British official has written abou t the conditions of the people of 
India. No one has, to my knowledge, said that the I ndian villager has enough to 
keep body and soul together. On the contrary they h ave admitted that the bulk of 
the population live on the verge of starvation and ten per cent are semi-starved, 
and that millions have to rest content with a pinch  of dirty salt and chillies and Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  polished rice or parched grain. You may be sure tha t if any of us were to be asked 
to live on that diet, we should not expect to survive  it longer than a month or 
should be afraid of losing our mental faculties. An d yet our villagers go through 
that state from day to day. The Village Industries Association was formed last year 
in order to study the conditions in which they live d and the state of their 
handicrafts, and to revive such village arts and craft s as may be revived." 
(Harijan , 4-4-1936; 62:298.) 
* * *  
"Today our villages have become a mere appendage to t he cities. They exist, 
as it were, to be exploited by the latter and depen d on the latter's sufference. 
This is unnatural. It is only when the cities reali ze the duty of making an adequate 
return to the villages for the strength and sustena nce which they derive from 
them, instead of selfishly exploiting them, that a healthy and moral relationship 
between the two will spring up, and if the city chi ldren are to play their part in 
this great and noble work of social reconstruction,  the vocations through which 
they are to receive their education ought to be dir ectly related to the 
requirements of the villages. So far as I can see, the various processes of cotton 
manufacture from ginning and cleaning of cotton to the spinning of yarn answer 
this test as nothing else does. Even today cotton is  grown in the villages and is 
ginned and spun and converted into cloth in the citi es. But the chain of processes 
which cotton undergoes in the mills from the beginn ing to the end constitutes a 
huge tragedy of waste in men, materials and mechani cal power. 
"My plan to impart primary education through the me dium of village 
handicrafts like spinning and carding, etc., is thu s conceived as the spearhead of a 
silent social revolution fraught with the most far- reaching consequence. It will 
provide a healthy and moral basis of relationship be tween the city and the village 
and thus go a long way towards eradicating some of the worst evils of the present 
social insecurity and poisoned relationship between  the classes. It will check the 
progressive decay of our villages and lay the foundat ion of a juster social order in 
which there is no unnatural division between the 'h aves' and 'have- nots' and 
everybody is assured of a living wage and the right to freedom. And all this would 
be accomplished without the horrors of a bloody cla ss war or a colossal capital Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  expenditure such as would be involved in the mechaniz ation of a vast continent 
like India. Nor would it entail a helpless dependen ce on foreign imported 
machinery or technical skill. Lastly, by obviating t he necessity for highly 
specialized talent, it would place the destiny of t he masses, as it were, in their 
own hands." 
(Harijan , 9-10-1937; 66:169-70.) 
* * *  
"The cities are not only draining the villages of th eir wealth but talent also." 
(Harijan,  31-3-1946; 82:365.) 
* * *  
"I will have no regrets if the money invested in thes e machines is reduced to 
dust. True India lies in its seven lakh villages. Do  you know that big cities like 
London have exploited India and the big cities of I ndia in turn have exploited its 
villages? That is how palatial mansions have come up in big cities and villages have 
become impoverished. I want to infuse new life into these villages. I do not say 
that all the mills in cities should be demolished. But we should be vigilant and 
start afresh wherever we happen to make a mistake. W e should stop exploiting the 
villages and should closely examine the injustice do ne to the villages and 
strengthen their economic structure." 
(Talk with Manu Gandhi, 18-4-1947; 87:303.) 
* * *  
"In the scheme of reconstruction for Free India, it s villages should no longer 
depend, as they are now doing, on its cities, but c ities should exist only for and in 
the interest of the villages. Therefore, the spinnin g-wheel should occupy the proud 
position of the centre round which all the life-giv ing village industries would 
revolve." 
(Harijan , 30-8-1947; 89:82.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
"But for the last 150 years the trend has been for cities to exist only to 
squeeze wealth out of the villages. They took raw m aterial from the villages, 
carried on trade with foreign countries and made cr ores of rupees. This money did 
not go to the villagers, or only a very small fractio n of it did. The bulk of it went 
to millionaires and the mill-owners. Towns exist to  exploit the villages. The city 
culture does not therefore fit into the framework o f villages. A woman worker 
from a town should not carry to the villages the atm osphere and the ways of 
towns. May be she has a lot of money and articles o f luxury. May be she has a 
motor car, cosmetics, dresses of velvet and toothpast es, foreign or indigenous, 
tooth brushes, dainty shoes and sandals. If she tak es all these things along with 
her, how can she serve the villages? If with these t hings she sets the standard for 
the villagers they will devour the villages. The citi es should be for increasing the 
prosperity of the villages, for making money availabl e to them for developing the 
village culture." 
(Prarthana pravachan II pp. 185-8; New Delhi, 9-12-1 947; 90:201.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
UPLIFTMENT OF VILLAGES 
"We are inheritors of a rural civilization. The vastn ess of our country, the vastness 
of the population, the situation and the climate of  the country have, in my 
opinion, destined it for a rural civilization. Its d efects are well known but not one 
of them is irremediable. To uproot it and substitut e for it an urban civilization 
seems to me an impossibility, unless we are prepare d by some drastic means to 
reduce the population from three hundred million to  three or say even thirty. I can 
therefore suggest remedies on the assumption that w e must perpetuate the 
present rural civilization and endeavour to rid it o f its acknowledged defects. This 
can only be done if the youth of the country will s ettle down to village life. And if 
they will do this they must reconstruct their life and pass every day of their 
vacation in the villages surrounding their colleges o r high schools and those who 
have finished their education or are not receiving an y should think of settling down 
in villages." 
(Young India , 7-11-1929; 42:108.) 
* * *  
"India does not live in its towns but in its villages . But if the cities want to 
demonstrate that their populations will live for th e villagers of India the bulk of 
their resources should be spent in ameliorating the  condition of and befriending 
the poor. We must not lord it over them, we must le arn to be their servants. When 
the cities realize that they must live for the welfa re of the poor, they will make 
their palaces and institutions and the life of thei r inhabitants correspond 
somewhat to our villages.'' 
(Young India , 23-4-1931; 46:12.) 
* * *  
"I have no partiality for return to the primitive met hod of grinding and husking 
for the sake of them. I suggest the return, because  there is no other way of giving 
employment to the millions of villagers who are livin g in idleness. In my opinion, 
village uplift is impossible, unless we solve the pre ssing economic distress.  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16   
Therefore, to induce the villagers to utilize their idle hours is in itself solid 
uplift work. I invite the fair correspondent and tho se who feel like her to go to 
some villages, live there for some time in the midst of the villagers and try to live 
like them, and they will soon perceive the soundness  of my argument." 
(Harijan , 30-11-1934; 59:413.) 
* * *  
"The true Indian civilization is in the Indian vill ages. The modern city 
civilization you find in Europe and America, and in a handful of our cities which 
are copies of the Western cities and which were bui lt for the foreigner, and by 
him. But they cannot last. It is only the handicraf t civilization that will endure and 
stand the test of time. But it can do so only if we  can correlate the intellect with 
the hand. The late Madhusudan Das used to say that our peasants and workers 
had, by reason of working with bullocks, become lik e bullocks; and he was right. 
We have to lift them from the estate of the brute t o the estate of man, and that 
we can do only by correlating the intellect with th e hand. Not until they learn to 
work intelligently and make something new every day,  not until they are taught to 
know the joy of work, can we raise them from their low estate." 
(Harijan,  30-3-1940; 71:335-36.) 
* * *  
"India is trying to evolve true democracy, i.e., with out violence. Our weapons 
are those of satyagraha expressed through the chark ha, the village industries, 
primary education through handicrafts, removal of un touchability, communal 
harmony, prohibition, and non-violent organization of labour as in Ahmedabad. 
These mean mass effort and mass education. We have big agencies for conducting 
these activities. They are purely voluntary, and thei r only sanction is service of 
the lowliest." 
(Harijan , 18-5-1940; 72:60.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
"If some of you see the villages, you will not be fa scinated by the sight. You 
will have to scratch below the dung heap. I do not s ay that they ever were 
heavenly places. Today they are really dung-heaps. They were not like that before. 
What I say is not from history but from what I have seen myself. I have travelled 
from one end of India to the other and have seen the  miserable specimen of 
humanity with lustreless eyes. They are India. In t hese humble cottages, in the 
midst of these dung-heaps, are to be found the humb le Bhangis in whom you find 
the concentrated essence of wisdom." 
(Harijan , 20-4-1947; 87:192.) 
* * *  
". . . besides communal unity I had recommended to the nation only one thing, 
viz., handspun yarn with which alone we could bring swaraj nearer. 
"The spinning-wheel has almost been forgotten. Ther e is all this talk of 
militarization and industrialization. But it is my conviction that a day will come 
when they will all see for themselves that for Indi a there is no way other than that 
of village industries and non-violence. We shall not  find a way out unless we 
develop these. But I am still optimistic." 
(Talk with C. Rajagopalachari, 25-5-1947; 88:4.) 
* * *  
"Take the village people and slum-dwellers in your h ands and give them the 
benefit of your knowledge, skill, insight, construc tive work and patriotic spirit. 
Give the people this true education through the exam ple of your own lives. Let all 
your activities be directed to the welfare of the p eople. If that is not done and if 
the people lose patience, our plight will be much w orse than the present slavery. 
Before the people take to the path of destruction, see that they are given 
constructive, life-giving training." 
(Bihar Pachhi Delhi , pp. 14-19; 88:16.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
VILLAGE SANITATION 
"It is scarcely necessary to enlarge upon the rule that dirt must not be thrown on 
the street. Disposal of refuse is also a science. G lass, iron, etc., should be buried 
deep. Twigs and sticks used for cleaning teeth shou ld be washed, dried and used 
for fuel. Rags may be sold. Left-over food, peeling s, etc., should be buried and 
turned into manure. I have seen many a heap of manur e prepared in this way. 
Paper can be made from rags. It should not be neces sary to employ anyone to 
remove refuse in a village, because there is very litt le of it and most of it can be 
converted into manure. 
"Near the village or dwellings, there should be no d itches in which water can 
collect. Mosquitoes do not breed where water does n ot stagnate. Where there are 
no mosquitoes, the incidence of malaria is low. At one time, water used to collect 
around Delhi. After the hollows were filled, mosqui toes were greatly reduced and 
so also was malaria." 
(Navajivan,  2-11-1919; 16:273.) 
* * *  
"Naturally a village worker must find happiness in a simple and frugal life. Let 
no one think that I have sketched what is an impossi ble requirement. I have not. 
The technique though it reads formidable is by no m eans so for a patient student. 
Purity of character must be a foregone conclusion i n any of this work. And no 
village worker can help falling a prey to some disea se or other if he does not know 
and observe in his own person the laws of sanitation  and does not know domestic 
treatment of simple diseases. The spinning organiza tion is capable of 
accommodating any number of workers who can satisfy  the simple test laid down 
above." 
(Young India , 10-3-1927; 33:152.) 
* * *  
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
"Villagers today have no practical knowledge in many  fields and we find, 
instead, that often ignorant superstition has estab lished a hold over them. 
". . . From the standpoint of health, the condition  of villages is deplorable. 
One of the chief causes of our poverty is the nonavai lability of this essential 
knowledge of hygiene. If sanitation in villages can be improved, lakhs of rupees 
will easily be saved and the condition of people imp roved to that extent. A sick 
peasant can never work as hard as a healthy one. . .  
". . . In my opinion based on experience, our povert y plays a very small part in 
our insanitary condition." 
(Shikshan Ane Sahitya , 18-8-1929; 41:295.) 
* * *  
". . . Hence the primary duty of a village worker is  to educate villagers in 
sanitary habits. . . 
". . . This is so because these insanitary habits h ave taken such deep root that 
the villagers are not prepared to listen to the volun teers, and, even if they do so, 
show a singular lack of enthusiasm to act according ly. . . 
". . . Hence it is the dharma of the volunteers to give object- lessons. Only if 
they themselves perform the tasks that have to be pe rformed by the villagers, will 
the latter follow their example; then doubtless the y will positively do so. . . 
". . . We should never get into the habit of defeca ting on the road. It is 
uncivilized to do so in the open in public and to ma ke even little children do so. 
We are aware of the uncivilized nature of this act,  for we avert our eyes if anyone 
happens to pass at that moment. Hence every village s hould have the most 
inexpensive water-closets built at one place. The s pot at which the dunghill is 
located can itself be used for this purpose. Farmer s can share among themselves 
the manure accumulated in this manner. And so long as they do not start making 
such arrangements, volunteers should clean dunghill s in the same way as they 
clean streets. Every morning after the villagers have  performed this function, they 
should go to the dunghill at an appointed hour, cle an up all the filth and dispose Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  of it in the manner mentioned above. If no field is  available, one should mark out 
the place where the excreta may be buried. If this is done, it will facilitate the 
task every day and when the farmers get convinced of the matter, they can make 
use of the manure that is collected there." 
(Shikshan Ane Sahitya , 22-9-1929; 41:445-47.) 
* * *  
"I would, therefore, expect every one of you who ha s cherished the ideals of 
the Vidyapith and who is pledged to serve it to go s traight to the villages and start 
living those ideals there. Each one of you will thus  be a peripatetic Vidyapith, 
teaching the ideals by means of his own personal ex ample. . . 
". . . The village worker will thus be a living embo diment of industry. He will 
master all the processes of khadi, from cotton- sow ing and picking to weaving, and 
will devote all his thought to perfecting them. If h e treats it as a science, it won't 
jar on him, but he will derive fresh joy from it ev eryday, as he realizes more and 
more its great possibilities. If he will go to the village as a teacher, he will go 
there no less as a learner. He will soon find that he has much to learn from the 
simple villagers. He will enter into every detail of  village life, he will discover the 
village handicrafts and investigate the possibilitie s of their growth and their 
improvement. He may find the villagers completely ap athetic to the message of 
khadi, but he will, by his life of service compel in terest and attention." 
(Harijan , 31-8-1934; 58:305-307.) 
* * *  
"I am of opinion that a good deal of medical help i s given only in order to 
make people more helpless. Medical help, in most ca ses, is practically thrown at 
them, and so it is lost on them. Some of my co-work ers are going to a village close 
by where the streets are covered with filth. No won der if the eyes of the children 
there are bad and there are all kinds of diseases. Just now our workers' efforts do 
not seem to make any impression on the villagers; bu t when they find that, as a 
result of their village having become cleaner and fre e from filth, they are also 
comparatively free from disease, they will appreciat e the difference. Now, if you 
had a free dispensary there and were giving doses o f medicine to all that came, Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  you would make no headway. Tackling the village sani tation is the only really 
substantial work. There is an evil at our doors whic h is perfectly preventible, and 
yet we have suffered our villagers to tolerate it fo r scores of years. It is an uphill 
task, whilst the distribution of free medicines is much easier. But I am asking my 
co-workers to avoid the easy thing and cheap applaus e. We must first concentrate 
on the prevention of disease, we can tackle the dis ease itself later on." 
(Harijan , 29-3-1935; 60:324.) 
* * *  
"The task of rural sanitation is no easy one, it me ans nothing less than raising 
the village Bhangi to the status of an ideal Bhangi.  The whole subject is 
unexplored; the profession, far from being a dirty one, is a purifying, life-
protecting one. Only we have debased it. We have to raise it to its true status." 
(Harijan , 5-12-1936; 64:105.) 
* * *  
"1. An ideal Indian village will be so constructed a s to lend itself to perfect 
sanitation. It will have cottages with sufficient li ght and ventilation built of a 
material obtainable within a radius of five miles o f it. The cottages will have 
courtyards enabling householders to plant vegetables  for domestic use and to 
house their cattle. The village lanes and streets wi ll be free of all avoidable dust. 
It will have wells according to its needs and access ible to all. It will have houses of 
worship for all; also a common meeting place, a vill age common for grazing its 
cattle, a co-operative dairy, primary and secondary  schools in which industrial 
education will be the central fact, and it will hav e panchayats for settling 
disputes. It will produce its own grains, vegetables  and fruit, and its own khadi. 
This is roughly my idea of a model village. In the p resent circumstances its 
cottages will remain what they are with slight impr ovements. Given a good 
zamindar, where there is one, or co-operation among  the people, almost the 
whole of the programme other than model cottages ca n be worked out at an 
expenditure within the means of the villagers includ ing the zamindar or zamindars, 
without Government assistance. With that assistance  there is no limit to the 
possibility of village reconstruction. But my task just now is to discover what the Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  villagers can do to help themselves if they have mutu al co-operation and 
contribute voluntary labour for the common good. I a m convinced that they can 
under intelligent guidance, double the village inco me as distinguished from 
individual income. There are in our villages inexhaus tible resources not for 
commercial purposes in every case but certainly for local purposes in almost every 
case. The greatest tragedy is the hopeless unwillin gness of the villagers to better 
their lot. 
"2. The very first problem the village worker will so lve is its sanitation. It is 
the most neglected of all the problems that baffle workers and that undermine 
physical well-being and breed disease. If the worke r became a voluntary Bhangi, 
he would begin by collecting night-soil and turning  it into manure and sweeping 
village streets. He will tell people how and where t hey should perform daily 
functions and speak to them on the value of sanitati on and the great injury caused 
by the neglect. The worker will continue to do the work whether the villagers 
listen to him or no. 
"3. The spinning-wheel should be the central theme of all such village 
exhibitions and the industries suited to the partic ular locality should revolve round 
it. An exhibition thus arranged would naturally bec ome an object-lesson for the 
villagers and an educational treat when it is accomp anied by demonstrations, 
lectures and leaflets." 
(Harijan , 9-1-1937; 64:217-18.) 
* * *  
"If rural reconstruction were not to include rural sanitation, our villages would 
remain the muck-heaps that they are today. Village sanitation is a vital part of 
village life and is as difficult as it is important.  It needs a heroic efforts to 
eradicate age-long insanitation. The village worker who is ignorant of the science 
of village sanitation, who is not a successful scaven ger, cannot fit himself for 
village service. 
"It seems to be generally admitted that without the  new or basic education 
the education of millions of children in India is w ell-nigh impossible. The village Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  worker has, therefore, to master it, and become a b asic education teacher 
himself. 
"Adult education will follow in the wake of basic e ducation as a matter of 
course. Where this new education has taken root, th e children themselves become 
their parents' teachers. Be that as it may, the vill age worker has to undertake 
adult education also." 
(Harijan , 18-8-1940; 72:380.) 
* * *  
"Village sanitation, domestic cleanliness, personal  hygiene and health care 
have the first place and also full scope, the underl ying idea being that this done 
there can be no disease." 
(Letter to D.D. Joshi, 1-8-1946; 85:105.) 
* * *  
"Mirabehn had called a conference which was attende d by a large number of 
people. They came to the conclusion that all the co w-dung, human faeces and 
vegetable-waste available in villages could be turned  into rich manure. It requires 
not expenditure but a little labour and it increase s the fertility of the soil. . . 
"... I do not know how clean you keep your village. But it is your paramount 
duty to make yourselves strong. You must keep yourse lves clean externally and 
internally. Your village should be free of dirt and  dung in every way. And it should 
be free from foul smells. You should follow the rul es of sanitation." 
(Speech at a prayer meeting, 27-12-1947; 90:306-307 .) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24   
VILLAGES AND SPINNING 
"For the vast bulk of the population, as also the wo rker in the villages, a museum 
of industries is simply bewildering. They should ha ve one universal industry. And 
by a process of exclusion, one arrives at the irresi stible conclusion that the only 
universal industry for the millions is spinning and  no other. That does not mean 
that other industries do not matter or are useless.  Indeed, from the individual 
standpoint, any other industry would be more remune rative than spinning. Watch-
making will be no doubt a most remunerative and fasc inating industry. But how 
many can engage in it? Is it of any use to the mill ions of villagers? But if the 
villagers can reconstruct their home, begin to live a gain as their forefathers did, if 
they begin to make good use of their idle hours, al l else, all the other industries 
will revive as a matter of course.. . 
". . . national resources must be concentrated upon  the one industry of hand-
spinning which all can take up now and besides whic h the vast majority can take 
up no other. And when the nation's attention is thu s rivetted on its revival, we will 
not have to be in search of a market for khaddar. T he energy and money that have 
today to be devoted to popularizing khaddar will to morrow be devoted to its 
greater manufacture and to its improvement. It is t he national inertia that blinds 
us to the possibility of khaddar and thus paralyses  our capacity for a grand national 
effort. It is not enough to say that hand-spinning is  one of the industries to be 
revived. It is necessary to insist that it is the  central industry that must engage our 
attention if we are to re-establish the village home ." 
(Young India,  30-9-1926; 31:463-4.) 
* * *  
"It is this spinning of a constructive type that can  bring swaraj and it is in this 
land that the charkha can sing its finest music." 
(Young India , 29-12-1927; 35:402.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  "The charkha understood intelligently can spin not only economic salvation but 
can also revolutionize our minds and hearts and dem ostrate to us that the non-
violent approach to swaraj is the safest and the eas iest. Though the progress may 
seem slow, it will prove, quickest in the long run. " 
(Harijan , 2-1-1937; 64:195.) 
* * *  
"My intellect will continue to develop till the mom ent I die. The charkha is 
also the prop for my intellect but it does not stra y into wrong paths. I have no 
time to see, hear or read pleasurable things. I dis cover  Daridranarayana  through 
the charkha and have vision of God. This is the way my intellect has been 
developing and will continue to develop all my life.  The testing of a man is not 
complete till he dies. If at the moment of death a man's intellect does not retain 
its brilliance I will say that he has not succeeded . . . 
"I am not yet able to say where the limits of the c onstructive programme lie. 
The instance of the clay image shows only this. In the constructive programme we 
have all-round development. The charkha is a mantra. When I see those who ply 
the charkha discouraged, I am baffled." 
(Speech at Gandhi Seva Sangh meeting, 20-4-1937; 65 :126-127.) 
* * *  
"People may say I am mad in saying that I wish to d ie with the charkha in my 
hand. I do not wish to die holding a string of bead s. For concentration the charkha 
is my beads. God appears to me in thousands of form s. Sometimes I see him in the 
charkha, sometimes in Hindu-Muslim unity, sometimes  in the eradication of 
untouchability. I move as my feeling draws me. When I wish to enter a room in an 
institution, I do so and I feel there the presence of God. In the  Gita  God has said 
that He looks to the well-being of those who worshi p Him. You must be firm in this 
faith if you have understood me." 
(Ibid, 65:133-134.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  "I repeat that if untouchability lives, Hinduism and  with it India dies. Is that 
not a programme worth living for, dying for? And th e spinning-wheel whose every 
turn brings India nearer her destiny? Surely it can  fully occupy every day of every 
Congressman. And the wheel being the centre of our solar system it includes all 
the planets in the shape of village industries. . . 
". . . The wheel brings us at once to the emancipat ion of India's manhood,  
kisans,  labourers and all those who are weary and heavylade n. If this all-inclusive 
and mighty programme is not understood and apprecia ted by Congressmen they do 
not know the A B C of non-violence nor do they know  the elements of C.D." 
(Statement to the press, Sevagram, 28-10-1941; 75:61 -62.) 
* * *  
"My idea is that in a well-organized village one per son should suffice. For 
example, one worker may devote two hours to taking in yarn, distributing slivers 
and spinning tools, and sales of khadi; village ind ustry work might take even less, 
and the remainder of the time he could give to vill age uplift and general 
education. This has not till now been possible beca use the khadi workers' time has 
been devoted to teaching people how to spin, etc. Bu t now the time has come 
when khadi and village products, locally produced, m ust also be locally absorbed. 
In that case one person will be able to do all the work. Today it suffices to say 
that all this work is complementary—and must become  one as far as possible. The 
amalgamation cannot be imposed; it must be a natura l growth. I do not, I cannot, 
apportion any blame to anyone for the existing posi tion. Our plans have 
progressed as far as our intelligence and experienc e could have taken them. The 
creation of khadi  vidyalayas  is meant to expand and improve the technique of 
work. We shall learn from them how all departments of village work can be 
amalgamated." 
(Harijan , 31-5-1942; 76:38.) 
* * *  
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
"If we are able to adopt the charkha intelligently we can revive the entire 
economic life of our villages once more." 
(Speech at All India Spinners' Association, Sevagram , 1-9-1944; 78:66.) 
* * *  
"Today we are not really able to help the villagers.  By offering the spinners 
three, four, six or eight annas I comfort myself wi th the belief that I have given 
them a livelihood. But it amounts to nothing more th an a dole, for the work that I 
am providing them is not of a permanent nature. In c ase we get control of the 
State in our hands and by that means close all mill s, it may perhaps then be 
possible to provide them permanent work. But today I cannot hide from them the 
truth that I have been only trying to fill their id le hours. If I have to provide them 
with some money I shall teach them other crafts als o. I shall fully acquaint them 
with the present economic situation and educate the m in this regard. No doubt I 
would wish to give work to every spinner who comes se eking it. But I shall not send 
the khadi thus produced to Bombay. I shall ask the workers to sell it in the 
neighbouring villages. But this is not enough. I mus t investigate what work other 
than spinning can be provided to them in the village . Only by revising the entire 
economic life of the village can our work become pe rmanent. Whether for villagers 
or for us, I agree, cities will always have some sor t of attraction. Nevertheless we 
shall be free from our present day city life: We sh all show how in contrast to the 
cities more amenities can be provided in the village s. But if we merely go on 
sending to Bombay the khadi produced in the village,  this object can never be 
accomplished, however high a wage we may pay to the village spinners. . . 
"... I would explain to the people that they could not get khadi like mill-cloth. 
I would try to bring it home to them that if khadi is dearer the extra money goes 
to the villager, his family and to the village, and t hat this provides security to the 
economy of the village. I would explain to them the moral aspect as well. Besides, 
I would teach them other methods of earning in the village. I have now given up 
the idea that villagers can earn their living throug h doing khadi work alone." 
(Discussion with Shrikrishnadas Jaju, 12-10-1944; 7 8-185-87.) Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  * * *  
"I have distinguished other village industries from k hadi and called them 
planets and the charkha or the spinning-wheel the s un. As a matter of fact there is 
no real reason for such a distinction, for khadi is  also a village industry. But it has 
acquired a special position, and it is because of t his special position which it has 
acquired that we can now talk about the other villag e industries. 
"Today we are not required to demonstrate the speci al position acquired by 
khadi but we are required to discover ways and means  of putting it and other 
village industries on a firm footing. 
"One of the ways is to resort to centralized produc tion of necessities through 
machinery worked by power and requiring the minimum  of human labour. This 
results in increasing the number of the rich few an d making it a dharma to 
multiply the people's wants. Even if all such centr alized industries were to be 
State-owned, it would make no difference to me. For  the obligation to increase 
wants will not only not decrease, but may be streng thened where such industries 
are owned by the State. Only the task of increasing  wants will pass from the hands 
of small capitalists to the bigger capitalists, or the State, whose action will secure 
the seal of public support. This is how things are going in England and America. I 
am purposely leaving out Russia; because their work  is still continuing, I shall not 
at this stage dare to assess the result. I hope tha t Russia will produce something 
unique. But I must confess that I have my doubts whe ther it will truly succeed. I 
shall consider it a great success if, through it, a ll the wealth really goes into the 
hands of the poor, and intellectual and personal fr eedom is at the same time 
secured. In that case I will have to revise my prese nt concept of ahimsa. 
"Now I come to the main point. In England and Ameri ca, machinery rules 
supreme. On the contrary, in India we have village in dustries, symbolizing the 
resurgence of human labour. In the West, a handful of persons with the aid of 
mechanical power rule over others. In India, on the  other hand, the great task of 
bringing out what is best in every individual is bei ng attempted by the A.I.S.A., 
A.I.V.I.A. and other allied institutions. From this  point of view the growth of 
Western civilization seems to be an easy thing, but to develop and organize the Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  latent capacities of individuals through village in dustries appears to be a very 
difficult task. 
"Looking at it from another point of view, it may be  said that, for a handful of 
men to rule over other men with the aid of steam and  other power will be harmful 
in the end, as it is bound to multiply injustice. B y using the human power available 
to us by the million, injustice is reduced. And the re is no room for failure. For 
here, along with human power, we rely on divine Powe r. In the other method, no 
value is attached to divine Power. In short, if in th e case of village industries we 
do not truly obtain God's help, we are bound to fai l. The Western method only 
appears to be successful, but in truth there is not hing but failure in it. For it 
destroys the will to work." 
(Pyarelal Papers.  Also  Gram Udyog Patrika,  June, 1945, Part-I, pp. 344-5; 
80:152-153.) 
* * *  
"The weavers live in the cities today. The businessm an exploits them and 
keeps them dependent on him. If the people Governme nt could supply them with 
all the yarn they require it would simplify things for them and put their vocation 
on a stable basis. They would not then need to live  in the cities. . . 
". . . The villagers should develop such a high degr ee of skill that articles 
prepared by them will command a ready market outsid e. When our villages are 
fully developed there will be no dearth in them of men with a high degree of skill 
and artistic talent. There will be village poets, v illage artists, village architects, 
linguists and research workers. In short, there wil l be nothing in life worth having 
which will not be had in the villages. Today the vill ages are barren and desolate 
and are like dung-heaps. Tomorrow they will be like  beautiful gardens and it 
would be difficult to deceive the people there. . . 
". . . The reconstruction of the villages should be  organized not on a 
temporary but on a permanent basis." 
(Harijan , 10-11-1946; 86:58-59.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  "I find that talk of khadi and village industries do es not interest people any 
more. Here I am sitting in the capital. Refugees ar e lying all round shelterless and 
shivering. Thousands are pouring in every day. How l ong will you feed them 
without giving them any work? I am sure everyone wil l remember this old man one 
day when it is realized that India has no alternati ve except to develop village 
industries. Any government formed by any party—Cong ress, Socialist or 
Communist—will be forced to accept this truth. We d o not realize this today, but 
we shall realize it after we stumble in our attempt s to compete with America or 
Russia." 
(Dilhiman Gandhiji,  I, 296, 17-11-1947; 90:57.) 
* * *  
". . . what I want is that the music of the charkha  should be heard in every 
home and no cloth except khadi should be seen anywh ere. If this happened, the 
poverty prevailing in the villages would disappear." 
(Prarthana Pravachan-II, 189-192; 90:207.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31   
EDUCATION FOR VILLAGES 
"Unfortunately we, who learn in colleges, forget th at India lives in her villages and 
not in her towns. 
"India has 7,00,000 villages and you, who receive a liberal education, are 
expected to take that education or the fruits of th at education to the villages. 
How will you infect the people of the villages with your scientific knowledge? Are 
you then learning science in terms of the villages a nd will you be so handy and so 
practical that the knowledge that you derive in a c ollege so magnificently built—
and I believe equally magnificently equipped—you wi ll be able to use for the 
benefit of the villagers? 
"Lastly then, I place before you the instrument to which you may apply your 
scientific knowledge and that is the humble spinnin g-wheel. Seven lakhs villages in 
India are today pining for want of that simple inst rument. It was in every home 
and every cottage of India only a century ago, and a t that time, India was not a 
lazy country that it is today." 
(The Hindu , 19-3-1925; 26:302.) 
* * *  
" 'But what about my children and their education?' —says the candidate 
worker. If the children are to receive their educat ion after the modern style, I can 
give no useful guidance. If it be deemed enough to m ake them healthy, sinewy, 
honest, intelligent villagers, any day able to earn  their livelihood in the home of 
their parents' adoption, they will have their all-r ound education under the parental 
roof and withal they will be partly earning members  of the family from the 
moment they reach the years of understanding and ar e able to use their hands and 
feet in a methodical manner. There is no school equ al to a decent home and no 
teachers equal to honest virtuous parents. Modern hi gh school education is a dead 
weight on the villagers. Their children will never b e able to get it, and thank God 
they will never miss it if they have the training of  the decent home." 
(Harijan , 23-11-1935; 62:133.) Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  * * *  
"Those who go and live in villages as true villagers a re needed where more 
than persons like me who go there with their own th ermos flasks; such persons can 
provide living literature to the people." 
(Harijan , 14-11-1936; 63:415.) 
* * *  
"When you are imparting knowledge to a child of 7 o r 10 through the medium 
of an industry, you should to begin with exclude al l those subjects which cannot 
be linked with the craft. . . 
". . . Our education has got to be revolutionized. T he brain must be educated 
through the hand. If I were a poet, I could write p oetry on the possibilities of the 
five fingers. Why should you think that the mind is everything and the hands and 
feet nothing? Those who do not train their hands, w ho go through the ordinary rut 
of education, lack 'music' in their life. All their  faculties are not trained. Mere 
book knowledge does not interest the child so as to  hold his attention fully. The 
brain gets weary of mere words, and the child's min d begins to wander. The hand 
does the things it ought not to do, the eye sees th e things it ought not to see, the 
ear hears the things it ought not to hear, and they  do not do, see, or hear, 
respectively what they ought to. They are not taugh t to make the right choice and 
so their education often proves their ruin. An educa tion which does not teach us 
to discriminate between good and bad, to assimilate  the one and eschew the 
other is a misnomer. . . 
". . . What we need is educationists with originali ty, fired with true zeal, who 
will think out from day to day what they are going to teach their pupils. The 
teacher cannot get this knowledge through musty volu mes. He has to use his own 
faculties of observation and thinking and impart his  knowledge to the children 
through his lips, with the help of a craft. This me ans a revolution in the method of 
teaching, a revolution in the teacher's outlook." 
(Harijan , 18-2-1939; 68:372-374.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  "Some work for adult education is being done in man y places. It is mostly 
concentrated among mill-hands and the like in big c ities. No one has really 
touched the village. Mere three Rs and lectures on p olitics won't satisfy me. Adult 
education of my conception must make men and women better citizens all round. 
To work out the syllabus and to organize the work o f adult education is a more 
difficult task than preparation of the seven years' course for children. The common 
central feature of both will be the imparting of ed ucation through village crafts. 
Agriculture will play an important part in adult ed ucation under the basic scheme. 
Literary instruction must be there. Much informatio n will be given orally. There 
will be books more for the teachers than the taught . We must teach the majority 
how to behave towards the minority and vice versa. The  right type of adult 
education should teach good neighbourliness and cut  at the very root of 
untouchability and communal problem." 
(The Hindu , 29-10-1944; 78:237-38.) 
* * *  
"According to Nai Talim, craft, literary instructio n, hygiene and art are not 
separate things but blend together and cover educat ion of the individual from the 
time of conception to the moment of death. Therefor e, I would not divide village 
uplift work into water-tight compartments from the very beginning but undertake 
an activity which will combine all four. Instead of  regarding craft and industry as 
different from education I will regard the former a s the medium for the latter. Nai 
Talim therefore ought to be integrated into the sch eme." 
(Harijan , 10-11-1946; 86:59.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
ECONOMY OF VILLAGES 
"I feel convinced that the revival of hand-spinning a nd hand- weaving will make 
the largest contribution to the economic and the mo ral regeneration of India. The 
millions must have a simple industry to supplement a griculture. Spinning was the 
cottage industry years ago and if the millions are to be saved from starvation, they 
must be enabled to reintroduce spinning in their ho mes, and every village must 
repossess its own weaver." 
(Young India,  21-7-1920; 18:72.) 
* * *  
". . . all the village industries are gradually slip ping out of the hands of the 
villager, who has become producer of raw materials f or the exploiter. He 
continually gives, and gets little in return. Even th e little he gets for the raw 
material he produces he gives back to the sugar mer chant and the cloth merchant. 
His  mind and body have become very much like those of the  animals, his constant 
companions. When we come to think of it, we find th at the villager of today is not 
even half so intelligent or resourceful as the villag er of fifty years ago. For, 
whereas the former is reduced to a state of miserab le dependence and idleness, 
the latter used his mind and body for all he needed  and produced them at home. 
Even the village artisan today partakes of the resour celessness that has overtaken 
the rest of the village. Go to the village carpenter and ask him to make a spinning-
wheel for you, go to the village smith and ask him t o make a spindle for you, you 
will be disappointed. This is a deplorable state of  things. It is as a remedy for it 
that the Village Industries Association has  been conceived. 
"This cry of 'back to the village', some critics say , is putting back the hands of 
the clock of progress. But is it really so? 
"Is it going back to the village, or rendering back to it what belongs to it? I am 
not asking the city-dwellers to go to and live in t he villages. But I am asking them 
to render unto the villagers what is due to them. Is  there any single raw material 
that the city-dwellers can obtain except from the vi llager? If they cannot, why not Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  teach him to work on it himself, as he used to befo re and as he would do now but 
for our expoiting inroads? . . . 
". . ..we shall have to find out whether the village r who produces an article or 
foodstuff rests content with exporting it and with using a cheap substitute 
imported from outside. We shall have to see that th e villagers become first of all 
self-contained and then cater for the needs of the city-dwellers. 
"For this purpose we shall have to form district or ganizations, and, where 
districts are too big to handle, we may have to divi de the districts into sub-
districts. Each of these—some 250—should have an ag ent who will carry out a 
survey and submit a report in the terms of the instr uctions issued to him from the 
head office. These agents shall have to be full-tim ers and whole-hoggers, with a 
live faith in the programme and prepared immediately  to make the necessary 
adjustment in their daily life. This work will cert ainly need money, but, more than 
money, it will need men of strong faith and willing  hands." 
(Speech at Gandhi Seva Sangh, 30-11-1934; 59:409-11 .) 
* * *  
"Villagers in many parts of India live on dal and r ice or roti, and plenty of 
chillies, which harm the system. Since the economic  reorganization of villages has 
been commenced with food reform, it is necessary to  find out the simplest and 
cheapest foods that would enable villagers to regain  lost health. The addition of 
green leaves to their meals will enable villagers to  avoid many diseases from which 
they are now suffering. The villagers' food is defic ient in vitamins; many of them 
can be supplied by fresh green leaves." 
(Harijan , 15-2-1935; 60:229) 
* * *  
"Indeed, economics that ruins one's health is false , because money without 
health has no value. Only that economy is true whic h enables one to conserve 
one's health. The whole of the initial programme of  village re-construction is, 
therefore, aimed at true economy, because it is aim ed at promoting the health 
and vigour of the villagers." Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  (Harijan , 1-3-1935; 60:268.) 
* * *  
"Not that there is not enough land to feed our 35 c rores. It is absurd to say 
that India is over populated and that the surplus po pulation must die. I am sure 
that if all the land that is available was properly utilized and made to yield up to 
its capacity, it would surely maintain the whole po pulation. Only we have got to 
be industrious and to make two blades of grass grow  where one grows today. 
"The remedy is to identify ourselves with the poor villager and to help him 
make the land yield its plenty, help him produce wh at we need, and confine 
ourselves to use what he produces, live as he lives,  and persuade him to take to 
more rational ways of diet and living. 
"We eat mill-ground flour, and even the poor villager  walks with a head-load 
of half a maund grain to have it ground in the near est flour-mill. Do you know that 
in spite of the plenty of food-stuffs we produce, w e import wheat from outside 
and we eat the 'superfine' flour from Australia? We  will not use our hand-ground 
flour, and the poor villager also foolishly copies u s. 
We thus turn wealth into waste, nectar into poison. " 
(Harijan , 11-5-1935; 60:463.) 
* * *  
". . . compulsory obedience to the law of bread lab our breeds poverty, disease 
and discontent. It is a state of slavery. Willing ob edience to it must bring 
contentment and health. And it is health which is r eal wealth, not pieces of silver 
and gold. The Village Industries Association is an experiment in willing bread 
labour." 
(Harijan , 29-6-1935; 61:212.) 
* * *  
"My definition of swadeshi is old but it is valid. O nly by following it can we 
evolve a new kind of economics. True economics must follow ethics. Even if we 
fail in this we shall have succeeded." Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  (Speech at Gandhi Seva Sangh meeting, 5-3-1936; 62: 241.) 
* * *  
"India's villages require to be revivified. Land is p arcelled out in holdings, 
often even less than one acre. The idea, therefore, is to turn waste into wealth. 
Hence talent that is expensive or that can only expr ess itself in bignesses will not 
serve my purpose. I want the use of that talent whic h can see the universe in an 
atom and, therefore, relates itself to and is roote d in the earth from which we 
have sprung, on which we are living, to which we have  to return. Anyone, 
therefore, who comes from the West has got to be ca pable of living the life of the 
poor. Therefore he must [be] able-bodied and be pre pared to live the life of the 
poorest in the land." 
(Letter to Dr. Fritz Michaelis, 13-8-1937; 66:41.) 
* * *  
"Our worker will have to keep a careful eye on the cattle wealth of his village. 
If we cannot use this wealth properly India is doom ed to disaster and we also shall 
perish. For these animals will then, as in the West , become an economic burden to 
us and we shall have no option before us save killin g them." 
(Khadi : Why and How , pp. 161-65; 78:162.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
REVIVAL OF VILLAGE INDUSTRIES 
"In a nutshell, of the things we use, we should res trict our purchases to the articles 
which villages manufacture. Their manufactures may be crude. We must try to 
induce them to improve their workmanship, and not di smiss them because foreign 
articles or even articles produced in cities, that i s, big factories, are superior. In 
other words, we should evoke the artistic talent of the villager. In this manner 
shall we repay somewhat the debt we owe to them. We  need not be frightened by 
the thought whether we shall ever succeed in such an  effort. Within our own times 
we can recall instances where we have not been baffl ed by the difficulty of our 
tasks when we have known that they were essential fo r the nation's progress. If, 
therefore, we as individuals believe that revivificatio n of India's villages is a 
necessity of our existence, if we believe that ther eby only can we root out 
untouchability and feel one with all, no matter to what community or religion they 
may belong, we must mentally go back to the villages  and treat them as our 
pattern, instead of putting the city life before th em for imitation. If this is the 
correct attitude, then, naturally, we begin with ou rselves and thus use, say, 
handmade paper instead of mill-made, use village re ed, wherever possible, instead 
of the fountain pen or the penholder, ink made in t he villages instead of the big 
factories, etc. I can multiply instances of this na ture. There is hardly anything of 
daily use in the home which the villagers have not ma de before and cannot make 
even now. If we perform the mental trick and fix our  gaze upon them, we 
immediately put millions of rupees into the pockets  of the villagers, whereas at 
the present moment we are exploiting the villagers w ithout making any return 
worth the name." 
(Harijan , 30-11-34; 59:414.) 
* * *  
"The revival of village industries is but an extensi on of the khadi effort. Hand-
spun cloth, hand-made paper, hand-pounded rice, hom e-made bread and jam, are 
not uncommon in the West. Only, there they do not h ave one-hundredth of the 
importance they have in India. For, with us their r evival means life, their Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  destruction means death, to the villagers, as he wh o runs may see. Whatever the 
machine age may do, it will never give employment to the millions whom the 
wholesale introduction of power machinery must disp lace." 
(Harijan- 4-1-1935; 60:55.) 
* * *  
"The big industries can never, they don't hope to, overtake the unemployed 
millions. Their aim is primarily to make money for the few owners, never the 
direct one of finding employment for the unemployed  millions. The organizers of 
khadi and other village industries don't hope in th e near future to affect the big 
industries. They may hope to bring a ray of light i nto the dark dungeons, miscalled 
cottages, of the villagers." 
(Harijan,  14-9-1935; 61:416.) 
* * *  
"If we are to re-introduce village articles after be ing used to the Western 
style, we shall have to be patient and inventive. Tha t the pen requires constant 
dipping is a good point. It lessens fatigue. That t he fountain-pen saves time is not 
an unmixed blessing. The village pen and ink undoub tedly admit of improvement. 
That can only come when you and I use these things. " 
(Letter to Amrit Kaur, 17-4-1937; 65:97.) 
* * *  
"At one time cities were dependent on the villages. Now it is the reverse. 
There is no interdependence. Villages are being exp loited and drained by the 
cities. 
". . . under my scheme, nothing will be allowed to be produced by cities 
which can be equally well produced by the villages.  The proper function of cities is 
to serve as clearing houses for village products." 
(Harijan , 28-1-1939; 68:259.) 
* * *  Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40   
"In modern terms, it is beneath human dignity to lo se one's individuality and 
become a mere cog in the machine. I want every indivi dual to become a full-
blooded, fully developed member of society. The vil lages must become self- 
sufficient. I see no other solution if one has to w ork in terms of ahimsa." 
(Harijan , 28-1-1939; 68:266.) 
"If village industries are revived, millions of villag ers will get full wages." 
(Harijan Sevak , 8-7-1939; 69:239.) 
* * *  
"The fact is that we have to make a choice between I ndia of the villages that 
are as ancient as herself and India of the cities w hich are a creation of foreign 
domination. Today the cities dominate and drain the  villages so that they are 
crumbling to ruin. My khadi mentality tells me that  cities must subserve villages 
when that domination goes. Exploiting of villages is  itself organized violence. If we 
want swaraj to be built on nonviolence, we will have  to give the villages their 
proper place. This we will never do unless we revive village industries by using the 
products thereof in place of things produced in cit y factories, foreign or 
indigenous. Perhaps it is now clear why I identify khadi with non-violence. Khadi is 
the chief village handicraft. Kill khadi and you mus t kill the villages and with them 
non-violence. I cannot prove this by statistics. The  proof is before our eyes." 
(Harijan , 20-1-1940; 71:103.) 
* * *  
"Village economy cannot be complete without the ess ential village industries 
such as hand-grinding, hand-pounding, soap- making,  paper-making, match-
making, tanning, oil pressing etc." The other villag e industries cover cattle 
farming, dairying, farming and compost manure." 
(Constructive Programme : Its meaning and place, 13- 12- 1941; 75:153.) 
* * *  
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41   
VILLAGES AND CONGRESS / VOLUNTARY WORKERS 
"I realize the truth of these words everywhere here  in Bengal. It is only recently 
that we thought of going into the villages. At first , we wanted things from the 
village people. It is only now that we are going to the villages in order to give the 
people something. How can we expect to win their co nfidence in such a short 
time? It often happens that a father takes years to  win his son's confidence. We 
have to win back our honoured place among the village  people, and will get 
nothing through impatience. Some persons serve their  own interests under the 
guise of service. What other means do the village pe ople have, except experience 
to distinguish between such persons and genuine wor kers? Public workers, 
therefore, must cultivate patience, forbearance, sel flessness and such other 
virtues. The masses can have no other knowledge but experience to guide them." 
(Navajivan , 28-6-1925; 27:310.) 
* * *  
"One quality is essential in such a worker and that  is purity of character. If he 
is a slave of his eleven senses he will be able to do no work. These eleven senses 
are the five of perception, the five of action and the mind. If the mind is pure, 
then the ten senses automatically remain pure. If t he mind is impure, then 
everything else will be impure. The senses of action  are the arms, the legs, the 
mouth, and two private organs. The senses of knowled ge are the skin, the sense of 
touch, the palate, the ear for hearing, the nose fo r smelling and the eyes for sight. 
Anyone who cannot control these should humbly refus e to become a volunteer. If 
he has become one and then later on finds that he i s unable to control his senses, 
he should humbly resign. This is the right way if w e want work to be done. 
"Some might say that this programme cannot be compl eted in a hundred years 
and we want swaraj just now. This objection has no force. We shall not have an 
abundance of workers when we get swaraj. Those who are workers now will run 
the country under swaraj. It is true that those who  run the administration at 
present will be there when its control is handed ove r to the people. If, however, 
the Congress does not have the type of volunteers th at I have suggested, then we Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  shall lose control of the administration or it will  become corrupt and there will be 
anarchy in the country. There is no reason to suppo se that those who are hated 
now will become godlike overnight as soon as the con trol of the administration 
changes hands. Hence, as we sow now, so shall we re ap. If we get sincere workers, 
the programme that I have chalked out can begin toda y. Let us first have seventy 
thousand volunteers and map out the country into blo cks of ten miles each and 
then we shall see what work to take up. This is not  the right way to start work. If 
we approach the task thus, we shall succeed in doin g nothing." 
(Navajivan , 7-6-1931; 46:338.) 
* * *  
"Although schemes for industrialization of the coun try might be put forth, the 
goal that the Congress has set before it today is n ot industrialization of the 
country. Its goal is, according to a resolution pas sed by the National Congress at 
Bombay, revival of village industries. You cannot have  mass awakening through 
any elaborate scheme of industrialization that you may put before the kisans.  It 
would not add a farthing to their income. But the A .I.S.A. and A.I.V.I.A. will put 
lakhs into their pockets within the course of a yea r. Whatever happens to the 
Working Committee or the ministries, personally I d o not sense any danger to the 
constructive activities of the Congress. 
(A.I.S.A. - All India Spinner's Association) 
(A.I.V.I.A. - All India Village Industries Associat ion) 
(Harijan , 18-2-1939; 68:371.) 
* * *  
"... I am in no hurry to precipitate civil disobedie nce. My prescription to 
Congressmen, for the time being, is to consolidate the organization by purging it of 
all weaknesses. I swear by the old constructive pro gramme of communal unity, 
removal of untouchability and the charkha. It is qui te clear that non-violence is 
impossible without the first two. If India's village s are to live and prosper, the 
charkha must become universal. Rural civilization is  impossible without the 
charkha and all it implies, i.e., revival of village crafts. Thus the charkha is the Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  symbol par excellence of non-violence. And it can occupy the whole of the  time of 
all Congressmen. If it makes no appeal to them, eit her they have no non-violence 
in them or I do not know the A.B.C. of non-violence.  If my love of the charkha is a 
weakness in me, it is so radical as to make me unfi t as a general. The wheel is 
bound up with my scheme of swaraj, indeed with life  itself. All India should know 
my credentials on the eve of what can become the la st and decisive battle for 
swaraj." 
(Harijan , 4-11-1939; 70:316.) 
* * *  
"You will have economic equality in the country onl y along the road I have 
pointed out. Perhaps you will not understand this t oday; but note my words and 
remember them when I am dead and you will say that what this old man of 
seventy-five said was true. This is not a prophecy I am making; I am saying this on 
the basis of my lifelong experience. A time will su rely come when nobody will 
listen to your long speeches; nobody will even atte nd your meetings, for preaching 
sermons to the people without following those princ iples in your own lives does 
not work long in society. The people will ask you f or an account of your own work, 
will ask you what you yourselves are doing, before t hey listen to you." 
(Talk with socialists, 27-5-1947; 88:18.) 
* * *  
"This is my analysis of the situation. There should  be rapport between the 
constructive workers and the institution. We must fi rst purify ourselves. The 
Congress has always had the constructive programme. Now it has the power. Why 
is it then that our work is not progressing? It may  be th£t we have no heart. 
Because if we were endowed with a heart \ve would ha ve been sensitive to the 
pain of others. Moreover, a person may be in sympath y with one in distress and 
still may not be of any help to him. But our minds have not opened. Many eminent 
people who are in politics have had this experience . I have had a hand in the 
formation of all these various institutions, and I c an say that things are in such a 
state because our hearts are not pure. A current wa s generated. The people 
caught on to th£ idea that that was the way to over come the British. Villagers toe) Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  flocked to us in ever larger numbers. It gladdened u s that there was such 
awakening in the country. But in the forefront were  intellectuals. And the result 
was that the freedom that came was not true freedom . The fight being over, our 
interest in the constructive programme waned. Const ructive work is not a strategy 
or a technique of fighting. Constructive work conno tes a way of life. It can be 
carried on only by men who have adopted it by the he art as well as by the 
intellect. . . 
"Today politics has become corrupt. Anybody who goe s into politics gets 
contaminated. Let us keep out of it altogether. Our  influence will grow thereby. 
The greater our inner purity, the greater shall be our hold on the people, without 
any effort on our part." 
(Mahatma Gandhi - The Last Phase , Vol. II, PP- 661-66; 90:216-17.) 
* * *  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45   
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 16, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1965. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 17, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1965. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 26, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1967. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 27, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1968. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 31, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 33, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 35, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 41, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 42, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 46, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1971. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 58, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 59, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 60, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 61, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1975. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 62, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1975. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 63, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 64, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 65, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 66, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 67, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 68, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1977. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 69, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1977. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 70, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1977. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 71, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1978. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 72, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1978. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 73, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1978. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 75, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1979. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 76, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1979. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 78, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1979. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 80, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1980. Gandhiji on VILLAGES 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46   
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 81, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1980. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 82, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1980. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 85, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1982. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 86, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1982. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 87, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1983. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 88, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1983. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 89, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1983. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 90, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1984. 
C.W.M.G. - Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 