 
Gandhiji on KHADI 
Selected and Compiled with an Introduction by 
 
Divya Joshi 
 
 
GANDHI BOOK CENTRE  
Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal 299 Tardeo Road,  
Nana Chowk Mumbai 400007 INDIA  
Tel.: 2387 2061   Email: info@mkgandhi.org    www.m kgandhi.org 
MANI BHAVAN GANDHI SANGRAHALAYA MUMBAI  
 
Published with the financial assistance received fr om the Department of Culture, 
Government of India.  
Published with the permission of The Navajivan Trus t, Ahmedabad - 380 014 
First Edition 1000 copies : 2002 
Set in 11/13 Point Times New Roman by Gokarn Enterp rises, Mumbai 
Invitation Price  : Rs. 35.00 
Published by  
Meghshaym T. Ajgaonkar, Executive Secretary Mani Bh avan Gandhi Sangrahalaya  
19, Laburnum Road, Gamdevi, Mumbai 400 007 Tel. No.  2380 5864, Fax. No. 2380 6239 
E-mail: info@gandhi-manibhavan.org and Printed at M ouj Printing Bureau, Mumbai 400 004. 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
PREFACE 
Gandhiji's life, ideas and work are of crucial impo rtance to all those who want a 
better life for humankind. The political map of the  world has changed dramatically 
since his time, the economic scenario has witnessed  unleashing of some disturbing 
forces, and the social set-up has undergone a treme ndous change. The importance 
of moral and ethical issues raised by him, however, remain central to the future of 
individuals and nations. Today we need him, more tha n before. 
Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya has been spreading information about Gandhiji's 
life and work. A series of booklets presenting Gand hiji's views on some important 
topics is planned to disseminate information as wel l as to stimulate questions 
among students, scholars, social activists and conc erned citizens. We thank 
Government of India, Ministry of Tourism & Culture, Department of Culture, for 
their support. 
Aloo Dastur  
President Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya 
Usha Thakkar  
Hon. Secretary Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya 
6Ih  April 2002 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
INTRODUCTION 
Divya Joshi 
Gandhiji presented khadi as a symbol of nationalism , equality and self-reliance. It 
was his belief that reconstruction of the society a nd effective Satyagraha against 
the foreign rule can be possible only through khadi . 
Khadi is the central core of the constructive activ ities as recommended by him. 
According to him there could be no swaraj without u niversal and voluntary 
acceptance of khadi. In his words, "I am a salesman  of swaraj. I am a devotee of 
khadi. It is my duty to induce people, by every hon est means, to wear khadi." 1 
Gandhiji started his movement for khadi in 1918. His  emphasis at first was on khadi 
as providing relief to our poverty- stricken masses.  But one finds a change in his 
emphasis from 1934, more especially from 1935, when  he began on insisting on 
khadi for the villager's own use, rather than merely  for sale to others. His 
imprisonment in 1942 and 1943 gave him time to ponde r further over his khadi 
movement, and when he came out of jail he came with a determination to give a 
new turn to khadi work in order to make khadi serve  the needs of villagers 
themselves first and foremost. He poured out his sou l to his fellow-workers in 
1944, and urged them to effect the change. 2 
The spinning wheel was at one time the symbol of In dia's poverty and 
backwardness. Gandhiji turned it into a symbol of s elf-reliance and non-violence. 
Khadi enabled him to carry his message of swadeshi and swaraj to the people and 
to establish connection with them. 
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Navajivan, 26-4-1925; 26:548 
2.  M.K. Gandhi, Khadi: Why and How, ed. Bharatan Kumarappa, Navajivan 
Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1955, Editor’s note, p .v. 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
IMPORTANCE OF KHADI 
"Like swaraj, khadi is our birth-right, and it is o ur life-long duty to use that 
only. Anyone who does not fulfil that duty is total ly ignorant of what swaraj is." 
(Navajivan,  5-3-1922; 23:11) 
* * * 
"We cannot claim to have understood the meaning of s waraj till khadi 
becomes as universal as currency." 
(Navajivan , 12-3-1922; 23:77) 
* * * 
"I have only one message to give and that concerns kh adi. Place khadi in my 
hands and I shall place swaraj in yours. The uplift  of the  Antyajas  is also covered 
by khadi and even Hindu- Muslim unity will live throu gh it. It is also a great 
instrument of peace. This does not mean that I do n ot favour boycott of Councils 
and law-courts, but in order that people may not ha ve a grievance against those 
who go to them, I desire that the people should car ry on work concerning khadi 
even with the help of lawyers and members of legisla tures. Keep the Moderates 
highly pleased, cultivate love and friendship for the m. Once they become fearless, 
that very moment they will become one with us. The s ame holds good also for 
Englishmen." 
(In an interview to Indulal Yagnik, which was publi shed in Navajivan  on 19-3-1922; 
23:86-87.) 
* * * 
"Ever since the commencement of our present struggle , we have been feeling 
the necessity of boycotting foreign cloth. I ventur e to suggest that, when khaddar 
comes universally in use, the boycott of foreign clo th will automatically follow. Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  Speaking for myself, charkha and khaddar have a spec ial religious significance to 
me because they are a symbol of kinship between the  members of both the 
communities and the hunger- and disease- stricken p oor. It is by virtue of the fact 
that our movement can today be described as moral an d economic as well as 
political." 
(Letter written to Abdul Bari from Sabarmati Jail, after 12-3-1922; 23:92.) 
* * * 
"You have asked me why wearing of Indian mill cloth does not amount to 
boycott of foreign cloth. This is colossal ignoranc e. For fulfilling the boycott it is 
not enough if we wear mill cloth. The Bengalis even today complain of the 
exploitation of Bengal by the mill-owners at the ti me of the Partition. Their 
experience should teach us that boycott cannot be a chieved with the help of only 
mill cloth. The propaganda should, therefore, be in  favour of khadi only. It is 
obvious that mill cloth has no place in the house of  the Congress." 
(A speech at Public Meeting, Poona, on 4-9-1924; 25 :87.) 
* * * 
"I am convinced that swaraj cannot come so long as t he tens of millions of 
our brothers and sisters do not take to the charkha , do not spin, do not make khadi 
and wear it." 
(Opening speech at Belgaum Congress, 26-12-1924; 25 :465.) 
* * * 
"What is the national programme today? Removal of un touchability by the 
Hindus, khaddar and Hindu-Muslim unity. I think all  the three items are calculated 
to help a solution of your difficulties. Even Hindu- Muslim unity means more or less 
a solution of the untouchability question too, and khaddar can unite us as nothing 
else can." 
(Young India , 14-5-1925; 27:14.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  "The charkha will help us overcome our narrowness. T oday a North Indian 
visiting Bengal has to tell others that he is an Ind ian. Bengalis living in other 
provinces regard themselves as foreigners. Similarly,  South Indians become 
foreigners as soon as they set foot in North India.  The charkha is the only device 
which makes us all feel that we are children of the  same land. We have so far 
accomplished nothing. Let us accomplish some little  thing at any rate. Boycott of 
foreign cloth is something which all can equally fu rther, towards which all can 
contribute equally. Untouchability hurts Hindus alo ne; the quarrels between the 
Hindus and Muslims will also be over some time or ot her; but if there is no khadi, 
the whole country will remain sunk in utter poverty. " 
(Speech at Shantiniketan on 31-5-1925; 27:181.) 
* * * 
"Even today I tell you with all the confidence that I can command that if 
only you all completely boycott all foreign and Ind ian mill-made cloth, you will 
achieve swaraj within less than a year." 
(Speech at swadeshi exhibition, Kanpur, 24-12-1925;  29:351.) 
* * * 
"Khadi has a tonic effect but, like nourishing food , it may not please one's 
taste; its savour lies in its tonic effect. Increas ed production of khadi will 
correspondingly increase the vitality of the country  and, in any case, will not bring 
about indigestion. To the workers in the field the immediate gain may seem too 
small, but, as a mango sapling yields thousands of mangoes when it grows into a 
tree, so a patient worker will certainly witness, i n the long run, excellent results 
of his seemingly modest beginning." 
(Navajivan , 14-2-1926; 30:16-17.) 
* * * 
"Khaddar is the concrete and central fact of swades hi. Swadeshi without 
khaddar is like the body without life, fit only to receive a decent burial or 
cremation. The only swadeshi cloth is khaddar. If o ne is to interpret swadeshi in 
the language of and in terms of the millions of thi s country, khaddar is a Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  substantial thing in swadeshi like the air we breat he. The test of swadeshi is not 
the universality of the use of an article which goes  under the name of swadeshi, 
but the universality of participation in the product ion or manufacture of such 
article. Thus considered, mill-made cloth is swades hi only in a restricted sense. 
For, in its manufacture only an infinitesimal numbe r of India's millions can take 
part. But in the manufacture of khaddar millions ca n take part." 
(Young India , 17-6-1926; 31:11.) 
* * * 
"Do you believe in the ability of khadi to remodel p olitical life? Do you know 
that I have staked all upon khadi? The proposition enunciated is that you advance 
the political life in the country in exact proporti on to the advance of khadi and no 
more. The moment I have driven this truth home, that  moment will begin the 
forward movement." 
(Letter to Dr. N. S. Hardikar, Wardha, 9-12-1926, 3 2:413.) 
* * * 
"Needless to say that khadi is not a threat. It is the breath of national life like 
swaraj. The khadi movement like swaraj cannot be giv en up against any 
concessions however generous. To give up khadi would  be to sell the masses, the 
soul of India." 
(Young India , 19-1-1928; 35:478.) 
* * * 
"The boycott of foreign cloth will succeed only whe n the twenty-two crores 
of our peasants begin to use khadi. And to convert t hem to the use of khadi means 
to explain to them the science of khadi, to show th em the advantages of self-help 
and to teach them the entire process of khadi produ ction. For this we need 
volunteers, mobile schools and preparation and distr ibution of booklets describing 
the processes of spinning, carding, etc." 
(Navajivan , 21-4-1929; 40:268-69.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  "If all those who are dedicated to swaraj also dedi cate themselves to the 
cause of khadi, we can boycott foreign cloth today sitting in our homes and if that 
boycott can be realized, the people will acquire ne w vigour and self-confidence." 
(Navajivan , 4-8-1929; 41:252.) 
* * * 
"I repeat what I have said so often that voluntary u niversal adoption of 
khaddar with all its vast implications means  puma swaraj and that civil 
disobedience becomes a necessary duty only because khaddar has not yet obtained 
the hold it should." 
(Young India , 5-2-1931; 45:135.) 
* * * 
"Self-sufficient khadi eliminates the middleman alt ogether. It is the easiest 
method of perceptibly" increasing the income of the  millions of the semi-starved 
villagers. 
"But will the villager ever take to self-sufficient khadi? Yes, if we have faith 
accompanied by technical skill, or rather a living faith that will move mountains 
and give the worker all the skill necessary for his task which is undoubtedly 
difficult. . . . 
"Without decentralization of cotton cultivation, un iversal manufacture in 
villages may not be possible. We have authentic exam ples of deserts having been 
turned into smiling gardens by judicious manipulati on of the soil. It ought not, 
therefore, to be impossible to grow enough cotton i n every village for local use. 
Not only will this cheapen khadi for the villagers, but it will also improve the 
durability of khadi." 
(Harijan , 3-8-1935; 61:305-6.) 
* * * 
". . . And khadi should be linked with liberty. All  the time you are spinning, 
you would not think in terms of your own requiremen ts but in terms of the 
requirements of the nation. You will say, 'I want t o clothe the whole nation that is Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  naked and I must do it non-violently.' Each time yo u draw a thread, say to 
yourselves, 'We are drawing the thread of swaraj.' M ultiply this picture millionfold 
and you have freedom knocking at your door." 
(Talk to Travancore State Congress Deputation, 15-11 -1938; 68:133.) 
* * * 
"I have not hesitated to say, and I make bold to rep eat, that there is no swaraj 
for the millions, for the hungry and the naked and for the millions of illiterate 
women without khadi. Habitual use of khadi is a sig n that the wearer identifies 
himself with the poorest in the land, and has patri otism and self-sacrifice enough 
in him to wear khadi even though it may not be so so ft or elegant in appearance as 
foreign fineries, nor so cheap." 
(Harijan , 27-1-1940; 71:125.) 
"The constructive programme to be sure comprises th irteen different 
activities. It can be further enlarged. But there ar e three items in it that are the 
most important. They are pregnant with revolutionary  possibilities. They are: 
khadi, eradication of untouchability and Hindu-Musl im unity. The MacDonald Award 
and 'Pakistan' are nothing but projections of our m ental attitude of treating the 
Harijans and Muslims as separate from us. Remember that the separation is not of 
their asking. It is what we have chosen to give them,  what we forced them to ask 
for. Thus, the unity between the caste Hindus and o utcaste Hindus, and that 
between Hindus and Muslims and khadi represent a re volution in our own lives." 
(During discussion with Kishorelal Mashruwala on 13 -11- 1940; 73:175.) 
* * * 
"I see khadi dying. Hence if khadi, which is the ma in plank of the constructive 
programme, is to be saved, it ought to become self-s upporting. Those who do not 
spin have no right to wear khadi. All those who wear  khadi must spin so that khadi 
may survive." 
(Talk with Narahari D. Parikh, 12-12-1944; 78:386.)  
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  "Swaraj cannot come through the machine. But if two  hundred million people 
with full understanding produce khadi with their ow n labour and wear it the face 
of India will be transformed." 
(Harijan Sevak, 28-7-1946; 85:15.) 
* * * 
"In German East Africa, I am told, cloth shortage d uring World War I was 
actually met by the Negroes being induced to manufa cture their own cloth. 
Whether that is so or not, if India made full use o f her spinning and weaving 
tradition which is universal and the matchless here ditary skill of her artisans, she 
could not only solve her own difficulty but even help  the world to meet the 
present crisis by releasing her mill production, fo r countries less favourably placed 
in the matter of cloth manufacture." 
(Discussion with a friend, 17-8-1946; 85:171.) 
* * * 
"People, whether in towns or in villages, should spi n and wear khadi. It should 
be as natural as cooking one's own food which is do ne in every home. This is not a 
very big thing. We shall all perish if we do not pra ctise this. We are facing 
starvation because we do the things we ought not to do. India is a country poorer 
than even China. We appear to be human beings, but. actually we live like 
animals. What would happen to the cow if human bein gs turn into animals? If 
every village in India became self-sufficient in the  matter of food and clothing,-
we would easily save a billion rupees. I have no dou bt about this. We would 
require no help from anyone, and the whole of India  would become a co-operative 
enterprise . . . 
". . . Khadi is meant for everyone. Even a depraved man, a sinner, a 
drunkard, a gambler, anybody, can wear it. But the sacred quality of khadi is that 
it is a symbol of freedom. Those who wish to live i n free India ought to wear 
khadi." 
(Address to workers, Sadaquat Ashram, Patna, 24-4-1 947; 87:349.) 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11   
PROPAGATION OF KHADI 
"Using khadi is the foundation of swadeshi, since k hadi is the only thing which can 
be made from thick yarn, and made easily. It has no t so far had to compete with 
machine-made cloth. The consumption of khadi alone enables lakhs of poor people 
to earn an honest living, staying at home." 
(Navajivan , 8-2-1920; 17:16.) 
* * * 
". . . boycott of foreign cloth by means of hand-sp inning and hand weaving, 
i.e., khaddar, not only saves the peasant's money, b ut it enables us workers to 
render social service of a first class order. It br ings us into direct touch with the 
villagers. It enables us to give them real political  education and teach them to 
become self-sustained and self-reliant. Organizatio n of khaddar is thus infinitely 
better than co-operative societies or any other form  of village organization." 
(Young India , 26-12-1924; 25:474.) 
* * * 
"It is but natural that at this time when a determi ned effort is made to spread 
the khadi movement in Maha Gujarat we should requir e a large number of 
volunteers. We need both part-time volunteers and ful l-time volunteers. It is 
essential that every volunteer should know all the p rocesses connected with 
spinning. Any persons who wish to offer their servic es as such volunteers may send 
their names to me, so that as and when the need ari ses their services may be 
utilized." 
(Navajivan , 1-2-1925; 26:62.) 
* * * 
"As regards charkha and khaddar, charkha is the lif e of Hindustan and I have 
compared it to the  Sudarshan Chakra  and Kamdhenu.  The destruction of charkha 
meant the beginning of poverty in India, and to driv e (away) poverty we must 
reinstate charkha in its proper place. Charkha shou ld be given the first place in Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  Indian homes. Let the wheel be plied in every home every day for half an hour in 
the name of God for the salvation of his or her star ving brothers. The educated 
people should first adopt it so that others may fol low." 
(Speech at All-Bengal Hindu Sammelan, on 2-5-1925; 27:10-11.) 
* * * 
"You will go stark naked rather than that you shoul d wear anything that is not 
hand-spun by your sister and hand-woven by your brot her in your home and not in 
the factory. That is the message of the spinning-wh eel. That is the simple little 
demand I make of every man and woman who loves India and who wants freedom 
of India." 
(Speech at Bengal Provincial Conference, Faridpur, o n 3-5-1925; 27:34.) 
* * * 
"I feel that the spinning wheel has all the virtues needed to make one's life 
truthful, pure and peaceful and fill it with the sp irit of service. I, therefore, beg 
of you all to give half an hour's labour daily in th e form of spinning." 
(Speech to students, Dinajpur, on 21-5-1925; 27:93. ) 
* * * 
"Where there is a will there is a way. The only thi ng needful is that there 
should be a determination not to desert khadi no ma tter what it costs. But, if your 
faith in khadi has slackened, you should tell me so . I have warned friends 
repeatedly that if in their experience they find kh adi to be an impracticable 
proposition, they must not hesitate to say so first  to me if they will and then to 
the public. I have no desire to bolster up a wrong cause no matter what grief it 
may give to me personally. As a matter of fact it wi ll be no grief to me but 
unmixed joy to discover my error. No friend therefor e need spare me when he 
finds that my faith in khadi is like building castl es in the air. But, if your faith is as 
green as when you wrote your essay then you dare no t desert khadi." 
(Letter written to N.S. Varadachari from Sabarmati Ashram on 13-6-1926; 
30:576.) Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  * * * 
"It is my firm belief that, even for the sake of kha di, no khadi lover should 
give up his principles, resort to incorrect behaviou r, or ever have recourse to evil 
ways even with the best of intentions. Nothing good can ever be accomplished 
through unclean means. The power that we look for i n khadi will be completely 
destroyed if we resort to undesirable means in our work. The annihilation of the 
distinction between high and low is a glorious resu lt of khadi." 
(Navajivan , 31-10-1929; 42:78.) 
* * * 
"The two issues of khadi and political organization  should be kept absolutely 
separate. There must be no confusion. The aim of kh adi is humanitarian; but so far 
as India is concerned, its effect is bound to be im mensely political. 
"The Salvation Army wants to teach people about God . But they come with 
bread. For the poor, bread is their God. Similarly,  we should bring food into the 
mouths of the people through khadi. If we succeed i n breaking the idleness of the 
people through khadi, they will begin to listen to us. Whatever else the 
Government might do, it does leave some food for the  villagers. 
Unless we can bring food to them, why should the pe ople listen to us? When 
we have taught them what they can do through their o wn efforts, then they will 
want to listen to us. 
"That trust can best be generated through khadi. Wh ile working out the khadi 
programme our aim should be purely humanitarian, th at is, economic. We should 
leave out all political consideratoins whatsoever. B ut it is bound to produce 
important political consequences which nobody can p revent and nobody need 
deplore . . . 
. . But through khadi we teach people the art of ci vil obedience to an 
institution which they have built up for themselves. Only when they have learnt 
that art can they successfully disobey something wh ich they want to destroy in the 
non-violent way. This is why I should advise all wo rkers not to fritter their fighting 
strength in many-sided battles, but to concentrate on peaceful khadi work in order Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  to educate the masses into a condition necessary fo r a successful practice of non-
violent non-co-operation. With their own exploitatio n, boycott of foreign cloth 
through picketing may easily be violent; through th e use of khadi it is most natural 
and absolutely non-violent." 
(An interview with Nirmal Kumar Bose on 9/10-11-193 4; 59:316-317.) 
* * * 
"But khadi is the sun of the village solar system. The planets are the various 
industries which can support khadi in return for th e heat and the sustenance they 
derive from it. Without it, the other industries ca nnot grow. But during my last 
tour I discovered that, without the revival of the ot her industries, khadi could not 
make further progress. For villagers to be able to o ccupy their spare time 
profitably, the village life must be touched at all points. . . 
". . . Naturally, they can have nothing to do with politics or political parties. 
The Congress, in my opinion, did well in making bot h the Associations autonomous 
and wholly non-political. All parties and all commu nities can combine to uplift the 
villages economically, morally and hygienically." 
(Harijan , 16-11-1934; 59:357.) 
* * * 
"Khadi cannot be moved from its central place. Khad i will be the sun of the 
whole industrial solar system. All the other indust ries will receive warmth and 
sustenance from the khadi industry." 
(Speech at Gandhi Seva Sangh on or before 30-11-193 4; 59:411.) 
* * * 
"The charkha understood intelligently can spin not only economic salvation but 
can also revolutionize our minds and hearts and demo nstrate to us that the non-
violent approach to swaraj is the safest and the eas iest. Though the progress may 
seem slow, it will prove quickest in the long run."  
(Speech at exhibition ground, Faizpur, 27-12-1936; 64:195.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  "I have often said that if khadi is a sound economic  proposition it is also a 
science and a romance. I believe there is a book cal led  The Romance of Cotton  
wherein the origin of cotton has been traced and an  attempt made to show how its 
discovery altered the course of civilization. Everyt hing can be turned into a 
science or a romance if there is a scientific or a romantic spirit behind it. Some 
people scoff at khadi and betray signs of impatienc e or disgust when one talks of 
hand-spinning. But it ceases to be an object of dis gust or ridicule immediately you 
attribute to it the power of removing India-wide idl eness, unemployment and 
consequent pauperism. It need not be, as a matter o f fact, a panacea for the three 
ills. To be absorbingly interesting, the mere hones t attributing of power is 
enough." 
(Harijan , 16-1-1937; 64:248-49.) 
* * * 
"The Working Committee has emphasized the necessity  of the members of the 
Legislatures and other workers taking the construct ive programme of 1920 to the 
three crore villagers between whom and their represe ntatives a direct contact has 
been established. The representatives may if they ch oose neglect them, or give 
them some paltry or even substantial relief from fin ancial burdens; but they 
cannot give them self-confidence, dignity and the p ower of continuously bettering 
their own position unless they will interest them i n the fourfold constructive 
programme, i.e., universal production and use of kh adi through universal hand- 
spinning, Hindu-Muslim or rather communal unity, pr omotion of total prohibition 
by propaganda among those who are addicted to the d rink habit, and removal by 
Hindus of untouchability root and branch. 
"It was announced in 1920 and 1921 from a thousand platforms that 
attainment of swaraj by the non-violent method was i mpossible without these four 
things. I hold that it is not less true today. 
"It is one thing to improve the economic condition o f the masses by State 
regulation of taxation, and wholly another for them  to feel that they have 
bettered their condition by their own sole personal  effort. Now this they can only  
do through hand- spinning and other village handicr afts." Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  (Harijan , 15-5-1937; 65:199.) 
* * * 
"I claim to be a satyagrahi. Such a one does not te ll a lie. Whether one 
describes a single thing as two or a hundred thousa nd, both involve falsehood. 
How then did I, a satyagrahi, make such a statement ? After so many years I have 
again started repeating the same thing. Khadi can b ring swaraj only if we are 
convinced of the principle underlying it. Swaraj ca nnot be won just by donning 
khadi without any understanding." 
(Harijan Sevak,  26-2-1938; 66:372.) 
* * * 
"As long as power has not come into the hands of th e people or as long as the 
State has not adopted it, khadi will have to depend  on voluntary contributions. 
Khadi cannot be propagated in any other way." 
(Letter to Vithaldas Jerajani, 6-9-1940; 72:446.) 
* * * 
"My idea is that in a well-organized village one per son should suffice. For 
example, one worker may devote two hours to taking i n yarn, distributing slivers 
and spinning tools, and sales of khadi; village ind ustry work might take even less, 
and the remainder of the time he could give to villag e uplift and general 
education. This has not till now been possible beca use the khadi workers' time has 
been devoted to teaching people how to spin, etc. Bu t now the time has come 
when khadi and village products, locally produced, must also be locally absorbed. 
In that case one person will be able to do all the work. Today it suffices to say that 
all this work is complementary - and must become on e as far as possible." 
(Harijan,  31-5-1942; 76:38.) 
* * * 
"We should increase our love for khadi and serve the villages. You should make 
all your dependents khadi wearers. Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  "I have compared khadi to the sun and the other indu stries to the planets in 
the solar system. Agriculture is a planet in this s olar system but it cannot be the 
sun, for agriculture is not free. Those who till th e land do not own it. The 
Government controls it through petty officials. The people have lost self-
confidence. Harmful customs have led to fragmentatio n of land." 
(Speech at A.I.S.A. meeting, Sevagram, 25-3-1945; 79 :304.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
ECONOMICS OF KHADI 
"Khadi is only seemingly dear. I have pointed out i n these pages that it is wrong to 
compare khadi with other cloth by comparing the pri ces of given lengths. The 
cheapness of khadi consists in the revolution of one 's taste. The wearing of khadi 
replaces the conventional idea of wearing clothes fo r ornament by that of wearing 
them for use. Opinion is divided as to the want of durability of khadi. Division of 
opinion is based probably on difference of experien ce. Different experience is 
inevitable so long as we have not arrived at uniform ity in spinning." 
(Young India,  7-8-1924; 24:525.) 
* * * 
"To have good slivers, it is certainly essential that  the cotton should have been 
properly carded but it is also necessary that the r olling of slivers should be done 
with equal care. If in making a sliver the fibre is  merely rolled into a cylindrical 
shape anyhow, even well-carded cotton will be waste d. 
"If cotton is spread out evenly on a hollow board an d, with a thin stick placed 
over it, rolled with one's palm five or six times, th e fibres get stretched out 
properly and form a roll to make a fine sliver. Onl y the person who spins with such 
a sliver knows the pleasure that spinning gives. If o ne or two more turns are given 
with the palm, the result will be still better. On the contrary, if only one or two 
turns are given, the sliver so made will not yield a well-twisted and even thread in 
spinning. In such slivers the fibres just stick tog ether somehow and the thread, 
therefore, can never be even." 
(Navajivan , 3-5-1925; 27:24-5.) 
* * * 
"Hand-woven cloth made of hand-spun yarn is of cours e khadi, however fine it 
may be. It may be made of cotton, silk or even of wo ol. One should wear 
whichever of these one happens to find convenient. Th e khadi from Andhra is very 
fine. In Assam, one can get some khadi made of silk . Woollen khadi is made in 
Kathiawar. In other words, the only criterion of kh adi is its being hand-spun and Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  hand-woven. Ordinarily, hand-spun khadi is found to be coarse and thick, hence, 
some people erroneously believe that khadi can only  be of this type, though in 
fact fine khadi of sixty to eighty count yarn is al so made. Nevertheless, those who 
have used thick khadi know that the touch of coarse rough khadi is soft to the 
body and, being rough, it affords better protection  to the skin." 
(Navajivan , 25-10-1925; 28:386.) 
* * * 
"The manager of the Khadi Bhandar, Princess Street,  run in Bombay by the All-
India Khadi Board (now All-India Spinners' Associat ion) has sent me a copy of his 
neatly printed price list. It shows the progress ma de by khaddar. The total sales 
during the four years of its existence amount to Rs . 8,30,329. The highest sales 
were in 1922-23, viz., Rs. 2,45,515, the lowest duri ng the current year, viz., Rs. 
1,68,280. It has been suggested that the sales went  up in 1922-23 because I was in 
jail. People thought and rightly that the more khad dar they used the nearer was 
swaraj. And swaraj meant my discharge. The flaw, ho wever, consisted in the 
reasoning that khaddar was only a temporary necessi ty. Whereas, the fact is that 
it is as necessary for all times as native food and  native air are." 
(Young India , 12-11-1925; 28:446.) 
* * * 
"I once more urge the workers in every province to b e prompt in their returns. 
If the All-India Spinners' Association is to become  an efficient organization 
covering every village of India, it must have the disc iplined and intelligent co-
operation of all its workers." 
(Young India , 27-5-1926; 30:486.) 
"The remarkable fact about the growing cheapness of  khadi is that generally 
the reduction in prices has not meant a correspondi ng reduction in wages of 
carders, spinners and weavers, but has been due to b etter knowledge and greater 
efficiency." 
(Young India , 18-11-1926; 32:60.) Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  * * * 
"In my opinion, by honest and able organization, we  can create a universal 
demand for khadi, 
(a)  if those who are engaged in khadi production will p ay attention to the 
manufacture of stronger and more even yarn equal at least to the mill-spun 
yarn; 
(b)  if they will also study the tastes of the people an d produce sufficient variety 
of khadi; 
(c)  if by efficiency in other directions they bring dow n the price of khadi; 
(d)  if those who are engaged in the distribution of kha di will gain greater 
knowledge of the tastes of the people and will lear n the art of selling; 
(e)  if both the producers and the sellers will realize that they must give the 
maximum of efficiency with the minimum of wages and  that  self-sacrifice  is 
the one imperative condition of successful organiza tion of khadi on a 
universal basis." 
(Young India , 21-4-1927; 33:248.) 
* * * 
"Indeed the economic and the philanthropic side of khadi is so 
overwhelmingly important that it is a wonder that Ra jas and Maharajas have not 
given the movement the support that it deserves. Everyb ody agrees that millions 
of villagers require a supplementary occupation. Sco res of paper schemes are 
being hawked about the country for achieving village reconstruction. But not one 
scheme has the universal application that khadi has . And so far as I am aware, not 
one scheme is being tried on the scale that khadi i s being tried. It is not a small 
achievement to be able to show that the khadi schem e is at work in at least 1,500 
villages." 
(Young India , 30-6-1927; 34:78.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  "Not everyone can run a khadi .bhandar successfully,  not even everyone who 
has been in charge of a cloth shop. A manager of a khadi bhandar should know the 
different varieties of khadi, and should know how t o distinguish between genuine 
khadi and imitations. He should also know the art o f presenting khadi to the public 
in an inviting manner, and above all, he has to be scrupulously honest." 
(Young India,  11-8-1927; 34:310.) 
* * * 
"To pay cash for khadi that the people want is the least protection that khadi 
is entitled to. Managers of sale depots must not be  afraid of losing custom if they 
do not give credit. They must rely upon their abili ty to carry on propaganda in 
their neighbourhood in favour of khadi for commandin g cash sales." 
(Young India,  7-6-1928; 36:371.) 
* * * 
"We must distribute production and centralize sales  for the time being. We 
must try the experiment of pooling prices of khadi produced in various centres to 
bring down the average. Look at the figures of mill  khadi . . . What does it 
indicate? A revolution in the people's taste. They are prepared to make a sacrifice. 
They ask for coarse cloth. But they are being foull y deceived by the millowners 
who do not hesitate to exploit their patriotic sent iment." 
(Young India,  27-12-1928; 38:246.) 
* * * 
"Khaddar is not dear at any price. If a man dear an d near to you is imprisoned, 
will you not try your utmost to set him free at any  cost? A spirit of sacrifice is 
necessary if you want to attain swaraj. Khaddar sho uld be used with the spirit of 
sacrifice. In saying that khaddar is dear, it means  that you want swaraj without 
any price. Foreign cloth is cheap, you say. Even if it is a free gift it is not worth 
having. Behind it there is the evil of your bondage and your weakness. Get rid of it 
and depend on your own self for your clothing." 
(The Hindu,  27-4-1929; 40:278.) Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  * * * 
"Khadi as conceived for the use of millions does not  cost more than foreign 
cloth for the simple reason that the millions must,  if khadi is to be used by them, 
be their own manufacturers and consumers. These pag es have shown that in 
Bardoli, Bijolia and several other places khadi is b eing so manufactured and 
consumed even as in millions of homes people cook an d eat their own food. It is 
possible to demonstrate, in terms of metal, that ri ce or bread cooked in a few 
factories would cost less than they cost today in t he millions of homes. But nobody 
on that account would dare suggest that the million s should cease to cook and 
should send their raw rice and wheat to be cooked i n centralized factories." 
(Young India,  19-12-1929; 42:292.) 
* * * 
"If, I can have my way and if people co-operate, kh adi will always be sold at a 
fixed price. The price of cotton may vary, but if th e women who spin and the 
weavers are paid at uniform rates in their respectiv e provinces and the rates of 
payment for the other processes are also uniform, t here should be no difficulty in 
having a fixed price for every variety of khadi. Since  we do not possess the 
requisite honesty, efficiency of organization and s ympathy for the poor, the prices 
of khadi have been changing. However, anyone who take s the slightest interest in 
khadi knows that in every province the prices have dec lined from what they were 
ten years ago. . . 
". . . The quality of spinning has improved and, in consequence, the weavers' 
work has become easier. This has made it possible t o reduce the rate of payment 
to weavers without reducing their total earnings. It  has been possible to bring 
about this happy result of reduction in prices beca use a philanthropic body is 
organizing khadi work. Thanks to this fact, the qua lity of khadi has progressively 
improved and the prices have come down. There is co nsiderable scope for still 
further improvement in quality. . ." 
(Navajivan , 7-6-1931; 46:341.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
"Khaddar in a sense is purely an economic propositi on. A khaddar organization 
must be a business concern before everything else. The democratic principle, 
therefore, cannot apply to it. Democracy necessaril y means a conflict of will and 
ideas, involving sometimes a war to the knife betwe en these different ideas. There 
can be no room for such conflict within a business organization. Imagine parties, 
groups and the like in a business concern. It must break to pieces under their 
weight. But a khadi organization is more than a bus iness concern. It is a 
philanthropic institution designed to serve demos. Such an institution cannot be 
governed by popular fancy. There is no room in it fo r personal ambition." 
(Harijan , 21-9-1934; 58:353.) 
* * * 
"The moral is obvious: the simpler the khadi, the l arger the amount that goes 
into the pockets of the poorest workers. The fancy work no doubt makes khadi 
popular in homes which could not otherwise look at it. I may add also that there 
are some popular varieties of saris and dhotis manuf actured for poor people. On 
these no management charges are at all added. And t here is no such thing as net 
profit in any of the numerous stores managed by the  A.I.S.A. The management 
charges are added in order to make khadi self-suppo rting." 
(Harijan , 12-10-1934; 59:166.) 
* * * 
"There is no reason why a spinner in Bihar should g et less than her sister in 
Gujarat. No doubt prices vary in different provinces because the standard of living 
varies. But the Association cannot afford to take th ings as they are. It has to 
change them, if they are unjust. There is no reason  why the price of one hour's 
labour in spinning should be less than one in weavi ng. There is more skill involved 
in spinning than in simple weaving. Simple weaving is  a purely mechanical process. 
Simplest spinning requires the cunning of the hand.  Yet the spinner gets one pie 
per hour against the weaver's minimum of six; the ca rder too does better, almost 
as well as the weaver. There are historical reasons  for this state of things. But 
they are not just merely because they are historica l. Time has come for the Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  Association to equalize if not also to stabilize th e prices of all labour regulated by 
it." 
(Harijan , 6-7-1935; 61:233.) 
* * * 
"The custom for fine khadi has fallen off even befor e the expected or rather 
threatened rise in prices. When it falls further, i f it does, it will do so not because 
of the rise in prices but undoubtedly because of wa nt of love or humanity in the 
buyer. Humanity does not search for low prices in a  spirit of bargain. 
The humane in man, even in his purchases, seeks oppo rtunities of service, and 
therefore wants to know first not the price of the article of purchase but the 
condition of its producers, and makes purchases in a manner that serves most the 
most needy and deserving." 
(Harijan , 2-11-1935; 62:85-86.) 
* * * 
"The efficiency earnings do not directly affect the  sale price. If anything, the 
efficiency of spinners improves the quality of khadi . The direct increase in the 
wages undoubtedly raises the prices, but its burden  is broken by the improvement 
in quality. Then the increase is so judiciously reg ulated as to affect the poorest 
buyer not at all or very slightly. I have no manner o f doubt that if only the workers 
will themselves be more efficient, more vigilant and more faithful, they will 
hasten the day when spinners can easily earn eight annas per day of eight hours' 
work without involving a phenomenal rise in the sale price. More scientific 
knowledge must improve the capacity of hand-gins, ca rding-bows and spinning-
wheels." 
(Harijan , 17-4-1937; 65:90-91.) 
* * * 
"City people should know that ceaseless effort is b eing made to evoke greater 
skill among the artisans so that the whole of the i ncrease in the wages may not 
fall upon khadi. Overhead charges are also being co nstantly reduced. Skill Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  overhead increases with experience. But sixteen time s increase in the wages of 
spinners cannot all be brought about merely by incr eased efficiency. Therefore 
some rise in the price of khadi is inevitable with t he increase in the wages. This is 
being unequally distributed among the different vari eties so that the heaviest rise 
will take place in the khadi that is purchased by t he monied classes. Everything 
that can be done to ease the burden on poor buyers is being done and will be done 
by the Association. 
"But khadi-wearers should know that the economics o f khadi are different 
from the ordinary economics which are based on comp etition in which patriotism, 
sentiment and humanity play little or no part. Khad i economics are based on 
patriotism sentiment and humanity. . . 
"The question of cheapness mainly affects the city- dwellers. If all of them, 
rich and poor, took to khadi, they could hardly use  more than ten per cent of the 
possible production of khadi. The rest has to be us ed by the producers themselves 
who are villagers. The question of price does not af fect them materially, if at all. 
It is true that khadi has not penetrated the villag es to the extent expected. During 
the transition period, therefore, it has to depend upon the patriotic spirit of city-
dwellers both rich and poor. Those who believe in t he message of khadi will not 
consider any price too dear for khadi. It is the on ly real insurance against famine 
and unemployment." 
(Harijan , 23-7-1938; 67:198-99.) 
* * * 
". . . what I wish to consider here is the reason f or the sales not keeping pace 
with the production. Propaganda undoubtedly has its  place. But more than 
propaganda is wanted scientific research. There is no doubt that our people use on 
an average 15 yards of cloth per head per year. Ther e is no doubt that this cloth 
costs the country a figure approaching 100 crores o f rupees, meaning less than 
three rupees per head, counting India's population at 35 crores. It is easy enough 
to say that the sales can be effected if the State protects khadi. That khadi 
deserves protection is in my opinion a self-proved pr oposition. But have the khadi Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  workers who have the qualifications found out wheth er we have done all we could 
to command sales even without protection?. . . 
"It is a shame that we who grow more cotton than we  need should have to 
send it abroad for being turned into cloth for us. It is equally a shame for us that 
we who have in our villages unlimited unused labour,  and can easily supply 
ourselves with village instruments of manufacture, s hould send our cotton to the 
mills of our cities for it to be manufactured into cloth for our use. We know the 
history of the shame. But we have not yet discovere d the sure way to deal with 
the double shame beyond a patriotic appeal to the p ublic.” 
(Harijan , 26-8-1939; 70:104-105.) 
* * * 
 “I have not hesitated to say, and I wish to repeat,  that everyone who spins 
for 26waraj brings 26waraj nearer by so many yards.  Think what it means if 
millions were to take part in this grand effort. Le t no one seek for a parallel in 
history. History has no record of a non-violent eff ort made for a nation’s freedom. 
Bona fide  non-violent effort presupposes the adoption of uniq ue weapons. It is the 
violence within the breast and the newness of the te chnique which stand in the 
way of an appreciation of the charkha.” 
(Harijan , 10-2-1940; 71:183.) 
* * * 
 “To understand the inner meaning of khadi one has to know why it has to be 
turned out by hand and not by power machinery. Why should innumerable hands 
be employed when a single person can manipulate an engine which can produce 
the same amount of cloth in far less time? If khadi  has to be produced by hand, 
why not by the  takli  only? And if the  takli,  why not the bamboo  taklil And if we 
could get the necessary work by suspending yarn by means of a stone, why even  
taklil  Such questions are perfectly natural. To find prop er answers to all such is a 
necessary part of khadi research.” 
(Harijan , 1-3-1942; 75:353.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  "We want to restrict our attention to only one of t he seven lakhs of villages. 
We want the same independence for that village as we  want for any other of the 
seven lakh villages and the world at large. So, our villages should at least become 
self-reliant as far as food and clothing are concer ned. 
"In such villages there cannot be any need for metal  or any other imposed 
currency for mutual transactions. Our standard shou ld be a rural product, which 
everyone can make, which can be stored and the price  of which does not fluctuate 
daily. What can this be? It can neither be soap, no r oil, nor vegetables. Thus, after 
enumerating and eliminating all the things only yar n remains. Everyone can 
produce it. There is always a demand for it. It can  be stored well. If we can 
introduce yarn currency in the villages, they will m ake great progress and become 
self-reliant very soon. This is not an attempt to en umerate all the advantages of 
yarn currency. I want to tell you only what it mean s and how it will function. . . 
"In such a scheme every house can become a mint and  can make as much 
money (yarn) as it wants." 
(Harijan Sevak,  3-5-1942; 76:42-43.) 
* * * 
"My experience tells me that if khadi is to become universal, both in cities and 
in villages, it should be made available only in exch ange of yarn . . . 
"I hope that as days go by everyone will himself in sist on buying khadi only in 
exchange of yarn. If this does not happen and if th ey give yarn grudgingly swaraj 
through non-violence is impossible. Surely some eff ort has to be made for swaraj. 
It cannot be had by mere begging. A certain kind of  freedom can of course be 
obtained on the strength of the rifle, but it will not be real swaraj and I for one am 
not interested in it. . . 
"What I am taking about relates to the crores of th e starving people. If they 
are to live, and live well, the charkha will have to b e central and spinning 
undertaken voluntarily also by those who do not nee d to spin. The weapons of non-
violence must not be adopted by people because they have no other alternative. 
Therefore to my mind the rule of yarn for khadi whi ch has been introduced has to 
exist and increase in its application." Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  (Gram Udyog Patrika,  Vol. I, pp. 352-354; 81:55-57.) 
* * * 
"It is my firm view that we should demand yarn for the khadi required by the 
Congress. It calls for tact and efficiency." 
(Letter written to Shrikrisnadas Jaju on 28-12-1945 ; 82:293.) 
* * * 
"If we believe that swaraj hangs by the hand-spun th read, then it is clear that 
the value of yarn will be far greater than gold and silver currency. Constructive 
workers are not exempt from spinning. How can there  be any such exemption from  
yajnal Spinning is the necessary  yajna  for everyone." 
(Harijan  28-4-1946; 84:34.) 
* * * 
". . . Just as gold and silver emerge as coins from a mint, so khadi alone 
should emerge from a yarn bank. Not until such time  as this happens will the 
defects in hand-spun yam be removed and the quality of khadi improved beyond 
expectation. This work cannot be accomplished by co mpulsion. Khadi workers 
must be selfless, true and of a scientific mind for  the easy, quick and voluntary 
achievement of this noble end. 
"To achieve it is the real goal of the Charkha Sangh . It will not matter if, in 
working up to this end, all the sales bhandars have to be closed and khadi-wearers 
reduced to a handful. Even so there will be no shame  attaching to the endeavour. 
On the other hand, if khadi is sold as a symbol of hypocrisy and untruth it will drag 
the names of both the Charkha Sangh and the Congres s in the mud and khadi will 
no longer be able either to deliver swaraj or be the  mainstay of the poor. 
Unbelievers will ask: 'Then why take so much trouble  over khadi? Why not let it 
remain as one of the many occupations of village Ind ia, instead of being a fad of 
non-violence?' Those who are khadi-mad must learn t he secret of the science of 
khadi and be prepared even to die for it and thereby  prove that it is the true 
symbol of nonviolent swaraj." Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  (Harijan , 7-7-1946; 84:381-82.) 
* * * 
"It is to be hoped that every khadi bhandar will bec ome a model of service and 
thereby not only raise itself but also maintain the  honour that khadi carries." 
(Harijan , 29-9-1946; 85:355.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30   
KHADI AND MILL-CLOTH / SILK 
"If therefore we merely use mill-made cloth, we sim ply deprive the poor of what 
they need, at least increase the price of mill- mad e cloth. The only way therefore 
to encourage swadeshi is to manufacture more cloth.  Mills cannot grow like 
mushrooms. We must, therefore, fall back upon hand- woven and hand-spun yarn. 
Yarn has never perhaps been so dear as it is today and mills are making fabulous 
profits out of yarn. He, therefore, who hand-spins a yard of yarn, helps production 
and cheapens its price." 
(Young India , 28-4-1920; 17:353.) 
* * * 
"Letters are coming in from everywhere telling me th at greedy persons have 
been selling foreign or mill-made cloth by passing it off as khadi and they also put 
up the price of such cloth. This does not surprise me. When the entire system of 
government is based on fraud, what else can we expec t from people? Go where 
you will, to law-courts, shops or hospitals, even to  legislatures everywhere you will 
see cheating. Non-cooperation is intended to save us  from this. Our non-co-
operation is directed not against individuals but a gainst their misdeeds. There is, 
however, always the danger, in trying to save ourselve s from one kind of sin, our 
being caught in another. And so long as we like to have cloths like that made in the 
mills and so long as our cloth is not woven before our eyes, so long the danger of 
being cheated will remain. The easiest safeguard ag ainst this is that every village 
should produce its own khadi and that people in the  cities should buy only such 
khadi as does not look like mill-made cloth, and th at too preferably stamped with 
a Congress mark. Even if all these precautions are t aken, there is no guarantee 
that there would be no danger of fraud." 
(Navajivan,  7-9-1921; 21:52.) 
* * * 
"If thirty crores of people  will,  if the core members of the congress  will,  I am 
sure that we can boycott foreign cloth and manufact ure enough for our wants 
during this month. Three conditions are necessary: we must discard all foreign Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  cloth, do with the least possible cloth during the transition stage, and get all the 
khadi we need woven by the village weaver out of yarn  spun by ourselves or our 
neighbours." 
(Young India,  6-10-1921; 21:254.) 
* * * 
"We try needlessly to encourage the use of mill clo th, and it is also a mistake 
to go running to buy it. Indian mill cloth will alw ays be in demand. If, by our 
actions, we tempt the mill-owners the quality of cl oth is bound to deteriorate and 
the traders in such cloth, who are concerned only w ith their profits, will be 
tempted to put up the prices. We cannot expect the dealers to conduct their 
business for the good of the country till the peopl e themselves have that good at 
heart. Which is easier of the two, that I should pu t up with the discomfort of 
wearing khadi, - if discomfort it is and if its pri ce is high, pay that price; or that 
the millowners should forgo their profits of crores  of rupees? It is foolish to expect 
any big sacrifices from the millowners. They will b e the last, not the first to wake 
up, and we should conduct our struggle on that assu mption. To blame them on this 
ground is to blame human nature. In their place we would certainly behave in 
much the same way. Those of us, therefore, who have  accepted swadeshi as a 
religious duty should not use mill-made cloth . . .  
"In short, khadi imported from Japan or produced in  our mills is not khadi but 
something which merely looks like it, and we must k eep away from it . . . 
"Once foreign cloth has disappeared completely from  their midst, the women 
will not take long to catch up. But even men have not  ceased to care for outward 
show. They have not yet completely overcome their fo ndness for fine cloth. 
Dhotis, for example, they must always have mill-made , and the heaviness of khadi 
seems an inconvenience. How can we expect anything f rom women when men 
themselves have not completely turned away from such  things? There are, thus, 
many obstacles in our path of swadeshi. When we hav e removed them all, we are 
sure to see the sun of swaraj rising on the horizon ." 
(Navajivan , 6-10-1921; 21:254, 255, 256.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  "I personally see no necessity of selling silk to m ake khadi popular. One can, 
however, understand and condone the use of silk bord ers to beautify khadi. . . 
"Khadi can and should have only one meaning, viz, han d- woven cloth made 
from hand-spun thread. Silk-thread, just fibre and wool woven in this manner may 
be called, if we like, silk, jute and woollen khadi , respectively. But it would be 
ridiculous for anyone dressed in khadi silk to clai m that he was encouraging 
khadi." 
(Navajivan , 20-4-1924; 23:463.) 
* * * 
"Foreign cloth must be totally banished from the In dian market, if India is to 
become an economically free nation, if her peasantr y is to be freed from chronic 
pauperism, if that peasantry is to find honourable employment during times of 
famine and such other visitations. Protection of her  staple industry is her 
birthright. I would therefore protect the Indian mi lls against foreign competition 
even though for the time being it may result in mulc ting the poor people. Such 
mulcting can take place only if the mill-owners be so unpatriotic as to raise prices 
owing to the monopoly they may secure. I have theref ore no hesitation in 
advocating the repeal of cotton excise duties and im position of a prohibitive 
import duty. 
"Similarly and consistently I would protect hand-sp un khaddar against the 
home mills. And I know that if only foreign competi tion is avoided khaddar will be 
protected without difficulty. Foreign cloth will be  banished when public opinion 
becomes effectively powerful. The same power will in sure the protection of 
khaddar against mills. But my strong belief is that  khaddar will come to its own 
without any unseemly war with the mills. But, whils t khaddar has only a limited 
number of votaries, they, the votaries, must necessa rily preach khaddar in 
preference to and to the exclusion of yarn and clot h manufactured even in our 
mills. To give the option is to kill khaddar." 
(Young India , 28-8-1924; 25:43.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  "I have purposely kept the precious samples in front  of me in order to warn me 
of my duty not to be angry against the mill- owners  in question in spite of their 
unpatriotic conduct. I know that they could have co nducted their trade without 
entering into competition with khadi. They could at  least have refrained from 
miscalling their coarse cloth 'khadi' when they wel l knew that 'khadi' was a word 
used to signify hand-spun cotton cloth. But two wro ngs cannot make one right. My 
satyagrahi spirit tells me that I may not retaliate . I may not imitate their 
unpatriotic conduct. I know that, if lovers of khad i remain true to the faith, hand-
spun khadi will thrive against all odds." 
(Young India , 28-8-1924; 25:43-44.) 
* * * 
"If to make khadi a practical proposition is interp reted to mean that it should 
compete with mill-made cloth, I think that is almos t impossible. Dharma need 
never enter into such competition. Mill-owners may g ive away their cloth gratis 
just to kill khadi, but can we do the same with kha di? There certainly is 
competition in trade when commodities are offered, (virtually) for nothing. I am 
willing to listen to all criticism of the work ther e. And I am eager to remove all 
recognizable faults." 
(Letter to Kantilal Parekh from Sabarmati Ashram wr itten on 11-6-1926; 
30:565.) 
* * * 
"... I want the mill industry to prosper - only I d o n t want it to prosper at the 
expense of the country. On the contrary if the inte rests of the country demand 
that the industry should go, I should let it go wit hout the slightest compunction. 
The millowners who support me understand my attitud e and many want this 
movement to prosper, even if its prosperity should me an their loss. 
"And you ask how those who produce mill cloth may w ear anything else. Do 
you know that in Manchester the manufacturers do no t wear their own products? 
You need not mind your inability to use cloth produ ced by your own mills. The 
good Duchess of Sutherland saw the miserable plight  of the poor islanders of 
Hebrides and placed spinning-wheels and looms at th eir disposal. The citizens of Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  Manchester, including millowners, do wear the hands pun stuffs prepared by the 
Hebrides people, even at three times the cost of the  mill stuff." 
(Speech on Khadi in Amalner on 12-2-1927; 33:68-69. ) 
* * * 
"But even if the mills were to play the game, Congre ssmen will not need to 
use mill-cloth or to advertise it. The mills playin g the game means their 
advertising and selling khadi, their assimilation of  the khadi spirit, their 
recognition of the predominance of khadi over mill- cloth. 
"It must be definitely realized that mills alone, e ven if they wished, cannot in 
our generation displace foreign cloth. Therefore th ere must be in the country an 
agency that would devote its attention, so far as bo ycott of foreign cloth is 
concerned, exclusively to khadi propaganda. That ag ency has been the Congress 
since 1920. Khadi production and khadi propaganda a ct at once as a check upon 
the greed of mills and also, strange as it may appe ar, as an indirect but very 
effective encouragement to mills in their struggle against foreign competition. 
Exclusive devotion to khadi on the part of Congressme n enables khadi to find a 
foothold and enables mills effectively to carry on t heir operations where the 
Congress has as yet no influence worth the name. He nce it is that the mills have 
never resented the khadi propaganda. On the contrary  many of their agents have 
assured me that they have benefited by the khadi pro paganda inasmuch as it has 
created an anti-foreign-cloth atmosphere enabling t hem to sell their comparatively 
coarser-count cloth. Stop exclusive khadi propagand a, play with mill-cloth and you 
kill khadi and in the long run you kill even mill-c loth, for it cannot by itself stand 
foreign competition. In a competition between indig enous and foreign mills the 
one disturbing factor of healthy mass sentiment wil l be wholly wanting, if there 
was no khadi spirit." 
(Young India , 10-5-1928; 36:301.) 
* * * 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  ". . . And I have repeatedly shown in these pages th at there can be no 
comparison between khadi and mill-cloth even as ther e can be none between the 
home-made chapati, however costly it may be and trou blesome to make, and 
cheap, easily prepared machine-made biscuit. Mill-c loth needs no protection or 
patronage from the public in the sense that khadi d oes. Indian mill-cloth gets 
preference as it ought to when khadi is unavailable at any cost, when machine-
made cloth becomes a necessity and when the choice lies only between foreign 
cloth and swadeshi mill- cloth. Khadi it is clear m ust displace both. Khadi has no 
established market like mill-cloth. It has not even become as yet a bazaar article. 
Every yard of khadi bought means at least eighty-five  per cent in the mouths of the 
starving and the poor ones of India. Every yard of mi ll-cloth bought means more 
than 75 per cent in the pockets of the capitalists and less than 25 per cent in the 
pockets of the labourers who are never helpless, wh o are well able to take care of 
themselves, and who never starve or need starve in the  sense that the helpless 
millions starve for whose sake khadi has been concei ved." 
(Young India,  4-10-1928; 37:330.) 
* * * 
"My conviction is that a time must come and that wit hin a few months when 
the mills will have to make their choice and accept  the terms that were offered to 
them last year. But it will wholly depend upon the determination of the people to 
boycott foreign cloth at any cost and replace it by  genuine khadi. Khadi has no 
limits. For we have millions of human spindles and l akhs of human looms. The one 
thing needful is the will to do it." 
(Young India,  7-3-1929; 40:96-97.) 
* * * 
"I regard the question of competing with cloth made  in textile mills - whether 
foreign or Indian - as a temporary and futile one. When farmers store their own 
cotton, carry on all the activities up to that of s pinning in their own homes, they 
will certainly get their own khadi made by paying t he proper wage to the weaver 
and not touch mill-made cloth. The economics of kha di is unique. It has a soul 
whereas the economics of textile mills is soulless.  Hence the two differ in kind. Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  Just as the waters of the ocean and those of the Ga nges being qualitatively 
different cannot be compared to each other, similar ly there can be no comparison 
between cloth produced in textile mills and handmad e cloth produced in villages." 
(Navajivan,  1-9-1929; 41:346.) 
* * * 
". . . But the khadi propaganda has produced in the  people a love for swadeshi 
on a scale unknown before, and it has resulted in p reference being given by the 
poor villagers to indigenous mill-cloth over foreign  cloth. But the reader may note 
what many mills have done to khadi. They have unscr upulously and unfairly 
resorted to the manufacture of coarse cloth, and ha ve not felt ashamed even to 
label it khadi with the pictures of the charkha pri nted upon that spurious stuff." 
(Young India,  26-9-1929; 41:471.) 
* * * 
"If khadi is not constantly kept in view, the result  will be that the price of 
cloth made in mills in India — not Indian mills — w ill keep increasing and the 
boycott will never become effective. 
1.  In this age, no amount of effort would make it poss ible for mills to make 
cloth sufficient to meet the country's needs. 
2.  The concern of mills generally is, and will be, pro fits. 
3.  The Government can, at any time, suppress the mills . 
4.  The present trend indicates that mills in this coun try are passing under 
foreign ownership and control. 
5.  As mills are dependent upon foreign machines and fo reign techniques, they 
could, all of a sudden, be faced with a difficult s ituation. 
While on the contrary: 
1.  If the sentiment for khadi becomes widespread in th e country, we can 
produce today as much khadi as we require. 
2.  Khadi does not require as much capital as mills do.  Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  3.  It does not require as much technical skill. 
4.  It may be said that potentially there are thirty cr ores of labourers employed 
in the production of khadi. 
5.  All the implements required for the production of k hadi are made in the 
country. 
6.  Khadi cannot be suppressed either by the Government or any other power. 
7.  Khadi can be produced in every home. 
8.  It is not necessary to make khadi at one place and send it to another. At 
present it does have to travel to some extent becau se the sentiment for 
khadi has not gained much ground." 
(Navajivan , 6-4-1930; 43:195.) 
* * * 
"The Congress toleration of mills is based on the b elief that the mills can 
serve a useful purpose during the transition stage. Immediate exclusion of foreign 
cloth becomes easier through the indigenous mills i f they work in sympathy with 
the movement. It is easier for khaddar to deal and c ompete with the indigenous 
mills alone than to do so with them plus English, J apanese, Italian and other mills. 
The increase in the number of indigenous mills need  not frighten khaddarites. The 
increase is no doubt proof that the economic influe nce of khaddar is not yet fully 
felt. When khaddar becomes universal, many mills ma y find their occupation gone. 
It is needless to speculate whether khaddar will ob tain such a hold on the people. 
It will depend upon the faithfulness of the workers . There is no flaw in the 
reasoning applied to khaddar. It is merely a questi on of giving a true education to 
the millions of villagers, of changing national tast e, of realizing the tremendous 
power of the wheel to banish pauperism from the lan d. It is no small thing to be 
able to show a way the adoption of which will be an  insurance against starvation 
and its attendant results. . . 
"As the author of the revival of khaddar I must conf ess that it never entered 
my head that I should wish for high prices of mill- manufactures for the protection 
of khaddar. It is one thing to seek protection agai nst killing competition, wholly Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  another to wish for higher prices of commodities pr oduced by a few for many even 
for the protection of an analogous industry. Khadda r economics is wholly different 
from the ordinary. The latter takes no note of the human factor. The former 
wholly concerns itself with the human. The latter i s frankly selfish, the former 
necessarily unselfish. Competition and therefore pr ices are eliminated from the 
conception of khaddar." 
(Young India , 16-7-1931; 47:143-44.) 
* * * 
"My faith in khadi is, if possible, stronger than e ver from the moral, economic 
and national (in its widest sense) standpoint; ther e is no comparison between 
khadi and mill-cloth, even indigenous. Exploitation of the poor through mill-cloth 
or mill- yarn is an impossibility in the case of kh adi. Exploitation of the poor 
through mill-cloth and mill-yarn is inevitable in so me shape or form, be it ever so 
mild. The use of genuine khadi constitutes some (be  it ever so small) automatic 
return to the poor for their continuous exploitatio n by the comparatively rich and 
can in the aggregate become a mighty return, though  never adequate, to the 
masses living in the villages. . . 
"Khadi represents human values; mill-cloth represent s mere metallic value." 
(Harijan , 9-2-1934; 57:133-34.) 
* * * 
". . . khadi can give employment to crores whereas s ilk hardly to more than a 
few thousand. Khadi is a necessity for both the poo r and the rich. Silk is a 
necessity for none but a few who, in order to nouri sh a religious sentiment, insist 
on silk garments on certain occasions. Hence when i t is a question of choice 
between silk and khadi, naturally those who have th e welfare of starving millions 
at heart will always choose khadi. . . 
". . . let it be remembered that if cotton khadi li ves but silk dies, the hands 
left idle due to the death of silk can easily take up cotton spinning and weaving, 
but if silk displaces cotton, it cannot employ the crores that will be without 
occupation or chance of it due to the death of cott on khadi. It seems to me, Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  therefore, to be the obvious duty of all lovers of  Daridranarayana  to prefer cotton 
khadi always when the question of making a choice c onfronts them. It will be 
economical in the long run to pay for the present d earer prices for fine cotton 
khadi than for the corresponding fine silk wear." 
(Harijan ; 7-11-1936; 64:8-9.) 
* * * 
"There is no doubt that khadi cannot compete with m ill- cloth, it was never 
meant to. If the people will not understand or appr eciate the law governing khadi, 
it will never be universal. It must then remain the  fad of monied people and 
cranks. And if it is to be merely that, the labours  of a huge organization like the 
A.I.S.A. must mean a waste of effort, if not someth ing much worse. . . 
"At present we are labouring under a heavy handicap . Cotton production has 
been centralized for the sake of Lancashire and, if  you will, for the sake of Indian 
mills. Prices of cotton are determined by the price s in foreign land. When the 
production of cotton is distributed in accordance w ith the demands of khadi 
economics, cotton prices would not fluctuate and, i n any case, will be, in effect, 
lower than today. When the people, either through S tate protection or through 
voluntary effort, have cultivated the habit of using only khadi, they will never 
think of it in terms of money, even as millions of vegetarians do not compare the 
prices of flesh foods with those of non-flesh foods . They will starve rather than 
take flesh foods even though they may be offered fr ee." 
(Harijan , 10-12-1938; 68:173-74.) 
* * * 
"Uncertified khadi means deprivation of the spinner' s rightful wage and 
general injury to khadi work. That khadi and [those ] articles made of khadi are 
certified which are sold by dealers certified by th e All-India Spinners' Association." 
(In a statement to the Press in Seagaon on 25-1-194 0; 71:140.) 
"You ask about woollens and silks. Who wears them? Can the poor do so? Why 
should we take all the trouble for a few rich peopl e? These things cannot become 
universal. We may certainly keep stocks of woollens  and silks in khadi bhandars as Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  we keep other things there but we must understand t hat that is no part of our 
work." 
(Discussion with the Charkha Sangh Workers on 27/28 -11- 1945; 82:123.) 
* * * 
"Uncertified khadi dealers are a powerful menace to  khadi whether from the 
standpoint of the poor man or of non-violence. For the dealer knows only his own 
pocket and nothing else matters to him. Of course, he goes to the weaver and the 
spinner and makes all kinds of promises, not knowin g that if he killed the A.I.S.A. 
he would kill himself." 
(Harijan , 12-5-1946; 84:94.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41   
MESSAGE OF KHADI 
(a) To Harijans 
"I have given up all those things which were only a m eans for securing swaraj. 
You must, however, pursue that which helps the attai nment of self-purification — 
khadi, the abolition of untouchability and Hindu-Mu slim unity. Practise these as 
your ordinary dharma regardless of whether swaraj i s secured or not, otherwise we 
shall surely perish. Hinduism will be destroyed if untouchability is not ended and, 
without khadi, there will be such starvation in the  country that our flesh will be 
eaten up by crows and dogs, leaving only bones behi nd." 
(Speech at Bardoli, 17-1-1925; 26:9.) 
* * * 
"Universalization of spinning means the automatic so lution of many other 
questions. Take the untouchability problem. It is i mpossible to universalize the 
wheel without tackling untouchability. Do you know that the untouchables would 
have nothing to do with khadi if we had not made the m our own? They would say, 
"What shall we do with khadi when we are treated as  untouchables?" And unless 
they co-operate, you cannot achieve the full khadi programme. And so also for the 
Hindu- Muslim question. The two things hang togethe r. You can thus see that 
spinning alone does lead to swaraj. . ." 
(Speech at khadi workers' meeting at Taltola on 9-5 -1925; 27:67-68.) 
* * * 
"Very few people have any notion of what khadi mean s to Harijans. Simple 
weaving is almost an exclusive speciality of Harijan s, and even though mill spinning 
and weaving have deprived many Harijans of a source o f livelihood, thousands of 
them are still dependent upon weaving. But a friend argues: 'What is the use of 
keeping alive a perishing industry? Why not give the m instead an industry that may 
be growing? Surely, you do not intend to confine th em to worn-out occupations 
even when you are devising all manner of means for th eir uplift otherwise'. Indeed, 
I have no desire to confine Harijans, or for that m atter, anybody, to spinning and 
weaving or to any one occupation, if they can be mor e profitably employed in any Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  other; only I do not take the gloomy view of hand-sp inning and weaving which the 
objector takes. I personally believe that hand-ginni ng, hand- carding, hand-
spinning and hand-weaving have a brilliant future, at  least in India. If the millions 
are to live with any degree of comfort, the mills mu st seek main custom outside 
India." 
(Harijan , 27-10-1933; 56:146-47.) 
* * * 
"What can a swadeshi exhibition do for Harijans, yo u may ask. I think khadi 
has got a great deal to do with it, because the int roduction of hand-spinning and 
hand-weaving of cloth, you will be surprised to kno w, has brought a ray of comfort 
and light into the dark homes of thousands and thou sands of Harijans. I had the 
good fortune to go to many Harijan homes even during  this brief tour and 
discovered the potency of khadi for Harijans. You w ill also be surprised to know 
that there are many things — I hope those things ar e exhibited here — at which 
Harijans have worked for the most part, if not entir ely." 
(Speech at All-India Swadeshi Exhibition, Madras, 2 0-12- 1933; 56:359.) 
* * * 
"I also heard a rumour that I have changed my opini on about the absolute 
necessity of khadi. I can give my assurance that my opinion has not undergone any 
changes whatsoever. On the contrary, the opinion tha t I expressed in the year 
1919 has become strengthened by experience. And I a m convinced that khadi is 
the only solution for the deep and deepening distre ss of the untouchables. Khadi is 
cheap at any price, for every pie that you spend in buying khadi goes directly into 
the pocket of the poor people. But I must not tire you with the arguments that I 
have advanced so often from the various platforms. I am only hoping that in this 
great movement of self-purification we shall not on ly get rid of untouchability but 
many other impurities from which our society is suf fering. And I hope that those 
Harijans who are present at this meeting will fully  bear in mind that they have also 
to contribute their share in this movement." 
(Speech at public meeting, Tirupur, 6-2-1934; 57:12 3.) Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  * * * 
"Those who, apart from the whole programme of anti-  untouhability, are 
interested in the economic betterment of Harijans s hould know that khadi gives 
employment to thousands of Harijan men, women and c hildren who otherwise had 
no employment. It entirely supports some families a nd supplements the slender 
resources of many more and keeps the wolf from the door. Its capacity to be the 
only universal source of employment to the starving m illions is not now seriously 
questioned. It is this poor man's stay which is bei ng undermined by unscrupulous 
methods. I learnt in Madura that some dealers in cl oth were palming off khadi 
cloth woven from mill-spun yarn as hand-spun and ha nd- woven. I was shown 
specimens which were exact copies of special khadi varieties. Lovers of khadi and 
Harijan servants who believe in the potency of khadi  to serve Harijans are 
requested not to buy khadi which does not bear the hallmark of the All-India 
Spinners' Association." 
(Harijan , 9-2-1934; 57:133.) 
* * * 
 (b) To Muslims 
"Spinning is such an activity that both Hindus and M uslims can take equal part 
in it. In respect of some crafts, Muslims lead the world and weaving is one of 
them. The Dacca muslin used to be woven by Muslims a lone. That is exactly why 
the weavers bore the sweet and dignified." 
(Navajivan , 27-7-1924; 24:450.) 
* * * 
"I have not known many Muslim organizations devoted s pecially to khadi work. 
Nor are many Muslims found to take lively interest in this much-needed nationat 
work. Indeed during the Bakr-Id in Ahmedabad, a fri end tells me, Mussalmans 
could be counted on the fingers of one hand who wer e dressed in khadi. They were 
not even dressed in Indian mill-cloth. It was all f oreign. Let me hope this 
committee will change this state of things. I hope,  too, that the members are all 
spinners and khadi weavers." Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  (Young India , 31-7-1924; 24:480.) 
* * * 
"You can win swaraj only with non-violence and neve r with violence. If you are 
convinced of that, you will not take time to be con vinced that by spinning alone 
can you win swaraj. For, non-violence in action can be achieved by nothing but a 
successful working out of a peaceful programme of t he universalization of the 
spinning-wheel. How will you solve the Hindu-Muslim question but by getting the 
Hindu to work in the cause of khadi for the Mussalm 'an, and  vice versa?  And in 
order that you get the Mussalman and the Hindu and the untouchable to work 
together, you have to plod away in faith and confid ence in yourselves." 
(Speech at Khadi Workers' Meeting at Taltola on 9-5 -1925; (27:68.) 
* * * 
"Maulana Shaukat Ali has asked me to say everywhere,  where I meet 
Mussalmans, that he had joined the Spinners' Associ ation. He has got unlimited 
faith in the charkha because he knows that, so long  as both the Hindus and 
Mussalmans are not wholly clad in khaddar, India ca nnot be free. . . 
. . Only they can be 'A' Class members of the A.I.S .A. who contribute to it 
one thousand yards of self-spun yarn per month — in  all, twelve thousand yards in 
the year — and are habitual wearers of khadi. The M aulana hopes that he will be 
able to bring around three thousand members from am ong the Mussalmans before 
the year closes. It has been complained that, where as there are many Hindus in 
the khadi service, there are but few Mussalmans. The refore, the Maulana wants 
me to declare this also that all such Mussalmans wh ose hearts are pure and who 
are industrious had got their place in it. But they  who want to come into it must 
obey its laws. Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians, Pars is, Jews and all have their place 
in this A.I.S.A., if they believe in khadi." 
(Speech at public Meeting, Bhagalpur, on 1-10-1925;  28:276.) 
* * * 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  "Wherever I have gone I have asked managers of khadda r organizations 
whether they have Mussalman workers with them and t hey have invariably 
complained of the difficulty of getting Mussalman w orkers for khaddar. Khadi 
Pratishthan has some but they belong to the humbler  walks of life. The Abhoy 
Ashram has one or two. I cannot multiply these inst ances. The thing is that khadi 
service has not yet become a popular service. There i s not much money to be had 
for service. In the figures I analysed some time ag o the highest pay given was Rs. 
150/- per month. That was paid to a very able organi zer. The best khaddar 
workers are all volunteers everywhere. The terms of s ervice must necessarily be 
stiff. You cannot have whole-time khaddar workers w ho do not themselves spin or 
habitually wear khaddar. I would love to have many M ussalmans of the right stamp 
offering their services. Let them all apply to the Maulana Saheb. He has 
undertaken to examine every case personally and mak e his recommendation to the 
Council. But I give due warning to all concerned wh ether Mussalmans, Christians, 
Parsis or Jews, that they must not blame the Counci l if the khaddar service 
becomes a Hindu preserve for want of efforts, abilit y or love for khaddar on the 
part of the others." 
(Young India , 8-10-1925; 28:308-9.) 
* * * 
 (c) To Women 
"I only pray for their goodwill. I need much help f rom them. I get some, but it 
is still too little. When Hindu and Muslim sisters have adopted the spinning-wheel 
and come to look upon khadi as their adornment, I s hall feel that I have got all I 
wanted. I shall then certainly please my correspond ent by wearing a dhoti and a 
long shirt with a collar, for I believe that, when the women have fallen in love 
with khadi, swaraj will have been won. Meanwhile the  correspondent should be 
kind to me and to those like me who wear a loin-clo th and, even if he regards the 
loin-cloth as indecent, should look upon people who  wear it as his brethren, 
overlooking their indecency." 
(Navajivan , 27-7-1924; 24:458.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  "Were our mothers mad that they used to spin? Now w hen I ask you to spin, I 
must appear mad to you. But it is not Gandhi who is  mad; it is yourself who are so. 
You do not have any compassion for the poor. Even so  you try to convince yourself 
that India has become prosperous and sing of that p rosperity. If you want to enter 
public life, render public service, then spin on th e charkha, wear khadi." 
(Speech at women's conference, Sojitra on 16-1-1925 ; 26:2-3.) 
* * * 
"I know hundreds of husbands who have been delighte d to find their wives in 
khadi clothes. Their household expenditure has been  reduced and their love for 
their khadi-clad wives have grown . . . 
"I appeal to the sisters who think like her to take  boldly to khadi and realize 
that beauty does not 'consist in dress but in purit y of character, and clothes are 
not meant for adornment but for protecting the body  from heat and cold." 
(Navajivan , 22-2-1925; 26:185-86.) 
* * * 
"I assure you that in the days of Rama and Sita the re was nothing but khaddar, 
hand-spun and hand-woven. When Sita traversed the len gth and breadth of India 
she was not dressed, as you are, in foreign cloth. For sita what cloth her country 
produced was quite enough for her decoration. It wa s reserved for the modern 
women of India to tell me that khaddar is too coars e for them. But do you know 
that by your ceasing to wear khaddar millions of ou r sisters and brothers have 
been reduced to poverty? It is all very well for you who are fairly well-to-do, to 
attend functions and to go about in saris of 18 cub its. But remember that your 
sisters in the villages of India have not only no s aris such as you have, but have not 
even enough food to eat. And I am telling God's trut h when I say that I have seen 
hundreds, if not thousands, of women in India who h ave no clothes to wear but 
rags. 
"I, therefore, ask you for the sake of those sister s, for the sake of your 
religion, and for the sake of God, to throw away al l the foreign cloth that you are 
using and to wear such khaddar saris as you can pro cure . . . Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  "I ask you once more to restore the spinning-wheel to its proper place. Your 
presence here pleases me. But it will soon become p ainful and intolerable for me 
to attend such meetings if sisters continue to besi ege these meetings dressed in 
foreign cloth. I have no desire to hear my own voice , and if I still continue to 
address meetings, it is because I have still a hope lingering in my breast that some 
words of mine will penetrate the minds of those tha t I address. May my words 
uttered this afternoon produce such an effect upon your mind." 
(Speech at women's meeting in Madras on 22-3-1925; 26:368.) 
* * * 
"A woman is adorable, not for the jewellery she wea rs, but for the purity of 
her heart. I therefore urge you, if you believe that  khadi will solve all the distress 
of India, to a certain extent, to part with the mon ey that you have brought and 
your jewellery also, if you can give it to the cause . If you will go a step further, I 
would ask you also to spare some time to turn the s pinning- wheel. It is a fine 
occupation for women in their leisure hours and it would be much better for you to 
pass your time in this useful occupation than idle talk. Now, you will give what you 
can to the volunteers who will go in your midst." 
(Speech at women's meeting in Trichinopoly on 20-9- 1927; 35:11.) 
* * * 
"What I ask you all is to consider your own dharma and henceforth make a 
sacred resolve that for the sake of these poor siste rs you will wear nothing but 
khadi. But then khadi needs something more than mer ely wearing cloth spun and 
woven by the sacred hands of these villagers. If you will, through this khadi, think 
of these poor sisters with a true heart, then khadi  will be a symbol not only of your 
outward change but the whole heart will be changed.  If you do that you will again 
revive the age of Sati and Sita. And that is what I am incessantly praying God to 
make you like. But even God cannot make us what we should be, against our own 
wills. God only helps those who are willing to help  themselves. . ." 
(Speech at women's meeting at Karaikudi on 24-9-192 7; (35:27.) 
* * * Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  "Immediately the spinning-wheel is reinstated in al l its glory and with all its 
implications in the millions of cottages of India, woman recognizes her definite 
power and her place in India's regeneration. For sh e is then able to say to men, 
'you depend for your food and your clothes as much upon us as on yourselves.' 'We', 
she may say, 'clean and cook your food, we spin the  yarn from which khadi is 
prepared.' Then she is clothed with dignity which i s hers by birthright and of which 
we, men and traitors of our womanhood, have deprived  her. For in our stupidity 
and in our ignorance we removed from each cottage s pinning-wheels and became 
infatuated with the foreign fineries. . . 
"... I have come to you to wake you up to a sense o f duty by the starving 
millions on whom and on whose labour you and I are living. Even your money, your 
jewellery, your rings and your necklaces can be of no earthly use to me unless 
both men and women will wear khadi and nothing but that. This collecting of 
purses for the spinning-wheel is only a brief and i ntermediate interval. When every 
man and woman in India naturally takes to khadi as they all take to the grains that 
are grown on India's plains there will be as little  use for these collections as there 
is for collection in order to carry on propaganda f or cultivating rice and wheat in 
India." 
(Speech at public meeting, Pagneri on 27-9-1927; 35 :44-45.) 
* * * 
". . . And if I could but induce you to understand the tremendous importance 
that khadi has to millions of starving people living in 7,00,000 villages in the whole 
of India, you will understand that enthusiasm and e ffort are not only necessary but 
indispensable. Remember the fact that it is calcula ted to serve not the city-
dwellers but millions of starving people living in t he villages." 
(Speech at Ernakulam on 13-10-1927; 35:128.) 
* * * 
"Only those women who have drunkards as their husba nds know what havoc 
the drink devil works in homes that once were orderl y and peace-giving. Millions of 
women in our hamlets know what unemployment means. Today the Charkha Sangh 
covers over one hundred thousand women against less than 10,000 men. Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  "Let the women of India take up these two activities , specialize in them; they 
would contribute more than man to national freedom.  They would have an access 
of power and self- confidence to which they have hit herto been strangers. 
". . . They will find when they study the subject o f foreign- cloth boycott that 
it is impossible save through khadi. Mill-owners wil l themselves admit that mills 
cannot manufacture in the near future enough cloth for Indian requirements. Given 
a proper atmosphere, khadi can be manufactured in o ur villages, in our countless 
homes. Let it be the privilege of the women of India  to produce this atmosphere by 
devoting every available minute to the spinning of ya rn. 
". . . If the women of India will listen and respon d to my appeal, they must act 
quickly." 
(Young India , 10-4-1930; 43:220-21.) 
* * * 
". . . Men may well spin, but for generations the p rofession 
of spinning has been practised by women and men's h ands do not possess the 
same skill in this that women's do. Women alone can  bring about this solidarity 
among their own sex. I would, therefore, advise wome n to make this their special 
field of work. 
". . . Therefore, all those sisters who have faith in the spinning-wheel and the  
takli  and who wish to devote themselves to saving sixty cr ores of rupees every 
year, should take up this work of boycott and the t ask of propagating spinning." 
(Navajivan , 13-4-1930; 43:249.) 
* * * 
 (d) To Students 
"We have lived through that golden age when, in this land, there were not 
these semi-starved millions as they are today. The creed of the spinning-wheel is 
that there should be a bond established between you rselves and the villagers; that 
is the meaning of village reconstruction - that is your another question. And the 
village reconstruction must dance round your charkha  as the centre. You may not 
go to the villages, unless you take a little bit of bread to the semi-starved Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  villagers. They will starve. During six months, if Si r P. G. Ray is to be depended 
upon, for six solid months cultivators of India, i. e., eighty per cent of the 
population of India - have no work. They are idle. D o you suppose that the 
peasantry of any part of the world can possibly enj oy four months' holiday and 
make both ends meet. Not even a millionaire in this  age will be able to enjoy four 
months' holiday. They soon find there is a deficit to meet or there is some hopless 
mismanagement of their estate. If you want to take a little bit of life into these 
little cottages of India, you will only do so by th e revolution of the charkha and, 
therefore, I say, whoever draws one yard of yarn per  day, has added to the wealth 
of India. . . 
"You ask me a question about mill-cloth,  versus  foreign cloth. You have not 
studied the recent economics. I place mill-cloth an d foreign cloth in the same 
category. I will not have you wear mill-cloth that c omes from Ahmedabad, Bombay 
or even Banga Lakshmi. That is meant for those who do not think of India, who do 
not think of her future. Therefore, for you the rea l economics is to wear khaddar. 
When you wear khaddar, you are supporting the labou r of a poor weaver. If you 
are to wear khaddar, you will be supporting many wi dows, you will be supporting 
many of your cultivators who may spin during their idle hours. You will be 
supporting many weavers who are not getting today su fficient for their labour. 
Study any history - economic history - and it will tell you that the majority of 
weavers have died out. . . 
"... I tell you, the real economics for you are tha t you should wear khaddar. 
You should spin and spin. Spin in order to make kha ddar cheap. That is discipline 
for you. It will enable you to create your purity. Sit at the spinning-wheel calmly 
for half an hour and watch the transformation of yo ur heart. I can quote to you 
instances of many men and women, of brilliant admin istrators, one of whom was a 
member in the Bombay Executive Council. He is as old  as I am. He learnt spinning 
only a few months ago. He said: 'After I began spin ning at the wheel, I have 
somewhat got rid of my insomnia. I returned from of fice tired, sometimes at mid-
night and, then, I was dozing, thinking of many pro blems which I did not want to 
think of. Now I sit at the spinning wheel and spin away. Immediately comes the 
all- refreshing sleep - the sleep of innocence.' Fi nd out for yourselves what it can 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  do. Find out what it cannot do." 
(Speech at Krishnath College, Behrampur on 6-8-1925 ; 28:42-44.) 
* * * 
"I do not mean to suggest that one should give up on e's studies and devote 
oneself immediately to khadi work. I suggest that a  student who has courage, 
strength and faith should take a vow from today onwa rds that he will become a 
khadi worker when he has finished his studies. If h e makes this resolve one can 
consider that his service in the cause of khadi has already begun, because he will 
then choose whatever he decides to learn with the ob ject of acquiring the 
necessary capacity for this particular type of work ." 
(Navajivan , 3-7-1927; 34:98.) 
* * * 
"Now, consider for yourselves what you owe to these men who pay for your 
education. I suggest then that you should render ce aseless service to these 
starving millions and that you should not be satisfi ed till this gnawing poverty is 
banished from our land. And, I have told you that k haddar is the easiest and the 
only way. I ask you not to allow your minds to be b efogged by all kinds of specious 
reasoning that will be advanced against the spinning - wheel and against khadi in 
these days of rush for machinery." 
(Speech to students, Madras on 3-9-1927; 34:444.) 
* * * 
"All over India, it has been my good fortune to enj oy the confidence and 
friendship of the student world. But I mention my p leasure over this address, 
because it contains a promise about khadi. The stud ents have made a solemn 
promise in their address, henceforth to use nothing  but khadi. Let me remind the 
students of the sacredness of promises. It is the c ustom very often in our country 
as also elsewhere especially for enthusiastic stude nts to make all sorts of 
promises. This habit of making promises is really a  vicious habit unless it is 
accompanied by a firm determination to fulfil them at any cost. If my 
recollections serve me right, it was from a teacher in Calicut that I received a Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  pathetic letter asking me to speak to the student w orld, and put an emphasis on 
some of their failings. Day after day, it is being realized by educationists all the 
world over that mere literary education, unless it i s built upon a solid foundation 
of character, is not only of no avail but is a misc hievous accomplishment, and the 
beginning of character-building is surely made by c omplete adherence to truth." 
(Addressing a public meeting in Calicut on 25-10-19 27; 35:185.) 
* * * 
"I can say with certainty, if you wish to bring glo ry to this effort, take up some 
constructive work. By doing so, you will set an exam ple to other students. Khadi is 
the first thing I shall talk about. You can render much service by wearing and 
selling it. Until settlement is reached, you can ca rry on that work and collect 
foreign cloth from house to house. And if you wish to go a step further, bring it 
here and make a bonfire of it. The burning of forei gn cloth will bring much credit 
to you. You will see an article about the ruin that  we bring upon India by using 
foreign cloth. There must be at least some of it le ft with you. When you take up 
this work, the Government will also be convinced th at students have now begun to 
work. 
"Among Tolstoy's stories, there is one in which Sat an climbs on the top of a 
house to give a speech and, falling down, becomes un conscious. When he 
collapses, people say he has toppled down. 
"Even if you tumble down people will say that you ha ve achieved something. 
The nation will certainly admit that these students  have at any rate done 
something. You can take a vow to clean up the stree ts of Ahmedabad or do 
prohibition work. You can undertake many such tasks ." 
(Speech to Gujarat College students in Ahmedabad on  30-1-1929; 38:414.) 
* * * 
". . . If you will express the requisite purity of character in action, you cannot 
do it better than through the spinning-wheel. Of al l the myriads of names of God  
Daridranarayana  is the most sacred inasmuch as it represents the u ntold millions 
of poor people as distinguished from the few rich p eople. The easiest and the best Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  way of identifying yourselves somewhat with these st arving millions is to spread 
the message of the spinning-wheel in the three-fold  manner suggested by me. You 
can spread it by becoming expert spinners, by weari ng khadi, and by pecuniary 
contributions. Remember that millions will never have  access to the facilities that 
Malaviyaji has provided for you. What return will yo u make to these your brothers 
and sisters?. . . 
". . . You need clothes. If you wear khadi worth on e rupee, 13 annas will be 
paid out of that to the poor people. But if you wer e to buy foreign cloth that 
money would go out of the country. The poverty witn essed in this country is not to 
be found elsewhere in the world, and if you wish to  remove it, you should wear 
khadi. 
"I am aware that amongst those who wear khadi many men may be hypocrites, 
impostors, frauds and scoundrels. But those are com mon faults. Even those who do 
not wear khadi can have them. Even those who do not use khadi can be impostors 
or scoundrels. So, if such a man is an impostor or a fraud at least one good thing 
about him would be that he does wear khadi. I came across a prostitute who wears 
khadi. She said to me: 'Pray to God so that fallen women like me are absolved of 
our sins.' " 
(Speech at Hindu University, Benaras on 25-9-1929, 41: 462-463.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54   
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 17, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1965. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 21, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1966. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 23, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1967. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 24, Publication Division, N.  Delhi,  1967. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 25, Publication Division, N.  Delhi,  1967. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 26, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1967. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 27, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1968. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 28, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1968. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 29, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1968. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 30, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1968. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 31, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 32, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 33, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 34, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 35, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1969. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 36, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 37, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 38, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 40, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 41, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 42, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1970. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 43, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1971. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 45, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1971. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 46, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1971. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 47, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1971. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 56, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1973. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 57, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 58, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 59, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 60, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1974. Gandhiji on KHADI 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 61, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1975. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 62, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1975. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 64, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 65, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 66, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 67, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1976. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 68, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1977. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 70, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1977. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 71, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1978. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 72, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1978. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 73, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1978. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 75, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1979. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 76, Publication Division, N.  Delhi,1979. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 78, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1979. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 79, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1980. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 81, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1980. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 82, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1980. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 84, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1981. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 85, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1982. 
M.K. Gandhi - CWMG Vol. 87, Publication Division, N.  Delhi, 1983. 
C.W.M.G. - Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 