 
Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
 
 
By : Milie Graham Polak 
 
 
Compiled by : C. F. Andrews 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
FOREWORD 
Some seventeen years ago, in Durban, it was my priv ilege first to meet Mrs. 
Polak, who has written these reminiscences of Mr. G andhi. The picture that she 
draws,  by means of a series of incidents, brings back vividly  to  my own mind 
the strain, mingled with a buoyant happiness that w as felt by all those who 
took part, under Mr. Gandhi's leadership, in the Pa ssive Resistance struggle, 
then at its height. 
It was clear to me how greatly Mrs. Polak had suffe red. Yet there was a 
brightness in her face as she welcomed me to her ho me which told of radiant 
happiness within. 
Owing to her husband's imprisonment a few weeks ear lier, just when he was 
leaving for India, at Mr. Gokhale's request, to hel p to place the South African 
Indian cause once again before the Motherland, she had been urged by the 
Indian community to go in his stead to the Indian N ational Congress, then about 
to meet; but, when already on her journey, she had been recalled to South 
Africa by Mr. Gokhale with the news that I was on m y way there. 
Just before my arrival, her husband, Henry  Polak , whom I had already known 
for some years, had been released from prison with Mr. Gandhi. He, too,  was 
looking worn on account of recent hardships cheerfu lly endured. But he was 
enthusiastic about the Indian cause. It was a gay a nd gallant spirit with which 
they both,  with their children, had confronted innumerable di fficulties and 
overcome them. There was a certainty of  victory in the very air which they and 
their fellow-workers breathed. 
Of Henry Polak, in those South African days, the Re v. J. J. Doke, of 
Johannesburg, who knew him intimately, wrote as fol lows: 
"In the law courts he had been the British Indians'  advocate; in the office he 
had been their adviser, and always their friend. At  the same time he had 
devoted himself to their general interests througho ut South Africa by pen and Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  speech with wonderful persistence. Like all great l eaders of men, Mr. Gandhi 
had the magic power of  attracting and attaching to himself the passionate  
devotion of such characters as Henry Polak." 
Concerning Mrs. Polak, Mr. Gandhi, in  Satyagraha in  South Africa,  wrote these 
words: "People in India are familiar with Mrs. Pola k, who not only never came 
in her husband's way, but was a perfect help-meet t o him during the struggle." 
Among the tiny group of European helpers that had g athered round Mr. Gandhi, 
Mr. and Mrs. Polak not only became his fellow-worke rs, but shared his own 
home with him and joined in the intimacy of family life. Their elder son, 
Waldo, who, as will be seen from this book, was pec uliarly dear to Mr. Gandhi, 
died suddenly a few years ago. I was in Durban when  the unexpected news 
came. It was most touching and revealing to me to w itness the deep affection 
for and sympathy with the bereaved parents among th ose Indians who had 
known them all in earlier years. 
It seemed well to explain at some length these simp le relationships, because 
they form the best introduction to  the narrative itself and help to bring us at 
once in touch with the writer of this book. As she relates in a direct and life-
like manner one story after another about Mr. Gandh i, in the course of his daily 
life of service, she at the same time gives us quit e unconsciously an insight into 
her own independent character. The  ndivet with which she does this makes it 
all the more effective, because it is so spontaneou s. It would be impossible to 
find a better foil to set off the peculiar temperam ent of Mr. Gandhi. With a 
strong imagination of her own, she is yet critical and stands upon solid fact, 
where he soars into the sky. Though an idealist her self, she seeks by rare 
common sense and penetrating insight to test his th eories and check what she 
regards as his extravagances. In this way, she clea rs aside all kinds of fantastic 
notions about him and reveals him as the most tende r soul in all the world and 
humble in spirit as a little child. 
But all this the readers will find out for themselv es in the narrative that 
follows. They will discover that Mr. Gandhi is asto nishingly and delightfully 
human. They will find in him a character which at t imes will remind them of St. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  Francis of Assisi by its inner radiance and beauty.  At other times, they will 
share in Mrs. Polak's own difficulties that arose i n the intimacy of the daily life 
and the sharing of a common household with such an intractable and lovable 
saint, who will always insist upon discomfort. Whil e the legendary fantasies 
that surround Mr. Gandhi to-day are eliminated one by one, his personality 
shines through her narrative all the brighter, and as a man he comes much 
closer to our hearts. 
C. F. ANDREWS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5   
 
PREFACE 
(First Edition) 
Often, during the past few years, since Mr. Gandhi has become a world-figure, 
people that my husband and I have met, knowing of o ur old close association 
with him, have questioned us concerning him. "You k new him in his home-life. 
What was he like as a man? How did he respond to hi s environment in those 
days? In what things was he then mainly interested?  Is it possible to discover in 
his thoughts and activities of those days the mains prings of his later ideas and 
- actions?" 
And in the discussions that resulted, some of the i ncidents related in the 
following pages have been recalled by me. "Why don' t you write that down?" 
was the frequent comment. But I had always refused to do so. The sacredness 
of the intimate talk of friendship would, it seemed  to me, have been violated 
by publication. Then came the  Autobiography , and, with something of a 
shock, I realized that Mr. Gandhi himself had not h esitated to strip the veil off 
everything that he had thought or experienced, and that I need not have been 
hypersensitive about recording my own recollections  of those days. 
About a year ago, in reading through some old paper s and letters, I came 
across a few of Mr. Gandhi's letters to me and foun d some note-book jottings 
of events that had happened in earlier years. I put  some of them together, 
and let the thought of writing about them sink in. 
Later on, in more talks of the Mahatma with some Am erican friends, I was 
again urged to put into print some of my reminiscen ces of one who was not to 
me, first, a Mahatma or a saint or a "subtle politi cian", but a great and loving 
man, who had shown to me and mine an affection that  transcended race and 
sex and time. I replied eventually that I was think ing over the suggestion. 
"Do," was the answer. "I can promise you a great in terest in what you may 
recall about him." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  Hence this small book. 
The conversations recorded here are not word for wo rd precisely as, or in the 
order in which, they happened. The significant pass ages, however, in every 
conversation are exactly as they were spoken by Mr.  Gandhi, and the others 
are as nearly so as can now be reproduced; true in the spirit, if not quite 
exact in the letter. All kinds of things, of course , besides those touched upon 
in these pages were discussed between us. 
The incidents themselves are actual happenings; but  in a few instances, where 
others than Mr. Gandhi are also concerned, I have s lightly altered the names 
and the setting, so that no pain should be given to  those that played a part in 
them and now figure in the episodes without their k nowledge and consent. 
It only remains to add that whilst there will, in t he following pages, be found 
many references to the Indian Passive Resistance mo vement in South Africa, I 
have especially sought to avoid the political contr oversies surrounding it, in 
order the better to focus the reader's attention up on the great central human 
figure. 
M. G. P. 
London,  July,  1931. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7   
 
MR. GANDHI: THE MAN 
CHAPTER I 
It was in 1905 that I had my first contact with Mah atma Gandhi. I was in London 
and expecting to be able to go out shortly to South  Africa to marry my  fiance,  
Mr. Henry S. L. Polak. He was at that time articled  to Mr. Gandhi, of the Inner 
Temple, London, who was then practising as an attor ney or solicitor in 
Johannesburg. 
I had not been in robust health for some time, and my  fiance's  father, on 
hearing that I was preparing to join his son, had w ritten to Mr. Gandhi begging 
him to use his influence to postpone the marriage i ndefinitely, as he did not 
consider that I was physically strong enough for th e strenuous life of the 
Colonies. Mr. Gandhi's reply to this and his subseq uent letter to me, the first 
that I had had from him, set the tone to the whole of my relationship with him, 
establishing him in my life as a loving and underst anding elder brother, and 
showed the human tenderness of the man. 
To Mr. Polak, senior, he wrote that "if the young l ady in question was not at 
that time in robust health in London, all the more reason for her to hasten her 
departure from it, so that in South Africa, amidst loving care, a beautiful 
climate and a simple life, she could gain the physi cal strength she evidently 
needed." To me he wrote assuring me of a warm welco me in his home, where 
every possible care, he said, would be given to me,  and where my  fiance  was 
already as a member of his family. 
Two or three other friendly letters passed between us, and then, at six o'clock 
on the morning of December 30, 1905, I arrived at J eppe Station, 
Johannesburg, and I found Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Polak waiting on the platform 
for me. 
My first impression of Mr. Gandhi was of a medium- sized man, rather slenderly 
built, skin not very dark, mouth rather heavy lippe d, a small dark moustache, Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  and the kindest eyes in the world, that seemed to l ight up from within when he 
spoke. His eyes were always his most remarkable fea ture and were in reality 
the lamps of his soul; one could read so much from them. His voice was soft, 
rather musical, and almost boyishly fresh. I partic ularly noticed this as we 
chatted of the little things of my journey and proc eeded to his home. 
The house was situated in a fairly good middle-clas s neighbourhood, on the 
outskirts of the town. It was a double-storied, det ached, eight-roomed building 
of the modern villa type, surrounded by a garden, a nd having, in front, the 
open spaces of the kopjes. The upstairs verandah wa s roomy enough to sleep 
on it, if one wished to do so, and, indeed, in the warm weather, it was often so 
used. 
The household, I learned, consisted of Mr. Gandhi, his wife and three sons, 
Manilal, aged eleven, Ramdas, aged nine, and Devada s, aged six, a young 
Englishman engaged in the telegraph service, a youn g Indian ward of Mr. 
Gandhi's, and Mr. Polak. My addition to the family completed its possibilities of 
accommodation. 
Later that morning I had my first experience of the  strained state of racial 
relations in the Transvaal. The banns of our intend ed marriage had been put up 
at the magistrate's office, according to law, and w e had supposed that 
everything was in order when we appeared before the  Registrar of Marriages 
for the civil ceremony. After taking the necessary particulars, however, we 
were surprised when he excused himself and disappea red for some time. It 
being a Saturday morning, and the office closing at  noon, we became 
somewhat anxious. Mr. Gandhi accordingly went over to the Chief Magistrate's 
office to enquire the cause of the delay. The Chief  Magistrate was a personal 
friend of some years' standing, and had been a memb er of a Theosophical 
group, with whom Mr. Gandhi had read a great deal o f Hindu religious 
philosophy. Though not himself a Theosophist, he ha d very many friends who 
were, and in those more peaceful years he occasiona lly gave lectures to Theo-
sophical lodges. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  To his surprise, Mr. Gandhi learnt that the Registr ar had raised the question of 
the legality of our marriage, since, under the Tran svaal Law, marriage between 
a white and a coloured person was prohibited, and a ny marriage officer 
performing the same rendered himself liable to heav y penalties. The Registrar, 
on account of Mr. Polak's close association with Mr . Gandhi and the Indian com-
munity, had assumed that he must be a "coloured per son"! It had not occurred 
to him that any "white person" would venture to off end against the racial 
conventions that imposed the strictest segregation in social relations. 
Fortunately, Mr. Gandhi was able to remind the Chie f Magistrate that he had 
met my  fiances  father during a short visit to South Africa a coup le of years 
earlier, and he had no difficulty in assuring him t hat no infringement of the 
marriage law was contemplated. So, with Mr. Gandhi as our sponsor and with 
the Chief Magistrate as celebrant, Mr. Polak and I were united in marriage on 
assembled for the grinding of the wheat for the day —all bread being made at 
home. A rather big hand-mill was fixed in a storero om for this purpose, and the 
grinding took from fifteen to thirty minutes each m orning. This piece of work 
was looked upon as a pleasant, if somewhat arduous,  morning exercise, apart 
from its usefulness otherwise. Talk and laughter ac companied the sound of the 
grinding, for in those days laughter came quite eas ily to the household. Other 
exercise took the form of skipping, at which Mr. Ga ndhi was adept. 
 
After I had been in South Africa for about a couple  of months, I was disturbed 
and puzzled one evening by my husband returning hom e from the office in a 
sulky and irritable mood. I hastily went over possi bilities in my mind of things 
that I might have done or not done, but I was quick ly reassured about myself 
when I realized that my husband was not speaking to  Mr. Gandhi. The dinner 
hour, usually so cheerful and happy, was a dismal a ffair. The family were alone 
that evening, so there was nothing to brighten the clouds that hung over it. As 
soon as dinner was over, my husband went to our roo m, where I followed him, 
wonderingly. 
"What is wrong?" I asked. "What has happened to mak e you so cross?" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  He then told me that an article by a well-known Sou th African journalist had 
been published in a widely- circulated English maga zine, making very 
inaccurate and harmful statements about Indian immi gration into and trade in 
the Transvaal, and that Mr. Gandhi would not take a ny action in the matter; 
that, in fact, he refused even to write and refute the most damaging and 
incorrect statements made by the writer. "And he kn ows," continued my 
husband, "he knows quite well the harm such an arti cle will do in England." 
I sympathized with my husband, but thought he must be taking an exaggerated 
view of the matter. If Mr. Gandhi did not think the  article of sufficient import-
ance to worry about, why should  lie  do so? I was rather new to political life and 
its bypaths, and quite new to anything approaching a "Race Problem", so that I 
could not quite see why my husband was making such a fuss about this matter. 
The next four days passed thus—four days in which m y husband did not address 
a word to Mr. Gandhi beyond those absolutely necess itated by courtesy or 
business. In the evening, we sat in our room alone,  or walked over the veldt in 
front of the house. 
We were all beginning to feel the atmosphere rather  strained. Mrs. Gandhi had 
asked me: 
"What the matter Mr. Polak? What for he cross?" 
"He is cross with Bapu," I replied. 
"Bapu" is the Gujarati word for "father", and it is  by this name that he is 
generally known to his large family, though his col leagues used to call him 
"Bhai", or "brother". My husband is his "Chhotabhai ", or younger brother. 
"What for he cross Bapu? What Bapu done?" 
"He has not done anything and that is why Henry is cross with him." 
I then tried to explain the matter to her. I had he ard so much about it myself 
during those four days that I did know at least my husband's thoughts on the 
subject. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  "Oh, oh," she murmured, when I had finished my reci tal, not, however, 
expressing any opinion one way or the other. But a suspicion flitted through my 
mind that she was not altogether sorry that Mr. Pol ak was cross with Bapu. She 
was vexed with him herself sometimes, and the anger  of another person who, 
she knew, cared very much for him seemed to justify  her own. 
At last it fretted Mr. Gandhi, and just as we were leaving the dining-room after 
dinner, he called my husband back. 
"I want to speak to you," he said. "Please wait." 
As soon as the others had left the room, he began t o remonstrate with my 
husband. 
"What is the matter with you? You are sulky and dis agreeable!" 
"You know quite well what is the matter," my husban d replied. 
"Anyway, tell me. What are you so angry with me abo ut?" 
"Your attitude with regard to N_______'s article in  the _______ Review." 
"But why should you worry about that?" said Mr. Gan dhi soothingly. 
"Because it is packed with inaccuracies and you kno w it!" 
"Yes, and since we know they are false, what does i t matter?" 
"But it does matter," my husband's voice broke in a ngrily. "It matters very 
much! You have no right to allow such an article to  pass. Other people do not 
know it is false. How can they, if you do not enlig hten them? It is just such 
statements as these that add to the difficulties an d make the Indian position 
here almost impossible. It is vitally necessary tha t they should know the truth, 
in the interests of the Indian community." 
"Well, what do you want me to do?" And Mr. Gandhi's  voice sounded quite 
meek. 
"Write and contradict the statements, of course," r eplied my husband, "giving 
facts and figures to endorse all you say. You know them better than anyone; 
you have them at your finger-tips. After all, it's  your problem!" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  "You know them, too," said Mr. Gandhi. "Of course I  do! Anyone could who took 
the trouble to find out. That is why it is so easy to prove N_______ wrong." 
There was a pause in the argument. Then, in a brigh t and cheerful voice, as 
though a happy solution to a difficult problem had been found, Mr. Gandhi said: 
"Well, if you feel so strongly about it, why don't you write the article yourself?" 
The storm-clouds were dispersed, the air was clear again. The article was 
written and published in due course, and it was alm ost a classic on the subject 
during- the next few months, and became my husband' s introduction to public 
life in India, where it was widely reproduced in th e press. 
 
 This episode reminds me of another journalistic on e that occurred sometime 
before my advent to South Africa, but which I heard  about so often that I soon 
knew every detail of it. My husband used to take a delight in teasing Mr. Gandhi 
about it, and the latter, I think, thoroughly enjoy ed the joke against himself. It 
happened, soon after my husband joined Mr. Gandhi a nd was doing; some 
special work for  Indian Opinion,  that he was asked to go to Pretoria to attend 
that funeral of President Kruger, and to write a re port of it for the paper. 
My husband went to the funeral and, on returning ho me, sat down and wrote 
what he believed to be an impressive and picturesqu e article with a pleasant 
literary touch, of which he was secretly proud. But  his pride received a shock 
when the next number of  Indian Opinion came into his hands and he saw his 
article in print. The opening line, "He is dead and  is buried!" had seemed to 
strike the right note to commence with, but to his consternation, he saw his 
first line in print as follows: "He is dead and is  burned!"  Apart from the error, it 
seemed an outrage to the memory of Kruger that he s hould have been 
consigned to a lurid fate by my husband's paper. We ll aware of the propensities 
of the printer's devil, my husband had extracted a solemn promise from Mr. 
Gandhi, who was then in Durban, that he would perso nally revise the proof of 
the article before publication. He was, therefore, very angry about the matter Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  and wrote an accusing letter to Mr. Gandhi, asking him how, after his promise 
to see things through, he had allowed such an error  to escape him. 
"You know," he wrote, "of the narrow religious beli efs of the Boers, and you will 
have unnecessarily hurt their susceptibilities by y our saying that their President 
is 'burned.' It is about equal to saying he has gon e to hell. I specially asked you 
to go through the proof carefully, and this is how you have done it!" 
Mr. Gandhi was most contrite and expressed very rea l regret at the error. 
"But," he said in explanation, "our people are much  more conversant with 
burning after death than burial, and the compositor  (a Hindu) would have quite 
thought his sentence was the right one; so also wou ld the printer. And though I 
read it through, I did not notice it, for my mind, too, would have accepted the 
familiar burning of the body. I will, however, inse rt a correction in the next 
issue." This was done and my husband had to make th e best of the situation; 
but he never again asked anyone else to be responsi ble for the proof-reading of 
any of his special articles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
CHAPTER II 
Mrs. Gandhi, like most mothers, was proud of and am bitious for her children, 
and, among other things, she wanted them to be nice ly clothed. Apart from 
her, the household wore European clothes, so that, when new shoes or a new 
suit was wanted for one of the boys and Mr. Gandhi seemed indifferent to the 
need, Mrs. Gandhi would often say to me: "You ask B apu for it," and I did. 
Out of these requests many discussions arose betwee n Mr. Gandhi and me as to 
whether what I asked for was a necessity or not; wh ether it was right or not for 
the boys to have English-style suits or Western sho es; and whilst I would urge 
that the children must have the things to equip the m for their time and place, 
Mr. Gandhi would express very great doubt as to the  necessity for these or 
state that he never wanted the boys to have possess ion or to be taught to think 
of things that might •obscure the simple vision of the soul's needs. 
With regard to education, we had many earnest discu ssions. The eldest boy 
wanted to go to a proper boys' school, and this I t alked over with Mr. Gandhi; 
but he had very little belief in the value of our e ducational system. He seemed 
to think that book-knowledge obscured—if, indeed, i t did not destroy—the 
capacity to perceive the inner vision. I would argu e against this theory, saying 
that the cultivation of any faculty we possessed sh ould help us tocome to a 
fuller comprehension of Divine things. 
"Do not confuse the promptings of your mind with th e feeling of your heart," he 
once said in reply to one of my arguments. " 'Seek ye first the Kingdom of God,' 
you are told, and also that 'The Kingdom of God is within you.' Why, then, cover 
Him up by extraneous thoughts and things?" 
"I do not want to cover Him up," I replied, "but I want to understand Him." 
"That is your Western mentality getting in the way of your real vision. You have 
an Eastern heart, but I am afraid a Western mind, a nd the two will clash. You 
have no need to go to books to find God, you can fi nd Him within yourself." 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
I have said before that the dinner-hour in this bus y little household was nearly 
always a very happy one. It would be the first time  in the day that the family 
met together, and as, more often than not, some gue sts were present, ten to 
fourteen people sat down to a meal every evening. 
The dinner would consist of two courses, and, the a ppointments of the table 
being very simple, no one waited on us. Various kin ds of vegetable dishes were 
served as the first course, accompanied by a kind o f lentil dish, hard-baked 
wholemeal bread and nut butter, and various little dishes of raw salad would be 
on the table. The second course would be a milk dis h and raw fruit. After this, 
a kind of cereal coffee or lemonade, hot or cold ac cording to season, would be 
served, and that completed the meal. It was never a  hurried one, and more 
than an hour would be spent at the table, the time being occupied often by 
serious discussions. More often, however, dinner-ti me was passed in light 
conversation, jest and wit playing a big part in it . In those early years, Mr. 
Gandhi had a fine sense of humour and would laugh m ost heartily at any 
amusing story. 
On one occasion, some Europeans had invited themsel ves to dinner. Mr. Gandhi 
did not know them very well and Mrs. Gandhi not at all. When they arrived, 
they were frankly and almost rudely curious about t he home-life, asking all 
kinds of intimate questions in a very arrogant mann er. Mr. Gandhi answered 
quite kindly, but laughed at many of the statements  about what they thought 
Indian people did or did not do. Mrs. Gandhi had, f rom the first, been angry 
about them, and before we went to the dining-room s he disappeared. Mr. 
Gandhi sent for her, but she did not come. Eventual ly, Mr. Gandhi went himself 
in search of his wife, and found her in her room, b ut she refused to come down. 
The dinner passed off, Mr. Gandhi giving some expla nation for his wife's 
absence. The next day when I saw her, she told me t hat she would not have 
people come to the house just for idle curiosity an d to "make laugh" of her and 
her home. So that, if they came, they would not see  her. Bapu could see them Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  himself. I think Mr. Gandhi tried to reason her out  of this mood, but she stuck 
to her opinion and was not moved by any of our argu ments. 
An amusing little incident occurred on another even ing, one that made a big 
impression upon all those concerned in it, and that  showed Mr. Gandhi's method 
of dealing with young people and the way he believe d of teaching them self-
control. 
One of the children was inclined to be, as so many small boys are, rather 
greedy. Of the dishes he liked most, he would keep asking for more and more, 
and when checked would be sulky or rebellious. Mr. Gandhi had tried reasoning 
with him, but the child was only a tiny boy and his  father's reasoning made no 
impression upon his appetite. At last, one evening,  Bapu told him that he could 
have as much as ever he wished to eat and that no o ne should stop him or 
check him. The meal proceeded, the child sitting at  table in his usual way, and 
having eaten all he could, he laid his head upon th e table and fell asleep. The 
table, however, was not cleared even though all of us had finished, and 
presently the child woke up again. Mr. Gandhi asked  him if he wanted anything 
more. He replied in the affirmative and recommenced  eating. We still sat at 
the table, not hurrying the child in any way, but t alking of many things. Even-
tually, the little fellow could not swallow any mor e, and being more than filled 
to repletion, he commenced to cry. Mr. Gandhi took no notice of him, and 
when Mrs. Gandhi wanted to attend to the child, he prevented it The child 
cried quietly for a little while, and tried to go t o sleep again, but he grew more 
and more uncomfortable, and eventually had to be ca rried from the room. This 
Mr. Gandhi did quite tenderly, taking him in his ar ms and carrying him upstairs 
to bed, where his mother took him in charge. Most o f the night he was unwell, 
but the lesson was never forgotten, and the child n ever again worried to be 
given things to eat that were refused him. 
After dinner, if no strangers were present, we used  to sit together whilst Mr. 
Gandhi or one of his wards intoned a couple of  slokas  or verses from the  
Bhagavad Gita,  whilst my husband would read the English equivalen t from 
Arnold's beautiful  Song Celestial.  Mr. Gandhi explained the difficult passages to Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  us and general discussion followed. Sometimes my hu sband and I had a lesson in 
Gujarati from him. When guests were present, philos ophies of different 
countries would be compared and many varieties of r eligious and mystic experi-
ence dwelt upon. One never-failing theme was the di fferent customs of East 
and West, and the different outlook upon life that various races of the world 
exemplified. In such discussions practically all pr esent joined and everyone 
would be listened to equally. 
Another incident worthy of recording occurred about  this time. An Englishman, 
who had joined Mr. Gandhi in his Phoenix scheme (of  which more later), had 
left Phoenix and returned to Johannesburg. He was f ull of "bitter complaints at 
the treatment he had received. As it was possible t hat I, too, should be going to 
Phoenix at some future time, when Mr. B_______ came  to "have it out" with Mr. 
Gandhi, I was invited to be in the room with them. Mr. B_______ abused Mr. 
Gandhi and his fellow-countrymen without reserve, w alking up and down the 
room one side of the table and Mr. Gandhi walking u p and down on the other 
side. I did not believe that half the things Mr. B_ ______ said could be true; they 
sounded so inhuman and shocking. When he said that during an attack of fever 
he had been utterly neglected by the other members of the community, that he 
had been left lying on his bed alone and ill, with no one to do anything for him, 
not even to bring him a glass of water, Mr. Gandhi said: "I do not think that is 
quite correct; there were S_______ and C_______; th ey surely came to help 
you? Besides, I know that W_______ went two or thre e times a day to you." 
"No," shouted Mr. B_______, "they did not, they lef t me all alone; for days no 
one came near me. I have finished with it all and w ith them." 
Mr. Gandhi tried to reason with Mr. B_______, telli ng him, as I afterwards 
learnt was true, that he was not fully conscious fo r a few days and that 
everyone had helped to look after him and assist hi m back to health. He further 
told him that his present black outlook upon his fe llows was partly physical, 
even now he had not - properly recovered, and when he was well again he 
would see life differently once more and take a mor e kindly view of his fellows. 
Mr. B_______, however, refused to be reasoned with or listen to "suave" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  explanations from Mr. Gandhi. So the two parted wit h, on the one side, a 
feeling of burning resentment and, on the other, a sadness that a respected 
colleague had forsaken him and was nursing within h imself a sense of 
disillusionment and grievance. 
After Mr. B_______ had gone, Mr. Gandhi, who looked  very tired and 
thoughtful, turned to me and said: "You have now he ard what Mr. B_______ 
thinks about Phoenix and us." 
"It cannot possibly be as bad as he has said," I re plied. "I cannot believe that 
amongst the Europeans and Indians there, no one att ended to a man who was 
ill in bed. I cannot believe that any people behave  as callously and badly as Mr. 
B_______ says they did." 
"I am afraid he is still a sick man, and sick men a re not entirely responsible for 
what they say," Mr. Gandhi replied. 
"But how painful for you to have to listen for near ly three hours to such charges 
and complaints," I said. "It was all most unpleasan t." 
This incident must have made a deeper impression up on me than I knew at the 
time of its happening, for when later on I went mys elf to Phoenix, I started life 
there with a subconscious fear of it, that probably  prevented my being as happy 
there as I might otherwise have been. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
 
CHAPTER III 
"Is Mr. Gandhi a Christian?" a visitor to my first home in Johannesburg once 
asked me. 
"Do you mean one who is converted to Christianity,"  I replied, "or one who 
believes in the teaching of Christ?" 
"One who has been what we call converted," she said . "I thought, and I have 
heard it said, that Mr. Gandhi was born a Christian . Is that so?" 
"Oh, no!" I said emphatically, "I know he was not b orn a Christian, nor has he 
been admitted to the Christian Church. But why do y ou ask this question?" 
"I was talking about him with some friends the othe r day, and we were 
wondering how it is he knows the Christian Scriptur es so well, and seems to be 
fond of quoting the words of Christ. My friends tho ught he must be a Christian." 
After she had gone, I thought over what my visitor had said. It was quite true; 
Mr. Gandhi very frequently quoted the sayings and t eachings of Jesus. The 
lesson of the "Sermon on the Mount" seemed to be co nstantly in his mind, and 
was a source of guidance and inspiration to him. I had not thought it strange 
that this was so, for I had been so accustomed, in my home-life in England, to 
hear frequent quotations from the Scriptures that i t seemed a normal part of 
life, and I had not hitherto realized that it might  appear strange to hear the 
sayings of Jesus fall from the lips of a Hindu. I w ent over a number of things in 
my mind, and thought of Mr. Gandhi's office in town . I recalled the beautiful 
head of Christ that adorned the wall over his desk.  When I noticed it the first 
time, I had said to him: "How beautiful that is!" 
"Yes," he replied, looking up to it; "I love to hav e it there. I see it each time I 
raise my eyes from my desk. It is, indeed, beautifu l!" 
I remembered there was no picture of the Buddha or of Krishna in the office, 
and only three other pictures were to be seen on th e walls. I learned some Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  details about them later. One was of Justice Ranade , the great Indian social 
reformer. Another was of Mrs. Besant, ever eager to  defend the downtrodden 
and to denounce injustice. The third picture was of  Sir William Wilson Hunter, 
editor of the  Imperial Gazeteer of India , who had written very strongly in  The 
Times  against the system of Indian indentured labour, wh ich he had described 
as "semi-slavery". At home was a large photograph o f Dadabhai Naoroji, who 
was, in his day, known as the "Grand Old Man of Ind ia". It was he who, with a 
handful of friends, European and Indian, founded th e Indian National Congress. 
I met him in his old age in London, and, later stil l, I visited him in the quietude 
of his retirement at his Indian home at Versova. I am thinking, to-day, that 
even he, progressive and far-seeing patriot as he w as, could not have foreseen 
what a tremendous instrument in India's destiny the  Congress was to become. 
Nor, I am sure, could Mr. Gandhi have then had even  a dim vision that he would 
be called to be its leader when it had grown to num ber its adherents by the 
hundred thousand. Who could then have dreamed that Mr. Gandhi would have 
played David to Dadabhai Naoroji's Saul? All these photographs portrayed those 
who were fighting for the liberation of the oppress ed and so were dear to Mr. 
Gandhi's heart; but in the centre of his room, domi nating it, gazing calmly 
down upon him as he sat and worked at his desk, was  the face of Christ. 
When Mr. Gandhi came home that evening, I told him of my visitor and the 
conversation that had taken place. 
He smiled. "I did once seriously think of embracing  the Christian faith," he said. 
"The gentle figure of Christ, so patient, so kind, so loving, so full of forgiveness 
that he taught His followers not to retaliate when abused or struck, but to turn 
the other cheek—I thought it was a beautiful exampl e of the perfect man." 
"But you did not embrace Christianity, did you?" I asked. 
"No," he replied thoughtfully. "I studied your Scri ptures for some time and 
thought earnestly about them. I was tremendously at tracted to Christianity; 
but eventually I came to the conclusion that there was nothing really in your 
Scriptures that we had not got in ours, and that to  be a good Hindu also meant 
that I would be a good Christian. There was no need  for me to join your creed Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  to be a believer in the beauty of the teachings of Jesus or to try to follow His 
example." 
I thought how sincerely Mr. Gandhi was trying to fo llow the example of Jesus 
and knew that what he said was true. 
"Of course," I said, "it is what a man is that coun ts, not what he calls himself. 
But tell me, do you believe in conversion, in chang ing from one form of faith to 
another?" 
"What do you yourself feel?" he asked. 
"It does not please me, somehow. I could not do it, " I said in reply. 
"I think that is right. If a man reaches the heart of his own religion, he has 
reached the heart of the others too.  There is only one God, but there are many 
paths to  Him." 
"If Karma and reincarnation be true," I said, after  a pause, "we are born into 
the faith to which we belong, and the one most suit able at the moment for our 
development. So we should not change." 
"What do you think is the essential lesson for man in the teaching of 
Christianity?" he continued. 
"I could think of two or three; but the one that st ands out strongest in my mind 
at the moment is  Love„ which is expressed in the words, 'One is your Maste r, 
Christ, and all ye are brethren.' " 
"Yes," replied Mr. Gandhi, "and Hinduism teaches th e same great truth, and 
Mohammedanism and Zoroastrianism, too." 
I thought of the stories I had read and heard about  the caste system in India, 
and I had doubts as to the association of Hinduism and brotherhood. Then after 
a pause, I said: 
"Do you think Hinduism does teach 'all men are brot hers' as Christianity does?" 
"Do not take men's imperfect interpretation, as you  see it, for the real teaching 
of any great faith. You would not suggest to me tha t the Christian world lives Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  as brothers, would you? Think of its wars, its hatr eds,, its poverty and its 
crime!" 
"That is true. I suppose the ideals of mankind are always far ahead of them, 
and men and women are very much the same in whateve r part of the world you 
find them." 
"If we realized our ideals, they would cease to be ideals. We should have 
nothing to strive for," he concluded. 
 
A picture rises before me. My husband and I were se eing Mr. Gandhi off at the 
Johannesburg railway station, probably to interview  General Smuts on some 
serious Occasion. He had been giving my husband fin al instructions about some 
important matters then pending. Just as the train w as about to leave I turned 
to him and said: "Is there anything special I can d o?" "Yes," he replied with quiet 
earnestness. "Pray for me!" He had always an immens e belief in the efficacy of 
devout prayer, and the prayers of a woman, he somet imes thought, were the 
most unselfish of all. 
 
Often Mr. Gandhi would speak of the value of the Hi ndu divisions of life: the 
period of early childhood—a time for play and carel essness, just a period of 
growth in the loving care of parents and the sunshi ne of life; then the student 
period, when thought begins to gain ascendancy over  the growing physical 
being; then the period of the householder, with the  burden and responsibility 
of the family, the care of wife and children occupy ing all his mature strength; 
finally, having served his period of stress, came t he time when he might retire 
from the world and its perplexities, its cares and labours, and, going into the 
silence for meditation and thought, he could accust om his eyes to behold the 
soul of life and his own self. "Yes," I once said, in reply to such a dissertation, 
"that is all very well. I admit it sounds right and  beautiful; but what is the 
position of the woman? Where does she come in, in t his last period? She never 
seems to reach a point in Hindu thought where she c an lay aside the care of Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  external things and devote herself to the life of t he spirit and so prepare her 
soul for the hereafter." 
"Oh," replied Mr. Gandhi, raising his hand and poin ting a finger, a favourite 
habit of his in those days, "you have missed the be auty of it. She has no need to 
retire to the jungle, or to leave life to contempla te God. She sees Him always. 
She has no need of any other school to prepare her for Heaven than marriage to 
a man and the care of her children." 
"Yes," again I interjected, "but she may not have c hosen to bear the physical 
burden while the man may sit in quiet contemplation  or commune with his Soul 
Why should she not also have a period of contemplat ion? Man made such rules 
for himself; why did he leave her out?" 
"Because there was not any need for her," smilingly  replied Mr. Gandhi. I 
acquiesced, but was not convinced. 
On yet another occasion the position of woman was u nder discussion, and Mr. 
Gandhi had said that the East had given her a highe r position than she had been 
given in the West. 
"I do not see that," I said. "The East has made her  the subject of man. She 
seems to possess no individual life." 
"You are mistaken," Mr. Gandhi replied. "The East h as given her a position of 
worship. Have you not heard the story of Satyavan a nd Savitri, and how, when 
Satyavan died, Savitri wrestled with the God of Dea th for the return of her 
beloved? She had a hard battle to fight, showed the  highest courage, fortitude, 
love and wisdom, and eventually, after many dangers , won him back to her 
side." 
"But that seems to me just the point," I urged. "In  your mythology, woman is 
made to serve man, even to wrestling with the God o f Death for him. In ours, 
or at least in the great classic that we love, it w as Orpheus, the man, who 
fought for Eurydice, the woman, and won. It was he who served and saved her, 
and that ideal has persisted ever since. He may hav e expressed it badly, but it 
is the Western ideal nevertheless." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  "And do you," interrogated Mr. Gandhi, "think that it is giving to woman a lower 
or subordinate place in life when it is she who is depicted as the greatest of 
conquerors, when she is worshipped as the preserver ?" 
"That is beautiful in theory, I admit," I replied, "but I do not find her 
worshipped; I find her always waiting on the pleasu re of some man." 
"Isn't that because you have not yet understood?" r eplied Mr. Gandhi. "In the 
great things of life she is man's equal or superior . In the lesser things she may 
serve him, but is it not a privilege of the great t o serve the least?" 
"But do men think like that?" I asked. "Does a man really think that his wife is at 
least his equal, when custom requires her to stand behind his chair while he 
sits and eats?" 
"Do not mistake appearance for reality," Mr. Gandhi  smilingly replied. "Men 
have not reached the ideal yet, but nearly all know  it in their hearts." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
CHAPTER IV 
This period of comparative domestic peace of the li ttle household did not, 
however, last long. About four months after my arri val in Johannesburg Mr. 
Gandhi decided to give up the house and adopt a sim pler method of life for the 
family. This coincided with his wish to go to Phoen ix and develop the little 
settlement there. Accordingly, the house was given up, some of the furniture 
sold, some packed for Durban and some kept in store . I accompanied the family 
to Durban, leaving my husband to complete the vacat ion of the house and 
follow in about a week's time. 
Phoenix was an estate that had come into Mr. Gandhi 's hands about a year 
previously to my arrival in South Africa. It compri sed about a hundred acres of 
fertile land and was situated about fourteen miles from Durban, in the midst, 
at the time, of the sugar-cultivated lands of the n orth coast of Natal. Here a 
colony had been established on Tolstoy an principle s. The original members, 
who had been induced by Mr. Gandhi to become pionee r settlers, comprised a 
small group of Indian and European idealists who in tended to work together 
and put their ideals into working practice. Here ha d been set up the printing 
press where  Indian Opinion  was printed, published and dispatched to various 
parts of South Africa and overseas, and where it wa s hoped that a printing and 
publishing business could be successfully run. The colony was to be as much as 
possible self- supporting, and life's material requ irements were to be reduced 
to a minimum. Each member or householder of the com munity was to have two 
acres of land for his own use and cultivation and a  simple house to live in. 
Should any member vacate his house or holding, it c ould not be sold, but was 
to be passed on to another member. 
There was to be a school organized on very simple l ines, where pupils should be 
taught elementary school subjects, but where the ma in teaching ,should be for 
the purpose of character-building and to find God i n natural beauty and in their 
own inner selves. No dogmas of any kind were to be taught, and even the few Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  set subjects were to be sufficiently elastic to all ow for complete individual 
freedom. 
There was also to be a house of healing, where only  so-called "natural" means 
of healing were to be resorted to. Rest and pure ai r, fasting and a cleansing of 
the internal organism of the body by water,, steam baths, sun treatment and 
mud packs, and, of most importance, the getting awa y from the fret and wear 
of things to the calm contemplation of peace and be auty—these were the 
methods and agencies that it was hoped to employ fo r the curing of body, mind 
and spirit. 
Beyond the settlement no buildings were to be seen except a few small Zulu 
farm-huts and the houses of a Native mission colleg e, about two miles away, 
run by Zulus themselves. Between the settlement and  the railway station was a 
big sugar estate covering thousands of acres, but s ugar later on gave way to 
wattle, and the latter formed a pleasant shade to t he travellers on a hot day to 
and from the station and the colony. Apart from one  miserable nondescript 
little general store, a few minutes from the railwa y station, there was no 
shopping convenience, and all goods had to be procu red from Durban, fresh 
table commodities being almost unknown to the early  settlers. Even butter was 
bought in a tin, and was often simply oil by the ti me it reached Phoenix. 
There were about eight dwellings of a bungalow type  on the settlement. These 
were built of corrugated iron, with rough wooden su pports and no inner lining. 
Mr. Gandhi's bungalow was no different from the oth ers, except that it was a 
little larger. It consisted of a large room, which was living-and-dining-room, 
two small bedrooms, another small room as kitchen a nd a lean-to structure for 
bathroom. The fittings of the bathroom were primiti ve but ingenious; a good-
sized hole was made in the iron roof, an ordinary g arden watering-can was 
balanced on a piece of wood, and to the can was att ached a piece of cord. 
After the can was filled with water and fixed in it s place one could get a good 
imitation shower- bath by standing under the hole a nd pulling the cord. On the 
roof of Mr. Gandhi's bungalow, which was flat, a si mple kind of adjustable 
wind-screen was fixed up, and this served to shield  the roof-sleepers from the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  prevalent wind at any time. The roof was reached by  a ladder-like stairway, 
and was practically always used by Mr. Gandhi and t he boys during the dry 
season for a sleeping-place. 
Sanitary arrangements on the estate were equally pr imitive, each bungalow 
having its own little shelter, where a bucket syste m was installed, and each 
householder was responsible, personally, for the em ptying of the bucket at a 
recognized place set aside for that purpose. Later,  Mr. Gandhi devised a 
somewhat more elaborate and very satisfactory syste m which, I believe, he has 
employed on a larger scale at his Ashram in Sabarma ti. Indeed, one of his 
cherished roles has always been that of a super-sca venger!  
My first view of Phoenix disappointed and depressed  me. Mrs. Gandhi, too, did 
not feel happy at being transplanted from the town,  with its domestic and 
human amenities, to the more primitive conditions w hich prevailed at the 
settlement. She and I shared a little room the firs t night we arrived, and lay 
awake talking and grumbling for hours. We were prob ably overtired, both ner-
vously and physically; for we had had two days and a night in a train, and at 
the end of that a long two-mile tramp along a badly  constructed road across 
difficult country, our path lighted only by a flick ering lamp, and the fear of 
snakes constantly in our minds. The youngest boy al so had become tired and 
commenced to cry miserably. When we reached our des tination, we had to set 
to work to make beds ready, and all the arrangement s for the night. 
About four o'clock in the morning, just when it was  getting daylight, Mr. Gandhi 
came down the ladder and walked up and down outside  our room. After a time, 
knowing that we were only dozing, he spoke and aske d what it was we really 
wanted. His voice had a worried note, and it was ev ident that our attitude of 
the previous night had much disturbed him. Mrs. Gan dhi replied in Gujarati, 
and a conversation ensued which I could not underst and. Eventually, Mr. 
Gandhi begged us to be patient and see what we coul d do with the things 
around us, promising to get any other really necess ary things that we required. 
The essence of the last sentence lay in the word "n ecessary", however, for so Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  many things we desired we could not prove to be nec essary, and so life was 
lived at Phoenix in a very simple way. 
One day Mrs. Gandhi and I, Mr. Gandhi and my husban d were invited to a small 
party at a middle-class Mohammedan house in Durban,  where (one of the few 
cases I ever met with) there were two wives and whe re the ladies observed 
purdah. Our host had arranged that, as an Englishwo man, I should be privileged 
to join the men, but my husband and Mr. Gandhi teas ingly said my place was 
with the women and to that place I went. When, thre e hours later, we left the 
house, I showed annoyance at having been bored, for  no one, apart from Mrs. 
Gandhi, spoke a word of English, and I had sat alon e most of the time. Mr. 
Gandhi teased me about it, but led me to wonder if I had not really learned 
more by being shut up with a few ladies, even thoug h they did not speak my 
tongue, than if I had been with the men. When I tho ught of it afterwards, I had 
to admit that I had seen a household, not at all ri ch, where two women of 
mature years, intelligent if not highly educated, l ived in harmony as the wives 
of one husband. It was my first introduction to pol ygamy, and I could not say 
that it was unhappy for those living under the syst em, if this were a typical 
example of it. 
On another occasion I had been asked to tea by a Eu ropean lady that I had met 
somewhere by chance. Mr. Gandhi talked the invitati on over with my husband, 
and I wondered why such a fuss was being made about  it, and said so. Then I 
learned that she had, only a few months previously,  been divorced, and Mr. 
Gandhi, while not wanting to spread gossip, yet tho ught. I could not accept the 
offer unless I was told of the lady's past, and eve n then he was not at all sure 
that he liked the idea of my visiting her house, as  the scandal that had not yet 
died out might injure me. He had doubts himself as to whether he should 
recognize her, for his views on the sanctity of mar riage were most rigid, and he 
regarded divorce as an abhorrence. But, as usual, i n practice, his fine humanity 
rose uppermost. 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  The paper  Indian Opinion  was published weekly, and when publishing-day 
came, every hand was called to the work. Mr. Gandhi  and my husband would 
be busy -writing or correcting last-minute articles  or material for the paper. 
The printers would be busy on their job, and those of us who could not do any 
other special work were occupied in folding and wra pping the papers as they 
came from the machines. 
The printing-press, at this time, had no mechanical  means at its disposal, for 
the oil-engine had broken down, and at first animal  power was utilized, two 
donkeys being used to turn the handle of the machin e. But Mr. Gandhi, ever a 
believer in man doing his own work, soon altered th is, and four hefty Zulu girls 
were procured for a few hours on printing day. Thes e took the work in turns, 
two at a time, while the other two rested; but ever y male able-bodied settler, 
Mr. Gandhi included, took his turn at the handle, a nd thus the copies of the 
paper were "ground out". 
It was indeed a busy and happy band of workers at t he machine. Everyone 
seemed to feel a quiet excitement in getting the pa per out to time, and 
however late we all worked, no one grumbled or felt  aggrieved. Seldom were 
the last papers finished and folded before midnight  and often much later. Then 
we would all troop off in a body to the main house,  accompanying Mr. and Mrs. 
Gandhi to their door, where good-nights would be ex changed, and each would 
go his own way absolutely tired out, but content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30   
CHAPTER V 
The ideals and theories that had sounded so right a nd reasonable in the study, 
or read so well in books, had a chance of being put  to the test at Phoenix, and, 
as might be expected, were often found impracticabl e when applied to the 
hard facts of life. Problems arose that had not bee n taken into account, and 
many very trying, but nevertheless often amusing, i ncidents were the result. 
One very early problem arose from the fundamental r ule that, there being no 
private ownership of land at Phoenix, no land was f enced in. Paths and narrow 
roads divided one holding from another, and each ma n knew his own boundary-
line. Every man also tilled his own land and plante d or sowed the produce most 
desired. The Zulus of the surrounding country could  be trusted not to steal or 
damage the growing crops, and kitchen- gardening pr omised well. But humans 
were not the only inhabitants of the neighbourhood.  Some Native farmers on 
the land adjoining the settlement were the possesso rs of some mules and 
donkeys. These were not stabled at night-time, nor was the land on which they 
lived fenced in, and as the animals were allowed to  run loose, the Phoenix 
plots became the scene of luxury meals for the unte thered quadrupeds. As soon 
as carrots and other succulent vegetables made thei r appearance above 
ground, the mules and donkeys found them out, and t rampled down what they 
did not eat up. This destruction of growing crops w as a much greater trial than 
appears on the surface. Each settler had only a tin y monthly allowance for his 
or his family's needs, and to grow his own vegetabl e produce, apart from its 
being laid down as a rule for the community, was a necessity. Mr. Gandhi was 
consulted, and someone went to the owners of the an imals and remonstrated 
with them (the owners, I mean). This produced very little result at first, and 
further remonstrance was resorted to. One or two me mbers put tall sticks up 
round about their vegetable plots, and the children  used to drive away from the 
estate any animal found straying on it, so in time a certain immunity was 
obtained. But the land remained without proper fenc ing, and some of the 
amateur farmers began to lose heart. Later on, some  alterations were made in Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  farming the estate, but many other awkward things h ad happened and 
inconveniences suffered ere that day arrived. 
Another trial was the water-supply, especially that  of drinking-water. This was 
collected from the roofs of the buildings during th e rains and stored in big 
water- butts. When the dry weather, which lasted se veral months in a year, 
had continued for some time, the drinking-water had  to be most sparingly used. 
No waste was permitted of any kind, and the water-b utts were anxiously 
examined from time to time to see how the supply st ood. The Zulus seemed to 
be able to consume what the new-comers would call i mpure water, and 
suffered no ill-effects from it. Nevertheless, they  liked the clearer water that 
Phoenix collected, and, when passing along the road  nearby, would often come 
to one or other of the houses and beg for a cup of water. To refuse such a 
simple request seemed cruel and, in addition, contr ary to the belief that "all 
men are brothers in the sight of the Father and ent itled to share equally in His 
gifts." But to give five to ten cups of water a day  would have soon emptied the 
butts long before the new rain-supply could be hope d for. Mr. Gandhi, realizing 
the difficulty of the water-problem, had had hopes for some time of being able 
to have a well dug. This, however, was never done. Money was always too 
scarce to enable the well to be dug, and so the pro blem of giving to the thirsty 
Zulu wayfarer a cup of water had to be dealt with b y each householder, and 
much heart-searching and real unhappiness was cause d by the necessity of 
refusing the simple request. 
Fortunately, for washing and bathing purposes, a fa ir stream ran near the 
boundary of the estate, and from this the household  water had to be fetched 
daily. The boys and some of the men used to go dire ct to the stream for their 
daily bath. 
This stream became the scene of an important incide nt. Just suspended from 
an overhanging bough of a tree at the spot where wa ter was fetched daily, 
there was one day observed a big green mamba, one o f the deadliest snakes 
found in South Africa. The colonist who first saw i t did not know what to do. 
Non-killing was a fundamental principle in Phoenix;  but no one could argue or Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  reason with a snake, and the snake seemed absolutel y disinclined to go away. 
Besides, as one snake never lives alone, no one kne w how many more might 
come and take up residence there. Eventually, an In dian colonist settled the 
problem for himself and the others. He was not  a vegetarian but an old hand at 
the gun, which he fetched, and then shot the snake and kept vigil at intervals 
for the next two or three days so as to dispose of any others that should come 
along. He was himself the father of two little girl s, and believed that the safety 
and life of the children were of greater importance  than those of  a snake. I do 
not think Mr. Gandhi complained to Mr. S_______ of his action, nor did anyone 
else. But all of us thought about it, and some of u s secretly believed Mr. 
S_______ to be quite right and wanted to thank him for having taken prompt 
and effective action. This incident, however, was n ot allowed to be used as a 
precedent for other things, and the unwritten law a t Phoenix continued to be 
the sacredness of all life. 
In this connection, Mr. Gandhi would tell us storie s, from Indian sources, of 
good and wise men living side by side with all mann er of wild and so-called 
dangerous creatures, and coming to no harm by them.  On one occasion, when I 
was present, he reminded one of the Indian settlers  of the fact that in many 
households in India a saucer of milk is placed for the snakes of the 
neighbourhood by the head woman of the family, and that the children could 
rejoice accordingly in immunity from attack by the snake. The snake and the 
children thus having no fear of the other, all were  safe. 
 
Another snake incident which occurred much later in  the life of Phoenix is 
worthy of repetition here, as it points to the deep  influence such teaching had 
upon many who came into close contact with Mr. Gand hi. A member who joined 
the settlement after my first visit there was a Eur opean of the hunting, flesh-
eating type, accustomed to defending himself in the  usual way while living and 
travelling alone in the less-known parts of Africa.  At the time that this man, 
Mr. C_______, met Mr. Gandhi, he must have been abo ut forty, and was seeking 
for a higher explanation and rule of life than that  of the jungle. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  I do not know whether he had heard of Mr. Gandhi's experiment at Phoenix ere 
he met him. But soon after the meeting in Johannesb urg, he severed himself 
from the life that he had been accustomed to and jo ined the Phoenix 
settlement. He lived, as the other members of the l ittle colony did, in a very 
simple bungalow, doing his own household work, assi sting in the life of the 
colony, meditating and studying. 
One day, on going to his shed to fetch his bicycle,  he saw two green mambas 
coiled up quite near it. Just before observing them , he must have disturbed 
them, for already they were commencing to lift thei r heads. He stood still and 
watched them uncurl themselves. The shed was a smal l and narrow one, and 
was too full of things to allow much room for him t o move about to avoid the 
reptiles or even to get out of the door, as he woul d have had to pass close in 
front of them to do so. He also realized that to go  out of the shed and leave the 
snakes in possession of it would not solve the diff iculty, as he wanted the 
bicycle at once. He was due in Durban, a fourteen-m ile run, very shortly. His 
first real conscious thought was a most natural one : to look for an implement to 
kill the snakes with; but before he attempted to pu t thought into action, he 
remembered his new faith, and determined to put him self to a severe test. He 
said to himself: "Love overcometh all things, and m an should fear nothing that 
God has created." So he endeavoured to hold his min d calm, to eradicate from 
it, not only any sense of fear, but also of antipat hy and dislike. Slowly he went 
towards the door and, having reached it, stood quie tly up against the 
supporting post. The snakes, by now fully awake and  alert, commenced to 
move. First one looked around, then glided towards Mr. C_______ and the door. 
But Mr. C_______ stood firm. He neither moved nor a llowed his mind to falter. 
The snake glided close to him, passed him, and went  out into the open. The 
second snake followed the first, after turning its head to the right and to the 
left, then coming close up to Mr. C_______, almost touching him, as it, too, 
passed out through the open door, leaving Mr. C____ ___ quite unharmed. We 
all soon heard the story and were tremendously impr essed by it, but I never 
heard of anyone else there repeating the experiment . Years afterwards, Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  however, I understand, Mr. Gandhi himself calmly al lowed a deadly snake to 
crawl over his legs on its way to safety. 
 
Mr. C_______ was also the central figure in another  interesting episode at 
Phoenix. He allowed two horrible spiders, big, red,  hairy and rather poisonous 
creatures, to build their home (this variety builds  a web-like nest, and with its 
legs outstretched is about as large as a coffee sau cer) near the head of his bed. 
There he trained himself to sleep comfortably and u ndisturbed, thus proving his 
own strength of will, Mr. Gandhi's teaching, and hi s own faith in the principle of 
love being the preserver of life. After remaining a t Phoenix some time, Mr. 
C_______ left South Africa to continue his humanita rian work and teaching in 
Europe. 
 
Often, when discussions took place with Mr. Gandhi as to the relative values of 
human and animal life, I would argue that human lif e was the highest form of 
life evolved on the earth, and ought, therefore, to  be preserved, and that if 
the question arose of human life versus animal, the  animal had to go for the 
preservation of the human. 
"But why should you think that human life is of mor e importance to God than 
animal?" Mr. Gandhi once countered. 
"Because human life is higher in the scale of evolu tion. Man, at least, can think 
about God, which an animal cannot, and that gives h im a higher and more 
important place." 
"Yet many men behave worse than the brutes of the f ield. They are more cruel, 
for they enjoy their I cruelty. Animals will only k ill for food; but man will 
torture his fellow-man in addition to killing him,"  urged Mr. Gandhi. 
"I know all that," I said. "But I still maintain th at mankind is of higher value in 
the scheme of creation than the animal, and man oug ht not to be destroyed to 
enable the animal to survive." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  "But why must they destroy each other? Is not the e arth big enough to hold 
them both, side by side?" 
"In many cases, no," I replied; "some creatures bre ed so quickly that, unless 
they were destroyed, mankind could not survive. Tak e, for example, Australia 
and the rabbit problem." 
Mr. Gandhi, however, never agreed with such an argu ment, and would supply 
numbers of stories from Indian legend to substantia te the theory that animals, 
even the fiercest and deadliest, should and could l ive side by side with man, 
and neither suffers injury from the other. I believ e he has since had to face 
(though he has not solved) a similar problem to the  Australian one in the 
depredations of the monkeys at his Ashram in India.  
On another occasion we were discussing what our dut y would be if we were 
placed in the position of being in charge of a huma n being who was quite 
unable to defend himself, and who was in certain da nger of being killed and 
devoured by a hungry animal. Mr. Gandhi said that i f such an occasion 
occurred, and the man in danger of death chose to g ive his life for the hungry 
animal, as the Buddha had done, it was the highest form of sacrifice and the 
most divine. 
"But," I said, "supposing the man does not want to sacrifice himself for the 
animal, and I could preserve him by killing the ani mal? I know this, that 
however beautiful in theory the story of the Buddha  is, if the life of someone I 
loved or was responsible for was in danger through a wild animal, I should pray 
for wisdom and strength to destroy the animal so as  to protect my charge. And 
were I successful, I should return thanks to God wh o had nerved and armed me 
for the struggle." 
Mr. Gandhi smiled, and said: "Yes, I believe you wo uld. To every man his own 
duty, and as long as you think like that, you are r ight to act in such a way." 
 
Another subject of discussion, I might almost say o f contention, between us 
was the right of the head of the household to absol ute control over the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  members of it. I would not allow that the husband o r father had any rights over 
the life of wife or child. One such argument arose over the story of Abraham 
offering his son as a sacrifice to the Lord. Mr. Ga ndhi had spoken of it with 
great feeling and approbation. 
"But that is not the man's sacrifice," I said, some what impatiently. "It is the 
son's, to say nothing of the wife and mother. If a man offers himself as a 
sacrifice, that is, perhaps, his affair; but he may  not offer another, not even 
his child. He has no such right over it. The child is his to protect, not to 
destroy." 
"Yet," said Mr. Gandhi, "the story is part of your own Scripture. God called upon 
Abraham to offer his son. 
"Yes," I replied, "I know it is; but I do not belie ve God called upon Abraham to 
kill Isaac as an offering to Him. I believe that wa s man's interpretation of his 
own idea of God. Each human soul is responsible to God for itself, and not even 
a father has the right to injure the life he has ca lled into being. The child's life 
does not belong to the father to destroy, and for m an to take credit to himself 
for attempting to destroy his child is to me barbar ic. I grow angry and terribly 
hurt at such a monstrous idea!" 
"Then you do not accept your Scripture?" said Mr. G andhi, enquiringly. 
"The story may be a true account of an event, but I  do not believe God meant 
Abraham to kill Isaac." 
"God did not permit him to," Mr. Gandhi quietly int errupted, "and was not the 
whole beauty of the story in the test of Abraham's love and belief in the Lord, 
so that even his beloved son he was willing to give  to his God when it was 
asked of him?" 
"I know that is meant to be the lesson, and the les son, I believe, I can 
appreciate. But I cannot appreciate man's belief in  his right of life and death 
over wife or child, and no mention is made of what Isaac thought about it, or 
Isaac's mother. It is only  Abraham's  sacrifice that counts." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  Mr. Gandhi shook his head. "You are missing the bea uty of it," he said. 
"Whether Isaac had agreed or not to be sacrificed, it would not have lessened 
the father's pain in sacrificing his child. So that , anyway, it was Abraham's 
agony and faith that mattered, and that is why the story is told as though it 
mainly concerns him." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
CHAPTER VI 
The peaceful development of the little Colony was s oon disturbed. After a very 
few weeks of my stay at Phoenix the Natal Native re bellion broke out and a 
great deal of unrest was felt by us all. Although t here was nothing to be feared 
from our Zulu neighbours, yet the knowledge that on ly a few miles away was a 
big rebel encampment, and that our own soldiers wer e being sent forward in 
ever-increasing numbers to deal with the trouble, b egan to affect most of us. 
I am reminded here of a somewhat humorous, if rathe r grim, happening just 
before I left Johannesburg. It was told me by one o f my few English women-
friends as having occurred to her. Trouble among th e Zulus was brewing and it 
was affecting the Johannesburg "house-boys", most o f whom were Zulu 
tribesmen from Natal. It was a time of anxiety, and  many white women, .left 
alone during the day with their Native servants, se cretly learnt the use of fire-
arms for self-defence in case of need. Fortunately,  the need never arose in the 
Transvaal. 
My friend had had a "kitchen-boy", named Tom, for m any years. From time to 
time he had returned to his kraal, with his savings , doubtless used to provide 
himself with another wife, but he had always come b ack at the proper time to 
render further loyal and faithful service. He was d evoted to my friend and she 
had developed a sincere liking and regard for him. 
One day, hearing a rumour that the Johannesburg "'h ouse-boys" were about to 
rise against and massacre their employers, she said  to him, half in jest, half in 
earnest: "If the 'boys' make trouble, Tom wouldn't hurt Missis, would you?" 
"No," said Tom, with deep-toned conviction. "Tom ki ll next-door Missis. Next 
door 'boy' kill this Missis!" 
With which consolation my friend nearly collapsed. Mr. Gandhi was much 
amused when he later heard this story; but the even t assumed quite different 
proportions in the eyes of my friend at the time. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  To resume. Mr. Gandhi made an offer to the Governme nt to take a stretcher-
bearer company to the scene of action, and though t he offer was not accepted 
at the time, the knowledge that at any moment he mi ght be called away added 
to the feeling of unrest in the community. 
As soon as my husband had come down from Johannesbu rg, we had had a little 
house arranged for us for a home of our own. It was  rather on the outskirts of 
the settlement, a little two-roomed wood-and-iron s hack, practically empty of 
furniture. Here I tried to make a little home, the first of my married life. But 
the impossibility of getting suitable food, the kno wledge and fear of the 
snakes, spiders and other poisonous or unpleasant c reatures, the 
disappointment to me, a town- bred girl, of the who le place, and, lastly, the 
rebellion, proved too much for me. I could not slee p, and would lie awake 
nearly all night, watching for insects and crawling  creatures and listening in 
imagination to the reports of guns and the shrieks of people dying. Mr. Gandhi 
talked the matter of our continuing at Phoenix over  with me, and decided that 
it was wiser for my husband to take me into Durban,  at least for the present. 
Arrangements were accordingly made and I left Phoen ix one morning to take up 
life in Durban, travelling down in the train with a  man in khaki, who said he had 
Bambaata's head in a sack that was beside him. As t here was a price on the 
Zulu leader's head, I believed the story. But wheth er it was really true or not I 
do not know. My husband continued to go to Phoenix several days a week to 
continue his editorial work for  Indian Opinion,  and I sometimes accompanied 
him. 
Soon after we left Phoenix, Mr. Gandhi's offer of a  stretcher-bearer company 
was accepted, and he left for the front with a smal l contingent of his 
countrymen that he had himself collected together a nd whom he had instructed 
in their duties. Mrs. Gandhi was naturally rather w orried at this new step in her 
husband's life. But he was not away long. The rebel lion was soon over, and Mr. 
Gandhi returned to Phoenix, but not to stay. 
Events in the Indian community in the Transvaal nec essitated his presence 
there. He left almost immediately for Johannesburg,  after arranging that my Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  husband and I should follow in a week or two. On hi s arrival in Johannesburg he 
took a small house in a distant suburb, put into it  the absolute minimum of 
furniture, and here, shortly afterwards, we joined him. Mrs. Gandhi and the 
three boys remained in Phoenix to continue their li fe there, the boys again 
going back to a few haphazard lessons as opportunit ies arose. The eldest boy, 
by this time, was making an urgent demand for what he called a proper 
education. Just before I left Phoenix, he had said to me: 
"My father was properly educated; why can't I be?" 
I sympathized with him, but repeated to him the thi ngs his father had said to 
me. m "That is all very well," he replied; "but my father could not do the work 
he is doing if he had not been educated, and I want  to be, too." 
I promised to talk it over with Mr. Gandhi, but I h ad no hope of success with 
him. 
The little house to which I was taken was devoid of  any pretence of beauty or 
of the things that I had been accustomed to look up on as necessities. There 
were no carpets or rugs to cover the bare deal boar ds of the floor, no curtains 
to the windows, only some ugly yellow blinds to kee p some suggestion of 
privacy. Of course, there was not a picture on the yellow-washed walls, and 
only furniture of the simplest was installed in the  house. 
As soon as I arrived I looked over the place to see  what I could do with it. I 
knew Mr. Gandhi did not want to have a middle-class  house again, and my hus-
band was indifferent to the many details that make a house home, since he 
was, like Mr. Gandhi, entirely absorbed by the fres h troubles arising for the 
Indian community. I soon set to work to improve mat ters, turned the kitchen 
into a room where meals could be taken, and arrange d our books and few 
personal things in the front room to make a little sitting-room. The other two 
rooms were bedrooms, one for Mr. Gandhi and one for  my husband and me. All 
the rooms were very small, not one being big enough  to take even two single 
beds in it. There was also an outside room for a se rvant, but as we were not to 
keep a servant, a young Indian in Mr. Gandhi's char ge occupied that. In the 
front of the house was a little verandah, or stoep;  otherwise it stood facing a Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  big stretch of kopje leading away to a district tha t had been named the 
"Highlands", because a few well-to-do Scotch people  had built for themselves 
houses there. 
A few days after my arrival in Johannesburg I said to Mr. Gandhi that I wanted 
some curtains, some floor-covering, and a few other  things to make the little 
house "home". 
"But why?" asked Mr. Gandhi, in a surprised tone. " Why? Is not the country that 
you can see from your windows more beautiful than a ny picture? Why, then, do 
you want to shut it out by curtains? You have said you love sky-scenes and 
beautiful sunsets. There you have it all in front o f you. I do not understand why 
you want to shut it out with curtains." 
"Some lace curtains or thin muslin will not shut it  out," I replied. "They can just 
come down the sides of the windows to hide the chea p, ugly wood. And 
anyway, I cannot be looking out of the windows all day. Besides, it gets dark 
soon after six, and then I have to look at the wall s. It is not as though the house 
had any beauty of itself; it is all cheap and hard,  and the bareness worries me. 
I can make it look much better with very little mon ey, and even a picture or 
two. I should like to hide that ugly wall." 
"But," said Mr. Gandhi, "can you have any painting more beautiful than that 
which you can see from here?" And Mr. Gandhi stretc hed his arm towards the 
striking view seen from the window in the little si tting-room. -"Why do you 
want to cumber yourself with things that will only need more time to be spent 
upon them? You say you want beauty. You have it aro und you. God has given 
you the reality; why, then, worry about the things made by man?" 
"I do not so easily distinguish between God and man  as you do," I replied. "I 
cannot draw a line of demarcation between them in s uch a manner. If man 
creates, things of beauty, it is God speaking throu gh him." - "But," again urged 
Mr. Gandhi, "if you have God, do you need to worshi p man?" 
"I can worship God through man," I replied. 
"No, you lose sight of God in the worship of man." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  "I do not agree with you. I know I can be brought n ear to a mystic feeling of 
love, or beauty, by seeing something beautiful that  man has made. Man is God's 
interpreter." 
For a little while there was silence; then Mr. Gand hi said: 
"Very well, if you feel you must have curtains and carpets, you must have them. 
We will talk it over with Henry." 
And within a few days a carpet was bought and I was  busy making curtains for 
the windows and cushions for the chairs, and even a  picture was procured for 
the wall. And in the course of a few weeks the litt le house became a home. 
Mr. Gandhi teased me about the things I added to it , telling me that the time I 
spent on such things, either making or caring for t hem, I could spend on 
acquiring knowledge as I had often said I desired t o do. 
"But I think while I needlework," I said; "my brain  is not idle because my hands 
are busy. And needlework is restful to the nerves."  
I sometimes wonder whether, as he spins his khadi-t hread, with his mind on his 
many problems, Mahatma Gandhi recalls these convers ations. 
As I said before, we were not to keep a servant, bu t it was arranged that the 
household tasks were not to fall entirely upon my s houlders. One of the men of 
the house was to keep the windows clean, another th e stoep and the yard 
swept and tidy. All the ordering was done in town, from a list I made out, by 
one of the men. Breakfast at this period consisted of fruit and brown bread and 
nut-butter, for those who wanted it, and each one p repared what he wanted 
himself. The men all left early in the morning, and  I was left with the day to 
myself to put the house in order and cook the eveni ng meal. The washing-up of 
the dinner things was to be shared by the men of th e household; my part of the 
evening's work was clearing the things away. This, however, was not found a 
very satisfactory arrangement. Mr. Gandhi and my hu sband had not the time for 
such domestic duties as were supposed to fall upon them, and after awhile a 
young Native boy was procured to help in kitchen wo rk and do the windows and 
other things. He, however, was very raw, and after I found him blacking the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  table in the kitchen instead of scrubbing it, as I had told him to do, I got rid of 
him and tried another one. 
Mr. Gandhi was amused by my struggles to teach a "p iccanin" how to clean a 
floor or a stove or windows. But he also recognized  that, as I was approaching 
motherhood, I ought to have some proper assistance in the house, and 
eventually, after a further period of no domestic h elp, about a month before 
my first baby was born, I got a young coloured girl  as general help. This meant 
supplying her with a room Fortunately, the young In dian occupying the outside 
room had been wanting for some time to go and stay with some friends he had 
in Johannesburg, so he gave up his room and the mai d took up her quarters 
there. 
The days had by now become most strenuous and anxio us for us all. A crisis was 
approaching in the life of the Indian community. Th e evenings of philosophic 
calm were no more. Often it was midnight before Mr.  Gandhi reached the little 
home, and he had had to tramp four miles after fift een hours of hard work in 
town to reach his place of refuge. But even then hi s day's labours were often 
not ended. Some of his people would tramp the four miles with him to continue 
discussing ways and means of dealing with the troub les around them. It was not 
an unusual thing to have four or more men return at  midnight with Mr. Gandhi, 
and when all were too worn out to continue to talk,  rugs would be thrown down 
along the passage or anywhere else for the visitors  to get a few hours' sleep ere 
they started to tramp back to town. A bus used to r un from near our house to 
the centre of the city, but this was for the conven ience of white folk; coloured 
people were not allowed to ride in it. This meant t hat any Indian people coming 
to see Mr. Gandhi always had to walk to and fro, un less they could afford to 
hire a private carriage. Of this hardship Mr. Gandh i never complained for 
himself. Indeed, he could, if he had cared to apply  for the privilege, have 
received exemption, but he refused to accept an adv antage over the humblest 
of his countrymen. Moreover, he believed in using o ne's own legs as a means of 
getting anywhere within reasonable distance, but he  did feel it often when Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  some elderly Indian man or woman had made the journ ey on foot in the hope of 
seeing him for a little while alone. 
An amusing but, at the time of its happening, rathe r startling incident occurred 
during this period. Some visitors had returned with  Mr. Gandhi late at night, 
and about 1 a.m. some of them had thrown themselves  on rugs along the 
passage, and the others on the tiny- verandah at th e front of the little house. 
The place had grown silent, all its inhabitants asl eep, when we were startled 
and alarmed by a stifled scream, and the sounds of groans and scuffling. The 
sounds came from immediately under our bedroom wind ow where the verandah 
was. We hastily rose to see what was the matter. We  threw open the window 
and in the meantime someone opened the street door.  It did not take long to 
discover the cause of the trouble. Two men had arri ved from an upcountry 
place, and, determining to see Mr. Gandhi without d elay, had walked to our 
house. The night was dark, and when they had found the house they hunted for 
the door. In their search for this they had stepped  on a sleeper. The sleeper 
thus rudely awakened, and probably thinking he was being assaulted by a thief, 
immediately struck out. Lamps were lit, all came in side, and more talk ensued. 
I am afraid none of us had much more sleep that nig ht, although fortunately no 
one was any the worse for the unpleasant escapade. 
Such human incidents, although disturbing at the ti me, lightened the strain of 
the anxiety of those days. We learned to find some food for kindly laughter 
even in the midst of the most trying days. Mr. Gand hi never failed to see the 
amusing side of things, and his smile and a few soo thing words from him helped 
to keep many dark events from becoming tragic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45   
CHAPTER VII 
Mr. Gandhi had the reputation, among both professio nal colleagues and 
laymen, of being a very sound lawyer; and he was he ld in the highest esteem by 
the courts. When the office was very busy, law case s would often be talked 
over by Mr. Gandhi and my husband in the evening, a nd I was present at the 
discussion of many troublesome legal problems. Some times, however, a case 
would be interesting, not so much because of points  of law involved in it, but 
because of Mr. Gandhi's reaction to it. One such wa s the following. 
It was a rather small and sordid affair; a man was charged with stealing, and 
had applied to Mr. Gandhi to defend him. It was wel l understood that Mr. 
Gandhi would never plead "not guilty" for a man who m he believed to be guilty. 
He would plead "extenuating circumstances", but wou ld not stand before a 
magistrate and knowingly state a falsehood. He had been known on more than 
one occasion to throw up his brief and leave the co urt upon discovering that his 
client had betrayed him. Every client was forewarne d of this, and engaged his 
services on that understanding. 
When, therefore, Mr. Gandhi interviewed the accused  man he interrogated him 
closely, and very soon the man confessed that he ha d committed the crime. 
"But why did you do it?" asked Mr. Gandhi. "You kne w you were stealing, and 
you knew the penalty. Why, then, did you do it?" 
"I had to live," replied the man with finality. 
"You had to live?" echoed Mr. Gandhi softly. 
"Why?" 
I have often thought of that episode since, and  Mr. Gandhi's "Why?" at the end. 
It was so indicative  of the working of his mind. "Why have you to live? Wha t are 
you contributing to life?" were the questions perpe tually before him. 
On another occasion a client came on Sunday morning  to inform Mr. Gandhi 
that he had just  been arrested on a very serious charge and had been rele ased Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  on bail, and to ask Mr. Gandhi to appear for him  in court next day. My husband, 
who had noticed that Mr. Gandhi was being rather ba dly overworked, 
expostulated with him for receiving the client on S unday, when he should have 
been recuperating his mental and physical forces. M r. Gandhi's reply was a 
gentle but penetrating rebuke. 
"A man who is suffering misfortune knows no Sunday rest! This man is unhappy 
and anxious. How can I shut myself away from him, even if he is, as in  the 
present case, guilty?" 
On yet another occasion my husband, who for  a time was in charge of the office 
accounts, noticed  that a client was heavily indebted to Mr. Gandhi, though  he 
had several times been asked for payment. The  case was a flagrant one. My 
husband, accordingly, drafted  a letter of demand, threatening legal 
proceedings if  the debt was not speedily liquidated, and had it placed  before 
Mr. Gandhi for signature. Mr. Gandhi, however,  sent for him. 
"Don't you know that  I never invoke the law  to secure payment of my own 
accounts, whatever I may do for clients upon their instructions? A man is not 
made honest by threats and force, and if the client  does not willingly pay, I 
must suffer for my folly and lack of foresight in h aving allowed him to run up an 
account, instead of obtaining payment at the time."  
Another rather interesting story with a legal flavo ur is the following. Dr. F. E. 
T. Krause, now a Judge of the Supreme Court of Sout h Africa, and then a well-
known Advocate, had at one time incurred the severe  displeasure of the British 
Government. He was tried in England for sedition, d uring the Boer War, was 
imprisoned and was afterwards disbarred by his Inn.  Upon the resumption of 
peace and the establishment of British rule in the Transvaal, he had applied 
for, and obtained, re-admission as an Advocate of t he Transvaal Supreme 
Court, with a view to reinstatement at the English Bar. Mr. Gandhi, who had 
known him as Public Prosecutor in Johannesburg befo re the war, and had 
received many kindnesses from him in the course of practice, happened to be 
in court that day on professional business. He was the • first to congratulate 
Dr. Krause, and with great satisfaction assisted hi m to put on once more his Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  professional robes, the sign and symbol of his rest oration to the rights and 
privileges of the legal profession. It is curious t o reflect that, since then, Mr. 
Gandhi himself has been disbarred by the Inner Temp le; but I am afraid that Dr. 
Krause will never have the pleasure of officiating at Mr. Gandhi's restoration to 
the roll of barristers, for the great Indian leader  now describes himself as a 
"farmer and spinner", and years ago renounced forev er the practice of law, 
which, he said more than once, "in its final resort , rests upon physical force." 
I used to experiment with all kinds of foods, tryin g to make pleasing and 
appetizing dishes of different vegetables or fruits  or cereals, and often I knew 
the experiment was a ghastly failure. But Mr. Gandh i and my husband would 
heroically eat the preparation and generally praise  it. Often, however, they 
and other people present would be talking, and I fe lt sure they had not noticed 
what they had been eating; which was possibly the b est thing sometimes! 
During these years our experiments in dietetics wer e many and various. For 
some months no cooking of any kind was done with th e addition of salt. It was 
cooked in a (so-called) conservative way without an y condiments. This I found 
very unappetizing, but I continued to try it. Anoth er period was marked by an 
absence of sugar, so as to avoid the use of a produ ct of "indentured" labour, 
and for sweetening purposes I used dates or currant s. Then we had a period of 
nearly all "unfired" food served with olive oil. I was not required to confine my 
own diet to these things and did not do so; but Mr.  Gandhi and my husband 
kept to each experiment for weeks or months at a ti me, always expressing a 
great liking for the things they were having. Food values were most earnestly 
discussed, and their effect upon the human body and  its moral qualities 
solemnly examined. For a time a dish of raw chopped  onions, as a blood- 
purifier, regularly formed part of the dinner meal.  Indeed, I was told that, so 
fond of Spanish onions in salad were Mr. Gandhi and  a few other friends who 
regularly frequented a vegetarian restaurant in Joh annesburg ' before my 
advent on the scene, that they jestingly formed the mselves into "The 
Amalgamated Society of Onion-Eaters"! Ultimately, M r. Gandhi came to the 
conclusion that onions were bad for the passions, a nd so onions were cut out. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  Milk, too, Mr. Gandhi said, affected the "passion" side of human life and 
thereafter milk was abjured likewise. I did not min d the raw onions going, but I 
questioned the denial of milk. 
"Why is it," I said, "if milk stimulates the passio ns, that it is the best food for 
babies and young children?" 
"The mother's milk is the correct food for babies,"  replied Mr. Gandhi, "but it is 
not meant for adults." 
"It may not be meant for adults because it is the f ood for babies. I do not mind 
that," I said, "but I cannot see that the same argu ment can be used against it as 
a stimulant of the passions. If that were correct,"  I said, "a milk-fed child would 
be a most unnatural little brute. Think of a little  child obsessed with sex-
passion because it had had a diet of milk. It is no t reasonable!" 
However, milk was not again a regular article of di et for Mr. Gandhi, and 
eventually he took a vow never again to touch cow's  milk himself. This vow he 
has kept through the ensuing years, though, as will  be seen later, to satisfy Mrs. 
Gandhi, he has since taken goat's milk, which, verb ally at least, did not infringe 
his vow. 
"We talk about food probably quite as much as gourm ands do," I said on one 
occasion to Mr. Gandhi. "I am sure we talk about fo od more than most people; 
we seem to be always thinking of the things we eith er may or may not eat. 
Sometimes I think it would be better if we just ate  anything and did not think 
about it at all." 
"Even flesh?" teasingly queried Mr. Gandhi. 
To which I replied: "A man shall be judged by what comes out of his mouth, not 
by what he puts into it." 
 
We were talking of the value of courtesy in friends hip one day. I had said that I 
did not like the idea that, because I was near to t he heart of a person, I need 
not have the same courtesy shown to me as would be shown to a stranger. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  "But," argued Mr. Gandhi, "it is the privilege of a ffection and friendship that it 
has not to show formality." 
"I am not making a plea for formality, but why shou ld it be considered more 
right for a man, for example, to open a door for a stranger when the same man 
would not attempt to open it for his wife?" 
"But a man does not need to be always thinking abou t his own. His own are a 
part of himself." 
"That argument may make an appeal to my heart but i t does not to my brain," I 
objected. 
"Then your brain is wrong," replied Mr. Gandhi. "I have often told you so; you 
should not trust it." And Mr. Gandhi laughed. 
"I am serious," I said; "I want to know what you re ally think about it." 
"Does a man think about his arm, then, or pay speci al attention to it? Of course 
not; it is a part of him, and is cared for with the  rest of him. Our nearest are 
like that, a part of our very selves, and, as such,  can seem to be forgotten, but 
they are always there." 
"I think I sometimes prefer to be thought of, then,  as someone perhaps a little 
farther away. I don't want to be put on one side as  an unconscious bit of the 
body by those I love!" 
"Then what do you want?" asked Mr. Gandhi. "Well, I  do not want the price I pay 
for love to be that I am ignored. It seems to me th at because I love another I 
should show the best part of me to that one, and lo ok for chances to give the 
little acts of courtesy that I believe love and fri endship are entitled to." 
"But if you know you are the heart of another, do y ou need to be told it, and 
shown it?" 
"Yes," I replied. "I do; most certainly I do." 
"That is not 'identification', as all true love sho uld be!" 
"I am afraid we are getting too involved," I answer ed. "To return to the 
beginning; I said, and I say again, I think it wron g to omit the acts of thoughtful Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  courtesy and self-control to those who have the fir st claim upon our 
consideration, and to reserve our smiling best for the stranger. I see it happen 
and it vexes me, for I cannot justify it." 
"Then do not worry yourself by thinking about it!" was Mr. Gandhi's final reply.
 
Another subject we almost contended about was what I called Mr. Gandhi's love 
of the uncomfortable. 
"I do not know why you always want to choose the mo st uncomfortable way of 
doing a thing," I once said to him. 
"But it is not uncomfortable to me," he replied. "W hat are you complaining 
about?" 
"It must be uncomfortable to do so many of the thin gs you do, not because you 
have to do them, but out of, what seems to me, a st range idea of principle. If 
you have to go from one place to another, you alway s look to see if there is a 
stony path to walk over, rather than the soft grass ." 
"Ease and comfort are often the paths from God. We must not let the body have 
its own way when it asks for sensuous ease."  
"But God does not mean you to whip your body all th e time." 
"And He does not mean you to lose sight of Him beca use of it." 
"No, I admit that, but I cannot help believing that  God makes the flower-decked 
path for our enjoyment. I cannot believe He meant u s to ignore these flowers 
and hunt for jagged stones to cut our feet on." 
"Our danger is of putting the comfort of our body a nd serving it before the 
service of God." 
"But," again I urged, "we are not denying God becau se we appreciate the beauty 
of His world. Are the stones more His than the gras s?" 
"The temptation to seek ease and slothfulness is al ways with us and we have to 
guard against it." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  But it was no use arguing with Mr. Gandhi when he w as in these moods. His 
bent was naturally towards the ascetic and not towa rds the aesthetic. And it 
must be admitted that this tendency and his constan t practice of the hard and 
simple life stood him in good stead when he had to endure the discomfort and 
privation of prison-life. He could adjure his follo wers so to live in times of 
peace that they might be able to endure hardship in  times of struggle. 
 
Mr. Gandhi paid a flying visit to England in 1906, and when he unpacked his 
things after his return he brought me a parcel. 
"For a present," he said. 
I opened it wonderingly, for while he was always mo st generous, direct present-
giving was not a habit of his. 
"What is it?" I queried. 
"Open it and see," he replied. 
My husband was in the room with us, and bent over m e as I opened the parcel 
and found a very elaborate bottle 'of some patent h air-restorer! I looked at the 
bottle, then at Mr. Gandhi, puzzled. 
"It cost me two pounds!" he said ruefully. 
"Two pounds!" I echoed incredulously. "What did you  buy it for?" 
"I did not want to buy it," he replied, somewhat pl aintively. 
"I do not understand. What happened to make you buy  it? Because I know you 
did not buy it for me really." 
"I was foolish and did not have the courage to ackn owledge my folly. I went into 
the barber's saloon at the hotel (he had been stayi ng at the Cecil in London) to 
get my hair cut. I was in a hurry and thinking abou t other things. The barber 
said I needed some treatment for my hair and sugges ted some preparation for 
it; I did not really attend to what he was saying, and when he pressed the 
matter, asking to be permitted to send a bottle of something for my use to my 
room, I agreed. I did not even undo the parcel at f irst when I saw it. Then, Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  after a few days, when I was coming away, I was pre sented with a bill for two 
pounds for the wretched stuff! I did not want it, b ut I thought you might like to 
use it." 
I thanked him. Then the three of us went off into p eals of laughter, and the £2 
bottle of hair-restorer became a standing joke in t he household. I believe that 
the contents ultimately found their way down the si nk. It might have been 
dangerous to use the stuff! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53   
CHAPTER VIII 
During a brief lull in the Indian troubles my first  baby was born. This event 
seemed to give great joy to Mr. Gandhi, and the bab y became the centre of a 
new human relationship. Every little detail of its life was a source of great 
interest to him. Its weight at birth, its feeding a nd development, its first signs 
of intelligence, and it’s very apparent determinati on to have its own way—
every phase of its physical and emerging mental lif e was of intense pleasure, 
no less to Mr. Gandhi than to my husband and to me.  
I do not think, now, that we were any of us very wi se in the care and training 
of an infant child. I had no nurse and I was myself  too ignorant of mothercraft 
to have any knowledge of how to bring up a baby, an d, unfortunately for me, I 
was living too far out of town to receive from olde r and more experienced 
women the advice and assistance I needed. Mr. Gandh i believed in the instinct 
of mother-love to do that which was best and right for the child. So love was 
trusted as a guide for the child's needs, and much earnest discussion took place 
as to the best treatment for a very young baby. 
Today, a good and well-trained nurse starts trainin g a baby in the way it should 
go from the first day it is born. The nurse I had f or the birth of my baby knew 
nothing of the training of today, and was, therefor e, of 110 use in putting in 
any foundation of good habits for the child, or of advising me, and the baby, 
unlike most normal babies, never seemed to want to sleep at proper hours. 
Particularly was this noticeable at night-time Mr. Gandhi came to the 
conclusion that it seemed useless to try to coax or  force the child to sleep 
when it did not want to. "So," said he, "since the child evidently will not or 
cannot adapt itself to the needs of the mother, the  mother must adapt herself 
to the needs of the baby. You must try to sleep whe n the baby sleeps, 
whatever the time may be, day or night." 
I did not think the advice wise, but I tried it, wi th, of course, no success. To 
add to the difficulty of any such experience, my "c oloured" maid had found Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  living out of town too lonely for her and so had go ne away, leaving me to do 
the best I could by myself. 
We procured another "coloured" girl and made an exp eriment of another kind 
with her. We had so often said we believed in the u nity of all life, and did not 
believe in artificial barriers of class divisions. So it was arranged, when we 
engaged the new girl, half Native and half "poor wh ite", that I should have a 
nice idealistic talk with her, and after that we sh ould invite her to sit at table 
with us. She did it twice, seeming positively frigh tened the whole time. Then 
she absolutely refused to sit at dinner with us aga in. I asked her why she 
preferred having her dinner alone instead of having  it with us. She could give 
no reason but she "didn't like it." At the end of t wo weeks she ran away from 
us, without waiting to receive any money or anythin g else; just packed her 
belongings into her box and went off early one morn ing with it before anyone 
was about. Our kindness had evidently scared her aw ay. So disappeared 
another theory. I did not attempt the experiment ag ain. Neither did Mr. Gandhi 
ask me to do so. I next procured a full-blooded Bas uto woman, a member of a 
one-time Chief's family, and found her one of the b est, most helpful and 
faithful domestic helps I have had anywhere in the various parts of the world 
where I have lived and kept servants. She was only with me a few Weeks, for 
she had to leave to join her husband in a different  part of the town. But I 
remember her with gratitude for her devotion to me and my baby. 
 
It was while we were occupying this little bungalow  that Mr. Gandhi's life was 
attempted by one of his compatriots and he lay ill for a considerable time at 
the house of some European friends who had gone to his rescue. During his 
absence from the home in the suburbs we left it and  took a small house in 
town. Here Mr. Gandhi came on his recovery, but whi le he was still very weak. 
During the early days of his convalescence he devel oped the power, which he 
afterwards retained, of being able to fall asleep w hile at work just where he 
sat, and after a very few moments to awaken refresh ed and without any break 
in his continuity of thought. I have sat in the roo m while he has been dictating Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  to his secretary, who had come up from the office f or this purpose, and quite 
suddenly the voice ceased and the eyes closed. The secretary and I would sit 
still, then equally suddenly Mr. Gandhi's eyes woul d open again and the voice 
would continue dictating from the very point that i t had stopped. I never 
remember his asking, "Where was I?" or "What was I saying?" 
His utter refusal to take any kind of medicine duri ng his illness was a great 
source of worry and perplexity to his friends and t hose nursing him, but the 
simplest kinds of remedies he refused. He trusted t o Nature to perform her own 
work, and fortunately Nature did, but only after he  had suffered unnecessarily. 
As soon as he recovered sufficiently he threw his w hole strength again into the 
work of the office and Indian Colonial Politics. Ye t he always found time, either 
early morning or late at night, to have a few quiet  moments with the baby and 
me. 
The story of the "Passive Resistance" struggle, whi ch lasted for some years, has 
been told by himself and others. It is not, therefo re, my intention even to 
touch upon it here, except at times to illustrate t he warm human side of the 
great leader of that movement. Soon after his recov ery from the attack made 
upon him he was arrested in connection with the rev ival of "Passive Resistance" 
and sentenced to three months' hard labour. 
As the Indian struggle for rights grew more intense  and more difficult, the 
periods of prison life became almost a refuge for M r. Gandhi. He lived the 
philosophy he had taught at this time, to do everyt hing in one's power to right 
the wrong one saw around one, but if forcibly remov ed from the field of action, 
then to trust to God to carry His work on without o ne. So, in prison, 
notwithstanding the sordid surroundings and the rou gh labour he was at first 
put to, his soul grew in quietude. He thought and i ntensified his vision. Each 
time he returned to the world one felt that some al most indefinable growth 
had taken place in him during his absence. 
Two very different human incidents stand out in my mind during this period. 
Immediately upon his return from three months' impr isonment he took up the 
fight with added vigour. He seldom got more than ab out four hours' sleep, and Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  every minute of his waking hours was occupied with anxious thought and work. 
One night he returned home late as usual, and went to the kitchen to get some 
lemonade that was kept there. 
Our little house was in a rather cheap neighbourhoo d, since, apart from the 
desire for simplicity, all the available money was used to assist the struggle; 
and we, therefore, had to take a house at a low ren tal. The one we occupied 
was the best we could find at the time, but it was a miserable sort of a place, 
built in rather  a primitive manner. There had not originally been a bathroom, 
and a previous tenant had had a bath put into  a long cupboard that ran under a 
peculiar stairway which led to a long and odd-shape d room under a decidedly 
sloping roof. The bath had been just put in without  any- proper attempt to 
arrange for any means to carry off the waste water.  A hole had been cut in the 
wall and a piece of pipe attached to the plug-hole in the bath was run through 
this hole. The water ran out of this down the wall at the side of the house, and 
was supposed to find its way to the gutter in the r oad. This seldom happening 
completely, it meant that the wall, which was in sh adow, and the ground 
around it were always damp. Consequently, we were t roubled with a great 
number of big, fat slugs crawling about as soon as it was dark. 
As Mr. Gandhi went along the passage-way to the kit chen with stockinged feet 
he trod upon one of these slimy creatures. He felt its soft body crush under his 
foot and for a moment thought that it must be a pie ce of fish or meat, left 
there by the non-vegetarian Native girl. Coming at the end of a tiring and 
worrying day, immediately before a further period o f imprisonment, it seemed 
just too much to be endured patiently. His ascetic nature rose in revolt, and 
with an almost passionate fervour he exclaimed: "Th ank God, I shall be in jail 
tomorrow!" We often laughed about this incident aft erwards, but at the time it 
seemed tragic that his only place of refuge from th e trying problems of life was 
a prison. 
 
On his release from this term of imprisonment, find ing me ill, he expressed 
much concern about it. I had not had any proper sle ep for a considerable time, Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  and in addition to many factors producing insomnia,  I was trying to wean my 
baby, now eight months old, and finding it extremel y difficult. Mr. Gandhi 
asked: "If someone could take the baby for a few ni ghts, do you think you could 
sleep?" 
"I do not know," I replied, "but I am getting absol utely finished out!" 
"Will you trust me with him?" he then asked. 
"But what can you do?" I questioned. 
"If you will trust him to me, I believe I could hel p to wean him. I am sure I 
could coax him to sleep away from you." 
I consented to allow Mr. Gandhi to try, and it was arranged that, on his return 
from a meeting, whatever the time was—it would cert ainly be after eleven 
o'clock —he would take the child from me. 
He arrived home about one o'clock that night, and c oming to my room took the 
baby from his cot to sleep on a little mattress on the floor beside his own. He 
had -a jug of water and a glass beside him, if the child should seem thirsty. The 
household settled down to sleep, and for about five  hours not a sound was 
heard to break the restful quiet of the night, the baby sleeping throughout 
without a whimper. This arrangement was repeated ev ery night for about two 
weeks, by which time the weaning was completed, and  the baby returned to 
my room in much better condition than when he left it. 
 
I cannot think of any human problem that at some ti me or other I did not 
attempt to thrash out with Mr. Gandhi. Most often, the discussions arose 
spontaneously and were the outcome of something he said that would seem to 
challenge my mind or something deep-seated in me. O ne day he was talking of 
the value of celibacy for the priesthood and for al l those engaged in real 
teaching. 
"I appreciate what you say," I remarked, "but I oft en think it is more difficult 
for the man or woman, cut off from a vital experien ce, to be able to advise 
concerning it." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  "He can concentrate on the perfect," replied Mr. Ga ndhi. 
"But concentrating on the perfect will not help him  to understand the mere 
human difficulties. The priest or teacher, who has never known the horror of 
seeing someone he loves and is responsible for, sta rving for food, cannot 
understand the temptation of such a person stealing ." 
"It is just because he can stand outside of the tem ptation that he is most able 
to help. You do not go to the sick to help the sick , but to the strong and well." 
"I admit that," I replied, "but I think I do not li ke your implied suggestion that it 
is wrong to produce children." 
"I did not say it was wrong." 
"No, you did not  say  so. But you did say something to the effect that i t was a 
pandering to the flesh." "And is it not?" queried M r. Gandhi. 
"No," I replied emphatically; "that reduces the pro duction of children to a 
weakness, if not an evil. If it is wrong, God Himse lf must be wrong, for it seems 
to be the only way He has of creating His children,  "and without it human life 
would cease on this planet." 
"Would that be so terrible?" 
"I am not at all sure it would be right, until mank ind has attained the 
perfection we believe it has to grow to." 
"But," persisted Mr. Gandhi, "you do believe that p eople who have a great 
mission or work to do should not spend their energy  and time in caring for a 
little family, when they are called to a bigger fie ld of work?" 
"Yes, I believe that." 
"Then what are you quarrelling with me about?" 
"Only that you are still making me feel that you th ink it to be a higher condition 
of life to be celibate than to be a parent, and I s ay that the condition may be a 
difference of kind and not of degree." 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  This question of "to be or not to be" a parent was one frequently discussed. Mr. 
Gandhi was reaching the point where he began to thi nk that it would be better 
for the world, and probably for God, if mankind cea sed to reproduce itself. 
There came a time when I felt that if one were goin g to have a child, it would 
seem as though it were "conceived in sin and carrie d in wickedness." I 
remember, when one of the members of the colony at Phoenix was going to 
have a baby, I did not for some weeks mention the l ady's name in connection 
with babies. In due time the child was born, and tw o days later my husband 
and I went to Phoenix to see Mr. Gandhi. We talked in the usual way for a little 
while. Then Mr. Gandhi almost plaintively said: 
"You have not asked about the new baby. Don't you w ant to know about it?" 
"Yes, very much," I replied, "but I was not sure wh at you thought about it." 
"Well, come along, we will all go and see it." 
And we three went off to visit the mother and child . 
Mr. Gandhi seemed quite pleased about it, talking i n the most happy and 
satisfied manner about the baby's good points and t he mother's progress. 
When he entered the mother's bedroom his eyes were alight with affectionate 
interest. I felt somewhat puzzled, but realized tha t even Mr. Gandhi 
distinguished between abstract truth and human love , and mother-love was 
always of great beauty and joy to him. I think he o ften endowed a mother with 
many attributes she did not necessarily possess. 
"Being a mother," I once said to him, "does not mak e a woman wise." 
"No," he replied, "not simply being a mother; but b eing a loving mother does, 
for all real love teaches us wisdom, and one of the  finest aspects of love in 
human life is mother-love. It contains within itsel f the seeds of great sacrifice." 
"Yet a mother may love her children dearly and have  no wisdom in training 
them," I objected. 
"Love will teach her even that," he replied. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  "But it does not even teach her how to feed them pr operly. She can kill them 
by loving overfeeding." 
"That applies to the mothers who have lost touch wi th their true instincts. Your 
civilization and living in big cities have destroye d the knowledge that mother-
hood should give. Don't you think you know how to d eal with your baby?" 
"I am learning by experience. I am not sure about m y instinctive knowledge of 
the subject." 
"Trust your love and it will not lead you wrong," h e concluded. "Don't try to 
reason with your brain too much about it." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61   
CHAPTER IX  
One evening a big meeting of Indians and sympathize rs was held in the Masonic 
Hall, Johannesburg. The large gathering overflowed the confines of the hall, 
and crowded up the doorway and porch. Mr. Gandhi wa s the chief speaker and 
always drew a big crowd to him wherever he went. At  the close of the meeting 
Mr. Gandhi came down from the platform and talked w ith a few people; then 
he and I walked out together. As we reached the out er door I noticed a man 
standing in the shadow of it. Mr. Gandhi also speci ally noticed him, it was 
evident, for he went directly to him and linked his  arm in the man's, saying 
something in a quiet, earnest voice to him. The man  hesitated for one moment, 
then turned and walked away with Mr. Gandhi, I mean time keeping my place on 
the other side of him. We walked the length of the street. I did not understand 
what the others were talking about, even could I ha ve heard it. But I could not 
hear, for both men were speaking in a very low voic e. At the end of the street 
the man handled something over to Mr. Gandhi and wa lked away. I was some-
what puzzled by the whole proceeding and, as soon a s the man had gone, I 
asked Mr. Gandhi what was the matter. "What did the  man want—anything 
special?" I queried. 
"Yes," replied Mr. Gandhi, "he wanted to kill me." 
"To kill you," I repeated. "To kill you? How horrib le! Is he mad?" 
"No, he thinks that I am acting traitorously toward s our people; that I am 
intriguing with the Government against them, and ye t pretending to be their 
friend and leader." 
"But that is all wicked and dreadful," I protested.  "Such a man is not safe; he 
ought to be arrested. Why -did you let him go like that? He must be mad!" 
"No," replied Mr. Gandhi, "he is not mad, only mist aken; and you saw, after I 
had talked to him, he handed over to me the knife h e had intended to use on 
me." 
"He would have stabbed you in the dark. I . . ." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  But Mr. Gandhi interrupted me. "Do not disturb ..yo urself so much about it. He 
thought he wanted to kill me; but he really had not  the courage to do so. If I 
were as bad as he thought I was, I should deserve t o die. Now we will not worry 
any more about it. It is finished. I do not think t hat man will attempt to injure 
me again. Had I had him arrested, I should have mad e an enemy of him. As it is, 
he will now be my friend." 
 
We had by this time moved to a somewhat larger hous e, and furnished it 
slightly more elaborately. I was expecting another baby and the methods of the 
household had had to be altered. The constant influ x of Indian guests, both by 
day and by night, had to cease. It was quite natura l that people from all over 
South Africa to see Mr. Gandhi came prepared to sta y at least for a night at our 
little house. But the time came when that had to be  altered, so it was arranged 
that, whenever Mr. Gandhi could, he should stay wit h us, but otherwise it 
should be given out that he was no longer with us, and our home should no 
longer be the centre of the Passive Resistance stru ggle, but our own private 
residence. 
 
One other amusing incident occurred about this peri od, but one  that caused us 
all to think.  We  had  a cat, and in the natural order of life it gave birth to 
kittens. Unfortunately for itself and us, it produc ed  a large  fa mily at one 
attempt. When I saw six little kittens  I won dered what I was going to do with 
them. It was useless suggesting, even if I had want ed to do so, to either Mr. 
Gandhi or my husband, who shared his views on the s anctity of life, that some 
of the kittens should have  a watery grave. So we left the mother to struggle 
along with her brood as we supposed Nature intended  her to do. The cat tried 
to settle the question for herself and  us. After a few days she ceased to feed 
two of them, and they were starving. I tried to giv e them milk, but they could 
not take it from me in the only way I knew how to g ive it to them. Then one 
died. The mother, still finding her family too larg e, tried to kill two of the 
others herself. She started by biting off their fro nt legs and then left the poor Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  creatures to their fate. We were confronted with th e problem of dealing with 
the mutilated kittens. I asked Mr. Gandhi and my hu sband what ought to be 
done. I do not remember what reply I got, but I do recollect drowning the 
injured and dying mites myself. From that time we d ecided not to keep a cat; 
the present one and the kittens should be given awa y, and we would not have a 
cat again with its problems in our midst. Mr. Gandh i, in explanation of the 
callous behaviour of the cat, said that when we dom esticated animals we 
destroyed their natural feeling, and that probably accounted for the cat 
destroying her young in the way she had done. I, ho wever, wondered! 
This cat incident is also reminiscent of a dog epis ode that occurred soon 
afterwards. I had a nice, healthy dog given to me, and, in accordance with the 
household tradition, tried to bring him up a vegeta rian. I had made for him 
quantities of "mealie pap" and other things, and he  had a very great liking for 
grapes. We talked to all our friends of the splendi d behaviour of our vegetarian 
dog, and Mr. Gandhi was proud of him. As, at the ti me, we were boycotted by 
all our neighbours, on account of our having "colou red people" in the house, we 
never heard of the troubles of the neighbourhood; b ut one evening a member 
of the household, falling over something at the bac k door, called out for 
assistance. Investigation ensued, and we discovered  a huge joint of venison. 
Later on I found that for months our dog must have stolen chickens and 
anything else he could find, and had eaten them raw . Some of our theories 
were thus found to have, if nothing worse, at least  weak spots! 
A little group of us, including Mr. Gandhi, my husb and, myself and a European 
guest, were talking of the dietetic value of raw or  unfired food, especially 
fruits and vegetables; or, if not actually uncooked , then conservatively cooked, 
the whole of the fruit or vegetable to be eaten, ex clusive only of the stones. 
As I have said in a previous chapter, Mr. Gandhi an d I had had such discussions 
often, but our guest was recently converted to Gand hism, and, being a new 
convert, he was tremendously in earnest and a "whol esale" experimentalist. 
"Tomatoes should always be eaten with their skins,"  said my husband, 
sententiously. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  "I do not mind that if they are not too tough," I r eplied. 
"The skins form 'roughage'," interjected Mr. Gandhi , "which the body requires. It 
helps elimination. Potaoes, too, have their most im portant mineral salts just 
under the skin, and should always be cooked with th e skin on, and the skin, 
too, should be eaten." 
"That is all right for baked potatoes," I interrupt ed. "They are quite nice in a 
well-baked jacket." 
"The value of cabbage," Mr. Gandhi went on, "is in the water the cabbage is 
boiled in; one could drink that and throw away the cabbage itself." 
"Potato parings make a very good soup, I believe," remarked our guest. "Of 
course, properly scrubbed and cleaned first." And h e looked hopefully at me. 
"We have tried cabbage water," I said, "without sal t or anything added. Henry 
said it tasted nice, and drank about a pint and a h alf of it, but he could not go 
to the office afterwards, for he was too unwell to do so! I do not like potato-
skins, and I am sure that I won't like potato-skin soup!" 
"Have you tried it?" asked Mr. Gandhi, turning to m e. 
"I have tried eating boiled potatoes with their ski ns and all, and it made me ill." 
"No, that could not have made you ill," smilingly J  said Mr. Gandhi. 
"But I know it did, because of the result," I repli ed, "and, anyway, I do not like 
things like that." 
"Our tastes become vitiated in modern life, and we waste the best of the food 
by throwing away the skin," said our guest somewhat  impatiently. 
"Yes, we have forgotten to live as Nature intended us to do, and we pay for it 
in the ills of modern civilization," continued Mr. Gandhi. 
"Do you think we ate those things, with their skins , when we were nearer to 
Nature than we are today?" I asked with apparent me ekness. 
Our guest looked at me with compassion, not untouch ed with contempt. 
"Of course we did," he replied with dogmatic emphas is. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  Mr. Gandhi, who knew me, better than our guest, was , I believe, wondering 
what I was going to say next. 
"Then how is it," I said, "that monkeys, in a state  of nature, chew off the skins 
of carrots and apples and throw that part away, pee l bananas and then reject 
the skins?" 
"That is not so," said our guest, dissenting energe tically. 
"But it is," I interrupted. "Is it not, Mr. Gandhi?  You know that monkeys never 
eat the skin or peel, do they?" 
Our guest turned to Mr. Gandhi, convinced that I sh ould get a verbal smacking 
for such a heresy. 
"I am afraid Millie is right," quietly came from th e umpire. 
 Then silence fell for a few moments, which I broke  by remarking: "Even if, in a 
state of nature, animals eat uncooked food, it does  not prove anything except 
that they have not learned to cook it. For if you g ive them cooked stuff—buns 
for instance to an elephant; all kinds of cooked fo od to a pig; and any cooked 
dainties to a monkey—they are eaten with enjoyment.  So what happens then? 
Does Nature go wrong in these cases by not aiding t he creatures instinctively to 
reject the cooked food?" 
No one answered me, but Mr. Gandhi laughed softly a nd our guest looked 
vexed. 
I sometimes think that Mr. Gandhi enjoyed such disc ussions, not because of 
their intrinsic merits, but because of the differen t points of view he would hear 
stated, and also because he often liked to hear me express myself vigorously, 
even if he did not altogether approve of my comment . Once he said to me: 
"Do you ever believe anyone to be entirely right?" 
"No, I think not. To be entirely right one would ha ve to have the knowledge and 
wisdom of the Infinite, and that no one has." 
"And so you bend the knee to none?" he asked questi oningly, but with a twinkle 
in his eye. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  "To no man do I yield up absolutely my intelligence ," I replied. 
"And you call no man Master?" he said smilingly. 
"That sounds horribly arrogant, I know, but I belie ve I am a seeker after Truth, 
and no one man holds it all." 
"Do you think you will ever find it?" he asked. 
"No, for if I thought I had found it I should know it could not be. My finite mind 
could not even apprehend the Infinite; how then cou ld I find it?" 
"And you will never find peace," Mr. Gandhi said, a lmost sadly. 
 
On another occasion I put the question to Mr. Gandh i, in answer to a statement 
of his about natural living and the training of chi ldren: 
"What is natural? We really do not know." 
"But we do," he replied. "Nature speaks through our  instincts very clearly, if 
only we listen to her." 
"I do not agree with that," I said. "My reason used  to tell me it was not true, 
and now my experience confirms it. The whole of our  young life is one long 
training out of our natural instincts." 
"That is where we are wrong," said Mr. Gandhi. "Tha t is where our conflict 
comes in." 
"But children left to themselves would be impossibl e as members of any 
society, for even their natural functions have to b e trained. I don't believe they 
would walk upright unless they were taught and enco uraged to do so." 
"Of course they would," said Mr. Gandhi. "It is nat ural for man to walk upright." 
"No, I do not think it is natural, in the sense in which you are using the word. It 
is natural that a human being can do so, but I beli eve children would just 
shuffle along like monkeys, unless they were taught  otherwise. There is that 
story we recently heard of the child who was stolen  by baboons from a Boer 
farm, and when found years afterwards she used an a rm and hand to help Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  herself along. Children would not learn to speak, u nless they were taught to do 
so. They would just grunt and make strange sounds."  
"You are exaggerating," said Mr. Gandhi, "and you d o not believe all you are 
saying." 
"I am logical," I replied, "and know that what I sa y is true. My baby has the 
capacity for expressing the qualities that belong t o human life; but I realize 
that I have to train him in their expression. Every  mother and nurse knows that, 
during the early years of a child's life, she is tr aining the child out of its natural 
instincts. Think of one thing only, how everything a child gets hold of he puts 
into his mouth. If it were poison, he would soon di e. Nature does not seem to 
teach him that he may not chew coal or poison-berri es. He. . . . ." 
"In a natural condition of life, he would not be ab le to get at coal," laughingly 
broke in Mr. Gandhi. 
"But he probably would get poison much more easily, " I retorted quickly. 
"No, your reasoning is false," said Mr. Gandhi. "We re it otherwise, we could not 
have survived as human beings. It guides us and pro tects us." 
"Nature guides us through the mind of man, I am thi nking and the mind of man 
is also Nature. Where can you say, this is Nature a nd that is not?" 
"I think there is a line drawn between the works of  beneficent Nature and the 
evil that the mind of man conceives' replied Mr. Ga ndhi with finality. 
 
Some time went by, and once again we were talking o f the learning of children. 
The subject was specially to the front at that time , because of the rapid 
development of my own little baby. My experiments i n allowing him to do just 
the things he wanted to do I had ceased to find sat isfactory, and by now I was 
trying to train him to sit in a chair for his meals  and feed himself with a spoon. 
One day, he turned his plate upside down, started p icking up bread and milk in 
one hand, and banging the sloppy mess with a spoon in the other. I corrected 
him, and he protested in the usual way. Mr. Gandhi was in the room at the 
time. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  "You see," I said to him, "that is all perfectly na tural, but he must not be 
allowed to do it, nor will I allow him to try to ea t bread and milk with his 
hands. For," I continued, "if he is to be a member of any community, he has got 
to learn to do as the other members do. Instinct wi ll have to go, I am afraid." 
 
"But instinct is right to make him eat only when he  is hungry and needs food," 
said Mr. Gandhi. "Do not force him to take food whe n obviously he does not 
need it." 
"It is not that he does not need food," I replied. "He does not need it now, but 
he does not understand that he cannot throw it on t o the floor and still have it 
on his plate in front of him. How can I let him scr amble over the floor, picking 
up the bits of sloppy bread with his fingers?" 
"But the way he should eat is only a question  of custom. Instinctively, a child 
does eat with its fingers. You may teach it not to do so, but take away its 
spoon and fork and it reverts to Nature." 
"I know all that is only a question of custom," I r eplied, "and I realize that if we 
lived in a jungle we should obey our primitive inst incts, and it would be quite 
right to do so. But I do not accept the suggestion that what may be right for 
the individual in the jungle is right for him as a member of a civilized 
community." 
"But you do admit that the instincts of the man in the jungle will probably be 
right for him there?" 
"Yes, I admit that, as long as he remains in the ju ngle. When he comes away, 
however, the instincts may be quite wrong." 
"But that would be the environment, not the instinc ts, at fault. That is what is 
wrong with so many of our people in India; their in stincts and habits are right 
for the village and the country but wrong for the t own." 
"Then are instincts a safe guide for us?" I asked. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  "We are getting away from our original point," repl ied Mr. Gandhi. "We were 
talking of training the child." 
"Yes," I said, "and you rather seem to think, or to  imply that you do, that 
children should be just left to grow and not be spo ilt by training." 
"What I mean is this: Children have in them the spa rk of God, and society so 
covers it up that they forget it or it is killed in  them." 
"But," I replied, "The spark of God is not killed b ecause a child is not allowed to 
give way to his natural instincts. To eat with a sp oon, for instance, or to wash 
with soap, or to cut his toe-nails with scissors, w ould not make him any the less 
conscious of the God within. Saints have come out o f civilized life as well as 
from the Himalayas." 
"Yes, but in spite of it, not because of it," said Mr. Gandhi. 
"Do you think children would grow as perfect flower s in a garden if left to 
Nature? I do not think so, and even in a garden the  best flowers are nearly 
always trained by the gardener. They become very di fferent specimens under 
training than they were in their original state." 
"Yes, they do become different. They are trained to  please the eye by their 
appearance, but the soul of the flower, the scent o f it, is lost in the process." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70   
CHAPTER X 
That little home, like the others, came to an end. The house was given up, the 
furniture disposed of, and I went with my two babie s to Durban for a few 
months, my husband remaining behind in Johannesburg  with Mr. Gandhi. About 
a month later I received a very important and urgen t letter from Mr. Gandhi. 
I would see, he said, that Henry (my husband) had b een asked to go to India to 
plead the South African Indian cause there. He woul d be away for some 
months, perhaps a year or more. But he would not co nsent to Henry's going 
unless I first gave my consent. He did not wish to influence this in any way, but 
I was to do just what I thought right^ myself, and he would agree with me, and 
Henry should agree also! This letter was so charact eristic of Mr. Gandhi, 
because in it he had done as he always did, put the  moral obligation for 
decision upon the other person concerned, but at th e same time conveyed a 
feeling, rather than a direct suggestion, that if o ne came to a different 
decision from his, one would place oneself in the w rong. Needless to say, my 
consent was given, and my husband joined me in Durb an for a few days. I then 
arranged to return to England until we could once a gain set up home together 
in South Africa. Within a few weeks of my return to  England, Mr. Gandhi also 
arrived, to interview the British Government with r eference to the position of 
Indians in South Africa. 
During his stay in London I saw him seldom less tha n once a week, sometimes 
more often. While on this visit to London he met tw o English ladies, relatives of 
mine, who, hearing of his Phoenix scheme, became mu ch enamoured of it and 
begged to be allowed to join it. Both being well ed ucated, they offered 
themselves for secretarial or journalistic work, or  as teachers for the proposed 
school. Several conversations on the subject ensued ,: but Mr. Gandhi did not 
feel at all sure as to the wisdom of allowing them to go to Phoenix. Eventually 
he turned them over to me, asking me to tell them q uite frankly all I knew 
about the settlement, and telling them that after t hat they could again discuss 
the matter with him. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  I was perfectly frank with them, and though, person ally, I would have 
welcomed their presence in South Africa, I knew tha t they could never settle 
into the life expected of them. I, therefore, point ed out the difficulties they 
would find at Phoenix—the lack of all so-called mod ern domestic amenities, no 
proper sanitation (only a rough shed fixed up in th e grounds), no bath-room, no 
society that they would call society, no music, no theatres, miles away from a 
railway station and no conveyance to get there, sna kes and insects making life 
a constant worry, and no doctor to be had for many miles, in case of accident 
or illness. Very simple food, and mostly, of the ki nd they would want, only 
procurable in tins. I told them that they would hav e to scrub their own floors 
and wash their own clothes, cook or prepare their o wn food and wash up their 
pots and pans themselves afterwards. They would onl y receive a trifling 
allowance for dress and necessities, and would neve r have anything to save for 
any future emergency. 
Needless to say, the ladies had not considered any of these practical details. 
They had never known the, necessity for troubling a bout such things 
themselves, and had not been able to visualize that  "simple life" in a place like 
Phoenix meant simple life  in reality , living close to Nature, and not as it might 
be portrayed on a London stage. They were most disa ppointed, and at first 
almost disinclined to believe me. Mr. Gandhi was ag ain approached in my 
presence and asked if I had stated the blunt truth or if I had exaggerated. 
Mr. Gandhi replied: "Yes, it is quite true, and I s uppose that is how English girls 
with your upbringing would see it. I do not. Yet Mi llie is right." 
"But could we not have a servant?" one said. "Surel y our talents would not have 
to be wasted in such work as washing or cleaning?" 
"To have a servant would alter the whole spirit of the colony," replied Mr. 
Gandhi. 
"Then I am afraid we could not be happy there under  such conditions." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  "But happiness, you know, depends upon what you can  give," Mr. Gandhi said, 
"not what you can get. However, I agree that, unles s you could quite alter your 
values of things, you could not be happy there or g ive happiness to others." 
The ladies did not go. Without any further hesitati on they agreed that it was 
impossible to adapt themselves to such a life, whic h they had thought of so 
differently. 
After they had gone, Mr. Gandhi smiled in rather an  amused but wistful way. 
"I am sorry," I said, "but I know it would not have  been to anyone's benefit had 
they gone to South Africa, and I think they would h ave made you unhappy, too, 
for you would have felt responsible for their unhap piness, and you would then 
have had to send them back." 
"Yes," he replied, "that may be true; but they say they are not happy here. This 
modern life of  your great city is all wrong; it makes you all restless  and 
discontented. You do not know yourselves what  you want. You fill your lives 
with accumulating things, thinking they are necessa ry to you, and thus make 
prisons for yourselves." 
 
Mr. Gandhi was not in London very long, but amongst  the other delightful, 
warm, human acts of his I remember of his stay was the following: 
One of my young friends was endeavouring to qualify  for a profession, but, 
having no money, was passing through a desperately hard time. Mr. Gandhi 
knew her, too, and one day, in talking to him of he r, I said: 
"I am worried about _______. I do wish I had a litt le money to lend her. She 
absolutely needs shoes and stockings and does not s ee how she can get them. 
Of course, if she can get through this year she wil l be able to manage, but it is 
the immediate  novo  that is the trouble. I wish I could help her!" 
"Do not worry about her," he replied, "she is  too fine a character to be hurt by 
hardship; she will not fail, but will manage to get  through all right." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  A few days after this, when again I met her, she sa id: "I have had such a 
wonderful surprise. Mr. Gandhi sent me two pounds, asking me to accept it as a 
little present from him." So the shoes and stocking s were- bought to the 
satisfaction of us all. But Mr. Gandhi never mentio ned the incident to me 
himself. 
 
It was during this visit to England that he met man y of the leaders of the 
Women's Franchise campaign. He showed the greatest interest in all they were 
doing, and in after-days often said that he learned  much of the value and 
methods of passive resistance from some of the Brit ish women, and applied 
some of those methods himself in his own political struggles in South Africa. In 
particular, he spoke very highly of the little grou p of women workers 
associated with Mrs. Despard. 
I recall that on one occasion, when we were talking  of the Suffrage movement 
in England, he expressed regret that a militant sec tion should have been 
formed and that it should have resorted to methods of violence. "They have 
their own weapon," he said. "Why should they copy t he evil ways of men?" 
"It may seem a pity," I replied, "but has not the m eekness of women been her 
undoing?" 
"If she only reproduces the tactics of men in publi c life, she will not help the 
world's progress upwards." 
"Some of these militant women are such gentle creat ures, really," I said. "It is 
probably a temporary phase of woman's evolution." 
"It may be so. Mrs. Despard herself is a wonderful woman. I had long talks with 
her in London and admire her greatly, and much appr eciates her advocacy of 
'spiritual resistance'. Mrs. Pankhurst, too, is a s plendid woman, and it is all the 
more pity that woman's struggle for freedom should be spoilt by threats of 
physical force." 
Mr. Gandhi was also greatly attracted to the Ethica l movement, some of whose 
members came at the time into close and sympathetic  touch with him, which Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  was subsequently maintained, through the ensuing ye ars of difficulty and 
anxiety, by frequent and encouraging correspondence . Whilst Mr. Gandhi's 
letters were nearly always brief and to the point, they nevertheless revealed a 
very fine human companionship and understanding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75   
CHAPTER XI 
The block of buildings, now known as Abbey House, i n Victoria Street, 
Westminster, was, in the year 1909, known as Westmi nster Palace Hotel. It was 
a fine hotel, and catered for a good middle-class c lientele, and for visiting 
politicians from overseas. Here Mr. Gandhi stayed o n his second visit to 
England during the Passive Resistance struggle, and  here many interesting 
people of all kinds came to see him. 
Just as he loved offering hospitality in South Afri ca, so, too, he loved to offer 
it here. Sometimes, it seemed to me, he was in his happiest mood when he had 
a party of earnest and affectionate people around h im. But even in London the 
hospitality offered was of the simplest kind, and m ust have been a source of 
amusement mingled with embarrassment to the hotel s taff. In those days a 
gentleman was supposed to "behave as a gentleman", and one could not break 
the social code and expect much respect from what w ere then called the 
"lower orders". 
I wish I could have heard what the hotel servants s aid amongst themselves 
about Mr. Gandhi and some of the people who visited  him. Often a dozen of us 
would meet by invitation in his private sitting-roo m at lunch- time. The table 
in the centre, normally covered with a nice velvet cloth, and looking 
reasonably respectable with Mr. Gandhi's books upon  it, would be cleared. 
Books and papers would get stacked upon the floor. Then newspapers would be 
spread over the table, and piles of oranges, apples , bananas, perhaps grapes, 
and a big bag of unshelled monkey-or pea-nuts, woul d be put ready. 
Mr. Gandhi would ring for the waiter, and when an a ttendant, resplendent in 
white shirt and tail-coat, appeared, he would order  tea and toast for those 
who desired it, and some plates. The waiter would l ook round the room, clear 
a portion of the table for his tray, and walk solem nly out. Soon the silver tea-
tray, beautifully appointed, would be brought in; t hen we would set to work, 
eating, drinking, talking and laughing. Some would walk about or stand, and 
the nut-shells would fly about the room, orange jui ce would run over the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  paper-covered table, and at the end of the meal the  room looked rather as if 
an ill-bred party of schoolboys had been let loose in it. I would gather the 
paper together with the orange-peel, the banana-ski ns, the apple-waste and 
the nut-shells, and stuff all I could into the wast epaper-basket. The bell would 
be rung, and the solemn attendant would come in and  clear away the debris. 
Mr. Gandhi would be totally untroubled by all the m ess and muddle in the 
room, and the waiter never lost his dignified gravi ty as he cleared away the 
rubbish. It all seemed rather fun then. The breakin g away from a conventional 
lunch gave an added enjoyment to monkey-nuts and te a; but I wonder what 
the waiters really thought! 
 
It was while I was paying one of my frequent visits  to Mr. Gandhi at the hotel 
that the following conversation took place. We were  alone together for a little 
while, and were talking about a visit he had made a  day or two previously to 
some dear friends of mine. They were in trouble at the time, and though I 
knew Mr. Gandhi was sympathetic towards them in a g eneral way, I felt he was 
somewhat impatient with the whole business. 
"Why should they make so much trouble about it?" he  said. "It is all a question 
of money only. If they gave up their present luxuri ous method of life and 
adopted a more simple one, they would have nothing to trouble about." 
"It is not so easy as that," I replied, "and their method of life is not expensive." 
"But they are living beyond their means, and that i s dishonest." 
"That is because their income has unexpectedly drop ped. There is very little 
business, such as Mr. B_______ does, being done any where at the present 
time." 
"Then why not give up their house and take a cottag e in the country?" 
"That would not help much and it is not practicable ." 
"And they keep a maid," went on Mr. Gandhi; "why no t give that up? Why does 
not Dora stay at home and look after her mother?" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  "Dora is earning her own living. Were she to give t hat up, it would not help the 
home." 
"Can't Mrs. B_______ do her own work?" Mr. Gandhi a sked. 
"She has never done any rough work in her life," I replied. 
"Then why should she not now begin to do so?" 
"She could not do it. Her health would not permit h er to." 
"The trouble is," began Mr. Gandhi, "that the house  is filled with all kinds of 
useless rubbish. She should get rid of it all. Why not throw the lot away, 
instead of having a woman to sweep heavy dust-colle cting carpets, and clean a 
thousand bits of china and ornaments?" 
"I am afraid you do not understand the psychology o f such people as Mrs. 
B_______. They are dear people,  in a way, but could not stand the drastic 
treatment you suggest. It would kill them!" 
"Then it is useless to worry about them. They must be left to their own 
devices. The trouble with such people is the accumu lation of things; that 
makes all the anxieties. They worry and work to pro cure and collect things 
round them, and cannot live were they to let them g o. Happiness can never be 
found if we crowd our lives with things." 
I realized that it was useless to pursue the subjec t further, and I realized, too, 
that there was much truth in what Mr. Gandhi said; but it was not the whole 
truth, and it was the bit of truth not voiced that made the complication for 
most people. 
On another occasion, when Mr. Gandhi had been speak ing of the thraldom of 
possessions, I said: 
"I think you are mistaken when you state that peopl e cannot be separated from 
their possessions. They can be, and not suffer much  either." 
"Then why do they strive so hard to keep them?" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  "To keep and preserve them may be a queer form of p rinciple or discipline with 
some people. They inherit things, or have them give n to them, and then feel in 
duty bound to care for them," I replied. 
"That is just it. They will spend their lives in a mistaken idea of duty to things 
instead of freeing themselves from them." 
"But I am sure," I said, "There are many people who  have great possessions, but 
who are not bound to them. They could let them go q uite easily, and I am sure 
one can be poor, have only a few valueless things, and yet be wickedly proud 
of them, and damage one's soul by the possession of  them. After all, the test is 
not how much you have, but what you think of the th ings you have got." 
"Yes, that is so. There is the story of the Hindu s age-King to whom came, one 
day, a Sannyasi with a single piece of cloth as his  sole possession. The King, 
wishing to test the reality of the Sannyasi's appar ent self-emancipation, caused 
by his occult powers his palace to burst into flame s, which consumed, among 
other things, the Sannyasi's only cloth. The Sannya si was greatly distressed by 
his loss; whereupon the King said to him: 
" 'You had only a single piece of cloth, which can easily be replaced. Yet you 
are more distressed about your loss than I am about  the destruction of my fine 
palace and its irreplaceable contents!' " 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79   
CHAPTER XII 
Perhaps in some ways Mr. Gandhi's inability to real ize his hope of establishing a 
"house of healing" was one of the great disappointm ents of these South African 
years. He had a natural love of healing and an inst inctive knowledge of the 
fundamentals of good health. If these qualities had  been properly trained and 
joined to experience, he might have become one of t he great modern healers. 
As it was, his life was too broken up and occupied with political or social 
questions to allow him time for consecutive study o r work of this nature. Yet 
many people, both European and Indian, came to him for advice and 
assistance, and many a person has been treated by h im and received great 
benefit thereby. At the time I first met him he had  become convinced of the 
value of the teaching of a German school of health culture, in connection with 
which he had installed in his house a Turkish cabin et-bath, a cold plunge and 
hip bath, and douches for external and internal use . 
One interesting case that came to my notice was tha t of a Mr. C_______, a 
connection of some European friends. Mr. C_______ h ad been under medical 
treatment on and off for some months, and at last t he doctors had ordered an 
immediate operation for appendicitis, much to the c oncern of our friends, the 
D_______s. Mr. D_______ came to Mr. Gandhi and talk ed the matter over with 
him. I was not present at the conversation, but I k now that the result was that 
Mr. D_______ went straight from Mr. Gandhi at eleve n o'clock at night to the 
lodgings of his friend, and carried him on his back  to his own house (a distance 
of about a mile). There Mr. C_______ was put to bed , douched, made to fast, 
treated, and nursed largely according to Mr. Gandhi 's directions, and he made a 
speedy recovery from the acute attack. As soon as M r. Gandhi thought he was 
fit, the patient was put on to a light non-flesh di et, and his strength was 
gradually built up. I knew of him for many years af ter that, but he stuck to the 
diet and internal cleanliness and never once had a relapse or a recurrence of 
the trouble that had made him so ill for months. Mu ch of the advice the 
modern health societies and their medical supporter s give and practise was Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  given and practised by Mr. Gandhi over twenty-five years ago. Today, it has 
become almost fashionable, and certainly respectabl e, to be a non-flesh eater. 
One might almost think that the evils of constipati on had only just been 
discovered when one reads health hints in various j ournals. But long years ago 
Mr. Gandhi was well aware of these evils and worked  on the principle of 
cleansing the internal machinery of the body, and g iving it small quantities of 
pure food, at not too infrequent intervals, to keep  it in health. 
The most remarkable cure that I knew of from the co mmencement of the 
Indian troubles to the end concerned Mrs. Gandhi he rself. She was about forty 
at that time and had been ailing for a long while. She had consulted a doctor 
who treated her, but she grew worse, and eventually  her condition, which had 
become serious, was diagnosed as pernicious anaemia . She was then living at 
Phoenix. Mr. Gandhi was in Johannesburg, and my hus band and I were living in 
Durban. A night arrived when a hasty messenger came  from Phoenix for us and 
the doctor. We got the last train to Phoenix and ar rived, between eleven and 
midnight, at the bedside of Mrs. Gandhi, feeling ve ry anxious. 
We found her in a state of collapse, and whilst the  doctor tried his restoratives, 
we, with the members of the family, waited. The nig ht was got through, and as 
soon as possible Mr. Gandhi was telegraphed for. Mr s. Gandhi would not permit 
"Bapu" to be bothered so long as she had had the po wer to prevent it. But with 
her collapse things were taken out of her hands. Mr . Gandhi arrived next day, 
and in the meantime Mrs. Gandhi had rallied slightl y. No possible hope, 
however, was given of her recovery, and at the most  only a week or two of life 
could be looked for. 
Mr. Gandhi put everything on one side and devoted h imself entirely to her. 
During one of her conscious periods he asked her if  she trusted him absolutely. 
She replied in the affirmative. Then he said: "Will  you let me try and help you?" 
This she agreed to, placing herself entirely in his  hands. After this he stopped 
all medicines and refused to allow the doctor to tr y and force his patient to 
take meat extracts. The doctor abused Mr. Gandhi, w ho, however, stood firm. 
Then, almost in despair and anger, the doctor pract ically threw up the case. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  For the next two weeks Mr. Gandhi scarcely left his  wife's side. He fed her at 
intervals with pure lemon- juice, and no other food  or drink of any kind was 
given to her. He poured his calm nerve-energy into her, and did for her all the 
little delicate duties that a very sick woman requi red. For these two weeks 
Mrs. Gandhi semi- consciously struggled for life, b ut by the end of that time a 
marked change was noticeable. The conscious periods  were much longer, sleep 
became more natural, the dropsical swellings became  less, and the eyes began 
to look clearer. Then, by slow degrees, a little fr uit and milk were given, and 
lastly vegetables without condiments, and cereals. And without a single 
relapse, Mrs. Gandhi slowly but surely returned to health. Although that is over 
twenty years ago, she has not had a serious illness  since, though she has 
endured a very difficult and strenuous life. 
Mrs. Gandhi's recovery from pernicious anaemia, at that time was almost in the 
nature of a miracle, for it was still looked upon a s one of the fatal diseases, 
and very few cases indeed of recovery were on recor d. Certainly, so far as Mr. 
Gandhi knew, no previous case had been treated by l emon-juice, aided by what 
we today call mental healing. It was a great puzzle  to the few medical men 
who knew or heard about it. 
Of course, some of Mr. Gandhi's health experiments were neither wise nor 
beneficial. One such was made upon my first baby, w ho, when a tiny mite of 
about six weeks old, was subjected to the shock of a cold mud-plaster being 
put upon the abdomen to assist in regulating its na tural functions. The child 
screamed and doubled up at the shock, then turned b lue and grew stiff. I tore 
the plaster off and warmed the little body next to my own, and fortunately the 
child soon recovered. But on many other occasions, in dealing with older 
children and adults, I have known a number of cases  where inflammation or 
congestion of a part of the body has been tremendou sly improved by the cold 
mud-compress as applied by Mr. Gandhi. 
In looking back over those years I can see how an i ncident that occurred in the 
early days of my life in South Africa must have pla yed a big part in Mr. Gandhi's 
dislike of orthodox doctors and their methods. A li ttle boy of about twelve Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  years of age, son of some Indian friends, was order ed an operation. The parents 
feared this very much indeed, and when eventually t hey did agree to having 
the operation performed—a fairly simple one, but co nsidered absolutely 
necessary for the child's health—they did so with t he proviso that it should be 
done at home, and that Mr. Gandhi should be present  to take care of the boy. 
So implicitly did these parents believe in him that  they felt that the child 
would be safe from all harm if only he were there. 
Unfortunately, the operation was not satisfactorily  performed. The child died 
on the operating-table, and Mr. Gandhi believed tha t the surgeon had been 
neither skilful nor careful, and that he had been p resent at what almost 
amounted to the murder of an innocent child. The pa rents were inconsolable, 
and in some obscure way Mr. Gandhi seemed to feel h imself responsible for the 
great sorrow that had come upon them. He felt that he had failed them. He 
returned home very much grieved and depressed, and for some days a cloud 
hung over his spirit. 
 
Considering Mr. Gandhi's character, it was most nat ural that he not only 
disbelieved in corporal punishment, but strictly fo rbade it in dealing with 
children. However tiresome and naughty a child migh t be, Mr. Gandhi believed 
in appealing to the best in him and in endeavouring  to arouse in the delinquent 
a sense of his own wrong-doing. Unfortunately, some  children seem to be 
lacking in a "best" or moral sense. They create som e of those problems that 
eternally crop up when those who believe in pure et hics are dealing with 
human nature. 
A boy about fourteen years of age had been put in M r. Gandhi's charge to 
educate, during one of his temporary school experim ents. The boy was a great 
source of trouble; he seemed to be naturally and in stinctively cruel and 
deceitful, two of the worst characteristics a child  could display in Mr. Gandhi's 
eyes. The latter tried to shower extra care and aff ection upon the boy; he 
reasoned and pleaded with him, but in vain. One act  of cruelty against other 
children or animals led to another, one lie to anot her. Eventually, my husband Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83  remonstrated with Mr. Gandhi for allowing the boy t o run wild. Other people, 
he said, were complaining, quite rightly, about it.  Mr. Gandhi sought for 
excuses, but my husband said that the boy needed a real corrective such as he 
would understand. Some physical punishment was evid ently the only thing the 
child would respond to. At last, one day, the boy f lung a cricket bat at a 
younger child's head, barely missing him. Mr. Gandh i, who witnessed the act, 
promptly asked my husband, who, too, was present, t o thrash the boy. This my 
husband did, and for a time a distinct improvement was noticeable. The boy 
put some sort of restraint upon himself, and it was  quite clear that he 
understood physical pain when applied to himself, a nd did not like it. 
Soon after this the boy returned to his parents, th e little school was broken up, 
and nothing further was heard of him. But I often w ondered if it were not 
almost a disappointment to Mr. Gandhi to know that the boy responded to 
brute-force, but was quite impervious to the gentle r and more ethical methods 
of correction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84   
CHAPTER XIII 
Nearly three years elapsed ere I returned to South Africa. My husband had 
come to England, and after a few months here I acco mpanied him to India, 
where we stayed nearly a year. 
On our arrival at Durban, arrangements were made th at we should settle there. 
My husband was to practise law in Natal and continu e, as in the past, to do 
some work for Phoenix. Mr. Gandhi was to remain chi efly in Johannesburg, but 
was also going to spend considerable time at Phoeni x developing the ideas that 
he had nursed for so long. 
Phoenix, during my absence, had undergone much •cha nge. Some of the old 
settlers had gone and new ones were installed. The plots of land were better 
cultivated, some kind of hedges had been planted, a nd nearly all the members 
of the community grew a considerable portion of the ir own vegetables. The soil 
being practically virgin and very rich, vegetables grew quite easily; salads and 
flowers of a fine variety were also cultivated with  ease, and pineapples grew 
from their own prickly tops, when planted in the fe rtile soil. 
One or two of the houses had been enlarged, and now  had more furniture in 
them and attractive curtains at the windows. A larg e one-roomed building had 
been erected and fitted for a school-room. Here one  of the new Phoenixites, an 
English lady, conducted school for the children of the colony. She had had no 
previous experience of teaching, but such things di d not worry Mr. Gandhi. Her 
heart was right, in his estimation, and her head wo uld, therefore, be right also. 
There were at this time, about fourteen Indian chil dren, between the ages of 
five and seventeen, boys and girls, attending the s chool. Some of these were 
boys placed in Mr. Gandhi's care for training. And this brought a new problem 
for him to deal with. The boys were adolescent and he had to study their 
developing sex-life. He thought a lot about it, and  cogitated over the best 
means of training them in knowledge and purity. A s eries of books were 
procured, such as  What a Young Boy ought to know,  and I was asked to read Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  them through and see which I thought the best to pu t into the hands of the 
boys to serve as a moral guide to them. But, alas! for hopes and theories; all 
the care and thought did not prevent one of those r egrettable incidents 
common to human endeavour. Mr. Gandhi was shocked a nd grieved when he 
heard that one of the senior boys had attempted ser iously to misbehave with 
one of the little girl-pupils. 
The father of the girl was naturally angry beyond w ords, and refused to allow 
her to go to the school-house again. In fact, he ke pt her closely guarded for the 
remainder of the time he stayed with his family at Phoenix. It was as though he 
blamed Mr. Gandhi for the deplorable occurrence. Th e boy himself, when asked 
to explain why he had behaved in such a manner, sai d "he could not help it, he 
felt like that." - Mr. Gandhi realized that it was impossible for him to deal with 
the boy unless he could keep him always under his p ersonal control. This not 
being possible, the lad was sent back to his father , and the incident was closed 
—not, however, without leaving its mark upon the co mmunity and setting up 
disruptive forces. 
 
It might seem that, with the erection of the school room, a suitable meeting-
place for the community would also have been procur ed. But this was not the 
case, for Mr. Gandhi's large living-room remained t he centre and meeting-place 
of the community. Here, every Sunday evening, all t he members gathered 
together for a kind of religious service. This serv ice was an interesting blend of 
East and West. We were fortunate in possessing a ni ce organ, and one or two of 
the English members were able to play a little. 
Mr. Gandhi usually opened the proceedings with a re ading from the "Bhagavad 
Gita" and would also read passages from the New Tes tament. Then there would 
be English hymns, in which all would join, and some  Gujarati sacred songs 
would be chanted by those that knew the language. M r. Gandhi joined heartily 
in the musical part of the service, thoroughly enjo ying the hymn-singing. We 
had a little hymn-book, specially arranged for our service, containing some Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  eighteen hymns taken from all sources, and printed and bound at the Phoenix 
Press. 
There were two great favourites of Mr. Gandhi, of w hich, through all the years 
I knew him, he never wearied. The first was the hym n of consecration: 
Take my life, and let it be 
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee. 
Take my moments and my days; 
Let them flow in endless praise. 
 
Take my hands and let them move 
At the impulse of Thy love. 
Take my feet and let them be 
Swift and beautiful for Thee. 
 
Take my voice and let me sing  
Always, only, for my King.  
Take my lips and let them be  
Filled with messages for Thee. 
 
Take my silver and my gold;  
Not one mite would I withhold.  
Take my intellect and use  
Every power as Thou shalt choose. 
 
Take my will and make it  
Thine. It shall be no longer mine.  Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  Take my heart; it is Thine own.  
It shall be Thy royal throne. 
 
Take my love, my Lord, I pour  
At Thy feet its treasure-store.  
Take myself, and I will be  
Ever, only, all for Thee! 
 
Perhaps in no place in the world would those beauti ful words of consecration 
be sung with greater fervour and meaning than in th at little lamp-lit 
corrugated-iron room, where Mr. Gandhi was the cent re of the life of an 
assembled congregation of about twenty people, from  East and West. 
The other hymn was one that he has often quoted whe n he has felt himself 
surrounded by difficulties: 
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom, 
Lead Thou me on;  
The night is dark, and I am far from home, 
Lead Thou me on.  
Keep Thou my feet; I do not ask to see  
The distant scene; one step enough for me. 
 
I was not ever thus, nor prayed that Thou  
Shouldst lead me on; 
I loved to choose and see my path; but now 
Lead Thou me on.  
I loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,  Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  Pride ruled my will: remember not past years. 
 
So long Thy power hath blest me, sure it still 
Will lead me on,  
O'er moor and fen, o'er crag and torrent till 
The night is gone;  
And with the morn those Angel faces smile,  
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile. 
 
All loved these Sunday evening services. It seemed to bring the community 
closer together and gave a feeling of Sabbath peace  to the day. 
 
Among the many young people committed to Mr. Gandhi 's care from time to 
time was a girl of about twenty years of age, whom I will call Lila. She was 
educated, clever and attractive, and Mr. Gandhi see med quite pleased to play 
guardian to her. She talked high idealism, had an u nderstanding and sympathy 
for all the reforms that "Bapu" planned, and busied  herself in teaching and little 
acts of service to those about her. So all was appa rently going well. Then a 
bomb fell. One day, on seeing Mr. Gandhi, I was sho cked at his appearance. He 
looked so depressed and ill. He greeted me, but wit hout his usual warmth and 
smiling welcome. 
"What is the matter? Are you not well or has someth ing happened?" I asked, 
somewhat perturbed, as soon as we had sat down in a  quiet corner alone. I had 
never seen him look so sad and troubled before. Eve n when affairs in the 
community had looked their darkest, his faith in th e right working out of a 
Divine plan upheld him and gave him serenity and ho pe. But this day he looked 
as though the light had been quenched within him; h e sat slack, with all the 
fight out of him. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  "The worst has happened!" he remarked tonelessly. 
"The worst?" I echoed, mystified. "What do you mean ?" 
"A dreadful thing has happened among ourselves." 
"But what is it? Please tell me what has happened!"  I exclaimed, now much 
alarmed. 
"Lila has been guilty of destroying her chastity. S he has had physical 
relationship with N_______!" said Mr. Gandhi. 
"That is indeed terrible! Are you sure it is true?"  
"Only too true! She has confessed all to me." 
"Still, I don't quite understand," I said. "How cou ld it happen? When did it 
happen? I thought you knew how she spent all her ti me, and where she went to. 
How, then, could this have taken place?" 
"I thought I knew Lila myself and knew her movement s, but it seems I did not," 
he added mournfully. "When I thought she was simply  taking a walk with her 
book, she was meeting N_______, with the result I h ave told you." 
"Has it been going on for long?" I asked. 
"Yes, some time," he replied; "some weeks, at least ." 
We sat silent for a few minutes. I scarcely knew wh at to say, for I realized how 
dreadful the knowledge of this must be to him. I re alized, too, how it would 
hurt him in the eyes of others, if once a rumour of  it got abroad, and I 
wondered if we could keep it to ourselves. But I kn ew that was impossible as 
soon as he spoke again. 
"Several people knew or suspected," he said. "I see m to be almost the only one 
quite ignorant of what was going on around me. And now what am I to say to 
her family? For I am responsible to them for her!" 
"But surely you are not blaming yourself for this, are you? How could you 
possibly have suspected that such a shocking thing could happen?" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  "Whom else should I blame, if not myself? I must ha ve neglected something. 
The responsibility must fall on me." 
"I do not think so," I said emphatically, and I fel t myself growing indignant that 
this girl to whom Mr. Gandhi had given such loving care, of whom he had 
spoken so proudly, should have deceived and betraye d him so badly. I did not 
feel the same about N_______, who was a few years y ounger than Lila, and 
knew little or nothing about girls. It was, I felt sure, a case of •deliberate 
seduction on her part. 
"Of course, you cannot be held blameworthy," I cont inued. "Lila was not 
ignorant. She knew what she was doing. She has beha ved disgracefully! It is 
dreadful for you, I know, but no one can hold you r esponsible for it. What are 
you going to do next?" 
"I must tell her family at once, and must accept th eir rebuke. Lila is full of 
remorse. She realizes how wicked she has been, and has done nothing but cry 
for the last twenty-four hours, and is starving her self." 
"Well, a fast will do her good," I said. "I have no  sympathy at all with her. But I 
am sorry for N_______. What could he know of sex-pa ssion before this? He has 
just been trapped. However, what are you going to d o about him?" 
"I do not know what to do about either of them yet.  They must both punish 
themselves. Of course, I cannot trust them to meet each other again, unless 
someone else is present, and I cannot send either a way from my care." 
My thoughts travelled to a possible further cause o f worry. 
"Is there to be a baby?" I asked. 
"No, thank God! At least that much is spared me," r eplied Mr. Gandhi fervently. 
"Well, that is something to be thankful for! It is,  indeed, dreadful enough for 
you without that to complete it." 
"I have told Lila that I must share the burden of h er guilt, and I hope by fasting 
to expiate it." Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  So we continued to talk, but the facts remained, an d we could not talk them 
away. I left Mr. Gandhi with a feeling of deep sorr ow for his suffering. I knew 
how enormously he valued chastity^ and how he felt himself responsible for 
these two young people under his care and whom he h ad yet been unable to 
keep from falling into temptation. The sense of res entment against Lila 
remained with me. She had not even the excuse of pl eading a great love for 
N_______, and, furthermore, she was already married ! 
More than a fortnight went by before I saw Mr. Gand hi again. He looked thin 
and haggard and was only just recovering from a lon g and rigid fast. After we 
had talked for a little while he begged me to see L ila, who, he said, was 
behaving splendidly now. 
"She has acknowledged her sin before us all; she ha s fasted with me, taken off 
all her jewellery, put on the garb of mourning, and  had her hair cropped short 
as a sign of guilt and remorse. I have great hopes of her again," he went on. 
"Perhaps this acknowledgment of her sin will purge her soul of much that was 
dross in it, and she will, in fact, be the finer fo r it, when she has fully expiated 
the harm done." 
I did not accept this new version of her character,  nor did I very much want to 
see her at the moment; but I did not feel that I co uld refuse Mr. Gandhi's 
request, so, after a few minutes' silence, "Very we ll," I said. 
"You will find her in the garden," replied Mr. Gand hi. 
I turned and went. 
She greeted me quite cheerfully, displayed not the least sign of 
embarrassment, and, so far as I could see, showed n o real remorse either. She 
certainly wore a dress denoting mourning, and had h er hair cropped, but I did 
not feel that she regarded herself as a guilty pers on. Mr. Gandhi was 
immeasurably more conscious of her guilt than she w as herself. On my way to 
the garden I had wondered what I should say to her when we met, but I need 
not have done so. She took the lead in the conversa tion, and almost at once 
commenced to lecture me on tea-drinking. She knew I  was fond of tea and that Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  Mr. Gandhi often teased me about the vice of tea- d rinking. She, too, had given 
it up since her "confession". I was so nonplussed b y her attack that I had very 
little to say in reply, and did not stay long with her. When I returned to Mr. 
Gandhi I told him frankly that I was not impressed by her supposed remorse. 
"I don't," I said, "believe Lila is really sufferin g at all. In fact, I wonder why she 
confessed to you." 
"It was not quite a voluntary confession," slowly r eplied Mr. Gandhi. "Some of 
our friends came to me and reported what they had a ctually seen; they thought 
I ought to know. I was incredulous at first, but wh en I taxed her with it she 
broke down and cried bitterly, and confessed everyt hing." 
"I cannot pretend I have any sympathy with her. It is not only the breaking of 
the moral code that offends me, it is everything ab out it; the way it has been 
done and all the other things." 
"Do not let us be hard or censorious," Mr. Gandhi s aid gently. "We do not know 
the weakness or temptations of others. We may not j udge them. We may 
condemn the act, but we may not condemn the actor."  
"I don't want to judge Lila; but she is not a heroi ne in a tragedy." 
"Yet we may remember the story of Mary Magdalene." 
What exactly passed between the father and Mr. Gand hi I never learned. I did 
know, however, that soon the girl was returned to h er father, and ultimately 
went back to her husband, so that Mr. Gandhi's resp onsibility towards her 
ceased. From the boy, who was virtually an ignorant  partner in her guilt, Mr 
Gandhi exacted a solemn vow that he should not marr y for some years and that 
he would live a strictly celibate life, until such time as he, Mr. Gandhi, should 
release him from his vow. 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93   
CHAPTER XIV 
The Indian community was not the only sufferer from  the proposed repressive 
Asiatic legislation that was destroying the peace o f South Africa. A number of 
Chinese, small traders and market-gardeners, were a lso affected, and adopted 
the policy of Passive Resistance, under Mr. Gandhi' s advice and guidance. They, 
too, had a leader, a very clever man, who was in co nstant consultation with 
the Indian leaders. When, therefore, Mr. Gandhi rea ched a verbal agreement 
with the Government, an important condition of whic h was afterwards 
repudiated by General Smuts, the Chinese leader acc epted the same terms, 
and just as Mr. Gandhi received ill treatment at th e hands of some of his more 
fanatical followers, who did not understand or acce pt the compromise that was 
the basis of the agreement between the contending p arties, so did the Chinese 
leader. His life was threatened, and he knew that i t was no idle threat. For 
days he had to remain in hiding, seeking the house first of one of his faithful 
followers, then of another, and sleeping where he c ould. Mr. Gandhi had been 
able to deal with the malcontents among his people,  but Mr. Leong Quinn, our 
Chinese friend, was not so successful. 
We were all very anxious and disturbed for his safe ty, and earnest discussions 
concerning him took place. One day I was told that word had been sent to Mr. 
Quinn to seek refuge in our house. I cannot pretend  that I was enamoured of 
the idea. I had visions of a band of people, intent  on murder, entering my 
home and doing their foul deed, while I would stand  helplessly by with my 
baby. I may say at once that Mr. Quinn never accept ed our house as a hiding-
place, and soon the trouble in the Chinese communit y calmed down. But the 
talks about it are of interest. 
One day I said to Mr. Gandhi: "But supposing Mr. Qu inn does come here and is 
hiding in our house, and some of his enemies come t o the door asking for him.' 
Am I supposed to say: 'Mr. Quinn is hiding in the c upboard,' or should I try to 
put them off by some subterfuge?" 
"What do you think you should do?" asked Mr. Gandhi . Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  "I am inclined to think I should try and put them o ff." 
"And if they asked you point-blank if Mr. Quinn wer e in your house, what then?" 
"I believe I should be justified in denying it." 
"But that would be lying to them." 
"I know it would be, but my sin, if any, would be s imple beside the sin of 
permitting a man to be murdered, to whom we had giv en refuge." 
"You are a Jesuit in your reasoning," objected Mr. Gandhi. "You are saying that 
the end justifies the means." 
"I do not mind your calling me a Jesuit. I think it  is often so difficult to know 
what is right and what is wrong. It is often a choi ce between two wrongs, and 
one naturally chooses the lesser." 
"You may never choose wrong that good may come of i t," concluded Mr. 
Gandhi. 
On another occasion, during this period, the questi on of right and wrong came 
up for discussion. Mr. Gandhi had again made a stat ement about keeping to the 
narrow path of absolute truth. 
"But is not Truth only one attribute of the Divine? " I said. "There are others." 
"If you break one law, you break them all," replied  Mr. Gandhi. 
"Yet to break what I believe to be a Divine law may  be the highest sacrifice, if 
in so doing I am helping to save someone I love, ev en though I myself pay the 
price." 
"Do you think you can save another by committing a wrong act yourself?" 
"I do not know about it in the absolute; probably n one of us does. But I think 
men and women reason differently about what you cal l sin. A woman would 
not hesitate to take upon herself the sin of one sh e loved, even if she went to 
hell for it. She might say, if asked by the Lord ab out something: 'Lord, I did it. I 
alone am to blame'; and she would rejoice in taking  the burden upon herself. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  You seem to think she would say: 'It was he whom I loved that did it.' In the 
interests of truth I must say that." 
"No, no, that is exaggeration!" smilingly said Mr. Gandhi. "You know that is not 
my meaning. But our standards must be set right, ot herwise we should be 
always floundering in the mire." 
That was a frequent and characteristic remark of hi s—"We must set our 
standards right!" 
 
Another incident that taught me a big lesson arose out of a discussion that took 
place on a later occasion. Mr. Gandhi had discovere d that a mutual friend had 
lied to him and deceived him. He was telling me abo ut it and expressing great 
pain and disappointment. I was sorry for him, but a t the time I think I was 
more sorry for the culprit. I knew how much she val ued Mr. Gandhi's good 
opinion, and I knew her temperament well enough to know that some actions, 
which Mr. Gandhi would call evil, came naturally to  her, and that she would 
hide such things from him if possible. His condemna tion of her would cut her 
off from him, and cause a deep and lasting wound. 
"I know she was wrong," I said, "but I do think you  ask too much of people. You 
ask more than they are able to give. Then, in self- defence, they try to deceive 
you. If she had cared less she would not have acted  in the way she has." 
"She has persistently lied to me," he replied, "the n tried to excuse herself when 
she knew I had found her out." 
"Yes, I know she has done all that, but I do not th ink she was really conscious 
of the wrong she was doing. She values your friends hip so much, and she did 
not wish you to think her wicked." 
"So," he said, rather sadly, "she preferred to lie to me than trust me with the 
truth. You cannot make excuses for her like that!" 
"But I do. Her excuse is that what she was doing di d not seem so wrong to her. 
She knew she was trying to deceive you about it aft erwards, but even that I 
believe seemed almost right to her. You have so oft en said it is the thought Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  that makes an action wrong or right; so that if we do not know we are doing 
evil, surely we are not evil. I am sure she did not  look upon what she was doing 
as really wicked, only perhaps a little unwise. She ...." 
"Ah!" he interrupted, "that is the worst of it. You  have condemned her out of 
your own mouth. To do evil and know one's act is ev il at least places one with 
those who know good from evil and right from wrong.  There is hope for such a 
one, who does wrong even deliberately, knowing it t o be wrong. But for one 
who commits an evil action, not even knowing the ac tion is evil, there is no 
hope. One can regret a wrong act, and determine nev er to commit such an 
error again. But if one has not yet awakened to the  consciousness of right and 
wrong, if one cannot distinguish between good and e vil, one is not aware of 
the God within. Such people are no higher than the brutes of the field, who 
live according to their nature and do not have to d eal with moral values." 
I had nothing to say in reply to that, so was silen t. The truth of Mr. Gandhi's 
words made a deep impression upon me. I never after wards felt that I could 
urge in extenuation of a fault: "I did not know." I  realized, as I had never done 
before, that Mr. Gandhi had enunciated a great fund amental truth; that 
according to our consciousness of right and wrong w ere we placed on the 
respective rungs of the ladder of evolution. Mr. Ga ndhi would not blame an 
animal for living the law of the jungle; that was a cting according to its nature 
and right for it. He would not blame one of the chi ldren of the race of men for 
behaving with an unawakened consciousness. But from  those who claimed that 
they belonged to the advanced higher orders of mank ind he demanded a life to 
be lived in accordance with that claim, and one of its great essentials was 
Truth and Honour. 
 
As I have said, it was most painful for Mr. Gandhi to realize that he had been 
deliberately deceived by those whom he trusted, and  it was, in fact, with 
difficulty that he could believe that he had been w antonly and intentionally 
misled by anyone who called him friend. This attitu de of mind, quite apart 
from its effect upon others, often gave rise to dif ficult situations for me. I Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  knew that I seemed sometimes to act with suspicion or a queer form of 
jealousy when I remained silent, while Mr. Gandhi a nd my husband would wax 
eloquent in their praises of this one or that. My s ilent disagreement or even 
disapproval was rather a trial to them. 
Mr. Gandhi, of course, had a large number of youthf ul followers and many of 
these were well known to me. They used to visit me,  or I would see them at 
meetings and elsewhere, and we would talk over the events of the day. They 
had no fear of me or of my criticism, and could and  did talk freely of 
themselves and others. Much of the struggle, so gri m and serious to others, was 
to them a rather joyous adventure, as it would be t o youth elsewhere. Often I 
was laughingly made the recipient of "secrets", and  as I was trusted by these 
young men, I certainly could not give them away. 
During the later phases of the struggle, Tolstoy Fa rm, a new Colony run on 
something like community lines, came into existence , about twenty miles 
south of Johannesburg. The estate belonged to Mr. H ermann Kallenbach, a 
farmer-architect, and a devoted follower of Mr. Gan dhi, at whose disposal he 
placed it, primarily to accommodate the families of  those who had gone to jail 
for the sake of conscience. As in other places, her e, too, Mr. Gandhi sought to 
put some of his cherished theories into practice. T he men's quarters were quite 
separate from the women's. Even the married men wer e separated from their 
wives and were supposed to be celibate while stayin g at Tolstoy Farm. 
The food was of the simplest kind. All such (so-cal led) luxuries as tea and 
coffee, sugar and jam, condiments, including salt ( which Mr. Gandhi most 
strongly objected to at this time), were forbidden in the diet list. Most of the 
colonists probably obeyed the rules, but there were  some who did not approve 
of so austere a life, and a few of these, including  some of the youths of my 
acquaintance, told me how they managed. They had—li ke the schoolboy—tuck 
boxes, and when the colony had retired for the nigh t, the tuck boxes would be 
brought out, and succulent dishes, including the fo rbidden things, would be 
prepared and enjoyed. I am afraid I rather sympathi zed with these young 
people. It was so natural that they should desire s omething more than frugal Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98  monastic fare. Some of them were only lads of eight een to twenty-one. When, 
one day, Mr. Gandhi was eulogizing the natural simp licity of these young 
fellows, extolling with simple delight their marked  preference for a plain and 
saltless diet to the highly seasoned dishes they ha d been accustomed to, I did 
not reply. 
"You are silent," he said. "Do you not admire the s acrifice these young men are 
making?" 
"I admire them," I replied, "but I would not call i t sacrifice. I think they are 
rather enjoying the whole thing. They certainly see m happy enough." 
"That is the beauty of it! (A common phrase with Mr . Gandhi). They are happy. 
They are such splendid young men, simple and loyal, " observed Mr. Gandhi. 
"Yes," I murmured dubiously, but without conviction . 
"What is the matter?" asked Mr. Gandhi. "There is s omething on your mind, I 
know." 
"Nothing, at least nothing to talk about," I replie d. 
And Mr. Gandhi never knew that tea and coffee, suga r and salt, and a dozen 
other delectable but forbidden things were smuggled  on to the Farm and 
thoroughly enjoyed there. 
 
Tolstoy Farm was also the setting for another snake  incident. This time my 
husband, Mr. Kallenbach and another man (a young Hi ndu) were the chief 
characters in the story. Mrs. Gandhi at the time wa s accommodated with 
befitting simplicity in part of a disused stable. H ere my husband and Mr. 
Kallenbach visited her one day, and whilst the latt er was conversing with her, 
my husband strolled to the other end of the barnlik e place and, glancing 
casually into a zinc bath lying there, noticed a de adly snake coiled up inside, 
comfortably asleep. My husband quietly made his way  to Mr. Kallenbach, 
explained the situation briefly to him and sought h is advice. Mr. Kallenbach, 
engaging Mrs. Gandhi in conversation in order to di stract her attention, 
whispered to my husband to get a pick-handle that w as handy and kill the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  snake. My husband, who had a horror of taking life,  was in a quandary. He 
raised the pick-handle, intending to bring it down upon the sleeping reptile's 
head. But the blow never fell, for his arm remained  paralysed in mid-air and 
refused its task. The movement, however, disturbed the creature, which now 
began to uncoil. At this moment, the young Hindu ca me along, observed the 
situation, assisted my husband to carry the bath, w ith its now active occupant, 
outside the stable, snatched up the pick-handle and  dealt the reptile its death-
blow. Mrs. Gandhi was much relieved at her compatri ot's readiness. I do not 
now recall Mr. Gandhi's reaction when he came to he ar of the episode. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100   
CHAPTER XV 
I have mentioned on an earlier page that Mr. Gandhi  thought a great deal of 
the Women's Suffrage movement in England. 
"Why don't you start something among the Indian wom en here?" my husband 
said to me one day in Johannesburg, during one of M r. Gandhi's prison spells. 
"They would not be permitted to join the women's mo vement here," I replied. 
"You know that." 
"I do not mean that you should attempt to join them  up with the Suffrage 
movement here. But why not form an organization amo ngst the Indian women 
themselves, for general public purposes?" 
"But what could I do," I asked, "that would be of s ervice or interest? Most of the 
women don't speak English and some of them never go  out into public life at 
all. So I don't suppose they would come to a meetin g were I to call one." 
"Why not try?" replied my husband. "Get some of the m together, and see what 
you can do. Those that do speak English can transla te anything you say to those 
that don't." 
"I will think about it," I said. "But if I do attem pt it, you will have to help me to 
get the women together. I do not know who has a wif e here and who has not, 
and I do not know where they live." 
"I can manage that for you," was the reply. "You th ink out what you want to do, 
and get a scheme ready in your mind to discuss with  the women. I am sure it 
would please Mr. Gandhi." 
The result of this conversation was that some forty -women attended my first 
meeting, which took place in a kind of hall lent fo r the occasion by one of the 
leading Indian business-men. The women, wives of pe tty storekeepers and 
hawkers, many of them with babies in their arms, we re, I soon found, most 
anxious to hear all about the political struggle in  which their men-folk were 
engaged; and I gave a brief account of current even ts. All kinds of questions Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  were asked me. What was Mr. Gandhi going to do abou t this, and what about 
that? I answered as well as I could, and then settl ed in to talk on some other 
subject, telling them something of the women's stru ggle for political freedom 
in England. Finally, arrangements were made that we  should meet fortnightly. 
From this small beginning grew the Transvaal Indian  Women's Association that 
played so big a part in the last phase of the Passi ve Resistance struggle. 
When Mr. Gandhi came out of jail and heard of the n ew women's movement, he 
was delighted and warmly praised my effort. 
"The women," he said, "will strengthen the hands of  the men enormously. I see 
that, more and more, women are going to play an imp ortant part in the affairs 
of the world. They will be a great asset to any mov ement." 
"Don't you anticipate divisions in the household wh en men and women are both 
in public life?" I asked. 
"That may be," he replied. 
"They will not both think alike, you know. A wife m ay think very differently 
from her husband, and won't that rather destroy the  harmony of the 
household?" 
"Women can destroy that now," he replied sententiou sly. "When they do not 
like something the. husband does, they can quarrel,  and sulk, and weep." 
"Oh, surely not in Indian homes," I said teasingly.  "Surely such disagreeable 
things don't happen in Indian homes!" 
He smiled. "I have learned more of passive- resista nce, as a weapon of power, 
from Indian women than from anyone else. Even Ba (M rs. Gandhi) has taught 
me that I cannot compel her to do anything she abso lutely and resolutely 
refuses to do. She just passively resists me and I am helpless!" 
One of our Indian acquaintances, a man over forty y ears of age, fairly well 
educated, and a supposed follower of Mr. Gandhi, ha d just returned to South 
Africa from a visit to India, bringing with him a l ittle girl-wife, a child of about 
thirteen. Mr. Gandhi was most vexed about the matte r and expressed strong Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  disgust at the man's conduct. It was a very unusual  case in South Africa, and 
Mr. Gandhi did not know quite what to do. There wer e no relatives of the girl 
at hand for him to appeal to, so that the girl for a year or two might have been 
removed from her husband. He felt he could do nothi ng^ and was accordingly 
rather despondent. 
"It is disgraceful," I said, "that such a marriage should have been permitted in 
any country. She is only a child." 
"It is, indeed, disgraceful," replied Mr. Gandhi so rrowfully. 
"But will they live in wedlock?" I asked. 
"I am afraid so," answered Mr. Gandhi. 
"The man should be whipped," I said. "It is an outr age to take a child of that 
age in marriage." 
"I know how you feel about it. Your heart is sad fo r the child. My heart aches, 
too." 
"And Indian law permits it!" I said indignantly. 
"The laws relating to marriage in most countries pe rmit a man to marry a young 
girl." 
"Yes, I know the laws do, but custom is against it, " I retorted. 
"Ah, there is much for me to do when I return to th e Motherland," he replied. 
"There is certainly need for a lot of social reform  work," I said. "You know I 
could not work with the Suffrage movement here. For  one thing, I could not 
join in the general denunciation of men; but I do r ealize how, everywhere, 
women have been exploited under man-made laws. It m akes me angry!" 
"You are right to be angry," replied Mr. Gandhi. ^E ven Christ permitted 
righteous anger, and you are -angry at the possible  suffering < to be inflicted 
upon a helpless child. But do you not think that wo men have a share in the 
blame, too?" Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  "No, no," I cried, "I cannot believe that a mother would willingly give her little 
daughter of twelve or so to be the wife of a robust  man of over forty. It is not 
natural." 
"But she does do so. She has done so. This marriage  was probably arranged by 
the women of the family. Certainly it was accepted by them, and it is women 
who must exert themselves to alter these things." 
"How can they?" I asked. "What freedom have they to  alter these dreadful 
customs that priests and laws have forced upon them ?" 
"Yet they must," replied Mr. Gandhi. "They must rou se themselves to do their 
share in the work of reform. 
It is for them to set the standard of life. It is t heir privilege and their duty." 
"But what can they do?" I asked again. "What powers  have they in India?" 
"A great deal more than you think! If nothing else,  they can refuse to have 
anything to do with these horrible things, and in r efusing to be a partner in 
man's shame, the conduct of life must be raised, fo r men will have to listen 
when women refuse to obey." 
"But would not force be brought to bear upon them t hen?" I. urged. "They 
would be broken, as they have been before in the wo rld's history." 
"Perhaps," he replied. 
"And what then?" I asked. 
"They can die," he answered, "and what man can prev ail against a dead 
woman?" 
I am reminded by this conversation that recalls to me one of Olive Schreiner's 
"Dreams", in which she insists that woman can break  her bonds and rise to 
freedom only by her own efforts and after many wear y struggles, of Mr. 
Gandhi's friendship with that great woman who alway s gave him loyal 
encouragement in his task. My husband tells the sto ry how, upon his return to 
England in the latter part of the War, he called up on her during her 
uncomfortable exile in this country, and the first thing she asked him, with Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  almost girlish eagerness, was: "So you have seen Ga ndhi recently? How is the 
dear boy?" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105   
CHAPTER XVI 
We had scarcely been nine months in Durban when onc e again a crisis arose in 
the Indian community, this time of a much more seri ous nature and spreading 
its effects more widely than the previous ones. 
We had, in the meantime, taken a nice little villa in a high and pleasant spot in 
Durban. My two sisters had come out to me, and I wa s settling down to some 
kind of constructive life. Mrs. Gandhi and the fami ly were fairly content at 
Phoenix, and Mr. Gandhi as before spent his time be tween Johannesburg and 
Phoenix, attending to his legal office and keeping his attention upon every 
important detail in the life of his people in South  Africa. 
The eminent Indian statesman, Mr. G. K. Gokhale, ha d also paid his visit to the 
country, and during his stay Mr. Gandhi had devoted  a very great deal of time 
to looking after him. As Mr. Gokhale was suffering from diabetes he was on a 
very strict diet, and many were the times that I he lped Mr. Gandhi to prepare 
food for him. He was staying in a house quite near to us, so that it was easy for 
me to go daily to see that the house was kept in or der and suitable food 
provided for Mr. Gokhale. One item of the diet Mr. Gandhi would nearly always 
get ready himself. It was the preparing of some sli ced potatoes. These had to 
be rendered into charcoal by means of putting them between hot embers. 
Sometimes the potatoes were completely burnt, and s ometimes they dried but 
did not char, and both Mr. Gandhi and I would anxio usly watch the preparation 
of this article of food. Mr. Gokhale was very fasti dious, too, about the neatness 
and corrects folding of the Mahratta scarf that he wore across his shoulders, 
and Mr. Gandhi would carefully iron and crease it w ith his own hands. Indeed, 
towards Mr. Gokhale he behaved as towards a revered  elder brother, and he 
looked upon him as his political guide and teacher.  
This last crisis, to which I have referred, seemed to develop very rapidly, so 
that, within a short time, many hundreds of Indians  were under arrest, and 
practically all the senior men were in prison. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  The women and younger men of the community were now  virtually alone to 
carry on the fight for the right to live as free pe ople in an organized society. 
Mrs. Gandhi threw herself into the work and, with a  small group of women, was 
also arrested and sentenced to three months' impris onment. 
My husband had again been asked by Mr. Gokhale to g o to India to represent to 
the Government there and the Indian people the cond ition of affairs in South 
Africa. Before going, he was anxious to see Mr. Gan dhi and have a final 
consultation with him. With that object in view he journeyed about a hundred 
miles to pick up Mr. Gandhi on his historic march f rom Natal into the Transvaal 
with some thousands of "passive resisters". It happ ened that Mr. Gandhi was 
arrested just after my husband reached him, and, re alizing the urgency of the- 
moment, my husband immediately took charge of the t hen leaderless army. 
The next day he, too, was arrested for "aiding and abetting", and I was hastily 
summoned to the scene of action, and was present wh en they were both 
convicted and sentenced, returning immediately ther eafter to Durban. 
Then, at the earnest request of the community, I st arted off to India in my 
husband's place at twenty-four hours' notice, but w as turned back at Delagoa 
Bay by a cable from Mr. Gokhale, telling me that an  official mission was leaving 
India immediately for South Africa to investigate a ffairs, and that he was 
sending Mr. C. F. Andrews to help unofficially. 
 
Events now moved very rapidly, and within a few wee ks I was making another 
journey up to the Transvaal, this time to meet Mr. Gandhi and my husband, 
who had been released after five weeks' incarcerati on, owing to the setting up 
of a Commission to investigate the Indian grievance s. All seemed happy and full 
of enthusiasm at the turn events had taken. Mr. Gan dhi expressed great 
satisfaction and enjoyed a quip at my going off to India as I did, without 
intending to consult anyone about my movements. He teased me about 
deserting my husband and children, and made some re marks about women 
breaking free as soon as the strong hand of the hus band was removed. As a 
matter of fact, a journalist friend, anxious that I  should have my husband's Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  authority to replace him, had had his permission ob tained, through the usual 
official channels, during his imprisonment. 
Soon after this I accompanied Mr. Gandhi to meet hi s wife and the other Indian 
women on their release from jail, and saw the almos t shy look in Mrs. Gandhi's 
eyes as she waited for her husband's approbation of  what she had done. 
The agreement which put an end to those long years of suffering was at last 
arrived at and the day came when my husband and I a nd Mr. Gandhi met 
together to discuss our personal future. Mr. Gandhi  had been for some time 
turning his eyes longingly towards India, and now, feeling himself free to do so, 
he determined to say "good-bye" to South Africa as soon as he had consolidated 
the ground that the struggle had won. Some time pre vious to the ending of the 
struggle, I had been promised that, at its successf ul conclusion, I should have 
the choice of either remaining in South Africa, whe re Mr. Gandhi would 
endeavour to see us comfortably settled, or return with my little family to 
England to live. I chose to return to England. The years I had spent in South 
Africa had been too full of pain and unrest for me to wish to continue there. So 
arrangements were made for our return, the house wa s put in the hands of an 
agent, and an auction of our furniture and personal  belongings was advertised 
to take place. Friends had been written to in Engla nd to seek for and rent a 
house for us. The proposed marriage of one of my si sters was hurried along, so 
that it could take place ere we left. 
Then, one morning, a very characteristic letter arr ived from Mr. Gandhi. A 
colleague, upon whom he had relied to give guidance  to the community in his 
absence in India, had suddenly decided to settle in  East Africa. He had been 
earnestly thinking, he wrote, and praying for guida nce, and had come to the 
conclusion that he and my husband could not, in the  circumstances, both leave 
South Africa at that time. One of them would have t o stay to help the 
community and see that the Government fulfilled its  agreement with them. But 
the choice could not be his or my husband's, it mus t be mine. They had both 
given their word to me that I Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  should have a home in England and they must honour their word unless I 
released them from it. The position was therefore t hat either I kept Mr. Gandhi 
in South Africa, when I knew he felt a strong call to return to his Motherland, 
or I must give up something that for so long, throu gh many dark days, I had 
held on to as a future reward. Mr. Gandhi had admon ished my husband not to 
put any pressure upon me, but to leave me to choose  entirely for myself, and 
then pathetically and naively said: "I have spent m any more years than you in 
public service in this country and long to go, but if Millie does not wish to stay 
here, I must." 
So, as before, the onus was put upon me to choose. I did not, however, feel 
that I had any freedom of choice. I knew that it me ant that I had to surrender 
my hopes and to stay on in South Africa. I wrote an d told Mr. Gandhi that we 
would remain, and my husband almost immediately lef t Durban to take over 
Mr. Gandhi's legal office and other affairs in Joha nnesburg. The sale of the 
household effects was proceeded with. I settled up affairs in Durban, and went 
on my way once more to start a new home. Mr. Gandhi , with my husband, met 
me at the station. He praised my action in arrangin g to free him, and said he 
was sure that my sacrifice would bring its own rewa rd. 
Mr. Gandhi's arrangements for leaving were hastily made and soon the day of 
his departure came. He expressed a wish to have our  elder child, by that time a 
little boy of six, to sleep with him, as he had don e as a baby, to enable him to 
have a quiet last talk with him. 
"You will be too tired," I had objected, "to be bot hered with Waldo, and you 
will have no time." 
"If he is there with me, I shall find time somehow, " he replied. 
So Waldo went to the little house where Mr. Gandhi was staying with Mrs. 
Gandhi and was given a mattress on the floor beside  the one Mr. Gandhi was to 
occupy, and was fast asleep long before the latter was free to retire. Both, 
however, awakened about four o'clock in the morning  and commenced to talk. 
Later on Mr. Gandhi told me that they had talked fo r nearly two hours of the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  nature of God, and that he had nothing to teach Wal do, for he was very near to 
God himself. 
I accompanied the party, with my husband, to Capeto wn, and we were there 
paraded in carriages round the town preceded by a b rass band which played a 
melody that I knew as "We won't go home till mornin g," but which probably the 
musicians believed to be something quite different and most suitable to the 
occasion. Mr. Gandhi sat patiently through it all, seeming neither pleased nor 
sorry at anything that was happening or had happene d. 
As I watched the boat steam out I felt an intolerab le sense of blankness come 
into my life. A chapter filled with movement and in tensity of thought and 
emotion had definitely closed. That was in 1914, an d war was declared on the 
day that the boat on which Mr. Gandhi was travellin g reached England, which 
was the goal of the first part of his journey. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110   
CHAPTER XVII 
It was during the third year of the Great War that I met Mr. Gandhi again, and 
this time we met in India. The intervening time had  been a very busy and 
anxious one, and my husband and I, like so many oth er reformers and idealists, 
had shed some of the illusions we had formerly cher ished. But all the world was 
suffering so badly at this period that our anxietie s seemed small by 
comparison, and our life calm by contrast with the lives of others, and with our 
own previous years of turmoil and stress. 
Recognizing that we had done our job, Mr. Gandhi ha d by now approved of our 
leaving South Africa to return to our homeland to t ake up our residence there. 
Previous, however, to going to England, my husband had to go to India to 
attend to some important matters. He proceeded me b y a few months, met me 
on my arrival in Bombay, and after a few days there  we proceeded to 
Ahmedabad to see Mr. Gandhi. We were not to stay at  the Ashram, where he 
was living, but with some Indian friends in the nei ghbourhood, and were to see 
him daily. 
I knew that during these three years he had travell ed a long way in thought, 
but I somehow felt he had become more Indian and le ss universal, and that I 
should personally find him different from the "brot her" I had known in South 
Africa. But this was not so. To me he was the same;  kind, gentle, and 
sympathetic to all the little things of my life, as  well as the bigger problems. 
I noticed, however, that his natural asceticism had  become more pronounced. 
More and more he was demanding of those around him that they should seek 
the things of the spirit. Yet, the queer anomaly of  it, his brain was seeing life 
politically, and plans for the amelioration of the misery of poverty and sorrow 
that he found in India were filling his horizon. 
I saw him now in what was practically the dress of a Gujarati peasant—a loin-
cloth to cover him to the knees and a voluminous pi ece of coarse cotton fabric 
that he wore as a shawl to cover the upper part of the body. On his feet, when Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  walking in the street, he wore a clumsy kind of san dal; otherwise his feet were 
bare. 
What different phases in Mr. Gandhi's mental career  had been proclaimed by 
the clothes he wore! Each costume, I think, denoted  an attitude of mind. Yet 
with what a curious detachment he wore them! Each s eemed to be but a 
fugitive expression of him, and behind it often one  sensed a human being, who 
wore form itself as though he would readily and eas ily cast it off, and stand 
naked before his God. When I first saw him in South  Africa, he wore a black 
professional turban, an easy lounge suit of a neat patterned material, a faint 
blue stripe on a darker ground being rather a favou rite with him, a stiff collar 
and tie, with shoes and socks for outdoor wear. Whe n later I met him in 
London, he looked distinguished in the conventional  dress of a pre- War English 
gentleman—a silk hat, well-cut morning- coat, smart  shoes and socks; and years 
afterwards I gave away a number of dress-shirts tha t he had discarded from his 
wardrobe of this period. 
Then again, in South Africa, he returned to the lou nge suit, but now a ready-
made, rather sloppy one, shoes more clumsy, and no longer starched collars for 
ordinary wear. During the latter part of his life t here, this gave way to a 
combination of East and West whenever possible—a pa ir of trousers 
accompanying a shirt-like garment, and nearly alway s sandals. Then the final 
change, a loin-cloth of home-spun material and a sh awl to throw round his 
shoulders when he considered it necessary to do so.  Some of his teeth had 
gone, "through taking too much acid fruit," he told  me. 
The absence of teeth made a big difference in his a ppearance. One felt almost 
sorry to see him laugh, because of showing the blac k gaps in the mouth. Later 
on he had a false set made, but he only wore them w hen compelled to do so, 
to assist in mastication when eating. 
Mrs. Gandhi had lost some of her English, but looke d happy in the busy life she 
led. As the eldest son's wife had recently died, sh e had his three young children 
with her to look after, as well as all the other wo rk that normally fell upon her. Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  After looking over the Ashram and discussing it, we  talked of the War. Mr. 
Gandhi was perplexed as to his exact position in re gard to it. War and 
bloodshed filled him with horror. He saw no reason why men and nations could 
not settle their differences by other means than ki lling each other. Yet he did 
not at this period openly advocate opposing the Ger mans by passively resisting 
them. .He talked of the "Gita" and the incident in it where Arjuna was urged by 
Shri Krishna to fight his enemies, even though he a lways interpreted the 
teaching of the Sacred Book in a spiritual sense an d refused to accept Shri 
Krishna's admonitions as a literal injunction. Late r on, he preached to his 
people that they should enroll themselves for work in the army. 
"But how can you advocate war?" I asked him one day , when we were talking. 
"To refrain from action because you are afraid of t he act or the results it may 
bring .to you is not virtue," he replied. 
"Then what do you advise?" I asked. 
"To take part in the work until you have learned yo ur lesson from it," he 
replied. "When you have really learned that, you wi ll no longer need to take 
part in it; you will be above it." 
"That almost sounds like saying war is right, and t hough I feel that right and 
wrong are relative terms and that there are times w hen you cannot reason 
about a thing, but just do what seems right at the time and trust God about the 
rest, that is not your position. You have proclaime d that 'love overcometh 
hatred.'" 
"Yes, I know," he said, rather sadly, "but I see th at my countrymen are not 
refraining from acts of physical violence because o f love for their fellows, but 
from cowardice, and peace with cowardice is much wo rse than a battlefield 
with bravery. I would rather they died fighting tha n cringed in fear." 
Indeed, it was with great difficulty that some of h is friends, including my 
husband, prevailed upon him not to offer himself as  a combatant soldier, as an 
example to others. 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  I often tried to talk with him of what he thought h appened after death, but his 
mind never speculated about the next condition. His  religious experience was 
that of the mystic, not of the metaphysician, and t hough he would talk freely 
of reincarnation, he would not talk of what might h appen ten minutes after a 
man is called "dead". On one occasion I was telling  him of some psychic ex-
perience of one of our friends. He grew quite impat ient about it, and thought it 
altogether a waste of time to want to know about af ter-death conditions. 
"But it is not a waste of time and energy to some p eople," I said. "They feel 
more interested in trying to pierce behind the veil  of death, than they are 
about life." 
"But their duty lies in attending to the affairs ab out them in making the 
conditions for their fellows more happy," replied M r. Gandhi. 
"And don't you think it would make them happy if th ey could know more about 
the meaning of death?" I enquired. 
"They have not got to worry about that. Death does not matter." 
"Yet we cry about that most," I said; but Mr. Gandh i changed the subject. He 
would not carry it further. 
 
My anticipated few months in India were prolonged b y the War into two years. 
My husband had, however— after a very serious illne ss during which he nearly 
died and which rendered him unfit for many months—r eturned to England 
alone, leaving me with my sister and children comme nded to the care of Mr. 
Gandhi. At the time my husband sailed from Bombay I  was ill myself. The 
prolonged nursing of my husband and little son had worn me out, and on the 
eve of a collapse I succumbed to a bad attack of ma laria. 
Mr. Gandhi had come down to Bombay for a few days, and after leaving the 
docks, where he had seen my husband off, came immed iately on to me. Days 
passed, the fever continued, and Mr. Gandhi grew qu ite anxious about me. He 
refused to leave Bombay until I had got over the wo rst part of my illness, and 
came every day to see how I was getting along. He w ould sit beside my bed Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  talking to me, while all I could do was to lie and let the tears tumble down my 
cheeks. He never suggested that I was foolish or we ak, or exhorted me to pull 
myself together, as a less understanding person mig ht have done. He would just 
sit there telling me little interesting scraps of g ossip or news and occasionally 
trying to make me smile by some whimsicality. 
I know that he had important work waiting for him i n Ahmedabad, and that he 
was neglecting it for my sake. Once I suggested to him that he had better go, 
adding that I would be all right with the dear Indi an friend in whose home I was 
receiving hospitality and care. 
"No," he replied, "I cannot leave you until you are  better"; and so he stayed on 
until the temperature became normal, and he knew I was on the road to 
convalescence. 
 
During my stay in India a day arrived when the sand s of Mr. Gandhi's own life 
seemed running out. For weeks he had been ill with some intestinal trouble. 
Two doctors were in constant attendance upon him, a nd were at their wits' end 
to know how to feed him. They believed milk to be t he only thing to keep him 
going, but as he had taken a vow about the taking o f cow's milk, neither the 
arguments of the doctors nor the absolute pleading on her knees of Mrs. Gandhi 
would make him break his vow. So those of us who lo ved him watched him 
sinking. I was at the time two days' journey away f rom him, but was kept 
constantly advised of his condition. Then I receive d a little note of farewell, 
dictated by him to an amanuensis. He was dying and wished to send me a word 
of affection ere he passed out. Something within me  told me it was not the 
end, and I wrote telling him so, adding that I knew  his work for India was not 
yet finished, and that it was not "goodbye". 
He recovered under conditions of which he himself t old me much later. He was 
content to leave the fleshly body that worried and hampered him so, and if 
milk was the only thing to save his body, he refuse d to break his vow by taking 
it. Then he said: "It was Ba (Mrs. Gandhi) who disc overed a way. She said to 
me: 'Your vow was taken against the milk of the cow , but it was not against the Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  milk of the goat, so you can take goat's milk and s till keep your vow.' You 
women are very persistent and clever," he added, wi th a twinkle in his eye and 
an intonation in the voice, as though he almost adm ired Mrs. Gandhi for the 
subtle distinction she had been able to make use of  to restore him to health. 
The goat's milk had proved a great success, fortuna tely, and he gradually 
became himself again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116   
CHAPTER XVIII 
Mr. Gandhi knew of my deep anxiety to get home to E ngland as soon as possible 
after the War, and sympathized with my desire to jo in my husband again. He 
had often deplored the fact that we had had to endu re several long 
separations, and hoped the day would come when we c ould have the comfort 
of some settled home-life together. He had, neverth eless, sometimes teasingly 
remarked that the separations were good for us, as they kept our married life 
from becoming monotonous. 
"That is all very well," I once replied. "But separ ations break as well as bind." 
"That is not possible in your case," he said. "I  know. Henry is a most loyal soul." 
"Do you mean, by that remark,  I am not?” ' I replied quickly. "I still sometimes 
wonder if you do not believe that men have a monopo ly of the higher virtues!" 
"If you were not true to Henry you would prove it i n this case!" 
A remark that silenced me. 
As soon as the War was over and the passenger-servi ce between India and 
England was resumed, I received a letter from Mr. G andhi advising me to give 
up my little bungalow in the Nilgiris and to make p reparations to come to 
Bombay at once. 
It was a two days' journey away from him, and I had  not seen him for nearly 
two years, so that I was distressed when, six weeks  later, I met him again and 
noted how weak and ill he still was. He, however, d eclared that he was almost 
himself again, and expressed great concern about me  and my little family. 
The dreadful influenza epidemic that had devastated  India was just over, and 
in the little hill-station of Coonoor, where I had been staying, I had seen its 
tragic effects. The utter helplessness of humanity,  as I had observed it around 
me, in the face of such a calamity, had left a deep , unhappy impression upon 
me. Death seemed much more real than life, for deat h had claimed more 
people in Coonoor than it had left. My sister, my t wo children, myself, and my Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  little staff had all suffered from the epidemic, bu t fortunately all had 
recovered. As there was no medical man to be had, m y sister and I had done 
the best we could for the little household, with an y remedies we could think of 
and procure. I belonged neither to the military nor  to other services, and was, 
in fact, practically ostracized by the Europeans of  the station, who knew that 
my husband had been so closely associated with Mr. Gandhi in South Africa, so I 
could get no help at all from them. My sister and I  thus had had to struggle 
through a very black six weeks almost alone. For ne arly a month my servants 
were too ill to work, and we had to attend to them in addition to my children. 
We had been unable to purchase fuel of any kind—the re was none to be 
bought, the vendors of fuel were all sick or dead—a nd we were dependent 
upon a little boy of about eight years of age—a rel ative of my butler—going to a 
bit of jungle-ground nearby to collect a few sticks  to make hot milk or porridge 
ready for the invalids. Other cooking we did not tr ouble about. 
In telling some of these things to Mr. Gandhi he wa s grieved and distressed. To 
add to his anxiety about us, cholera was raging in Bombay when we arrived, 
and he was afraid for us to remain in the city. 
"Now you are here," he said, "I cannot have you sta ying on. You must get to 
Matheran (the nearest hill-station to Bombay) and s tay there until you get a 
boat. J cannot bear the responsibility of having yo u here while this new trouble 
is sweeping over us. Please make arrangements, then , to go there at once." 
"But I have no money," I objected. "What am I to do  about that?" 
"That is not for you to worry about. I will attend to it somehow. All I want you 
to do is to get well and keep well." 
"And the arrangements for going home?" I asked. "Wh at am I to do about that?" 
"You will have to go before a Board to get your pas sages fixed; but first of all 
you will have to get an urgent medical certificate to entitle you to an early 
boat. We must see what can be done." 
Even while I was talking to Mr. Gandhi he was think ing over all the things I 
should have to do and arranging them from his sick- bed, sending a message Mr. Gandhi : The Man 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  here or a note there. And so, next day, I left Bomb ay for Matheran, after 
having been before two doctors and the Passenger Bo ard. There I stayed for six 
weeks, waiting for my boat. Every week I came into Bombay to see Mr. Gandhi 
and to attend to other matters. 
Once, feeling greatly depressed, I told him that I could now understand the 
worship of Kali in India; death seemed so terribly near and easy everywhere, 
and life so difficult. 
"But," he smiled, rather sadly, "you would not esca pe it. You would have to 
come back again." 
I did not answer him and we sat quietly for a few m inutes. 
"I once thought," he then continued, "that I could finish the wheel of rebirth in 
this incarnation. I know now that I can't, and that  I shall have to return to it. 
We cannot escape it, but I hope it will only be onc e more that I come back to 
it." 
"It is not that I am tired of living," I said. "The re is always something beautiful 
in life itself to me. The thought of birth and re-b irth does not sadden me, but 
death stalks grey and naked here. I feel it is easy  to give in to it." 
"That is not like you," replied Mr. Gandhi. "You ar e letting your imagination 
make you a coward. Where is your faith?" 
"At the present time, rather weak, I am afraid." 
"Come, come, you are not being true to yourself. I cannot let you talk like 
that!" 
Eventually the day arrived for me to leave India. M r. Gandhi was still 
unable to take much part in active life, so that I had gone with my children to 
say "goodbye" to him. The thought, I believe, was i n both our minds: "Shall we 
ever meet again in the flesh?" 