VOLUME 34       J        NUMBER  1         J         APRIL–JUNE   2012Quarterly Journal of the Gandhi Peace FoundationEditorial T eam
Chairperson
Radha Bhatt
Editors
M.P. Mathai  J  John Moolakkattu
editorgmarg@yahoo.co.in
Editorial Advisory Board
Johan Galtung  J Rajmohan Gandhi
Rajni Kothari  J Nalini Pant  J Anthony Parel
K.L. Seshagiri Rao  J Ramashray Roy  J Sulak Sivaraksa
Gandhi Marg: 1957-1976 available in microform from
Oxfor d University Micr ofilms, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor , Michigan, USA;
35 Mobile Drive, T oronto, Ontario, Canada M4A1H6; University Micr ofilms
Limited, St. John’s Road, T yler ’s Gr een, Penn., Buckinghamshir e, England.
II ISSN 0016—4437 LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CARD NO. 68-475534
New Subscription Rates (with effect fr om V olume 34, April-June 2012 onwards)
Period               Individual           Institutional          Individual          Institutional
                      (Inland)                      (foreign)
Single Copy Rs. 70 Rs. 100 US  $ 20 US  $ 25
1 year Rs. 300 Rs. 400 US $ 60 US $ 80
2 years Rs. 550 Rs. 750 US $ 110 US $ 150
3 years Rs. 800 Rs. 1000 US $ 160 US $ 220
Life Rs.5000 Rs. 6000 US $ 800 N.A.
(including airmail charges)
Remittances by bank drafts or postal or money orders only
Copyright © 2012,  Gandhi Marg , Gandhi Peace Foundation
The views expressed and the facts stated in this journal, which is published once in every
three months, are those of the writers and those views do not necessarily reflect the views of
the Gandhi Peace Foundation. Comments on articles published in the journal are welcome.
The decision of the Editors about the selection of manuscripts for publication shall be final.
Published by Surendra Kumar for the Gandhi Peace Foundation, 221 & 223 Deen
Dayal Upadhyaya Mar g, New Delhi-1 10 002 (Phones: 23237491, 23237493;
Fax: +91-1 1-23236734), W ebsite: www .gpfindia.or g, e-mail: gpf18@r ediffmail.com,
gandhipeacefoundation18@yahoo.co.in, and printed by him at Gupta Printing
and Stationery Service, 275, Pratap Nagar , Street No. 18, Delhi-1 10 007Contents
Articles
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr .,
and the Liberation of Self and Society 5
Sudarshan Kapur
‘Why Should I be Moral?’ A Sear ch for Justification of
Morality in W estern and Indian Philosophies 23
Saral Jhingran
Palestinian theological praxis in context:
Peacemaking and peace-building in the
Occupied W est Bank 33
Samuel J. Kuruvilla
Environmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future 51
Sasikala AS
Gramdan to Gram Swaraj: Insights from
Rajasthan Experiments 67
Sudarshan Iyengar
Parul T ina Doshi
Hari Desai
Defining and Interpr eting Non-V iolent
Political Revolutions 87
Antonino Drago
Notes and Comments
Gandhi and Pranami Vaishnavism 115
Nagindas SanghaviWe gr atefully acknowledge the financial assistance received from the Indian
Council of Social Science Research for the Production of this JournalMahatma Gandhi and T wo Attitudes of Religion 121
Arvind Sharma
Book Reviews
Socio-Economic Development of T ribal W omen:
Changes and Challenges 125
VIBHUTI  PATEL
Obituary
Mrinal Gor e: A Unique and Unassuming Personality 129
Prem SinghInformation for Authors
Gandhi Marg is the quarterly interdisciplinary journal of the Gandhi Peace
Foundation published from New Delhi in the months of March, June, September
and December every year . Original contributions on themes of national and
international importance falling under the broad area of Gandhian Studies are
invited from scholars and practitioners. Articles submitted to Gandhi Marg are
refereed, normally by members of the Editorial and Advisory Boards. It is
presumed that an article submitted to Gandhi Marg is original, and has not been
under the consideration of any another journal. In general, the articles should not
exceed 8000 words including notes and references.
We also invite pr ovocative and shorter essays (1500-2500 wor ds) for inclusion
in the notes and comments section. When an abbreviation is used, it should be
spelt out in full the first time. W e also accept r eview articles assessing a number of
recent books on a particular subject and book reviews. All articles should have an
abstract of not mor e than 150 wor ds. The name of the author , institutional af filiation
and complete address including email and telephone/fax should be supplied. A
short biographical statement of the author containing information about the area
of specialisation and principal publications is also necessary . British spellings should
be used throughout the manuscript. All the authors will be informed about the
status of the submissions within three months. No manuscript will be returned
unless accompanied by a self addressed and stamped envelope.
All notes and references should be numbered consecutively and placed at the
end of the article rather than on each page. References to books should include
author , title (italicised), place of publication, name of publisher , year , pp. (in that
order). Place of publication, publisher and year should be within brackets. In
subsequent references to the same work, ibid, and op.cit . can be used. References
to articles should include author , title of article in double quote, title of the journal
(italicised), number of volume and issue, year of publication, pp. (in that order).
All short quotations are to be included in the text with double quotation marks.
Longer quotes are to be indented. All quotations should be accompanied by
references.
Examples
Books:  Edwar d W. Said, Orientalism  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978), p. 23.
Articles:  Ramashray Roy , “Parameters of Participation”, Gandhi Mar g, 12, 3
(October-December 1990), p. 276.
Chapters within Books:  Pearl S. Buck, “A  Way of Living”, in S. Radhakrishnan, ed.,
Mahatma Gandhi: Essays and Reflections  (Bombay: Jaico Publishing House, 1956),
p. 51.
Internet Citations:   Apart from author and article, include also the URL and date of
download. For example: <www .un.or g> accessed on 10 May 2006.
A hard copy of the paper typed on one side with gener ous mar gins is necessary .
This may be sent to the Editor , Gandhi Mar g, Gandhi Peace Foundation, 221-223
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Mar g, New Delhi–1 10002. Authors ar e particularly
encouraged to send their articles as email attachments to
<editorgmarg@yahoo.co.in> for quicker processing and response. Articles having
tables and graphical presentations should be accompanied by a CD with the file
processed in MS W ord. Manuscripts pr epar ed in a car eless manner , even if they
have some heuristic value or potential will not be processed by the editors.COVER-3Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   5
April–June 2012Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi,
Martin Luther King, Jr ., and the
Liberation of Self and Society
Sudarshan Kapur
ABSTRACT
Religion gave meaning and direction to the lives of Mahatma Gandhi and
Martin Luther King, Jr .; it inspir ed their belief in the unity of life and
commitment to the way of love. Service to humanity was part and parcel of
their religion. The deeper they delved into serving society, the more they grew
in their spiritual awareness. In the process, they became less self-centered and
more spirit-centered. Their vision of a nonviolent social order was based on the
assumption that individual transformation and social transformation are
interrelated. Their lives are a demonstration of the fact that personal and social
transformation are interconnected and interdependent.
DECADES AFTER THEIR assassinations, Mohandas Karamchand
Gandhi (1869-1948) and Martin Luther King, Jr . (1929-1968) r emain
voices of hope and courage for people throughout the world. Even
though these twentieth-century prophets were rooted in different
religious traditions — Gandhi in Hinduism and King in Christianity
— they had a shared understanding of what it means to be religious.
Religion gave meaning and direction to their lives; it defined their
visions and provided them with the means of transforming self and
society . Religion also made them awar e that at its cor e nonviolence is
a way of life and not just a tactic for gaining ground in a conflict. In
the world they sought to create, there was room for all creeds, classes,
races, and nationalities. They did not view difference as a problem;
rather , difference was accepted as a pathway to the r ealization of the
ultimate T ruth. Both Gandhi and King r ecognized that the inner and6   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1the outer , the personal and the political, the r eligious and the secular ,
are related and that there is a fundamental link between personal
and social transformation. The renewal and liberation of their own
lives, they firmly believed, was intertwined with the renewal and
liberation of their societies. They lived their lives in the service of
God and humanity — Gandhi through his vision of Sarvodaya (welfare
of all) and King through his vision of the Beloved Community (a
community where the law of love reigns). The religious values they
inherited from their faith traditions, how they interpreted them, and
how they applied those values in their personal and public lives is
crucial to grasping the meaning of their lives.
Gandhi was born into a deeply religious household. His parents
led pious and r eligiously informed lives. Putlibai, Gandhi’s mother ,
rigorously adhered to religious rituals, especially vows and fasts. “The
outstanding impression my mother has left on my memory is that of
saintliness,” Gandhi writes in his autobiography .1 His father was not
only open to the many strands of Hinduism but he also sympathetically
engaged persons of different faiths who were frequent guests in their
home. Accor ding to Judith Br own, Gandhi’s British biographer , the
religious environment that the family provided was perhaps “the only
remarkable aspect of [an] otherwise unremarkable experience of”
Gandhi’s early years.2 This, however , did not lead to Gandhi gaining
“any living faith in God.”3 He disliked going to temple because of its
“glitter and pomp” and even developed an inter est in atheism.4 Yet
he was touched by the religious spirit. “One thing,” he writes, “took
deep root in me — the conviction that morality is the basis of things,
and that tr uth is the substance of all morality . Truth became my sole
objective. It began to gr ow in magnitude every day , and my definition
of it also has been ever widening.”5 In the process, he internalized a
powerful moral teaching — “return good for evil”— a teaching that,
starting in 1893 in South Africa, was to become his guiding principle
in personal and public life.6 In his quest for wisdom about his own
faith, he found a teacher , Raychandbhai, who helped him to gain a
place of peace and stability within Hinduism.7
Son, grandson, and great grandson of ministers, King was touched
deeply by religion from the outset at home and in the church. In an
essay titled “An Autobiography of Religious Development,” King
highlights closeness to his “saintly [maternal] grandmother” and the
centrality of religion in his life. Systematic study and practice of religion
also began early in his life. “Religion has just been something that I
grew up in.”8 It “has been real to me and closely knitted to life. In fact
the two cannot be separated; religion for me is life,” he added.9 So
central was religion and the church in King’s life that already at theMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   7
April–June 2012age of fifteen, he gave a trial sermon at his father ’s chur ch. And in
1948 he was ordained to preach. Just as Gandhi was pressed into
learning the importance of compassionate living, so also was King
encouraged from childhood to take seriously the Christian principle
of love of the other . His family taught him to love all, a teaching the
church reinforced.10 King did not readily grasp the wisdom of his
parents’ teachings. He had to be convinced of their truth and social
relevance, first at Mor ehouse College, then at Cr ozer Seminary .
The first real test came when King was only six years of age. He
had a white playmate from the age of three. Their friendship suffered
and finally ended when they started school. It was then that the white
boy’s father forbade him to play with King.11 Perplexed, King sought
an explanation from his parents, who told him about racism and the
insults and injuries Black people, including them, had experienced
and were still experiencing. King’s parents underscored their love
and God’s love for him. “Don’t let this thing impress you. Don’t let it
make you feel that you ar e not as good as white people. You ar e as
good as anyone else, and don’t you forget it.”12 Parental words of
affirmation, however , wer e not enough to soothe his feelings of anger
at and rejection of whites. He began “to hate every white person.”13
The feeling of hatred of whites “continued to grow” in him despite
the fact that his parents impressed upon him that it was his “duty as
a Christian to love” all people.14 “The question arose in my mind,”
King r eflected years later , “how could I love a race of people [who]
hated me and who had been responsible for breaking me up with one
of my best childhood friends?”15 It was not until King got to college
and participated in interracial activities that he was able to “conquer
this anti-White feeling.”16 In subsequent years, especially with the
start of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, the love of the other , the
stranger , the enemy became the operating principle of his public life
also. He not only preached the way of love, he persistently practiced
and forcefully advocated it.
It was in England that Gandhi “first discovered the futility of
mere religious knowledge.”17 He understood well that the Hindu
tradition, not unlike other religious traditions, had within it many
strands. He chose to live his life according to what the Gandhi scholar
Raghavan Iyer suggests is “a neglected strand of Indian tradition —
the path of karma yoga, or spiritual realization through social action.
. . . Gandhi believed strongly . . . that the time had come for the
purification of politics and the reformation of formal religion in
India.”18 Once this was understood, withdrawing from the affairs of
the world was not an option. Gandhi was convinced that it was only
by engaging the world that he could attain his ultimate religious goal8   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1— Moksha (liberation from the cycle of birth and death). “What I
want to achieve, — what I have been striving and pining to achieve
these thirty years,” he highlights in autobiography , “is self-r ealization,
to see God face to face, to attain Moksha.  I live and move and have
my being in pursuit of this goal.  All that I do by way of speaking and
writing, and all my ventures in the political field, are directed to this
same end.”19 He continued to believe that it is not possible to find
God by withdrawing from the affairs of the world. “If I could persuade
myself that I should find Him in a Himalayan cave, I would proceed
there immediately . But I know that I cannot find Him apart fr om
humanity ,” he told a Eur opean visitor as late as 1936.”20
That God could be realized only through service Gandhi learned
firsthand in South Africa. It was ther e that the way opened for him to
begin to serve both God and humans. Aged twenty-four , Gandhi
arrived in Durban on “a purely mundane and selfish mission” to earn
a living, not to change the world or to pursue a saintly path.21 “I was
just a boy r eturned fr om England wanting to make some money .”22
Racial segr egation was the established norm of South African society;
public facilities were strictly segregated. Gandhi had been in South
Africa just a few days when he was thrown off the train for refusing
to leave the first class compartment set aside for white passengers.
As a result, he sat and shivered at the train station through the night,
and asked himself the question: “Should I fight for my rights or go
back to India or should I go on to Pretoria without minding the insults,
and return to India after finishing the case?”23 Convinced that “it would
be cowardice to run back to India without fulfilling my obligation,”
he decided to stay and “to root out the disease [of color prejudice]
and suf fer har dships in the pr ocess.”24 We can see that, even at this
early stage, Gandhi had intimations of the notion that personal and
social transformation cannot be placed in separate, unrelated
compartments; the two are inextricably linked. The night spent on a
cold railway station, we know now , would pr ove to be a transforming
experience for Gandhi. “It changed the course of my life. . . . My
active nonviolence began fr om that date. And God put me thr ough
the test during that journey ,” he told Dr . John R. Mott, a Christian
missionary , decades later .25 “Was it destiny , heritage, luck, the Gita,
or some other immeasurable quantity” that led Gandhi to “resist the
evil” of racism, asks his biographer , Louis Fischer?26 Whatever the
precise answer , Gandhi’s experience at the train station put him on a
path which demonstrated to the world the transformative power of
peaceful ways of coping with conflict. Thus the way and the vision
became one.
As Gandhi consulted with members of the Indian community , heMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   9
April–June 2012realized that his experience was by no means unique. Instead of finding
an exceptional solution for the wrongs that had been done to him,
Gandhi sought ways of confronting segregation as such — his personal
concerns became political. In 1906, he launched a mass movement
founded on the principles of nonviolence, a movement that was to
inspire many all over the world and none more so than Martin Luther
King, Jr . The deeper Gandhi got into the service of his community
the more he grew in his spiritual awareness. In the process, he became
less self-centered and more spirit-centered.27 “Gandhi was a self-
remade man and the transformation,” Fischer writes, “began in South
Africa. It is not that he turned failure into success. Using the clay that
was there he turned himself into another person. His was a
remarkable case of second birth in one lifetime.”28
Judith Brown also stresses the significance of the melding of the
spiritual and the political during Gandhi’s time in South Africa. “These
African years were crucial in forging Gandhi into a public man,
inwar dly and outwar dly. In his self-understanding, too, Africa was a
seminal experience; but it was only the spiritual and political prelude
to his life’s work.”29 From his South African sojourn, Gandhi emer ged
committed to spiritualizing politics. All the work that he did fr om
1915 onwards in India was built on the insight that called for the
harmonization of r eligion and politics. As he told a missionary gr oup
in 1938, “I could not be leading a religious life unless I identified
myself with the whole of mankind and that I could not do unless I
took part in politics. The whole gamut of man’s activities today
constitutes an indivisible whole. . . . I do not know of any religion
apart fr om activity . It pr ovides a moral basis to all other activities
without which life would be a maze of sound and fury signifying
nothing.”30
When the time came for King to choose his vocation, he decided
to give his life to the service of the chur ch. Though King, Sr . influenced
the son in his decision to enter the ministry , the call to ministry came
“neither by some miraculous vision nor by some blinding light
experience on the road to life’s experience. . . . [I]t was a response to
an inner urge that gradually came upon me. This urge expressed
itself in a desir e to serve God and humanity , and the feeling that my
talent and my commitment could best be expressed through the
ministry ,” King notes in his autobiographical essay .31 In the fall of
1954, with his doctoral dissertation for Boston University still not
written, King took up the leadership of the Dexter Avenue Baptist
Chur ch in Montgomery , Alabama. Steeped as he was in the distinctive
social gospel tradition of the African American Chur ch, King br ought
a wide range of public concerns to his ministry and a commitment to10   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1politically engaged religion.32
The elder King’s activism, according to historian Clayborne
Carson, also “shaped his son’s understanding of the ministry and
presaged King, Jr .’s own car eer.”33 King, Sr .’s conviction that “the
true mission of the church” is “to do something about the broken-
hearted, poor , unemployed, the captive, the blind, and the br uised”
greatly influenced his son.34 By his refusal to accept discrimination
personally and actively engaging in voting rights for African
Americans, King, Sr . set a powerful example of politically engaged
religion for King.
Equally , if not mor e, significant was the influence of King’s
teachers. Under their guidance, “he began to rethink his religious
attitudes.”35 Morehouse Professor George D. Kelsey removed “the
shackles of fundamentalism” fr om “my body ,” King r ecalled years
later . 36 Kelsey guided King “to see that ministry could be intellectually
respectable as well as emotionally satisfying. When he accepted this
fact,” writes Coretta Scott King, “it opened the way for him to go
into the church.”37 Perhaps none among his teachers was more
influential in pressing King into the direction of politically engaged
religion than Benjamin E. Mays, President of Morehouse College.38
King acknowledged Mays as “my spiritual mentor” and “one of the
great influences in my life.”39 Mays encouraged his students to go
out into the world and challenge segregation openly and without
fear. He str essed that “a r eligion which ignor es social pr oblems will
in time be doomed.”40 And the meaning of that heritage was the call
to serve God by fully engaging the world.
Direct participation in the African American str uggle for justice
and equality , however , was not in King’s plans. “Although we had
come back to the South with the hope of playing a part in the changes
we knew wer e on the horizon,” King r emember ed later , “we had no
notion yet of how the changes would come about, and no inkling
that in little more than a year we would be involved in a movement
that was to alter Montgomery forever and to have repercussions
throughout the world.”41 But all that changed with Rosa Parks’s refusal
to give up her seat to a white man and the start of the Montgomery
Bus Boycott in December 1955. The successful year-long nonviolent
bus boycott brought King to the heart of the Black struggle and
ultimately catapulted him to national and international prominence.
No sooner had he accepted the leadership of the bus boycott
than he became the target of police harassment, obscene and
threatening phone calls and an arr est. As str ess and tension mounted,
King began to grow in fear and his resolve to stay in the struggle
weakened. When, in January , his house was bombed, King’s “crisisMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   11
April–June 2012of confidence peaked,” writes King biographer David Garr ow.42 In
the dead of night in his kitchen at home, King seriously considered
relinquishing the leadership of the boycott without appearing a
coward. Not only that, he was even ready to give up the struggle
altogether .43 In his moment of despondency , King turned to God like
he had not done before. “And I discovered then that religion had to
become real to me, and I had to know God for myself. . . . I prayed
a prayer , and I prayed out loud that night. I said, ‘Lor d, I’m down
here trying to do what’s right. I think I am right. I think the cause we
represent is right. But Lor d, I must confess that I’m weak now . I’m
faltering, I’m losing my courage. And I can’t let the people see me
like this because if they see me weak and losing my courage, they
will begin to get weak.”44 He “heard the voice of Jesus saying still to
fight on.”45 In what, accor ding to historian T aylor Branch, was King’s
“first transcendent religious experience of his life” uncertainty and
fear left him; he regained the courage and the strength to continue.46
Though very different in their setting and historical context, there is
likely a parallel between King’s kitchen experience and the night
Gandhi spent in South Africa in 1893 in the cold at a train station.
Staying true to the progressive tradition of the Black struggle,
with its r oots in African American Christianity , King made the
teachings of Jesus the cornerstone of personal morality and socially
responsible activism. T wo years into his involvement in the Southern
Nonviolent Movement, King reiterated his position on the place of
religion in society . “On the one hand [r eligion] seeks to change the
souls of men, and thereby unite them with God; on the other hand it
seeks to change the environmental conditions of men so that the soul
will have a chance after it is changed. Any r eligion that pr ofesses to
be concerned with the souls of men and is not concerned with the
slums that damn them, the economic conditions that strangle them,
and the social conditions that cripple them is a dry-as-dust religion.”47
Just as for Gandhi, so also for King, mere religious knowledge is not
enough; religion must inform our personal and public lives.
Religion also provided the Mahatma and King their openings to
nonviolence. In a fundamental sense, Gandhi’s journey to nonviolence
began early . At age fifteen he stole a piece of gold out of his br other ’s
armlet to clear a debt his brother had incurred. Though the debt was
cleared, Gandhi could not bear to live with himself for the wrong he
had committed. As a first step, he r esolved never to steal again. Next,
he decided to confess his err ors to his father . Terrified of speaking to
his father , he decided to write a confession note seeking for giveness.
With fear and tr embling, Gandhi handed the note to his father . Tears
fell down his father ’s cheeks as he r ead the note, which he tor e up.12   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1“This was, for me,” Gandhi r ecalls, “an object-lesson in Ahimsa
[nonviolent love]. Then I could r ead in it nothing mor e than a father ’s
love, but today I know that it was pur e Ahimsa. When such Ahimsa
becomes all-embracing, it transforms everything it touches. There is
no limit to its power .” And he added, “This sort of sublime for giveness
was not natural to my father . I had thought that he would be angry ,
say hard things . . . . But he was so wonderfully peaceful.”48
The application of the principle of forgiveness became
foundational in Gandhi’s life. As he matur ed, Gandhi found support
for the way of nonviolence in the scriptures — Upanishads, the
Mahabharata, and the Bhagavad Gita. Chandogya Upanishad lists
ahimsa as one of the five virtues.49 “Ahimsa is the greatest religion,”
says the Mahabharata. Contrary to what some Hindu theologians
have suggested, Gandhi insisted that in essence the Gita was an essay
in the way of nonviolence. “Even in 1888-89, when I first became
acquainted with the Gita,” Gandhi writes, “I felt that it was not a
historical work, but that, under the guise of physical warfare, it
described the duel that perpetually went on in the hearts of mankind,
and that physical warfare was brought in merely to make the
description of the internal duel mor e alluring.”50 Accor ding to Gandhi,
the Gita does not establish the “necessity of physical warfare;” it
proves “its futility .”51 The New T estament, Leo T olstoy’s The Kingdom
of God is within You, and Henry David Thor eau’s “On Civil
Disobedience” further reinforced Gandhi’s evolving faith in the way
of nonviolence.52 Once he grasped the meaning of nonviolence, Gandhi
worked to transform himself as well as society — first in South Africa
and then in India. Yet, as the T rappist monk Thomas Merton ar gues,
in Gandhi “the spirit of non-violence sprang from an inner realization
of spiritual unity in himself. The whole Gandhian concept of non-
violent action and satyagraha is incomprehensible if it is thought to
be a means of achieving unity rather than as the fruit of inner unity
already achieved.”53 [Original emphasis] And this “inner unity” too
was nurtured in and by a particular understanding of religion.
If the notions of forgiveness and “returning good for evil” in
daily living played their part in Gandhi’s acceptance of nonviolence
as a way of life, the concept of Christian love and the example of
Jesus were foundational in King’s pilgrimage to nonviolence. His
favorite childhood gospel song, we ar e told, was “I W ant T o Be Mor e
and Mor e Like Jesus.”54 And to want to be “mor e and mor e like
Jesus” meant loving one’s neighbor and forgiving all wrongdoers.
“Forgiveness,” as King emphasized in his mature, activist years, “is
not an occasional act; it is a permanent attitude.”55 Biographer David
Lewis stresses that King’s character traits, such as “abhorrence ofMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   13
April–June 2012violence” and a “desire to assume the suffering of others” in evidence
in his childhood, also prepared him well for the practice and advocacy
of nonviolence.56 In his V oice of Deliverance, Keith Miller ar gues that
“King arrived at [Crozer] seminary [in 1948] with his most important
ideas already intact,” including nonviolence.57 Nevertheless, King had
to labor some to deepen his understanding of nonviolence.
Encountering Gandhi was important to this process. Under the
guidance of Cr ozer seminary’s lone pacifist pr ofessor , Geor ge W .
Davis, King began his exploration of the life and thought of Gandhi.
While still at Cr ozer, a talk on the Mahatma by Howar d University
president, Mordecai Johnson, inspired King to take Gandhi more
seriously than he had done until then. Johnson, a longtime admirer
of Gandhi, had recently returned from India, where he had
participated in the W orld Pacifist Confer ence.58
Yet it was not until King’s involvement in the Montgomery Bus
Boycott that he fully grasped the meaning of nonviolent resistance.
Bayar d Rustin and Glenn Smiley , major twentieth-century
theoreticians and practitioners of nonviolence, were most helpful to
King in this. And in good measur e because of them, he was able to
meld the teachings of Jesus and the method of Gandhi.  As a r esult,
at the height of the bus boycott, King could say , “Christ showed us
the way , and Gandhi in India showed it could work.”59 From the
accounts of both Rustin and Smiley , King and other Montgomery
Impr ovement Association of fice holders had less than adequate
understanding of the fundamentals of nonviolent resistance. For
example, in the early phase of the bus boycott, both Rustin and Smiley
had to tell King to get rid of the guns that people were holding on to
for self defense. Even at that early a stage in the South-based
nonviolent movement, King demonstrated a genuine interest in
nonviolence as a way of life. T actical aspects of nonviolent r esistance
were secondary for him.60 Just as at the start of the bus boycott,
when he reminded the mass meeting at Holt Street Baptist Church
that they are Christian people who believe in the teachings of Jesus,
so also in subsequent years King drew upon the notion of Christian
love and the teachings of Jesus to mobilize and galvanize the African
American community . And the Black chur ch played an important r ole
in keeping nonviolence at the center . Befor e long, King became a
major twentieth-century proponent and practitioner of the way of
nonviolence.
Gandhi and King lived as if the world’s peoples, with all their
diversity , wer e their family . As alr eady noted, Gandhi’s early
exposure to world religions put him on a path that ultimately made
him a major advocate for and practitioner of religious pluralism. But14   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1his acceptance of religious pluralism was neither easy nor smooth.
Early in life, he “developed a sort of dislike for” Christianity; he
could not “endure” the abuse Christian missionaries poured on Hindus
and their gods.61 Gandhi’s deep study of world religions as well as
sustained working relations with practicing Christians stretching over
several decades, first in South Africa and later on in India, helped
him to understand not only the spirit of Christianity but also
deepened his commitment to religious pluralism.
Gandhi’s encounter with the American Christian missionary E.
Stanley Jones, is instructive here.  Jones asked Gandhi:  “How can
we make Christianity naturalized in India, not a foreign thing,
identified with a foreign government and a foreign people, but a
part of the national life of India and contributing its power to India’s
uplift? What would you, as one of [the] Hindu leaders of India, tell
me, a Christian, to do in order to make this possible?” Gandhi gave
the following answer — “First, I would suggest that all of you
Christians, missionaries and all, must begin to live more like Jesus
Christ. Second, Practice your religion without adulterating it or toning
it down. Third, Emphasize love and make it your working force, for
love is central in Christianity . Fourth, Study the non-Christian r eligions
more sympathetically to find the good that is within them, in order
to have a mor e sympathetic appr oach to the people.”62 As we can see,
instead of judging Jones or his endeavors, Gandhi shared out of his
own understanding the essential meaning of Christianity . He r elated
to all r eligions with r espect and in the spirit of sympathy . Gandhi’s
interpretation of the teachings of Prophet Mohammad further
illustrates his approach to religion. Contrary to scholarly as well as
popular interpretations of Islam wherein recourse to violence is
accepted under certain situations, Gandhi saw only a sanction for
nonviolence.63 When we examine the worldwide rise of militant Islam,
including the December 2008 bombings in Mumbai, we can see that
Gandhi’s is a minority interpretation of the teachings of Prophet
Mohammad. In other words, for Gandhi what really mattered is that
we live according to the life-affirming tenets of our religion even as
we reach out to the truths of other faith traditions.
Gandhi realized that only in and through a diverse community
was it possible for an individual to be whole, to be fully human.
Beginning in 1904, Gandhi founded four communities — Phoenix
Settlement and T olstoy Farm (1910) in South Africa and Sabarmati
Ashram (1915) and Sevagram Ashram (1933) in India. These
communities provided each member the space in which to begin to
live “as if” their dr eams wer e alr eady a r eality . They encouraged
people to be good and to be connected to the stranger — the other .Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   15
April–June 2012Ethnically diverse and religiously pluralistic in their makeup, these
communities were laboratories for personal and social transformation.
Prayer and meditation were the glue that held these communities
intact. At the same time, social concerns wer e at the cor e of all that
the communities represented. On the one hand, members had the
space in which to nourish their inner being; on the other , they could
engage the world that lay beyond the confines of the community .
King’s was also an inclusive vision of humanity founded on the
unity of life and the interconnectedness of people everywhere.  God-
loving people are called, he believed, to step out of their places of
comfort and convenience and to risk position, prestige, and even life
for the welfare of others.64 That much and more, he tried to do. He
fought to make the world better for all people and not just Black
people.65 This meant poor people, white people, brown people, black
people, Christians, Jews, Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, and people of
every nation. Accor ding to King, as childr en of the loving God,
humans, irrespective of their various identities, are members of one
family . Ther efore, it is not enough that we see people mer ely as Jews
or Gentiles, Catholics or Pr otestants, Chinese or Americans, Negr oes
or whites. In so doing, we “fail to think of them as fellow human
beings made from the same basic stuff as we, molded in the same
divine image,” he believed.66 In his Wher e Do W e Go fr om Her e:
Chaos or Community King once again stressed unity in diversity
and encouraged people everywher e to learn to live in harmony . He
insisted that “we have inherited a large house, a great ‘world house’
in which we have to live together — black and white, Easterner and
Westerner , Gentile and Jew , Catholic and Pr otestant, Moslem and
Hindu — a family unduly separated in ideas, culture and interest,
who, because we can never again live apart, must learn somehow to
live with each other in peace.”67
Unlike Gandhi, King did not have the experience of life in an
ashram-like intentional community . The congr egations of the chur ches
he ministered and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
were his communities. In the context of the African American str uggle,
King underscored the “interrelatedness of all [ethnic, regional, racial]
communities” emphasizing that “whatever affects one directly affects
all indir ectly .”68 He was convinced that “injustice anywher e is a thr eat
to justice everywher e.”69 Turning to the world beyond the United
States, at the height of his country’s involvement in V ietnam, he called
upon his government to “see the enemy’s point of view .”70 King
rejected the popular notion of patriotism, which insists that right or
wrong a people obey their government. Speaking “as a child of God
and br other to the suf fering poor of V ietnam,” he r eminded his nation16   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1that the V ietnamese “too ar e our br others”71 He stood for the
transformation of “this world-wide neighborhood into a world-wide
brotherhood,” which depended on “a radical revolution of values.”72
King’s was a plea for ensuring that our loyalties “become ecumenical
rather than sectional.” He urged that individual societies “develop
an overriding loyalty” to humankind as a whole. “This call for a
world-wide fellowship that lifts neighborly concern beyond one’s
tribe, race, class and nation is in reality a call for an all-embracing
and unconditional love for all men.”73 As a follower of Jesus, he was
an extremist for love.74
Gandhi and King understood the sterile and self-destructive
potential of materialism well. Gandhi critiqued modern civilization
with its emphasis on bodily comforts, and he urged that we set
“limit[s] to our indulgences.”75 An essential counterpoint to
intoxication with materialism for Gandhi was self-rule in matters
personal and societal. As an objective in life, self-r eliance seeks to
harmonize spiritual and material needs, inner and outer needs.
Towar d that end, Gandhi br ought about a number of fundamental
changes in his life. It was in South Africa that he initiated the most
significant transformations. He simplified his life, reducing his
personal needs to a bar e minimum. W ith the start of the Phoenix
Settlement, his personal and public concerns came together in
fundamental ways; he gave up his entire personal wealth. The burdens
of running a household ceased to exist; he now had more time to
attend to public affairs as well as his inner needs. His involvement in
nonviolent campaigns, though demanding, still left him with time
for quiet and private reflection. This changed once he was involved
in the Indian fr eedom str uggle, however .
Though he further simplified his life, Gandhi’s political
responsibilities grew exponentially and with it came a massive
nationwide following that made inordinate demands on his time. In
the process, he found himself with little or no time for quiet reflection.
It was during this phase, in 1926, when he was working at breakneck
speed and caught up in the intensity of constructive work, that Gandhi
devised a way of getting away from the pressures of daily existence.
An apparent physical need for rest led him to create the spiritual
discipline of silence. “It happened,” he told Fischer , “when I was
being torn to pieces. I was working hard, traveling in hot trains,
incessantly speaking at many meetings, and being approached in trains
and elsewhere by thousands of people who asked questions, made
pleas, and wished to pray with me. I wanted to rest for one day a
week. So I instituted a day of silence. Later , of course, I clothed it
with all kinds of virtues and gave it a spiritual cloak. But theMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   17
April–June 2012motivation was really nothing more than that I wanted to have a day
off.”76 A day of silence a week soon became much mor e than just a
“day of f.” Accor ding to Fischer , “silence of fered an opportunity for
spiritual exer cise.” Silence pr ovided Gandhi the time to withdraw ,
to meditate, to get away from pressures of daily living, and to renew
himself for engaging the world.
If Gandhi simplified his life by choosing communitarian living,
King avoided the snares of materialism and opted to live simply in a
modest house near a poor neighbor hood in Atlanta. Nor did he
accumulate wealth; King left behind less than $6,000.77  And the longer
he stayed in the str uggle for justice and equality , the mor e passionately
he engaged in the fight for and on behalf of the poor . This was
especially true after he took his campaign North in 1965 and
experienced firsthand the horrible living conditions of the urban poor .
Not surprisingly , from then on he br ought issues of economic justice
to the center of his concerns. A year befor e his assassination, he
challenged his nation to retreat from its mad rush to materialism.
“We must rapidly begin to shift fr om a ‘thing-oriented’ society to a
‘person-oriented’ society ,” he said.78 Materialism, he ar gued, was one
of the three evils confronting the nation, alongside racism and
militarism. W ithout let-up, he continued to drive home the point that
the nation must begin to attend to the basic needs of the poor . For ever
speaking out of the depths of his religious sensibilities, and repeating
his vision of the Beloved Community , he challenged the wealthy to
recognize that “the agony of the poor impoverishes the rich; the
betterment of the poor enriches the rich. W e are inevitably our
brother ’s keeper because we ar e our br other ’s br other . Whatever
affects one dir ectly af fects all indir ectly .”
King came to national and international prominence at a younger
age than even Gandhi. He was a few days shy of his twenty-seventh
birthday when the African American leadership in Montgomery
invited him to lead the bus boycott and head the newly formed
Montgomery Impr ovement Association. W ith the leadership of the
bus boycott, his days became very full. The post-boycott period did
not bring any r espite in his public r esponsibilities either . Befor e one
campaign or an issue was tackled, another was there begging for
attention. The presidency of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, founded soon after the conclusion of the bus boycott in
1957, King’s speaking engagements that ran on an average of four
per week, and the expanding movement in the South did not allow
him time to reflect or be still. He hardly had time to
breathe.79According to historian Lerone Bennett, “King was not often
in his house. T wo-thir ds of his time was spent elsewher e, a fact that18   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1disturbed him gr eatly . He had a feeling akin to guilt over his extended
absences fr om his family . He said privately and on occasions publicly
that nothing disturbed him more than his inability to fulfill his
demanding concept of what the head of a household should be.”80 “I
am not doing anything well,” King complained. He did not feel that
he could “continue to go at this pace, and live with such a tension
filled schedule.”81 The desir e to slow down, to withdraw , to r enew
was there, but he failed to bring it about. He continued to carry on
without respite until the end. The dynamism of the movement, with
grassr oots activists taking initiative on their own, did not help either .
Unlike Gandhi, who was among the pioneers in the field of nonviolent
resistance, by the middle years of the twentieth century , King was
one among many . In early 1968, it seemed that King yet might succeed
in taking the time to nourish his interior in ways he had not done
befor e. Arrangements wer e made for him for a spiritual r etreat with
Thomas Merton at Gethsemani outside of Louisville.82 Before that
could happen, King was assassinated.
Gandhi, on the other hand, was saved from the burdens King
carried, especially after 1904, when he gave up managing a single-
family household. Yet life in community did not eliminate all the
pressures of meeting parental or spousal responsibilities. Community
living certainly simplified Gandhi’s life and made it easier for him to
provide for many of the physical, emotional, and psychological needs
of the Gandhi family . In the setting of a community made up of many
families, the traditional role of “heading” a nuclear family was no
longer relevant. Children, for instance, could be guided by community
elders and not just their par ents. Yet, as is well known, Gandhi’s
eldest son, Harilal, with r eason, felt par ental neglect. And he blamed
his father for that. Nor did Kasturba Gandhi, the Mahatma’s wife,
feel that she had the freedom to be fully herself, especially in the
early phase of their marriage.
The genius of Gandhi and King lay not in that they were above
making mistakes or that they always succeeded in their personal and
political endeavors. W e know that each failed to live up to his ideals
as a par ent or a spouse. Equally , we know that neither fully achieved
his goals in the social, economic or political arenas. Nor did they
succeed in converting the masses in their respective countries to the
way of nonviolence; the vast majority of their supporters and co-
workers went along with them essentially for tactical reasons. The
fact that these prophets of nonviolence died at the hands of assassins
is proof enough that they failed to eliminate violence from their midst.
For our purposes, it is worth noting that their assassins (and those
who supported them) saw dangers to the existing social order in theMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   19
April–June 2012inclusive worldview of King and Gandhi. The attempts of these
leaders to bring those who stood on the periphery to the center of
the body politic were even a bigger threat to the upholders of the
status quo.83
Deeply committed to the notion of religious pluralism, Gandhi
and King recognized their pastoral responsibility to all people. The
limitations of their leadership notwithstanding, the challenges facing
the world at the dawn of the twenty-first century press us to
reexamine the visions of these men and to grasp the ancient wisdom
of love, truth, tolerance, and compassion that inspired them to make
this broken world community whole. For greed, bitterness, hatred,
and violence, we know only too well, can give us neither meaning
nor tranquility . It is possible these men might also inspir e people
everywhere to look into their particular tradition and to gain the
necessary wisdom and the courage to reconcile, heal, and nurture
our personal lives as well as the wellbeing of our communities. Perhaps
their lasting contribution lies in that they had the courage to take
risks and each in his own way and his own time attempted to live by
the highest ideals known to humankind.
Notes and  References
1.Mohandas K. Gandhi, An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments
with T ruth (Boston: Beacon Pr ess, 1993), p. 4.
2.Judith M. Br own, Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1989), p.  17.
3.Gandhi, An Autobiography , p. 34.
4.Ibid., p. 31.
5.Ibid., p. 34.
6.Ibid.,  p. 35.
7.Gandhi, An Autobiography , pp.137, 138, 159.
8.Clayborne Carson et al. The Papers of Martin Luther King, Jr . (Berkeley ,
California: University of California Press, 1992), vol. 1,     p. 361.
9.Ibid., p. 363.
10. Keith D. Miller , Voice of Deliverance: The Language of Martin Luther
King, Jr ., and its Sour ces (Athens and London: University of Geor gia
Press, 1998), p. 59.
11.Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1, p. 362.
12. Quoted in Lerone Bennett, What Manner of Man: A Biography of Martin
Luther King, Jr . (Chicago: Johnson Publishing, 1976), p. 19.
13. Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1, p. 362.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid., pp. 362-63.20   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 116. Ibid., p. 363.
17. Gandhi, An Autobiography , p. 70.
18. Raghavan Iyer , The Moral and Political Thought of Mahatma Gandhi
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1973), p. 49.
19. Gandhi, An Autobiography , xxvi. Also see p. 158.
20. Brown, Gandhi, p. 83.
21. K. Swaminathan, ed., The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi  (hereafter
CWMG ), (New Delhi: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
1977), vol. 68, p. 171.
22. Ibid.
23. Ibid. p. 1 12.
24. Ibid.
25. CWMG , vol. 68, p. 171.
26. Louis Fischer , The Life of Mahatma Gandhi  (New York: Harper & Row ,
1983), p. 42.
27. Eknath Easwaran, Gandhi the Man  (Petaluma, California: Nilgiri
Press, 1978), p. 28.
28. Fischer , The Life, p. 40.
29. Brown, Gandhi, p. 30.
30. Quoted in Iyer , op.cit., p. 41.
31. Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1. p. 363 and p. 44.
32. Taylor Branch, Parting the W aters: America in the King Y ears, 1954-63
(New York: T ouchstone, 1988), p.  1 15-16. See Carson, et al., The
Papers, vol. 1. 181-97. In his 1948 essay titled, “The Significant
Contributions of Jeremiah to Religious Thought” King argues that
“religion should never sanction the status quo.”
33. Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1. p.33.
34. Ibid. p. 34.
35. Stephen B. Oates, Let the T rumpet Sound: The Life of Martin Luther
King, Jr . (New York: Plume, 1982), p. 19.
36. Ibid.
37. Coretta Scott King, My Life with Martin Luther King, Jr . (New York:
Holt Rinehart W inston, 1969), p. 86.
38. Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1. p. 44.
39. King, My Life with , p. 85. Martin Luther King, Jr ., Stride T oward Fr eedom:
The Montgomery Story (New York: Harper & Row , 1958), p. 145.
40. Quoted in Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1.,  p. 38.
41. King, Stride T oward , pp. 23-4.
42. David J. Garr ow, Bearing the Cr oss: Martin Luther King, Jr . and the
Christian Leadership Confer ence (New York: V intage, 1988), p. 56.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid., p. 58.
45. Ibid.
46. Branch, Parting, p. 162; Garr ow, Bearing, p. 58.
47. King, Stride, p. 36.
48. Gandhi, An Autobiography , p. 28.
49. See Joan V . Bondurant, Conquest of V iolence: The Gandhian PhilosophyMohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr.   G   21
April–June 2012of Conflict (Berkeley , Los Angeles, California: University of California
Press, 1971), pp. 1 11-13.
50. Mohandas K. Gandhi, The Bhagavad Gita According to Gandhi , John
Strohmeier , ed. (Berkeley , California: Berkeley Hills Books), p. 16.
51. Ibid.
52. See Gandhi, An Autobiography , p. 137. Also see Candadai Seshachari,
Gandhi and the American Scene: An Intellectual History and Inquiry
(Bombay: Nachiketa Publications, 1969), p.  18 for Gandhi’s
discovery of Thoreau’s essay on civil disobedience.
53. Mohandas K. Gandhi, Gandhi on Non-V iolence: A  Selection Fr om the
Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, edited with an Introduction by Thomas
Merton (New York: New Dir ections, 1964), p. 6.
54. King, My Life , p. 80.
55. Martin Luther King, Jr ., Strength to Love , (Philadelphia: Fortr ess Pr ess,
1981), 40.
56. Quoted in Fair clough, Martin Luther , pp.  34-5.
57. Miller , Voice of Deliverance , pp. 54-55.
58. King, Stride , p. 96.
59. Carson et al., The Papers , vol. 1, pp. 48-9
60. Branch, Parting ,  p. 180.
61. Gandhi, An Autobiography , p. 33.
62. E. Stanley Jones, Mahatma Gandhi: An Interpretation  (London: Hodder
& Stoughton, 1950), pp. 69-70.
63. See Sheila McDonough, Gandhi’ s Responses to Islam  ((New Delhi: D.
K. Printworld, 1994), p. 120.
64. King, Strength , p. 35.
65. James Melvin W ashington, ed. A Testament of Hope: The Essential
Writings of Martin Luther King, Jr .  (New York: Harper & Row , 1986),
p. 341.
66. King, Strength , p. 33.
67. Martin Luther King, Jr ., Wher e Do W e Go Fr om Her e: Chaos or
Community? (Boston: Beacon Press, 1968), p. 167.
68. Washington, ed. A Testament , p. 290.
69. Ibid.
70. Ibid., p. 237.
71. Ibid., p. 236.
72. King, Wher e? P. 171; W ashington, ed. A Testament , p. 240.
73. Washington, ed. A Testament , p. 242.
74. Ibid., p. 297.
75. Mohandas K. Gandhi, Hind Swaraj and Other Writings , Anthony J.
Parel, ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), pp. 37;
68.
76. Fischer , The Life , p. 235.
77. Taylor Branch, At Canaan’ s Edge: America in King Y ears, 1965-68  (New
York: Simon & Schuster , 2006), 768. Also see C. Eric Lincoln, ed.,
Martin Luther King, Jr .: A Profile (New York: Hill & W ang, 1984),
p. 203.22   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 178. Ibid., p. 242.
79. Branch, Parting , p. 225; Bennett, What Manner , p. 179.
80. Bennett, What Manner , p. 179.
81. Fairclough, Martin , p. 48.
82. Thomas Merton, The Hidden Ground of Love: The Letters of Thomas
Merton on Religious Experience and Social Concerns , Selected and Edited
by W illiam H. Shannon, (New York: Farrar Strauss & Gir oux, 1985),
451, 639, p. 644.
83. See “The Politics of the Assassination of Gandhi” in Ashis Nandy ,
At the Edge of Psychology: Essays in Politics and Culture  (New Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1990). The argument that Nandy makes
concerning the Mahatma applies equally to the situation in the United
States of America. In seeking a just and an inclusive community ,
King posed a serious challenge to the powers that be.
SUDARSHAN KAPUR is Former Professor of Peace Studies, Naropa
University , Boulder , Colorado, USA; e-mail: rasulia@q.com‘Why Should I be Moral?’   G   23
April–June 2012‘Why Should I be Moral?’ A Sear ch
for Justification of Morality in
Western and Indian Philosophies
Saral Jhingran
ABSTRACT
This paper searches for a convincing answer to the question, ‘Why should I be
moral, if it goes against my interests?’,  in various philosophies, both Western
and Indian. There have been two broad approaches to moral issues in the West:
teleological or utilitarian, and deontological. Utilitarians  emphasize that an
act or a moral rule is right if its consequences are beneficial to humankind.
Deontologists, chief of them being Kant, argue that the consequences and any
other considerations do not count; an act is right if it is done in obedience to a
universal moral law , or categorical imperative.   Among post-Kantian thinkers,
R M Hare responds by emphasizing universality and prescriptive character of
all moral judgments, as also the need of sympathetic imagination. Many
ethicists also affirm that avoidance of suffering to others is the final test of
moral acts. Others such as John Rawls have emphasized the innate equality of
all persons which creates the demands of justice.
Ancient and medieval  Indian philosophy often fails in justifying morality on
the basis of equity and justice, which includes the criteria of reciprocity and
reversibility. But what it fails on the practical field it makes up in its
metaphysical (religious?) vision. According to it, one Absolute or Atman resides
in every heart; thus there is no basis left for discriminating between  all living
beings.
I.  Introduction:
WHAT IS MORALITY ? And What is the Justification of Morality?  We
mean by the term ’morality’ any discipline which seeks to answer24   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1the questions: ‘What should I do?’ and ‘What should I be?’ That is,
morality concerns itself with telling us what is the right course of
action, or our duty; and at a somewhat meta-ethical level-what should
we aim to be. Morality (ethics), thus, is a normative or prescriptive
discipline that seeks to tell us how we should behave, or what should
be the ideal(s) we should try to incorporate in our person. Morality
implies a set of criteria, standards or principles to judge any one’s
actions ther eby. Or, morality can simply be understood as the moral
point of view .
Our problem here is to search for a convincing justification of
morality . It brings us to our basic question –‘Why should I be moral?’
That is, ‘why should I bother what is right or my duty , if that course
of action would go against my personal interests?’
2. Some Relevant V iews in W estern Philosophy
Ther e ar e two br oad answers to this question in the W estern
philosophy: First comes from utilitarianism. Early utilitarians like
Adam Smith and J.S. Mill simply held that an act is right or wrong
according to its consequences; and these consequences, in turn, were
to be determined for their desirability or otherwise with reference
to the human good, which was conceived in terms of pleasure or
happiness. Utilitarianism, according to which whatever leads to the
good or welfare of the self and other human beings is right, and
therefore obligatory , has had a br oad appeal as an ethical theory . It
has gradually been developed into a more sophisticated form by  C.D.
Broad, Henry Sidgwick, Mar cus Singer , Stephen T oulmin, R.B. Perry ,
and Kurt Baier . They assert in their dif ferent ways that human good
or welfare, considered in terms of either the satisfaction of desires
or harmony of interests, both at the individual and at the interpersonal
level, gives justification to our actions.
There has been a resurrection of interest in utilitarianism in its
various formulations,  especially in r ule utilitarianism. Accor ding to
it, morality is a code of conduct that seeks to regulate our
interpersonal behaviour with the aim of minimizing evil and suffering
and establishing harmony of r elations (R.B Perry). Also most ethicists
writing in 1970s onwards have emphasized that avoidance of suffering
or even inconvenience to others  should be the main objective of
morality; and that involves a careful consideration of the consequences
of our contemplated act. Even the cardinal virtue of promise keeping
is secondary to it.
Second answer to our question comes from the deontologists.
According to them, consequences of an act are not relevant in a moral
judgment; rather morality consists in an unconditional obedience to‘Why Should I be Moral?’   G   25
April–June 2012the moral law .
Kant , in his classic, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals , based
morality on the foundations of r eason alone. Morality , for him, consists
in obedience to the moral law . This moral law  is an imperative or
moral command which is unconditional and totally independent of
all empirical considerations, whether those of consequences of an
intended act, or the circumstances thereof, including any cultural,
historical or religious differences. He, therefore, called it the
categorical imperative and defined it as a command that tells us  to
act only on that maxim which we can at the same time will to become
a universal moral law . 1 The categorical imperative  must never be
transgressed, and provides the foundation of all moral laws. The
worth or dignity of the moral law (categorical imperative) is absolute,
that is, is an end- in- itself, and  passes on to human beings who are
the locus of r eason, the giver of the moral law . The pur e reason is in
some way transcendental, that is, pr esupposed by morality , but not
proved independently . Kant rightly contends that this pur e reason
does not have its locus in the individual  self but belongs to all rational
beings, or is a general consciousness. That is why , its commands ar e
obligatory to the individual agent. It gives an inviolable dignity to
the human person who as a rational being is an end- in- herself, that
is, can never be made a means of another person, or any other goal.2
In the second part of the Metaphysics of Morals,  The Doctrine of
Virtue , Kant uses   the term ‘humanity’ instead of the rather mysterious
‘pure reason’. Now he says that man is an end- in –himself by virtue
of his humanity; and all his duties, as well as rights  should be based
on his  innate  dignity by virtue of his  humanity .3
To the question- ‘Why should I obey the categorical imperative?’,
Kant and his followers have argued that the categorical imperative is
a formal principle which simply cannot be violated without getting
into self-contradictions, or making life in the world practically
impossible. If I break my promise, I cannot will that everybody should
do so, as it would make normal life impossible; and so on.
On the other hand, I can still break my promise without bothering
about what would happen if everybody did the same. Why should I
ever bother about the whole world when my  interests are served
here and now by breaking my promise, or any other moral law? The
question is simple- ‘Why be moral?’
R.M. Hare has been the most comprehensive and influential
thinker of Kantian tradition in the 20th century . Accor ding to him, all
moral judgments are necessarily prescriptive, and universal. By the
prescriptive character of moral judgments, Hare means that if
someone consents to a moral judgment, he thereby commits himself26   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1to acting according to it. That is, it would be self-contradictory if
someone says that I agree that this  conduct or action is right, or that
one ought to do this; and then add ‘why should I do that ?’ (Why
should I be moral?’)4
By the universality of moral judgment, Hare means that any
judgment must be applicable to all similar persons in similar
circumstances.  Hare contends that an account of the facts of the case
(e.g. a description of an act of cruelty) alone cannot lead to a moral
‘ought’. Instead, when we prescribe or choose a moral principle and
acknowledge both that it is a universal principle and that  it is a
prescription or command for us to act in a certain manner , that it
becomes a basis of the moral ‘ought’. He affirms the need of
imagination in moral dilemmas. W e must put ourselves imaginatively
in the place of the victim or the other person who might be harmed
by our conduct, and think out what our response would be if we
were placed in his or her place. If we come up with the answer that
we would not like to be tr eated in that way , then accor ding to the
norm of universalizability of all  rational moral judgments, we cannot
act in that manner .5
It is the simple Golden Rule which can be put both in positive
and negative forms: “Act only in that manner in which you would
yourself want to be tr eated.” Or , “Do not act in that manner in which
you would not want to be treated by others.” It has often been
objected that the Golden rule appeals to the baser instinct of
selfishness for its justification. But it is not so at all. T o understand
others on the analogy of oneself is not an expression of self-love or
ego-centricity , but an honest assertion of the af finity of all human
beings.
Henry Sidgwick and Marcus Singer have equally emphasized the
universalizability , or generalizability  principle; and ar gue that any
moral  judgment  has to be universal in its authority , that is, a given
moral rule or command is applicable to all relevantly similar persons
in relevantly similar circumstances, emphasis here being on relevant
similarity .6 They add that the criterion of r elevance is based on the
grounds on which the original judgment is based.
The idea of the universalizability of moral rules and  judgments
is related both to the rationality of all moral assertions, and to their
validity . As Baier says, a moral point of view or the moral principle is
necessarily rational, that is, it is one for which rational arguments
can be given, and hence it has an overriding authority . It is often
argued  that in as much as moral judgments are not about facts, they
cannot be either true or false. Baier argues that even so, moral
statements can be valid, that is, moral arguments can be given for‘Why Should I be Moral?’   G   27
April–June 2012them;  and if they are rational, they would naturally be valid and
have an overriding authority .7
Mor eover , the moral point of view is objective, impartial and
universal. Objectivity and impartiality imply that there cannot be
any reference to individuals in our judgments, so that it is irrelevant
whether it is you or I who is benefited or harmed by our acts.
Universality means that  if an act is right or wrong  for one person, it
must be right or wrong for every relevantly similar person in
relevantly similar circumstances. That means above all that one cannot
make an exception of herself whenever it suits her inter ests.  As
experience shows, our self interest and our eagerness to make an
exception of our case are the main reasons for our rejecting the
demands of morality . And the r ejection of any such subterfuge may
go a long way in convincing an agent to be moral.
No doubt a rationally argued universalism is a much more
justifiable ethical theory than Kantian absolutism. It is also noteworthy
that none of these thinkers ever alludes to any religious belief either
for justifying his theory , or even by the way .  However , neither of
these thinkers  could satisfactorily answer our query- ‘Why should I
be moral?’ T rue, a certain moral principle is universal, or objective,
or even  is said to have overriding authority; but what is the authority
behind that  principle which can convince or even coerce me to act in
a certain way;  in short, ‘why should I obey  it , often at the cost of
my self interest?‘ While Kant appealed to ‘transcendental pure reason’
as the source of moral laws, others, not willing to affirm some such
principle, have just talked about the choice of  moral principles. So,
what is the source of these moral principles and their overriding
authority?
In mid-and late twentieth century John Rawls developed his
‘Theory of Justice as Fairness’. He developed an elaborate theoretical
system in order to include equality and justice along with individual
liberty in his ideal system of a just society by proposing that  each
legislating person should imagine herself in a state of total ignorance
regarding her position in a future  socio-economic-political set up; as
only then they would all agree for a system in which liberty is
harmonized with equality of opportunity and justice for the least
advantaged.8 The idea here is to emphasize the motto of Bentham
that ‘ Each man is to count for one and no one is to count for more
than one;’ that is, the absolute equality of all human beings,
irrespective of all other differences.
However , I do not think that liberals, whether then or now , have
been able to strike a real balance between self interest and interests
of the society or humanity as a whole. Nor have they been able to28   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1answer the crucial question- ‘Why should I be moral, that is, sacrifice
my self- interest for the sake of  the interests of others, or  do morally
right act?’
Kant’s assertion that rational nature exists as an end- in- itself,
and that the moral law is given by our own rational nature, gives a
certain justification for obeying the moral law . Or as he later asserted,
our actions and attitudes should be in conformity with the dignity of
humanity in us, that is, we should take care that our conduct does
not debase the humanity of ourselves and that of other persons.
P.F. Strawson has suggested the r ecipr ocity of claim as the
touchstone of morality . By this he means that ‘a demand made on an
individual in the interests of others must be balanced by a demand
made on others in his interest.’9 Kant had earlier affirmed the principle
of reciprocity in the second part of his Metaphysics of Morals. This
principle is also known as the principle of reversibility; and carries
forward the Kantian thesis that each rational person is an end- in-
herself and no one can be made a means of another . Baier has
emphasized the idea of r eversibility , saying that the test of r eversibility
is even mor e stringent than that of universalizability . Accor ding to
him, any kind of non-reversible behaviour is wrong in itself; no further
reasons are needed to justify or condemn it.10
Hare, Baier and Bernard Gert have argued that not causing any
suffering, or even inconvenience  to another human being is the first
priority of all (moral) action.11 An overt or implicit suggestion in all
such assertions is that the ‘other ’ suf fers in the same way as we do. I
appreciate this version of universal morality because it somehow not
only pr eserves the dignity of dif ferent persons of a society , but also
puts greater emphasis on two things: first, on the reciprocal duties of
all moral agents towards each other; and second, on a certain affinity
between all human beings. Perhaps Strawson  et al did not intend
the latter , but fr om my point of view , true morality and the principle
of reciprocity somehow acknowledge a certain affinity between
human beings, or all living beings. Both Hare and Rawls have tried
to incorporate this principle in their ethical systems; but Hare had to
appeal to imagination, and Rawls had to take recourse to a veil of
ignorance in order to argue their respective contentions. It may
suggest that they were not sure how to justify their ethical principles.
II  Indian V iews  on Morality and its Justification
In ancient India, morality was called dharma or the way of
righteousness; and it was considered integral with the moral order
of the universe ( rita). The way of dharma was a way which brought
the person in harmony both with the moral order of the universe‘Why Should I be Moral?’   G   29
April–June 2012and the Self  which is one with the Absolute within one’s heart.
Morality was  generally understood as autonomous, that is,
independent of divine commands, or any other external authority .
Significantly , dharma  or moral law was  conceived to cover entir e
human life, both one’s relations with one’s fellow beings, as well as
one’s own goal(s). The fact that dharma was unanimously accepted
as the first or  foremost among the three or four goals of life
(purusharthas ) signified that dharma or righteousness was both
supr eme and having unconditional or overriding authority . Whether
one was pursuing worldly goals of prosperity and pleasure (which
pursuing was liberally accepted), or the spiritual goal of liberation,
one could never be free from the demands of dharma. That is, dharma
or the righteous way of life was the first condition to follow any
path in life.12
However , a systematic tr eatment of moral pr oblems, or some
meta-ethics regarding  the source, cognition and justification of
morality or dharma  is singularly missing in Indian thought. W orse
still, The term dharma was used  for denoting universal morality
(sadharana dharma), rituals ( yajnas ) as pr escribed in the V edas (which
were at best amoral),  and above all for duties determined by one’s
caste and  its status in the varna  hierarchy ( varnashrama dharma ). The
term “ought” was freely used to denote all the three kinds of “duties”.
This blunted the edge of a pr ofound conception of morality .
Moreover , Vedic Hindus wer e acutely conscious of the dif ferences
in the ways of  various people of this vast subcontinent; and eager to
assimilate people who perhaps belonged to different races, societies
and cultur es. They , ther efore, often asserted that morality is r elative
to time and space or region, as well as to the caste or station in the
society of the doer . They even went on to assert that what is right or
wrong for a particular group (based either on region, varna , or stage
of life) may not be right or wrong to other persons belonging to other
groups.13 This was ethical relativism at its most unjustifiable form.
However , what Indian thinkers failed to achieve in practical and
systematic ethics, they more than made up in their conceptualization
of the foundation for a pr ofound morality . Accor ding to V edanta,
one Self (Atman) is the essence or Self of every living being. 1 Let me
quote the Bhagvadgita , a popular text:
He, O Arjuna, who sees with equality everything in the image of his
own self, whether in pleasure or in pain, he is considered a perfect
yogi.14
Therefore it is implied that there is no justification for our30   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1preferring our own good to that of others. This implication of the
Vedantic vision of unity of all cr eation and all living beings by virtue
of all having the same Self as their essence was later on very
beautifully developed in some of the Puranas and Epics; and above
all in the poetry of the saints of devotional sects of medieval period,
as Kabir , Tukarama, Dadu and Nanak.
Mahatma Gandhi was not a mystic, but he carried forward the
Vedantic vision of fundamental unity of all living beings by asserting
that one Ram resides in all hearts, where Ram not only does not
mean the historical person, but is also not a personal God, but a
name for the ‘Divine’.15 Above all, his God (Narayana) existed in the
dumb millions , through the service of those millions.16
Appar ently , the above morality  is r eligious, as it  pr esupposes certain
religious or metaphysical beliefs. And yet, it is not r eligious, as it involves
no unconditional obedience to a supernatural God, or any other
religious authority . However , it does not mean that every  person who
upholds a rational, universal morality must accept these presuppositions;
only that a universal morality is best justified if we do.
III.  Conclusion
Can we assert a universal morality of nonviolence, compassion and
integrity without af firming the metaphysical principle of one Atman
in all? W estern philosophers have af firmed such a universal morality ,
implicitly assuming a basic affinity between human beings, without
any religious or metaphysical overtones. Other thinkers have
contended that the most basic rule of morality is that we must avoid
causing any suffering or even inconvenience to others; but have failed
to tell us why should we do so. Kant has rightly argued that every
man who is in need wants others to help him; therefore it follows
that every person must help others when they are in need; as
otherwise, his desir e to be helped becomes self-contradictory .17
Hare  contends that we must not tr eat others in an unjust manner ,
as the moral principle applies to all persons alike; and in a situation
in which the agent is in the position or circumstances of  the other or
the victim of her actions, she would have to suffer in the way now
the other is suffering, and inasmuch as she would not like that, she
could not do the same to the other .18 While Kant did not include
animals in the category of equality or affinity with humans, Hare
includes them.
Inter estingly , Hindu texts do not always r efer to the one Self in
all while arguing for universal compassion. The Epics and Puranas
repeatedly affirm that same prana  ( life breath ) invigorates all living
beings. They often indiscriminately use the wor d, Atman and prana‘Why Should I be Moral?’   G   31
April–June 2012being the same in all living beings, the idea being to emphasize the
basic affinity or sameness of all; and inspire kindness towards them.19
Fifteenth century saint Kabir affirms the same thing again, and
emphatically so.20 The real idea is to realize that all beings are basically
akin in their needs and sufferings. The central values of a universal,
rational morality , such as not harming other beings, or compassion,
truth and justice, are best justified by founding them on a
presupposition (now proved by science) of the basic affinity of all
living beings.
However , though the above r ealization may motivate us to be
kind and considerate towards others, it does not explain the duty of
truthfulness or personal integrity , and the allied demands of morality .
Kant does give an answer that human beings have intrinsic dignity
by virtue of their rational  nature, or simply by virtue of their
humanity . They must not degrade their humanity by engaging in
acts of  self-indulgence or dishonesty .21 I find this  af firmation of the
innate dignity of human person, along with the recognition of the
basic affinity of all living beings, as the most convincing justification
of a moral way of life.
Ther e may be several justifications for morality . But, as Har e says,
everyone must decide for herself what principles or way of life she
wants to live by .22
Notes and  References
1.Immanuel Kant, Fundamental Principles (Groundwork) of the
Metaphysics of Morals,  tr., Thomas K. Abbott, (Indianapolis: The
Library of Liberal  Arts, 1984), pp. 19, 32.
2.Ibid., p. 46.
3.Kant, The Doctrine of V irtue, Part II of the Metaphysics of Morals , tr.Mary
J. Gr egor (New York: Harper T orchbooks, 1964), pp. 45-46; 81; 99-
101; 132-33.
4.R.M. Hare, Freedom and Reason  (London: Oxford University Press,
1963), pp. 73-74.
5.Ibid., pp., 89 ff.
6. Sidgwick asserts: ‘ Whatever action any one thinks that it is right
for himself, he implicitly judges to be right for all similar persons in
similar circumstances.’ He approvingly quotes the Golden Rule in
its negative form: ‘It cannot be right for A to treat B in a manner in
which it would be  wrong for B to treat A, merely on the ground that
they are two different individuals.’ Methods of Ethics , given in Jones,
Sontag, Beckner , Fogelin, eds., Appr oaches to Ethics: Repr esentative
Selections fr om Ancient T imes to the Pr esent ( New York: McGraw Hill,
1962_, pp. 392- 94. Marcus Singer has elaborated upon the same32   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1idea and called it the Generalization Principle.
7.Kurt Baier , The Moral Pint of V iew : A  Rational Basis of Ethics  (New
York: Random House, 1967), pp. 25 f f.; 38 f f.
8.See his  A Theory of  Justice  (Cambridge: Harvard University  Press,
1971), pp. 136-142; 302.
9.“Social Morality and Individual Ideal”, given in Kenneth Pahel &
Marvin Schiller , eds., Readings in Contemporary Ethical Theory  (New
Jersey: Prentice Hall,  1970), pp. 344 ff, especially p. 353.
10. Op. cit ., pp. 107-9.
11.See Morality: A New Justification of Moral Rules  (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1988), pp. 227 ff.
12. ‘ Dharma  being violated destroys; dharma being preserved
preserves…’ ‘The only  friend who follows man after death is
dharma…’ Manu Smriti VIII. 14-17 . The Mahabharata  contends that
dharma is what supports the  society . Ther ein lies its obligation, as
if it is not followed by all, the very structure of society would crumble.
Shanti Parva , CX. 1 1.
13. P.V. Kane has ar gued in detail about the r elativist appr oach of
Dharmashastras, Epics and Puranas in  his History of Dharmashastra ,
(Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Resear ch Institute, 1973), V ol. III., pp.
825 ff. Also see Saral Jhingran, Aspects of Hindu Morality  (Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1989, 1999), pp. 73 ff.
14. Bhagvadgita  VI. 32.
15. ‘…all life (not only human beings, but all living beings) is one, i.e.,
all life coming from one universal source, call it Allah, God or
Parmeshwara……Y ou may give Him any name that you like,
provided it is one God without a second..’ Harijan  26. 12.’36,  given
in  M.K. Gandhi, The Essence of Hinduism , pp. 10-1 1..
16. ‘I recognize no God except the God that is to be found in the hearts
of dumb millions…And I worship the God… through the service of
these millions.’ Harijan , 11.3. ’39, op. cit., p.65.
17. The Doctrine of V irtue , op. cit ., pp. 84 f f.
18. Freedom and Reason , op. cit ., pp. 93 ff.; 108 ff.
19. See  Mahabharata, Shanti Parva ,  CCLI. 19 ff.; ibid., CCCVIII. 120 ff., etc.
20. For a  detailed discussion of Kabir ’s  vision, see Saral Jhingran, “
Kabir and Gandhi as Apostles of Human Unity”,  Gandhi Marg ,
October -December , 2010.
SARAL JHINGRAN did her Ph.D from Delhi University in 1972
on the topic A Critical Reconstruction of Advaita V edanta with Special
Reference to the Problem of Action . She was awarded three UGC
Post doctoral Fellowships, the last two at the level of Associate
Professor . She was af filiated  first to Rajasthan University , Jaipur ,
and then to Nehru Memorial Museum and Library , New Delhi
Email:  saraljhingran@gmail.comPalestinian theological praxis in context   G   33
April–June 2012Palestinian theological praxis in
context: Peacemaking and peace-
building in the Occupied W est Bank
Samuel J. Kuruvilla
ABSTRACT
This article deals with the different approaches that the Palestinian contextual
theology movement ‘Al-Liqa,’ the liberation theology movement ‘Sabeel’ and
the intercultural movement ‘Diyar’ consortium have taken towards resolving
the Palestine-Israel conflict, given their similarities as well as divergences in
the light of the intersection between theology and politics. The contextualisation
of theology and politics in Palestine has a long history, especially in the light
of the tortured history of that nation in world affairs. Palestinian Christians
have long been controlled and influenced by Western Christendom and it was
only in the middle part of the last century that a so-called ‘contextualisation’
movement rose among them that sought to place the culture of the Palestinian
people right at the centre of their faith and practice. This article has sought to
show how the Diyar Movement in Bethlehem has and can have an impact on
Palestinian society, irrespective of party and religious affiliation, as it has
sought to bridge the secular-religious divide within Palestinian society.
Origins of the ‘Contextualisation’ Movement
Most Palestinian theologians own their debt to the Latin American
liberation theologians.1 The Palestinian Anglican theologian Naim
Ateek always uses the term ‘Palestinian Liberation Theology’ to refer
to his work.2  The Sabeel (river or str eam of life in Arabic) Centr e
that he helped to found in East Jerusalem has modelled itself in its
activities as an interdenominational ecumenical centre/institute for
the development of a Palestinian Christian theology of liberation in34   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1the ‘Holy Land.’ At the same time ther e are crucial dif ferences between
the Latin American and the Palestinian context. In the first place,
Latin America is a continent wher e the vast majority of the poor ar e
Christian, albeit with a strong admixture of indigenous beliefs and
cultur es. In Palestine, Christians ar e only a tiny minority . This means
liberation theology cannot simply be transposed from one situation
to another .
Secondly , the option for the poor in Latin America is about class.
In Palestine, all Palestinians are oppressed. Class in Palestine is largely
focused on the difference between town and village dwellers in the
Palestinian T erritories and socio-r eligious dif ferences between Arab
Muslims, Muslim Bedouins, Dr uze, Arab Christians and other non-
Arab Muslim groups dwelling in the territory of Palestine-Israel. What
is being dealt with here is a perverse form of racism where Semites
are discriminating against Semites.
Thirdly, it can be ar gued that the exodus paradigm does not play
out in Palestine. Palestinians find themselves in the role of the
dispossessed people. This has raised acute difficulties for biblical
study . Palestinian theologians have been much exer cised by how to
read the Hebrew bible.
Finally , Palestinian theologians do not have the backgr ound in
Marxism which many Latin American theologians had. T o them, it is
an alien form of analysis and they turn elsewhere for understanding
society .
Most Palestinian liberation/contextual theology practitioners in
general, tend to interact and r elate (intellectually , culturally , and
politically) mor e with the (formerly colonial) W est, fr om an Eastern
or Oriental standpoint, than with their fellow (formerly colonized)
global Easterners or Southerners (Christians of South Asia, the Far
East, and W estern or sub-Saharan Africa, for instance).
This is partly about where wealth, power and global political
control is centred in today’s world, but it may also reflect a kind of
‘elitist’ or ‘superior ’ Arab understanding of the so-called ‘two-thir ds’
world. It can also be seen as a r eflection of the historic ties that Arab
Christians have had with Christians in the Eur opean W est during the
long centuries of Islamic r ule in this r egion. T ies between W estern
and Eastern Christians were particularly cemented during the period
of the Cr usades, which saw a sustained W estern intr usion into the
region, both fr om a military , colonial and r eligio-cultural point of
view . The Ottoman territories of the ‘near east’ or ‘middle east’ wer e
also one of the first r egions penetrated and influenced by W estern
Christian missionaries and administrators, thereby considerably
culturally impacting the life and pr ospects of Arabic-speakingPalestinian theological praxis in context   G   35
April–June 2012Christians in the ar ea. Many Arab Christians migrated and settled in
parts of Latin America, North America, parts of Eur ope and
Australasia, thereby fuelling ties between these largely ‘developed’
regions of the world and the Arab Christian homeland of Syria,
Palestine, Lebanon and Egypt-Jordan.
Palestinian Contextual Theology
The premier Palestinian Protestant Theologian who sought to give a
contextual twist to his theologising was the Rev . Dr. Naim Ateek,
director of the Sabeel Liberation Theology Institute in Jerusalem who
used the term ‘liberation theology’ to describe what he is doing. The
Lutheran Mitri Raheb as well as the Latin Patriar chate’s Fr . Rafiq
Khoury preferred the term ‘contextual theology’. What lies behind
this difference in terminology was essentially the need to engage
with both Judaism and Islam.
‘Contextual theology’ can be said to have three meanings. In the
first place it can simply be a synonym for liberation theology . Thus
the Indian theologian K.C. Abraham writes that, ‘The aim of
contextual theology is not only to understand and interpret God’s
act, or to give reason for their faith, but to help suffering people in
their struggle to change their situation in accordance with the vision
of the gospel. Liberative praxis is the methodology for contextual
theologies.’3 Occasionally , Raheb uses the phrase like this. Secondly ,
the term is used to signify the recognition, originating in the sociology
of knowledge, that all discourse is placed. There is ‘no view from
nowher e’. As Abraham, again, puts it,
‘Creative moments in theology have arisen out of the church’s response
to new challenges in a given historical context. They bear the cultural
and social imprints of the time…...Theologians of every age are committed
to interpreting the Gospel of Jesus in a way (that is) relevant and
meaningful to the realities around them.’4
Thirdly, it originates in the attempt first of missionary theologians,
and then of indigenous theologians, to express theology in terms of
the symbols and values of a particular culture. Stephen B. Bevans
speaks of contextual theology as,
‘a way of doing theology in which one takes into account the spirit and
message of the gospel; the tradition of the church; the culture in which
one is theologizing; and social change within that culture, whether
brought about by western technological process or the grass-roots
struggle for equality , justice and liberation.’5 36   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1The Christian faith can be understood and interpreted, according
to Bevans, not only on the basis of ‘scripture and tradition,’ but also
on the basis of ‘concrete culturally conditioned human experience.’6
Contextual theology reflects on the ‘raw experience’ of the people.
It represents an amalgamation of Christian concepts, stories and
symbols on the one hand, with the particular indigenous culture of
the people on the other .7
There has been a growing realization world wide that
contextualized or local theologies are the key to the future appeal of
the Christian faith. As Jose M. de Mesa puts it,
‘Contextuality in the field of theology denotes attentiveness, the
determination to listen to the voice of the poor; and conscious and
intentional rootedness in the culture, in religion, in the historical
currents, in the social locations and situations of people as well as in
gender .  It aims to alter conditions in the Chur ch and in society that ar e
counter to the deep intent of the Gospel and seeks to include voices
which have been excluded in the participative process of theologizing.’8
K. C. Abraham likewise ar gues that, ‘Theologians of every age
are committed to interpreting the Gospel of Jesus in a way (that is)
relevant and meaningful to the realities around them.’9
Mitri Raheb seeks to make the Christian faith relevant or
contextual to the Palestinian faithful as part and parcel of their own
culture. Raheb is a ‘contextual’ theologian in his own words, seeking
to relate his theology to his practice, so that an effective praxis-
oriented political and cultural milieu is created, within which the
Palestinian Christian population can live and function. He has written
off the necessity for the Palestinian Church to be totally ‘Arabised’,
starting fr om the top of the ecclesiastical hierar chy, through the cler gy
and right down to the base-laity . This ‘Arabisation’ of the leadership
of the church should spread to include theology as well as education.
In his view , only this kind of essential ‘Arabisation’ would bind the
native Arab Christian people of Palestine to ‘their chur ch, their society ,
and their country .’10 Naim Ateek too has written of the need for the
(very Europeanized and Euro-centric) church in Palestine-Israel to
‘contextualize its faith and theology ,’ ther eby seeking to addr ess and
answer the important issues facing native Arab Christians and society
in the region.11 He writes,
‘……… the contextual concerns of the Church, although predominantly
political in appearance, are deeply and ultimately theological in nature.
These needs are perpetually frustrated by the increasing complexity of
the political conflict…….. The duty of the Church in Israel-Palestine todayPalestinian theological praxis in context   G   37
April–June 2012is to take its own concr ete and local context seriously . It (the Chur ch)
needs to incarnate itself in its context so that it can be the voice of the
oppressed and the dehumanized.’12
Writing in 1989, Ateek acknowledged that the chur ch in Israel-
Palestine had hardly begun to contextualize. He has since sought to
do this, with an emphasis on the political context. Palestinian
Christianity has long roots dating right back to the time of Christ.
Even during the Byzantine era, Palestinian Christians did not have
any experience being part of the ruling party as the Byzantine Church
in Palestine was ruled and controlled by Greeks and Cypriots.13
During the Islamic era, the majority of the Palestinian people slowly
converted over to the r uling faith and by the eve of the T urkish
conquest of Palestine in 1519, the land had become majority Muslim.14
Coupled with this was the almost continually disturbed nature of
Palestinian society that resulted in large-scale emigration over the
last 100 years or mor e.15 Today , native Christians in Palestine worry
more about whether they can ensure adequate quorum in their
churches to make them practically viable as part of the ‘living stones’
of the Holy Land.16 Palestinian Christians ar e small in number , but
their contributions to society vastly outnumber their actual
population. Their institutions, schools and hospitals dot the Holy
Land and they are actively involved in rendering valuable social
services to the Palestinian population at large.
The Al-Liqa Centre (Bethlehem)
Al-Liqa had its origins in the early 1980s, when a group of Palestinian
scholars and theologians associated with the T antur Ecumenical
Institute for Theological Studies, midway between Jerusalem and
Bethlehem, decided to withdraw from the centre and form a dialogue
centre of their own that would be able to focus on the all-important
issue of Christian-Muslim r elations in the Holy Land. Al-Liqa has
since its inception focused on this theme as well as on research into
the heritage and culture of the Palestinian and Levantine Christian
Arabs. They mainly fulfil their role through the conducting of yearly
and biyearly conferences on the two above themes as well as one-
day workshops, seminars and symposia directed mainly at the native
Palestinian and Christian population of the W est Bank, Jer usalem
and the state of Israel. Al-Liqa was also actively engaged in publishing
mainly in Arabic for domestic consumption as well as in English for
external consumption.38   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Sabeel Centre (Jerusalem)
Sabeel had its origins in the period immediately prior and during the
First Intifada when there were concerted calls on the Christian
community in Palestine-Israel to respond to the continued Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian T erritories, within a non-violent
framework.17 It had its origins in the commitment of Pastor Ateek to
develop a Christian non-violent theo-political approach towards the
Israel-Palestine conflict, one that sought to distinguish itself from
the more Islamist-oriented approach of the Hamas-Fatah movement
in those days.18 Sabeel has focused on community development from
its earliest days, trying to play a part in the development and
rebuilding of Palestinian society , fragmented and br oken by the over
forty years of Israeli occupation of the Palestinian T erritories. This
fragmentation and destruction of Palestinian communal life was
further accelerated by the negative impacts of the post-First Intifada
security measures put in place by the Israelis. Citing security
considerations, post-Intifada Israel created a virtual blockade of
almost all Palestinian urban centr es in the W est Bank and Gaza Strip
and then pr oceeded to cantonise the W est Bank and isolate the Gaza
Strip by strictly enforcing an encirclement (containment) policy from
the sea, land and air . This policy has continued for almost twenty
years since the end of the First Intifada in 1992.19
Dar Annadwa-International Centre of Bethlehem
The International Centr e of Bethlehem (ICB-Dar Annadwa
Addawliyya) had its origins in the outreach ministry of the Christmas
Lutheran Church in Bethlehem, a process that really kicked off after
the Rev . Mitri Raheb assumed the pastorate of the chur ch in 1988. He
sought to renovate and re-employ some of the empty rooms and
building that surround the church and convert them into revenue
generating institutions, thereby contributing to the renovation and
regeneration of the region. One of the first projects undertaken by
Raheb, with the full support of the Lutheran Church in the Holy
Land, along with other interested donors was the establishment of
the Abu Gibran Guest House in the heart of the Old City of Bethlehem
right next to the Lutheran Church, in 1992. This also coincided with
what was known as the Authentic T ourism Pr ogram in Bethlehem,
an initiative to get tourists to come again to the city and to enjoy the
traditional hospitality of the Palestinian people. The establishment
of the ICB followed in 1995, which coincided with the first
International and intercultural conference organized by the centre.
Raheb also emphasizes the importance of internationalistPalestinian theological praxis in context   G   39
April–June 2012collaboration. Many of his projects, were and are accomplished with
the help of W estern support, both political, financial and humanitarian
aid, directed towards the welfare of the Palestinian people, both
Christian as well as Muslim. In 1998, Raheb founded the Dar Al-
Kalima Model School, which became part of the network of Lutheran
schools in the r egion. A notable achievement was the high
participation of Muslim students in the rolls of the school. The ten
year period from 1999-2009 saw a frenetic pace of activity at the ICB
with the launch of the Al-Kahf Gallery and Arts and Crafts Centr e in
1999, followed by the Bethlehem Media Centr e (2003), The Dar Al-
Kalima Health and W ellness Centr e (2003), and finally the Dar Al-
Kalima College in 2006. That year also saw the official launch of the
Diyar Consortium that was intended to bring all the varied activities
of the Bethlehem centre under one organizational roof.
The International Centr e of Bethlehem, also know as Dar Annadwa
Addawliyya (The House of W orldwide Encounter) has a number of
other initiatives other than those mentioned above. These will include
the Bright Stars Program focused on pre-school and early primary
school childr en in the Bethlehem r egion, the Ajyal (generations)
program that focuses on community car e for the elderly and Azwaj
(couples) group program that focuses on young couples and families.
The ICB itself is housed in a landmark Bethlehem building abutting
the Lutheran church that once comprised part of the old Lutheran
School in the Old City . This was transformed into the Ad-Dar Cultural
and Conference Centre, an impressive centre built through a generous
donation fr om the government of Norway . This building was
significantly damaged during the April 2002 Israeli siege of Bethlehem
and had to be restored and partially reconstructed.20
Raheb has thus sought to ensure the grass-roots appeal of his
organisation and its activities benefit the maximum among the
Christians and Muslims of the population in the occupied W est Bank.
His holistic ‘cradle to the grave’ approach has been designed to benefit
and appeal to a wide cross-section of the Palestinian populace,
irrespective of religious and socio-political orientation.
Relevance of liberation/contextual theological approaches to
Palestinian Christians
Palestinian Christians are a small ‘minority within the Palestine-Israel
spectrum. They are often perceived as a somewhat ‘embattled’
minority , given their pr opensity to migrate in sear ch of gr eener
pastur es abr oad. One of the purposes of Ateek, Raheb’s and Al-Liqa’s
theo-political as well as cultural endeavours in the region has been to
seek to give a ‘voice to the voiceless,’ to ensure that the ecumenical40   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Palestinian Christian voice does not go unheard in the general
cacophony of competing forces and influences in the region. While
Sabeel started out initially as an organisation dedicated to educating
the ‘Christian’ W est about the situation on the gr ound in Israel-
Palestine, it has considerably diversified its activities over the years,
as its popularity and support base, both political and ecumenical as
well as financial, within and without the Palestine-Israel region has
increased. Sabeel benefitted from the ease of access that Israelis as
well as Palestinian residents and citizens of the state of Israel were
allowed in the occupied Palestinian T erritories, a situation that
radically changed during and after the first Intifada. Ateek himself
sought to apply strategies and policies learnt during his youth
pastoring depleted Christian communities within the state of Israel,
during the 1960s and 1970s, a situation that forced him to seek to
build up an ecumenical framework of collaboration between the
different Christian churches and communities in the area. He carried
this pr ocess on in his work as Canon in char ge of the Arabic speaking
congr egation in the main seat of Palestinian Anglicanism in Israel-
Palestine, St. George’s Cathedral in occupied East Jerusalem. Raheb,
while younger than Ateek, has had a similar ecumenical oriented
experience, both in his early life in the occupied W est Bank town of
Bethlehem as well as later when he went abroad to Germany for
higher education.
Post-First Intifada, the new and fractured situation in which
Palestinian Christian communities found themselves in the region,
because of the travel and other restrictions imposed by the Israelis,
meant that there has been a renewed focus on the necessity of
ecumenical as well as inter-faith activities for the sake of physical/
spiritual survival and continued relevance within radically changed
circumstances. It’s essentially W estern oriented appr oach has meant
that Sabeel has made ecumenical endeavours between Palestinian
Christians and W esterners as well as localized encounters between
the various Christian churches and communities in the region, their
prime goal of activism. Sabeel’s ecumenical counterpart in the W est
Bank town of Bethlehem, Al-Liqa, while having substantial
internationalist activism, has made inter-faith encounter in Israel-
Palestine, their main plank of activity . Diyar has made educational
and cultural endeavour among Palestinian youth of all groups and
faiths the main thrust of activism, while ensuring that the mainly
Lutheran world in the W est is well awar e of the ecumenical and
internationalist implications of their work in the occupied W est Bank
of Palestine.Palestinian theological praxis in context   G   41
April–June 2012The value of Palestinian Christian liberation/contextual theology
to Muslims
Has Palestinian liberation/contextual theology anything to offer in
the lar gely Muslim envir onment in Palestine today? Obviously , this
question is a sub-set of the more general question as to the importance
of minority faiths within the context of a majority faith environment.
This applies to Christians in India and in many Muslim countries, to
Jews in many parts of the world, to Sikhs just about everywhere,
and to Muslims in W estern Eur ope and North America. Reflecting on
these examples, one can see that minority faith communities often
‘punch above their weight,’ both in providing distinguished
individuals who represent their community (for example Gandhi in
South Africa, C.S. Andr ews in India, Bhikhu Par ekh in Britain today),
and in the ability of minority communities to puncture complacency
and ask questions the majority community cannot otherwise see.
The Church in Palestine is such a minority group, faced with
complex challenges intensified by the long drawn out Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian T erritories. As mentioned earlier , the
missionary emphasis on social, educational and medical work in
Palestine meant that Christians inherited a social services and
educational organizational and institutional network far in excess of
their actual numbers. This, in turn, has been the greatest contribution
that Christian missionaries and their native supporters have left in
Palestine, a legacy that has impacted on many generations of
Palestinian people, irr espective of r eligious af filiation. Ateek and
Raheb’s institutions are in many ways a modern development on the
older missionary pr oject in Palestine. The work of Al-Liqa in particular
in Bethlehem has been focused on developing a sustainable dialogue
between Muslims and Christians in Palestine-Israel, with the initiative
been taken from the side of the native Christian ecumenical
community . Sabeel’s focus on Christian-Muslim r elations in the r egion
is less overt, possibly because of the internationalist ecumenical focus
of the group. Raheb’s work in Bethlehem again stands out in this
context as the most praxis-oriented socio-political as well as
educational-culturally programmed approach that seeks to fashion a
new generation of Palestinians, Christian and Muslim, on the streets
of Palestine, who would be capable of carrying forward the goal of
building a sustainable and self-reliant nation-state for the Palestinian
people. In this sense, Raheb’s work under the Diyar umbrella stands
out as the approach that has the most to offer in the largely
conservative Muslim envir onment that is Palestine today . The
liberation that was sought to be propagated by Raheb for the42   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Palestinian Christian people was primarily one fr om fear , fear of being
part of an ever-shrinking Christian minority in a Muslim sea that is
the Christian situation in Palestine today . Raheb saw his r ole as
facilitator of Christian-Muslim youth encounters in this role,
programming and developing a generation of Christian-Muslim youth
to becoming the torch-bearers of an independent Palestine. In this
sense, the liberation he envisaged was one of the mind, a spiritual
liberation necessary for both the communities to live in peace and
brotherhood in a future independent Palestine of their dreams.
Dependence on the W est
The chur ch in Palestine was lar gely planted by W estern missionary
activism, an effort that went on more or less uninterrupted till the
mid-twentieth century . Even today , the chur ch in Palestine is far fr om
independent of W estern influence and financial support, a
circumstance that hardly sets it apart from the rest of the church in
the ‘third world.’ Christian Churches, particularly Protestant,
evangelical-origin as well as Catholic mission-origin churches in the
so-called ‘developing or third world’ still rely in varying extents on
financial and other support from parent churches in the so-called
developed ‘W estern’ worlds. The or ganizations r eferr ed to in this
study are not independent of this trend; indeed, they would find it
very difficult to function in their present format without the generous
help of their external donors, pr edominantly in Eur ope, America and
Australasia.
The pr ograms developed by both Sabeel as well as the Al-Liqa
centre in Bethlehem are relatively similar and largely based on the
dialogue approach, the premise that talking with one’s enemies is
the best path to reconciliation and peace. Funds accrued from the
West ar e lar gely spent (in addition to paying the salaries of of fice
and field staff members and meeting overhead costs) in conducting
conferences, both local as well as (particularly in the case of Sabeel)
international, local clergy and laity workshops, youth conferences
and day trips (as a means of bringing dispersed Palestinian
communities and individuals together in social networking exercises)
and finally (in the case of Sabeel) witness visits that are a means of
bringing W estern tourists and pilgrims to Palestine-Israel on a r eality
awareness exercise.
Sabeel has since its inception devoted increasing space and
resources to involving interested Palestinian clergy and laity within
an ecumenical liberation theology framework, one that is programmed
to emphasize the continued relevance of scripture, Old as well as
New , for the Palestinian Christian people and their context. ThePalestinian theological praxis in context   G   43
April–June 2012weekly Thursday noon communion service at the Sabeel offices in
Jerusalem featur es a Latin America base community modelled prayer
and scriptural r eflection format that again seeks to make the Anglican
bible passage of the week relevant to the Palestinian struggle for
liberation and against Israeli socio-political and economic oppression
in the Occupied T erritories. One of the outcomes of this has been
that Palestinian Christian participants at these sessions as well as
interested foreign visitors and observers are exposed to the scriptures
through the socio-political lens of liberation theology , a scheme of
reading and analysis not historically or culturally popular and
accepted in the Palestinian and Levantine Christian framework. People
are challenged as they r ealize that the situation in Palestine today ,
coupled with the Israeli occupation and its side-effects can be
remarkably similar to the circumstances and personal-collective
communal experience that Jesus and his early followers faced in Roman
Palestine, roughly 2000 years ago. This, in turn, encourages them to
go out and face the occupation on a daily basis, with courage and
fortitude, secure in the knowledge that what is happening in Palestine
today can be seen as a test of their faith. Just as Jesus took a stand
against his fellow Jewish oppressors as well as the Roman occupiers
on the basis of truth and justice as revealed in the Hebrew Scriptures,
so also Palestinian Christians and their foreign supporters are
exhorted to view the present confliction situation that they are placed
in through the eyes of Jesus Christ and His responses to the
circumstances that faced Him and Palestinian society at that particular
historical juncture. This mode of viewing the conflict, that was
enunciated by Ateek thr ough his first book, Justice and Only Justice ,
has the added advantage of being able to connect the Palestinian
struggle for liberation and the Christian sub-struggle within that
broader context, to concerned Christians and Christian communities
worldwide, including those that have been through and are still in
the process of developing these forms of non-violent protests against
sectarian, class, race and political-economic oppression. The reference
here is obviously to, among others, the South African str uggle against
Apartheid, the continuing Latin American experiments with base
communities and liberation theology and interested and concerned
supporters in the W estern world.
There has been a similar history of radical thinking and move
towards a contextualisation of theology within Palestine in the
Lutheran community as well. This move towards what was then
known as a ‘Palestinian theology’ started well before the first
Palestinian Intifada br oke out in 1987. A former bishop and head of
the Lutheran church in Palestine, (Naim Nasser) writing in a German44   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Protestant publication ( Friede im Land der Bibel-3. Folge ) during the
first Intifada explained Palestinian theology as follows:
We know ourselves to have been placed by God, as part of the Palestinian
people, in this land Palestine, and called by His Son, Jesus Christ, to be
His people. Therefore we are citizens of two states, the earthly-
Palestinian and the heavenly-divine state. It is the task of the so-called
“Palestinian theology” to clarify the relationship of those two states to
each other . Our theologians strive to pursue theology in the Palestinian
context, i.e., to seek new ways in which to proclaim the Gospel to our
people in its situation, language and mentality…21
An estimation of Raheb’ s approach in relation to liberation/
contextual theology in Israel/Palestine
Mitri Raheb was involved with the Al-Liqa Centr e from its early
years and honed his theological orientation within the context of his
native Palestinian heritage and culture in close association with this
organisation. He, however , diversified fr om the Al-Liqa set-up in
opting to follow partially the example pr ovided by Archbishop Elias
Chacour (the Galilean Palestinian-Israeli educator) in seeking to focus
on education as the tool of empowerment of the Palestinian youth in
the W est Bank and particularly in Bethlehem.
Raheb’s approach must be seen as an attempt to meld institutions
and approaches within a framework of occupation and oppression to
create facts on the ground in Bethlehem that are most suited to the
present needs of the Palestinian people, irrespective of faith, creed
or party affiliation. It is in this context that his theological approach
becomes apparent as well as its divergences from the top-down
appr oach favour ed by Sabeel and Al-Liqa. Raheb has sought to utilize
the broad similarities of culture, language and the political and
economic situation that do more than anything else to bind the two
main religious communities of Palestine together against a common
foe, to create a cultural theological approach that will in turn lay the
groundwork for a reliable, sustainable and mutually fruitful dialogue
between the Christians and Muslims of the Palestinian T erritories.
He also sought to do this through the use of the twin tools of co-ed
Christian-Muslim ‘education’ (conceived from the cradle to young
adulthood) as well as popular Arab cultur e, coupled with his holistic
‘cradle to the grave’ concept of providing readily available and
relatively cheap recreation and healthcare facilities to the occupied
and logistically constrained Palestinian people of Bethlehem and the
Palestinian T erritories in general. Raheb’s ability in achieving what
he has accomplished, has hinged on his success in persuading W esternPalestinian theological praxis in context   G   45
April–June 2012(mainly US and European Lutheran) donors that Palestinians deserve
a better life, even if this cannot at present include freedom.
Raheb views the pr esent situation in the T erritories as being mor e
fit for visions of the future as it should be in Palestine-Israel. One of
Raheb’s gr eatest fears as a long-time r esident of the occupied W est
Bank has been the continuing Palestinian and Christian emigration
from the T erritories, primarily as a r esult of the Israeli occupation.
His primary purpose in developing a theo-political contextual praxis
of liberation has been to counter this trend by giving the Palestinian
Christian people a sense of work-dignity , empowerment, holistic
development and pride in remaining in their homeland, despite all
the pressures to the contrary to make them leave.
He has a particular vision for infrastructure development and
building institutions in Palestine, and is particularly interested in
implementing projects that would result in developing human
resources through the arts, culture and modern vocational-oriented
education in the Occupied T erritories. He has felt the need to harness
the creativity and the inherent talent of the people. Raheb’s vision is
concerned with the building up of the Palestine of his dreams, and
not being bogged down with questions about how one must deal
with and end the Israeli occupation of the W est Bank. He feels that
there is already enough Palestinian and worldwide obsession with
the occupation and with the requirement of whether to support a
two or one-state solution. Now is the time to build up the Kingdom
of God on earth and particularly in this context of the proposed new
Palestinian national state. This is more important than anything else
in Raheb’s view .22
All Raheb’s outreach mission activities were theologically speaking
a fore-taste for understanding the concept of the Kingdom of God. It
is in this context that the Lutheranism of Raheb becomes apparent.
Just as Luther enunciated the concept of the two Kingdoms, the
Kingdom of man and the Kingdom of God, with the possibility and
necessity of cooperation between the two, so also Raheb views his
medical, cultural and educational work in the context of a necessary
outgrowth of his theological analysis in praxis.23 The end of the
occupation and the physical-political liberation of Palestine is not the
sole goal in Raheb’s eyes. He also believes in working towards the
greater purpose of the spiritual liberation (the liberation of the soul)
of the Palestinian people, both Christians as well as Muslims.24 Raheb’s
firm belief is that it would not be possible to achieve the ‘physical’
liberation of Palestine primarily by lifting the Israeli occupation. T rue
liberation of the Palestinian people could only proceed as a result of
the spiritual and physical liberation of the land of Israel-Palestine,46   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1and one of the tools, in his opinion, to achieve this is through the
contextual theological medium that he has devised and sought to
propagate through his various projects and institutions.
A contextual approach to theology is important precisely because
it gives importance to people’s narratives. This is because only
something like 8% of the Palestinian population is functionally literate.
One must take notice of the uneducated people in Palestine. As most
of the people do not car e about theology , we should appeal to them
by way of practical ‘on the ground’ policies.25 It is for this reason that
the ICB knowingly prefers a contextual and less politicized service-
oriented approach.26
Raheb’s emphasis on inter-faith dialogue sought to take further
what had been tried and tested in Al-Liqa over the past two decades
or more. The most important fact in this context was to actually bring
people together without talking about the process of doing so through
dialogue. Christians and Muslims must come together without having
the necessity to speak about coming together . Muslims and Christians
in Bethlehem and in Palestine had the same needs and sometimes
different needs. The ‘need of the hour ’ was to pr ovide for their need
which was what Raheb was trying to do through his different
institutions and projects. He felt that it was important to include
Muslims in all his projects, and indeed sometimes more work must
be done for Muslims than for Christians, as true liberation would
not be achieved for Christians unless the Muslims of Palestine acquire
their own physical and spiritual liberation as well. Liberation for
Palestinians has to be holistic, or not at all, as Christians are a small
minority in a Muslim sea. Raheb has said that he has a vision where
he would prefer to see Christians and Muslims swimming and walking
and going on tours and painting together rather than anything else
as well as going on tours to foreign countries together as brand
ambassadors of the extent of ethno-religious harmony in Palestine.
He feels that what he is doing at the ICB does more to bring Muslims
and Christians, and particularly the youth of Palestine, together . In
Raheb’s view , Christian-Muslim harmony and unity can be achieved
only as a result of a grassroots ground-based approach and can only
be achieved by emphasizing the essential unity of the people of
Palestine as well as the potential of the people to r emain together .27
In Raheb’s view , the most important thing is to cr eate a taste of
the new life that could possibly be enjoyed in Palestine once the Israeli
occupation is ended. It is important not to be obsessed by the
occupation, but to think beyond it. T o this end, Raheb ar gues that
theology must be translated into infrastructure, people and ultimately
onto the streets of Palestine-Israel.28 The holistic development soughtPalestinian theological praxis in context   G   47
April–June 2012through the Diyar consortium marks a major difference between his
approaches as opposed to the Sabeel programs. Whereas Sabeel and
Al-Liqa look to the ideal Palestine-Israel of the future, Raheb seeks
to change the pr esent. Raheb emphasizes the Arabic term Dar in all
his institutes, as well as the plural form Diyar , both of which mean
‘home’. All his or ganizations ar e homes and at Dar al-Annadwa  as
well as at Dar al-Kalima , what is most important is the building of the
homeland of Palestine and belonging to it.29
It has been asked whether what Raheb is doing in Bethlehem is
little more than applying plasters to the open sore that is the
Palestinian and Christian situational context today in the land of Israel-
Palestine. This would however , in the eyes of this r esear cher, be the
result of taking an extremely critical stand against the work of a
Christian organisation that seeks to pave the way as regards the
future of the Palestinian people in their own homeland. Raheb’s Diyar
Consortium has within the space of 14 years (1995-2009) grown to
become one of the largest employers of quality manpower in the
Bethlehem Governorate of the Palestinian Authority .30 They ar e
projected to reach out to some 60,000 people during the course of
their various activities and projects in 2009 and their impact is not
just restricted to the Bethlehem region, but now extends far afield
covering mainly the southern W est Bank and Jer usalem, plus even
the Palestinian populated areas of the state of Israel.31 Raheb’s entire
mission strategy is fashioned around the policy of ‘empowering
people in a context of continuing conflict.’ His vision and that of his
organisation is geared towards ‘influencing people’s transition from
a stance of r eactivity to one of pr o-activity , from being victims to
becoming visionaries, from waiting to creating, and from surviving
to thriving.’32 Again fr om a holistic and spiritual point of view , Raheb
seeks to emulate Jesus Christ’s own ministry of ‘preaching, teaching
and healing in his (Christ’s own) homeland….. That we might have
Life and have it abundantly (John 10:10).’33
Raheb declares that,
In a context of too much peace talking, Diyar believes in peacemaking.
In a context of too much politics, Diyar believes in caring for the polis/
city. In a context of too much r eligion, Diyar believes in investing in
spirituality . In a context of too much disempowering aid, Diyar believes
in empowering the individual and the community . In a context of too
much segregation, Diyar believes in building bridges and platforms for
inter cultural dialogue. In a context of despair , Diyar believes in to
creating room for hope. In a context full of liturgies of death, Diyar
celebrates the mystery of the risen Lord of life.3448   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Conclusion
Sabeel, Al-Liqa and Diyar ar e closely connected within the spectr um
of Palestinian liberation/contextual theology and in particular , the
advocacy and publicity (conference-oriented) support work that they
perform often overlaps with each other . This often confuses W estern
viewers and supporters of Palestinian Christians as to the actual
differences between the different groups. Both Sabeel as well as the
Raheb-inspired ICB engage in contextual theologies to bring the whole
gamut of their activities into focus. However the essential praxiological
focus of each remains different. Their differences lie within the theo-
political visions of the two Palestinian Christian clerics and directors
of these centr es, Naim Ateek and Mitri Raheb, as well as the socio-
political and economic angles through which these visions are
translated into actual praxis.
Notes and  References
1.Gina Lende (2003), A Quest for Justice: Palestinian Christians and their
Contextual Theology, M.Phil diss.,  University of Oslo, 51. This work
was one of the first works in English from a European University
that focused on Palestinian Christian issues and their affairs.
2.Gina Lende, A Quest for Justice: Palestinian Christians and their
Contextual Theology, 51.
3.K. C. Abraham (1992), ‘Thir d World Theologies’, CTC Bulletin, May-
December: 8, in ‘T owar ds a Contextual Theology ,’ by Lour dino A
Yuzon, CTC Bulletin , Chapter 1, XII (2)-XIII (1 and 2), July 1994-
September 1995. Available at http://www .cca.or g.hk/r esour ces/
ctc/ctc94-02/1.Y uzon.htm (accessed on April 30, 2006). The Rev .
K. C Abraham is one of the leading theologians of India (particularly
after the death of M. M. Thomas) and indeed, the Thir d World. He is
a member of the Church of South India (the South Indian wing of
the global Anglican Communion). He has served as a vice-president
of the Ecumenical Association of Thir d W orld Theologians
(EATWOT), as well as a Pr ofessor of Theology and Ethics at United
Theological College  (UTC), Bangalore, one of India’s leading liberal
Protestant theological seminaries. He has also served as the director
of the Bangalore-based ‘South Asia Theological Research Institute
(SATHRI),’ and as dir ector of the boar d of theological education of
the Senate of Serampor e University . He is the author of many books
and articles including Third World Theologies:  Commonalities and
Diver gences , (Eugene-Or egon: W ipf and Stock Publishers, October
2004), and Liberative Solidarity: Contemporary Perspectives on Mission,
(Tiruvalla-India:  Christava Sahitya Samithi, April 1996).
4.K. C. Abraham, Third World Theologies , 5.Palestinian theological praxis in context   G   49
April–June 20125.Stephen B. Bevans (1992), Models of Contextual Theology , NY:
Maryknoll-Orbis Books, 1. Stephen Bevans is the Louis J. Luzbatek
Professor of Mission and Culture at the Catholic Theological Union
in Chicago, US. Before joining the CTU, he spent over nine years in
the Philippines, teaching theology at a local diocesan seminary .
This experience obviously affected the way he thought and did
theology . Apart fr om Models of Contextual Theology he is also co-
author (with his colleague Roger Schr oeder , S.V .D.) of Constants in
Context: A  Theology of Mission for T oday , (Maryknoll, New York: Orbis
Books, 2004) .
6.Bevans, Models  of Contextual Theology , 1-2.
7.Ibid.
8.José M. de Mesa (2003), ‘Contextual Theologizing: Future
Perspectives,’ East Asian Pastoral Review 40, no. 3, in Theses on the
Local Chur ch:  A  Theological Reflection in the Asian Context, FABC
Papers 60, 54. Available at http://eapi.admu.edu.ph/eapr003/
mesa.htm, (accessed on September 14, 2006).
9.K. C. Abraham, Third World Theologies , 5.
10. Mitri Raheb (1995), I  am a Palestinian Christian , Minneapolis: Fortress
Press, 25.
11.Naim Ateek (1989), Justice and only Justice: A Palestinian theology of
Liberation, Maryknoll, New York: Orbis Books, 71.
12. Ibid, 72.
13. Rosemary Radfor d Ruether , ‘For ewor d,’ in I am a Palestinian
Christian,  by Mitri Raheb, 7.
14. Ibid, 8.
15. Raheb, Palestinian Christian , 15-16.
16. Ruether , Foreword , 8. Also see Raheb, Palestinian Christian , 24-25.
17. See Naim Ateek (2008), ‘A Palestinian Christian cry for
reconciliation,’ (New York: Maryknoll, Orbis Books), 7.
18. Ibid, 7-8.
19. Sonja Karkar , ‘The first intifada 20 years later ,’ The Electr onic Intifada,
10 December 2007. Available at http://electr onicintifada.net/
content/first-intifada-20-years-later/7251, accessed June 15, 2012.
20. See Mitri Raheb (2004), ‘Bethlehem Besieged: Stories of Hope in
Times of T rouble,’ (Minneapolis, Fortr ess Pr ess) for mor e information
about the scale of the destruction following the Israeli invasion of
Bethlehem and the determination of the staff and supporters of the
ICB to rebuild again after this.
21. Quoted in Malcolm Lowe, ‘Israel and Palestinian Liberation
Theology ,’ in End of an Exile , by James Parkes (2005) 3rd Ed. Eugene
B. Korn and Roberta Kalechofsky eds. (Marblehead, MA: Micah
Publications), 268-269. The clear reference to the classical Lutheran
concept of the Kingdoms of Heaven and Earth are very visible in
this statement. As has been explained later in this chapter , Raheb’s
work in Palestine has sought to follow up on this very Lutheran
principle of the two Kingdoms and their mutual interdependence.50   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 122. Interview with Rev . Dr . Mitri Raheb, International Centr e of
Bethlehem, August 24, 2007.
23. Historically , classical Lutheranism has believed that the Kingdom
of this world is quite distinct from the Kingdom of God in Jesus
Christ. Hence it can be argued that Lutherans will not be
theologically comfortable with the premises of the orthodox Latin
American format of liberation theology that has always stood
against any separation between the spiritual as well as the political
and physical liberation of mankind. Lutherans in general and
Western Lutherans in particular , might thus well opt to support the
less confrontational ‘contextual Lutheran-base theology’ of Mitri
Raheb.
24. Interview with Rev . Dr . Mitri Raheb, International Centr e of
Bethlehem, August 24, 2007.
25. Ibid.
26. Ibid.
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid.
30. Diyar employs a total of 100 people in 2009, making it the third
largest employer in Bethlehem. Refer speech made by Rev . Dr. Mitri
Raheb at the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America’s (ELCA)
Bishop’s Academy , which was held in the Middle East and
particularly in the Israel-Palestine-Jordan region in early 2009.
Available at Raheb’s website at http://www .mitriraheb.or g/
(accessed on April 02, 2009).
31. 60 percent of the people who benefit from Diyar programs are
Palestinian Muslims, reflecting the organization’s situational
context as well as communal outreach within the predominantly
Muslim Manger Street quarter of Bethlehem. The city of Bethlehem
itself is now a Muslim majority city , reflecting the lar ge-scale
emigration of Palestinian Christians from the region over the last
hundred years and almost completely reversing the Christian
history of the city over the last two millennia or so.
32. Speech made by Rev . Dr. Mitri Raheb at the Evangelical Lutheran
Chur ch of America’s (ELCA) Bishop’s Academy .
33. Ibid.
34. Ibid.
SAMUEL  J. KURUVILLA  is Visiting Research Fellow , Institute for
Defence Studies and Analyses (IDSA), 1-Development Enclave,
(near USI), Rao T ula Ram Marg, New Delhi-1 10 010 and a Post-
Doctoral Fellow at School of International Relations, Mahatma
Gandhi University , Kottayam 60, Kerala. Email: sjk201@gmail.comEnvironmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   51
April–June 2012Environmental Thoughts of
Gandhi for a Green Future
Sasikala AS
ABSTRACT
The environmental concern as we understand today was not there at the time of
Gandhi, but his ideas on development, technology, self sufficiency, village Swaraj
etc. disclose his environmental concern. Different streams of environmental
philosophy have paid their indebtedness to Gandhi. The present paper is an
attempt to understand the theoretical aspects behind Gandhian environmentalism.
The Philosophical elements of Gandhi such as truth and non violence, the idea
of science and technology, economic concepts, conflict resolution techniques etc.
are discussed to analyze their implications for environment. The paper
distinguishes Gandhian economics from conventional economics to underscore
its links with sustainability questions. The paper argues that the final outcome
of Gandhian economics is a green future.
Introduction
W E LIVE IN A world in which science, technology and development
play important r oles in changing human destiny .  However , over -
exploitation of natural resources for the purpose of development leads
to serious environmental hazards. In fact, the idea of development is
itself controversial in the present situation as in the name of
development, we are unethically plundering natural resources. It is
rather common to confront high dam controversies, water disputes,
war against deforestation and pollution these days.  Eminent Indian
envir onmental activist V andana Shiva ar gues that development is
actually a continuation of colonialism. Borrowing from Gustavo Esteva
she argues that “development is a permanent war waged by its52   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1promoters and suffered by its victims.”1 It is true that a science that
does not respect nature’s needs and a development which does not
respect people’s needs threatens human survival. The green thoughts
of Gandhi give us a new vision to harmonise nature with the needs of
people.
Gandhi was not an environmentalist in the modern sense.
Although he did not create a green philosophy or write nature poems,
he is often described as an “apostle of applied human ecology .”2 It is
a fact that environmental concerns were minimal in Gandhi’s time;
but eminent environmental writers like Ramachandra Guha consider
him an early Environmentalist3. His views on nature are scattered
throughout his writings. His ideas relating to Satyagraha based on
truth and non-violence, simple life style, and development reveal how
sustainable development is possible without doing any harm to nature
and our fellow beings. His idea that “nature has enough to satisfy
every one’s needs, but not to satisfy anybody’s greed” became one
line ethic to modern environmentalism.
Gandhi considered the earth a living organism. His ideas were
expressed in terms of two fundamental laws: Cosmic law and the
Law of Species. Cosmic Law views the entire universe as a single
entity . Nothing could malfunction outside the thr eshold limits built
into the grand system that includes both living and non-living
phenomena4. He believed that “the universe was structured and
informed by the cosmic spirit, that all men, all life and indeed all
creation were one”5. He was an advaitist who believed in the
essential unity of man and nature. He wrote: “I believe in the
advaita  (non-duality), I believe in the essential unity of man and
for that matter , of all that lives. Ther efore, I believe that if one
man gains spiritually , the world gains with him and if one man
fails, the whole world fails to that extent.”6 Regarding the law of
species Gandhi believed that without the cooperation and sacrifice
of both human and non-human beings evolution is not possible.
Being rational human beings, we are the custodians of the rest of
creation and should r espect their rights and cherish the diversity .
It is for this reason that taking more than the required resources
is seen as theft. Gandhi evolved these principles from his vast
readings and understandings of religious traditions of Hinduism,
Jainism, Christianity and Islam. His social, economic and political
ideas were framed on the understanding of interdependence of
the whole universe. This paper tries to analyze the ideas of
Mahatma Gandhi to understand their relevance for the
environment. First section of the paper presents the theoretical
aspects of truth, non-violence and Satyagraha  and theirEnvironmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   53
April–June 2012environmental implications. The second section discusses the
critique of Gandhi on science and modernity while the third section
makes a case for consideration of Gandhian economics as ecological
economics. The last section analyses the conflict resolution
techniques of Gandhi and their applicability in environmental
conflicts. The paper argues that a new model of environmentalism
put forward by Gandhi will lead us to a green future where the
rights of the present and future generations are well protected.
1
Truth, Non-violence and Satyagraha
Truth and Non-violence ar e the fundamentals of Gandhian
Philosophy .  His life itself was a r elentless sear ch for tr uth. His
views on truth are embedded in his religious beliefs and practices
and offer “a cosmological view of our relationship with one another
and a pervasive sense of duty we owe to one another .”7 Non-
violence or Ahimsa means non-injury , but to Gandhi non-violence
was much more than the absence of violence.  He used it to mean
non-injury in thought, word and deed. He viewed non-violence
as the philosophy of life.  Ahimsa, Satyagraha and Tapasya  wer e the
basic principles that guided his life8. Truth and Ahimsa  are
intertwined terms. T o Gandhi tr uth is that “which determines the
spirit in which one lives or the religious and ethical criteria which
governs the way in which he thinks and acts.”9  He believed that
truth can be achieved only by means of non-violence. It affords
the fullest pr otection to one’s self r espect and sense of honor .  If
truth is the highest law , then non-violence is the highest duty .
Gandhi claimed that truth was the most correct and fully significant
term that could be used for God. T o practice Ahimsa  is to r ealize
truth and to realize truth is to practice Ahimsa . The concept
Satyagraha  gave practical expression to the religious and ethical
ideals of tr uth and non violence. Tapasya  or self sacrifice is necessary
to achieve the highest truth.  It involves freedom from fear and a
willingness to die. Gandhi believed that Satyagraha  is nothing, but
tapasya  for the truth. The suffering that has to be undergone in
Satyagraha  is tapasya in its fullest form.10
Gandhi explained his concept of non-violence in the following
terms.
1.Non-violence is the law of the human race and is infinitely greater
than and superior to brute force.54   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 12.Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one’s self-respect and
sense of honor .
3.Individuals and nations who practice non-violence must be
prepared to sacrifice everything for the welfare of the whole world.
4.Non-violence is a power which can be wielded equally by all -
children, young men and women or grown up people, provided
they have a living faith in the God of love and therefore have equal
love for all mankind. When non-violence is accepted as the law of
life it must pervade the whole being and not merely applied to isolated
acts.
5.It is a profound error to suppose that whilst the law is good enough
for individuals it is not for masses of mankind.11
Satyagraha  is an active form of non-violence. Gandhi considered it
as truth force or soul force.  Satyagraha is based on the idea that the
moral appeal to the heart or conscience is more effective than an appeal
based on the threat or bodily pain or violence. Satyagraha  itself
originates from the belief that while violence to persons and property
diverts the minds of the parties concerned from the real issues
involved, non-violent action invites the parties to a dialogue about
the issues themselves.
The major difference between Gandhian and non-Gandhian
systems of non-violence is a disagreement about the relations of
ends and means.  To Gandhi, the selection of means pr ecedes the
selection of ends in the sense that one’s original and basic
commitment is to certain means or methods, and one’s ends are
seen as objectives which progressively emerge as one tries to bring
one’s life into conformity with this basic commitment.12 Satyagraha
tries to unite this objective and basic commitment. In a way this
gives an opportunity to understand both our opponent’s and our
own mission. In the Gandhian scheme of Satyagraha  one undergoes
self-suffering with a belief that the opponent can be converted to
seeing the truth by touching his or her conscience or that a clearer
vision of truth may grow out of the dialectical process for both
parties.13
March 12th, 1930 was a watershed in the history of India. Gandhi
started Dandi  march on that day to protest against the salt law imposed
by the British. Thousands of people including women and children
joined the march. Gandhi advised the people to make salt by
themselves in their own homes as a protest against the government.
On April 6, 1930 he br oke the British salt law by picking up a chunk of
the salt crust from the Dandi  beach. It was a unique method of protest
and Gandhi taught the world a new lesson that the power of non-
violence supersedes the power of violence. Non-violence has aEnvironmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   55
April–June 2012mesmerizing power to exert a pull in the minds of human beings and
it appeals to the heart. After Gandhi, leaders and activists of dif ferent
movements used prototypes of Satyagraha  to bring their campaigns to
fruition.
The ecological scope of non-violence is unlimited. Gandhi’s faith
in non-violence and vegetarianism made him a votary of conservation
of all diversity including all forms of life, societies, cultures, religions,
and traditions.14 He made manifest the internal relation between self-
realization, non-violence and what sometimes has been called
biospherical egalitarianism.15 Arne Naess, the pioneer of deep ecology
argued that ecological preservation is non violent in nature16. Naess
introduced and Thomas W eber systematized the r elation between
non-violence, self-realization and mutual dependence of all living
beings in the following points.
1.Self-realization presupposes a search for truth
2.All living beings are one
3.Himsa  (violence) against oneself makes self-realization impossible.
4.Himsa  against a living being is himsa  against oneself
5.Himsa  against a living being makes complete self-realization
impossible17
Naess used these principles to evolve a broader philosophy of
envir onmentalism i.e, deep ecology . He believed that Gandhi’s
utopia is one of the few that shows ecological balance.18 As Gandhi
envisaged, non-violence has the power to solve all our problems,
including ecological crisis. Gandhian non-violence is accepted by
different environmental movements as a vital principle. Most of
these movements lay claim to the Gandhian values of ecological
prudence and frugality and to the Gandhian model of decentralized
democracy and V illage  Swaraj . Many thinkers consider ed the Indian
Environmental Movements like Chipko movement, Narmada Bachao
Andolan  (NBA) etc. as the living example of Gandhian
Environmentalism and they consider Gandhi as a “man with deep
ecological view of life, a view much too deep even for deep
ecology .”19 It was in Chipko movement that Satyagraha was initially
used as an effective technique to fight against environmental
injustice.  The Forest  Satyagrahas  of 1930’s were a result of the
Forest Act of 1927 which denied the people access to biomass for
survival while increasing biomass production for industrial and
commercial growth20. The key agenda of the Chipko  movement was
that carrying forward the “vision of Gandhi’s mobilization for a
new society , wher e neither man nor natur e is exploited and56   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1destroyed, which was the civilizational response to a threat to
human survival.”21 All these together made Gandhi an exponent
of Indian environmentalism.
II
Gandhi’ s Critique of Modern Civilization
Modern industrial civilization has had a huge impact on human
kind as well as on the environment. It made a small part of the
population wealthy at the cost of exploiting the world’s natural
resources. Gandhi believed that it propagates nothing other than
the hunger for wealth and the greedy pursuit of worldly pleasures.
His denunciation of modern civilization and his proposal for
reordering it stems from his concern for the destiny of man which
modern society distorts22. Hind Swaraj,  published in 1909, criticized
the modern civilization as ‘satanic’. He observed that ‘machinery
is the chief symbol of modern civilization; it represents a great
sin. It is machinery that has impoverished India’23. The
distinguishing characteristic of modern civilization is an indefinite
multiplicity of wants, whereas ancient civilizations were marked
by an imperative restriction upon, and a strict regulating of these
wants24. Resources are limited and so the desire to amass wealth
leads to violence both at individual and collective levels. It also
creates a social or der in which inequality , oppr ession, and
deprivation pr evail with disastr ous implications for human dignity .
Gandhi believed that the ancient civilizations were religious in
nature which would surely limit worldly ambitions.
Gandhi’s critique of modern civilization was influenced by the
Western critique of modern industrial civilization. In the nineteenth
century , the gr eatest critics of the industrial r evolution in Eur ope
were Carlyle, Ruskin, and Morris to whom Asia held a particular
appeal. Ther e was a per ception that W estern industrialism was
destr oying the Asian paradise. Gandhi was a gr eat admir er of
Ruskin who criticized the V ictorian industrialization and
urbanization. It was through his book  Unto This Last  Gandhi
realized the importance of manual labor . The “magic spell of the
book”25 contributed to the Gandhian Sarvodaya . He was also
influenced by the ideas of T olstoy who believed that agricultur e
is the true occupation of man26. Gandhi believed that true
civilizational values are not present in modern civilization. In Hind
Swaraj  Gandhi argued that what we think as ‘civilization’ today is
an illusion, and that any civilization that ill treated outsiders couldEnvironmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   57
April–June 2012hardly avoid ill treating its own people. Gandhi’s critique of
western civilization and science emanates from his dissatisfaction
with the divorce of science and progress from morality27. He was
not against the technology , but the technologism which cr eates a
hierarchical relationship among men as well as between men and
nature. Gandhi believed that the greatest achievements of modern
civilization have been weapons of mass destruction, the awful
growth of anarchism, the frightful disputes between capital and
labor and cruelty inflicted on innocent, dumb, living animals in
the name of science and technology . He believed a science to be
science only if it afforded the fullest scope for satisfying the hunger
of body , mind and soul.
Modern civilization involved an egregious amount of violence
against natur e which was lar gely seen as man’s pr operty . This
undermined man’s unity with his environment and fellowmen and
destroyed stable and long established communities28.  Natural
resources were ruthlessly exploited and their rhythm and balance
disturbed while animals were killed or tortured for human needs.
Gandhi believed that villages would soon disappear due to the
urbanization which is part of modern civilization, and of which
environmental degradation is a product. Gandhi had a romantic vision
of the ideal village. He wrote:
..it will have cottages with sufficient light and ventilation, built of material
obtainable from within a radius of five miles of it. The cottages will have
courtyards enabling house holders to plant vegetables for domestic use
and to house their cattle. The village lanes and streets will be free of all
avoidable dust. It will have wells according to its needs and accessible
to all. It will have houses of worship for all, also a common meeting
place, a village common for grazing its cattle, a cooperative diary , primary
and secondary schools in which industrial training or vocational
education will be the central fact, and it will have panchayats  for settling
disputes. It will produce its own grains, vegetables, and fruits and its
own khadi ….29
While the western environmentalists spread the message of “going
back to the nature” Gandhi spread the message of “going back to the
villages”. He believed that the “the blood of the village is the cement
with which the edifice of the cities is built.”3058   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1III
Ecological Economics of Gandhi
Modern economy is “propelled by a frenzy of greed and indulges in
an or gy of envy .”31 It makes man mor e materialistic at the risk of
majority and the envir onment. Schumacher ar gued that, “W isdom
demands a new orientation of science and technology towards the
organic, the gentle, the non-violent, the elegant and beautiful.”32 He
identified Gandhian economic ideas as having the power to reach
that goal. Gandhi asserted that “true economics stands for social
justice; it pr omotes the good of all equally , including the weakest and
is indispensable for decent life”33. Dr. J C Kumarappa, known as the
Green Gandhian, systematized Gandhian economic and development
thoughts and integrated his economic thinking with scientific
knowledge to “entail macro-ecological problems of pollution as well
as depletion.”34 He summed up Gandhian economic ideas as a
constituting a philosophy that sought to create an “economy of
permanence”. He observed that self-interest and preservation demand
complete non-violence, co-operation and submission to the ways of
nature if we are to maintain permanency by non-interference with
and by not short-cir cuiting the cycle of life35. In another way , “all
nature is dovetailed together in a common cause”. Kumarappa argued
that “when this interconnection works out harmoniously and violence
does not break the chain, we have an economy of permanence”36. He
identified different types of economies and realized that the highest
form of economy is the economy of service which Gandhi suggests.
Gandhian economic Concepts like swadeshi , trusteeship, bread labour
etc received attention and acceptance from the whole world.
Gandhi defined Swadeshi  as “the spirit in us which requires us to
serve our immediate neighbors before others and to use things
produced in our neighborhood in preference to those more remote.
So doing we serve humanity to the best of our capacity”37. The swadeshi
spirit encourages us to consume commodities made from our own
villages, thus promoting small scale industries which help ordinary
farmers and weavers to live happily . Limitation of wants is another
important aspect in Gandhian economics. Gandhi urged us to minimize
our wants to minimize the consumption and thus reduce the burden
on nature by avoiding hazardous wastes. Our civilization, culture
and swaraj  depend on the restriction of wants. Gandhi realized that
the modern civilization and the market economics have a tendency to
multiply the wants and needs of common people. Schumacher also
identified modern economy as propelled by a frenzy of greed andEnvironmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   59
April–June 2012which indulges in an or gy of envy . He r ealized that every incr ease of
needs tends to increase one’s dependence on outside forces over which
one cannot have contr ol and ther efore incr eases existential fear .
Schumacher observed that as physical resources are limited
everywhere, people satisfying their needs by means of a modest use
of resour ces ar e obviously less likely to be at each other ’s thr oats
than people depending upon a high rate of use. Equally , people who
live in highly self-sufficient local communities are less likely to get
involved in large-scale violence than people whose existence depends
on world-wide systems of trade. Bread labour is another important
economic concept of Gandhi. He valued bodily labor saying “the rains
come not thr ough intellectual feats, but thr ough sheer bodily labor . It
is a well established scientific fact that where forests are denuded of
trees, rains cease, where trees are planted rains are attracted and the
volume of water received increases with the increase of vegetation”38
It not only promotes our environment, but also increases our economic
stability . The Gandhian concept of br ead labor encourages the use of
human hands and body instead of machines to produce essential items
like vegetables, cloth etc.
The economic ideas of Gandhi differed from conventional
economics and bore close resemblances with ecological economics.
Ecological economics is a relatively new area that came in to existence
in response to the failure of mainstream economics to bridge the gap
between economics and the environment. It has an explicit concern
for futur e generations and long term sustainability , and works with a
broader range of values than the limited perceptions of the current
generation of humans.39  Ecological economics sees sustainability not
only as an economic problem, but also a problem of maintaining
essential, non-replaceable and non-sustainable environmental
features.40  The importance has given to natural capital, i.e, to non-
renewable natural resources and renewable resources such as
ecosystem services. In Gandhian economics environmental
sustainability can be defined as sustainability of the ecological services
(includes the provision of food and other raw materials) on which
human beings depend.41 Environmental sustainability ensures
minimum use of natural resources. The term sustainable development
was not much discussed at Gandhi’s time, but his ideal vision of the
world known as Sarvodaya safeguard the rights of future generations,
through the welfare of all. The following table shows the difference
between conventional economics and Gandhian economics and reveals
how it contributes to envir onmental sustainability .60   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Table 1: Dif ferences between Conventional and
Gandhian Economics
Conventional Economics Gandhian Economics
Basic Philosophy Materialistic Spiritual
World V iew Human Centric Eco centric (considers
the equal right of
human and non
human beings.
Macro Aim Profit Maximization Sustainable commu-
nities  through agricul-
ture and constructive
programmes.
Views on Science Inevitable part of human ‘Scienticism’ or the
and T echnology progress ‘technologism’ makes
modern man slaves
of machines
Views on natural Maximum benefit out of Limited use of
resources natural resources resources
Views on modes Mass production with the Production by the
of production aid of modern technology masses
Nature of Capital intensive Labor intensive
production
Views on the Large scale market induced Local and national
market by globalization (Swadeshi)
Nature of Power Power vested in the indus- Power belongs to people
trial nations or the (decentralization of
corporate (centralization of power and resources)
power and resources)
Outcome Urbanization, environ- Village swaraj,  and
mental crisis, resource environmental
depletion and natural sustainability
calamities.Environmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   61
April–June 2012IV
Gandhian Conflict Resolution and Environment
Conflict resolution is an emerging branch of social science which deals
with the techniques to resolve conflicts between nations or between
individuals. It can also be applied to address environmental issues.
For the last forty years, India has been witnessing several conflicts
between the policy makers and environmental activists. This includes
disputes such as the Cauvery river water dispute, the Ganga water
contr oversy , high dam contr oversies like Narmada movement, Silent
valley movement, T ehri dam movement and so on. Ther e are several
other environmental debates on nuclear proliferation, deforestation
etc. Most of these movements use Gandhian techniques of conflict
expression to deal with their adversaries. The reasons may be, (1)
Gandhian techniques are non-violent in nature, which is more eco-
friendly than the violent protests, or (2) the success of other Gandhian
movements could have inspired them to use the Gandhian techniques.
Whenever there is a mismatch between different interests, conflicts
arise. Gandhian non-violence or Satyagraha  is accepted by many as an
effective technique of conflict resolution. Here the term ‘technique’ is
not used in the narrow sense, but as an effective method which contains
many contradictions and strategic implications. Conflict resolution is
used to denote the methods and processes of negotiation, arbitration,
and institution building which promote the peaceful ending of social
conflict or war . Gandhi never used the wor d ‘conflict r esolution’;
instead he used terms like mediation and ‘negotiation’. He never
consider ed conflicts as pr oblems. Rather , they wer e opportunities for
moral growth and transformation. For Gandhi, what mattered in a
non-violent struggle was ‘how the game was played and how the
opponent felt about his antagonist after the game was over ’42.
The contribution of Gandhi in conflict resolution was his “working
hypothesis that the non-violent resolution of group conflict was a
practical goal.”43 Gandhi experimented with mass actions without
violence and succeeded in them many times. Thomas W eber ar gued
that we should view Gandhi‘s philosophy vis-à-vis conflict resolution
theory , rather than as distinct fr om it. His philosophy of tr uth and
nonviolence contribute to the theory of conflict resolution. Gandhi
believed that the truth is one and different individuals perceive it
differently . Nobody can claim that their per ception is corr ect. If we
are not sure about the supreme truth there is no need of violence or
conflict. In order to realize truth one should have to realize God. Self
realization is the way to realize God. Self realization will lead us to62   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1refrain from violence against other beings.
Weber identifies the key points of Gandhian technique of conflict
resolution fr om Arne Naess’ systematization of Gandhian Ethics44;
those principles may be summarized as follows:
1.Non violence should be observed in any situation. V iolence is invited
from opponents if they are humiliated or provoked.
2.It is necessary to understand the root of conflict and our role in it.
3.Accepting the individuality of the opponent is crucial. Appealing to
greed, prejudice or hatred cannot under any circumstances be
reconciled.
4.It is necessary “to put ourselves in the shoes of the opponent”, to
understand his position well.
5.Tolerance, love and sympathy ar e the keys of conflict r esolution
6.Mutual trust is essential. It is easier to move from cooperation to
competition than from competition to cooperation. So trust needs to
be built early in the relationship, but one should not exploit the
trusting behavior of the opponent.
7.Compromise on honorable terms is another important element in
conflict resolution. Gandhian process of conflict is one of synthesis
rather than compromise
8.Surrender without conversion is not the ideal Gandhian way of
terminating a struggle. The conversion of an opponent should be
further ed by personal sincerity .
9.Self sacrifice is the essential quality of a Satyagrahi . The best way of
convincing an opponent is further ed by personal sincerity .
10. One should be careful not to take benefit out of the opponent’s
weakness.
The advice of Gandhi in group struggle was to “make a constructive
programme part of the campaign” to make it more understandable
and also more open to critical examination.45 He believed that the
civil disobedience itself is irrelevant if the entire nation did not take
part in constructive programmes.46  He suggested doing literacy
programmes, spinning or weaving, awareness campaigns etc as a part
of the campaign and he himself involved in several constructive
programmes. It would also help the participants to deviate their minds
from violent thoughts.
So far as the Indian environmental movements are concerned, the
conflict is often between different interest groups or between the
state and people, and are often led by peasant groups or tribal people.
It is often in the form of struggle for the protection of livelihood
control over resources or some form of self-determination. Non-
violent protest has a significant role here, because violence to any
living being is against the principle of environmental justice.Environmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   63
April–June 2012Environmental injustice, and marginalization are considered as
instances of str uctural violence. As Gandhi believed violence and
counter violence will never help to resolve conflicts, he considered
Satyagraha  as the “only for ce of universal application be that of Ahimsa
or love” to fight these kinds of problems.47 It is entirely different
from mere passive resistance, where there is no scope for mutual
love. In passive resistance, Gandhi believed “there is a scope for
hatred” but “Satyagraha may be offered to one’s nearest and
dearest.”48
Environmental movements in India used Satyagraha  as the moral
equivalent of war . For est Satyagraha  was first used ef fectively in Chipko
movement to protest against deforestation. Gandhian techniques like
padayatras  were conducted to save nature.  Conflict resolution
techniques based on non-violence and self sacrifice were used by
envir onmental activists like Chandi Prasad Bhatt, Baba Amte,
Sunderlal Bahuguna, Medha Patker and others.
Conclusion
Several decades before the rise of environmental movements, Gandhi
picked up fundamental environmental issues like over-consumption,
violence to man and nature and so on. Nowadays, there are several
movements in different parts of the globe fighting against
environmental injustice. Some of them are violent in nature, but in
India environmental movements have been forged by Gandhian
traditions of non-cooperation and non-violence. The Gandhian
definition of non-violence is far more than mere passive resistance,
rather “it is a way of life, which affects everything from what a person
eats through to how they relate to the world around them”49. Gandhian
Satyagraha  often functions as a conflict resolution technique. Forest
Satyagraha  proved to be effective as seen in the Chipko  movement.
Gandhi wr ote much about the colonial power , its impudence, and the
heinous destiny it has imposed on the country . He criticized
modernization and industrialization for its lethal ef fects on the society .
He believed that “the economic imperialism of a single tiny island
kingdom (England) is today keeping the world in chains. If an entire
nation of 300 million took to similar economic exploitation, it would
strip the world bare like locusts .”50 He observed that the Indian
situation demanded a new vision on economics which is centered on
agriculture and village industries.  He conceptualized a new economic
order based on ecological balance. The environmental thinkers like
Arne Naess considered Gandhi’s utopia as one of the few that shows
ecological balance. The village romanticism of Gandhi has been
consider ed as central to his envir onmental philosophy . However , going64   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1back to the thoughts of Gandhi is essential to build up a green future,
where there is no place for human greed.
Notes and  References
1.Vandana Shiva, Staying Alive: W omen, Ecology and Survival in India
(New Delhi : Kali for W omen, 1988), p.1 1.
2.T N Khoshoo, Mahatma Gandhi: An Apostle of Applied Human Ecology
(New Delhi: TERI, 1995), p.9.
3.Ramachandra Guha, “Mahatma Gandhi and Environmental
Movement in india” in Arne Kalland and Gerard Persoon (ed),
Environmental Movements in Asia   (London: Nordic Institute of Asian
Studies & Routledge , 1998), p.67.
4.R P Mishra, “Facing Environmental Challenges; The Gandhian
Way”. Anasakti Darshan, 5, 2 (July-December 2009), p.9.
5.Bhikhu Par ekh, Gandhi’ s Political Philosophy; A  Critical Examination
(London: Macmillan, 1989), p.72.
6.Young India , December 4, 1924.
7.Ronald J. T erchek, “Conflict and non violence” in Judith M Br own,
Anthony Par el (ed.) A Cambridge Companion to Gandhi  (New York:
Cambridge University Pr ess, 201 1), p.1 18.
8.Daniel M Mayton II, Non V iolence and Peace Psychology: Interpersonal,
Intrapersonal, societal and W orld peace  (New York: Springer and Science
+ Business Media LLC, 2009), p.6.
9.Glyn Richards, The Philosophy of Gandhi: A Study of His Basic Ideas
(UK: Curzon, 1991), p.33.
10. Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi  (CWMG), (New Delhi: The
Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
Government of India, and Ahmedabad: The Navajivan T rust, 1965),
Vol.  XVI, p.13.
11.Harijan, September 5, 1936
12. H J N Horsburgh, “The Distinctiveness of Satyagraha ”, Philosophy
East and west , 19, 2 (April 1969), pp. 171-180.
13. Thomas W eber, ‘Gandhian Philosophy ,Conflict Resolution: Theory
and Practical Approaches to Negotiation’,  Journal of Peace Research ,
38(4)(July 2001), pp. 493-513
14. T N Khoshoo, op.cit. p.3.
15. Thomas W eber, Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor  (New York: Cambridge
University Press: 2004), p.26.
16. Arne Naess, “Self Realization: An Ecological approach to Being in
the W orld” in John Seed, Joanna Macy et.al (ed), Thinking Like a
Mountain: T owards a Council of All Beings  (Philadelphia: Society
Publishers, 1988), p.26.
17. Thomas W eber, 2009, p.18
18. The Selected W orks of Arne Naess (SW AN), Edited by AllenEnvironmental Thoughts of Gandhi for a Green Future   G   65
April–June 2012Drengson in cooperation W ith the Author , (Netherlands: Springer ,
2005), V ol.2, p.lxviii.
19. R C Sharma, Gandhian Envir onmentalism  (New Delhi: Global V ision,
2003), p.45.
20. Vandana Shiva and Jayantho Bandhyopadhyay , “Chipko in India’s
Civilizational Response to the For est Crisis” in India’ s Envir onment:
Myth and Reality  ( Dehra Dun: Natraj, 2007),p.13.
21. Ibid, p.21
22. Ramashray Roy , Self and Society; A  Study in Gandhian Thought  (New
Delhi: Sage, 1985), pp. 36-38
23. M K Gandhi, Hind  Swaraj or Indian Home Rule (Ahmedabad:
Navajivan T rust, 1938), p.81.
24. Young India, June 2, 1927
25. M K Gandhi, An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with
Truth (Abridged edition), (New Delhi: Penguin Books, 2006),  p.164.
26. CWMG, V ol. IV , pp.399-400.
27. Shambhu Prasad, “T owar ds an understanding of Gandhi’s views
on science”,  Economic and Political W eekly , 36, 39 (Sept.2001),  pp.
3721-3723.
28. Bikhu Parekh, op.cit., p. 23.
29. Harijan, Jan.9, 1937.
30. CWMG , Vol.XCI, p. 57
31. E F Schumacher ,  Small is Beautiful: A  Study of Economics as if People
Matter ed (London: V intage Books, 201 1),  p.18
32. Ibid, p.20.
33. Harijan,  Oct. 9, 1937
34. Mark Lindley , J C Kumarappa, Mahatma Gandhi’ s Economist  (Mumbai:
Popular Prakashan, 2007), p. 164.
35. J C Kumarappa, Economy of Permanence : A Quest for a Social Order
Based on Non violence (Wardha. C. P  : All India V illage Industries
Association, 1946), p. 4
36. Ibid, p. 5
37. Young India,  Aug. 20, 1919
38. Young India, October 15, 1925
39. Robert Costanza, “Ecological Economics: Reintegrating the study of
Humans and Natur e” Ecological Applications , 6, 4 (Nov .1996), pp.
978-990.
40. John M Gowdy , “Terms and Concepts in Ecological Economics”
Wildlife Society Bulletin ,  28, 1, (Spring 2000), pp.26-33.
41. Ram Binod Singh. Gandhian Approach to Development Planning  (New
Delhi: Concept, 2006), p.223.
42. Robert E.Klitgaar d,  “Gandhi’s Non V iolence as a T actic”, Journal of
Peace Research    8, 2 (1971)  pp. 143-153.
43. SWAN, V ol V, p.5.
44. See Arne Naess, “A Systematization of Gandhian Ethics of Conflict
Resolution”, Journal of Conflict Resolution , 2, 2 (June 1958), pp. 140-
155, and also Thomas W eber , “Gandhian Philosophy , Conflict66   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Resolution and Practical Approaches to Negotiation”, Journal of Peace
Research , 38, 4 (July 2001), pp. 493-513.
45. SWAN, V ol.V, p.85.
46. Ibid
47. CWMG , Vol. XL VIII, p.341.
48. CWMG , Vol. XXXIV , p.97.
49. Timothy Doyle, Envir onmental Movements in Minority and Majority
Worlds: A Global Perspective  (London: Rutgers University Press, 2005),
p.18.
50. CWMG , Vol. XLIII, p. 413.
SASIKALA A S is a  Research Scholar attached to the Department
of Humanities and Social Sciences, IIT Madras, Chennai.
Email: sasikalaalappattu@gmail.comGramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   67
April–June 2012Gramdan to Gram Swaraj: Insights
from Rajasthan Experiments
Sudarshan Iyengar
Parul T ina Doshi
Hari Desai
ABSTRACT
This paper looks at Gramdan as a necessary condition for  achieving Gram
Swaraj, upon which a nonviolent social order is to be built,  and not a mere
extension of the concept of Bhoodan. In this paper , the experience of Gramdan
in Rajasthan is reviewed  to find out whether the efforts made were on the
pathway to achieving Gram Swaraj or not. The Gramdan Act of the Government
of Rajasthan has been more progressive compared to similar Acts in other
states. Three Gramdan villages are covered in the study. The study findings
are analysed in the context of the spirit of the Act and the idea of Gram Swaraj.
The paper ends with a general discussion of some issues relating to Gandhi-
Vinoba discourse.
Introduction
GANDHI AND VINOBA  visualised and pr ogrammatised the
formation of a society based on non-violence –an ahimsak samaj . They
conceived non-violence  not in a passive sense. The proposed social
system sought to minimise structural violence as well1. The basic issues
that need to be addressed  include, among others, inter-individual/
inter-personal relationships, nature-human relations and relationship
with self 2. The last issue is hardly brought into the mainstream social
science discourse. All r esear ch and socio-economic and political policy
perspectives and prescriptions seem to skirt this issue. In Gandhi-
Vinoba discourse for r ealising ahimsak samaj  ‘relationship with self ’ is68   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1extremely important and basic. The proposed socio-economic and
political structures in the discourse assume a healthy and dynamic
relationship with self. For Gandhi, Swaraj did not mean political
freedom and ‘home r ule’ only ,  but it meant something that ultimately
leads to regulating the self. Thus, the principle of Gram Swaraj which
meant self- regulated autonomous village as a unit of human settlement
has this component of ‘enlightened and self regulated individuals’ at
its core.
When the self-regulated individuals join the world of production
for physical survival and well being their relationship with physical
factors of production such as nature, land, capital and labour is
assumed to be that of a tr ustee rather than that of an owner . The
concept of private property and the right to alienate it 3 is rejected in
the Gandhi-V inoba discourse. Due to historical r easons pr operty may
be owned by private individuals and due to production relations it
may also be created by individuals, but ultimately it has to be treated
as common property and shared with and by all for moving towards
the a himsak samaj  where the last person also achieves optimum welfare.
In reality , the natur e of pr oduction r elations and the concomitant
inter-individual relations has resulted in an unequal society which
accords undue importance to ownership of the means of production
and the capacity to use goods and services for personal welfare. How
does one correct this? Gandhi proposed a decentralised production
system and self- sufficient villages side by side with individuals who
have attained self-control4. The individual was not only responsible
for involving himself in the production process but also responsible
to the neighbour , and would consume what the neighbours pr oduced.
The pr ocess, if followed by all or at least by many , would lead to
better equity . The next question would be: how should the pr operty
owners behave? W ith r espect to industrial and non-land assets the
owners were supposed to behave like trustees and use them for the
benefit of the society they belong to. Gandhi had not given full
thought to the question of the use of land in his trusteeship scheme.
Vinoba, later , developed a concr ete set of ideas and pr ogrammes on
the question of land relations and applied them. He introduced what
is now well-known as Bhoodan  – gift of land. Land owners were
persuaded to donate land to landless. At the time of political
independence India was still a rural economy and major resource for
production and subsistence was agriculture. Hence, land was a critical
factor in pr oduction. W ithout having ownership on land those who
produced could have no access or control on what they produced.
Distribution of land was highly skewed, so to say . It then appear ed
that unless the land was redistributed, it would not be possible toGramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   69
April–June 2012alleviate the misery of the poor . The Government of India and various
state governments initiated land reforms. Reacting to the misery of
the landless the radical and extremist political  groups, in some places
in India, were organising violent movements leading to killings of
landlords (known as Zamindars) and redistributing the confiscated
land5.
Bhoodan evoked considerable positive responses and land
owners came forward in large numbers to gift land for the landless.
It gr ew into an influential movement. Consequently , Vinoba was
prompted to develop the idea of Bhoodan  further; the serious and
disturbing socio-political situation prevailing then also compelled him
to take Bhoodan further to its logical end. Thus the idea of Gramdan
was born. It is obvious that Gramdan was not just an extension of
the idea of bhoodan, that is, if most land owners in a village came
forward with donation of land, it would be called Gramdan. Several
conditions have to be fulfilled if a village was to become a  Gramdan
village. In the ultimate analysis Gramdan was a necessary condition
for Gram Swaraj. And Ahimsak Samaj  is to be built on the basis of
Gram Swaraj. In this paper , we intend to r eview the experience of
Gramdan in Rajasthan and examine a few Gramdan cases to see
whether they were on the pathway to Gram Swaraj or not. This paper
is part of research that we are undertaking to review Bhoodan and
Gramdan experience in selected Indian states. T o begin with we have
selected Rajasthan state because the Gramdan Act enacted by the
Government of Rajasthan has been progressive relative to similar
Acts in other states and also because we have been able to do some
field work ther e earlier . The paper , after the intr oductory part, is
divided into four sections. In section one a brief review of Gramdan
is presented. In section two a review of Gramdan in Rajasthan is
attempted. In the third section case studies of three Gramdan villages
are presented. In section four the status of Gramdan villages under
study is analysed in the context of the Act and the idea of Gram
Swaraj. Finally , in the light of the pr esent status some general issues
relating to Gandhi-V inoba discourse ar e discussed.
Gramdan as a stage of the Bhoodan Movement
Vinoba anchor ed his thought and action in the Gandhian str eam, but
he tried to extend its frontiers with his own contributions. Thus,
working on Gandhi’s idea of trusteeship, he evolved the concept of
Bhoodan and then extended it and developed it in to a movement.
Conceiving land gift as a panacea for solving the problem of land
allotment for the landless poor in India, V inoba soon expanded the
concept into Gramdan  and subsequently into sampatti dan, sadhan dan,70   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1samaya dan, and sarvasva dan.  The concept of Sarvodaya Patra – an
offering vessel for sarvodaya - was also introduced by him. He
suggested that, just before cooking, the youngest child of every family
should pick up a handful of grain and store it in a vessel to be donated
later to the poorest of the poor in the village. This ignited the
imagination of many , but it appears that the pr ogramme did not pick
up as a r egular and lar ge scale activity . The natur e of the extension
then V inoba conceived and attempted is easy to see. He intr oduced
dan, which can be gift or donation, as the central component  in the
redistribution of assets, physical and others. Accor ding to him gifting
what one has in excess to others in the spirit of sharing and sacrifice
is the central point. While other forms like sharing of gift of wealth,
time, means of production etc. are individual-centric, Gramdan is a
communitarian action. Gramdan fired the imagination of many during
the heyday of the movement and even attracted international attention
inspiring researchers and activists to visit the sites where it was carried
out and conduct on the spot study and evaluation. Hence revisiting
Gramdan villages in Rajasthan, one of the most active fields of
Gramdan experiment,  assumes some importance.
In 1952 V inoba enter ed Uttar Pradesh as part of his p adyatra  for
Bhoodan. During his visit to a village called Mangroth in Hamirpur
district he reminded the people of the ancient Indian tradition of
considering all land as belonging to God - s ab bhoomi Gopal ki . People
of Mangroth absorbed this message. The Zamindar of Mangroth
owned a very large part of the land in the village. He gifted his land
to Vinoba. This gestur e prompted other landowners to come forwar d,
and they too donated their land. Since all land owners began to donate
land this came to be called Gramdan. Thus Mangroth has the
distinction of being the first Gramdan village in India. Encouraged
by this V inoba and his Sarvodaya colleagues declar ed in the Palani
Sarvodaya Annual Confer ence (1956) that Bhoodan should now shift
to Gramdan. Three stages were envisaged. In the first stage villages
would agree to donate all their land, in the second stage the village
would be declared as Gramdan village once the gift consent papers
were received by the Sarvodaya Mandal, and in the third stage the
village would be registered as a Gramdan village in government
records. In September 1957, the Prabandh Samiti (Managing
Committee) of the Sarva Seva Sangh decided that if more than 80 per
cent land owners agreed to donate land and if that constituted more
than 50 per cent of the total land in the village, the village will be
declared a  Gramdan village.
Vinoba later conceptualised the path fr om Bhoodan to Gramdan
in the following way . In the first phase bhoodan - land gift - shouldGramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   71
April–June 2012be made so that there would be no landless family left in the village.
The next phase would be to reach a stage in which no land owner
would be left in the village. In terms of economics V inoba tried to
assess land as a fr ee gift fr om natur e. He ar gued that as air , water
etc. are gifts from God, so is land.6 Initially Gramdan meant gift of
all land within the jurisdiction of a r evenue village. All land was to
be gifted first and later redistributed as per the need of the families.
If 80 per cent of land owners in a hamlet gifted land and the land  so
gifted was 50 per cent of the total village land,  it was declared as a
case of Gramdan. It was resolved that  the stipulation that 80 per
cent the people should agree includes the landless families also. Such
changes in the working definition occurred and the concept of
Gramdan slowly evolved into a comprehensive one.
The second and third villages donated almost all land and that
happened in Manipur and Akili in Orissa in 1955. During his padyatra
in the eastern parts of the country V inoba further r efined the concept
of Gramdan and introduced Sulabh Gramdan . The conditions specified
were the following.
1.75 percent of the land owners in a village or a hamlet should transfer
their ownership of land to the Gram Sabha.
2.The donors should gift 1/20th part of the land owned to the landless
families. The Gram Sabha should redistribute the land.
3.Every family should donate one thirtieth or fortieth part of their
annual income from agriculture and industry to the Gram Sabha.
Gram Sabha was empowered to determine the share.
4.Income sharing was not limited to agriculturists and artisans; it
was applicable to the traders, teachers and others too.
Gift of 1/20th part of the land for landless was laid down as an
obligatory condition and r est wer e to follow . Eventually , Gram Sabha
was to plan for each family so that all able bodied persons would get
employment and have a source of income. This entire programme
was christened as ‘ Sulabh Gramdan’.
T.P. Singh (1973) has noted that in Bihar liberalised norms wer e
incorporated and implemented. He also notes that people of Gramdan
village had no right to sell or mortgage the land. In spite of such
liberalised norms the land owners, especially big landowners, were
unsatisfied and the Gramdan norms wer e further r elaxed. V inoba
asked for relinquishment of one twentieth share of land and rest
could be retained by the donor for heritable rights. This
understanding led to evolving of Sulabh Gramdan concept. The norms
for it were formalised in  the 1963 Raipur conference of Sarva Seva
Sangh. The owner could retain 19 parts out of 20, but could not sell72   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1or mortgage it because Gram Sabha was the custodian of all the land
in the village. However , the original owner had the right to bequeath
and transfer to his kith and kin. A Village Community Fund known
as  Gram Kosh  was developed wherein all producers had to contribute
one fortieth of the produce after deducting land revenue. Non-land
earners had to contribute one thirtieth of the income earned. The
Kosh was to be used for taking care of the poor and the destitute,
supporting education activity and renovating and establishing village
industries.
It should be noted that the idea of Gramdan did catch the
imagination of the people in some states. Enthusiasm was perhaps
highest in Bihar . Gramdan evolved further in to Prakhand Daan  and
Zila Daan . In Bihar it culminated into Bihar Daan ! But one needs to
critically assess all these developments. Some analysis is attempted
in the second and thir d sections of this paper . In terms of statistics,
however , accomplishments in the Gramdan movement ar e not easy
to establish. Therefore a variety of sources were examined. The most
authentic source is the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD),
Government of India. But the Ministry too does not seem to have
reliable data. The only sour ce that we could tap was T .P. Singh’s
study (1973). It lists three types of areas namely Gram (village),
Prakhand (region) and Zila (district). In Bihar 15 cases of Ziladan are
recorded followed by 1 1 in T amil Nadu, 8 in Uttar Pradesh and 7 in
Madhya Pradesh. In Orissa two Zilas were donated and in four states
only one Zila each was donated. Prakhand (cluster of blocks) donation
also followed the same pattern by state. In all 1249 Prakhands were
donated. A total of 1,68,056 villages wer e donated with mor e than
60,000 fr om Bihar followed by mor e than 30,000 in T amil Nadu and
32,000 in Uttar Pradesh.
II
Gramdan in Rajasthan
The first Gramdan in Rajasthan took place on 1 1th Febr uary 1955 in
Nagaur district. The Bhoodan coordinator Badri Prasad Swami
inspir ed residents of Gorava village. All land owners donated their
land. Senior Gandhian and Sarvodaya leader Gokulbhai Bhatt
presided over a meeting in which Gram Sabha members were
distributed land based on their membership. Soon the people in the
village were misled by some others and the process was stopped
and reversed. Nevertheless, the activity continued in other parts of
Rajasthan and by the end of 1957, ther e wer e 11 villages wher eGramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   73
April–June 2012Gramdan was accomplished7.
The Gramdan Act was passed in Rajasthan in 1960. As per the Act
the authorities were expected to declare the villages as Gramdan
villages. In 1960, 28 villages were declared as Gramdan villages. By
the end of 1963, a substantial number , 234 villages,  wer e cover ed by
Gramdan. However , only 65 villages wer e declar ed as Gramdan
villages under the Act. The year 1964 also turned out to be a special
year. In November 1964 the then Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri
visited Sikar , a town and the district headquarters. On the occasion,
a special function was organised by the Neemka Thana Panchayat
Samiti during which 88 villages offered Gramdan. It was the Prime
Minister ’s 61st birthday . Same number of villages was gifted to him
as Gramdan villages. By the end of 1964 Rajasthan reported 351
villages under Gramdan. In 1965, Gramdan activities were initiated
in two new districts — Jaisalmer and Sawai Madhopur . The total
Gramdan commitments increased. By the end of 1965, 543 villages
made commitment for Gramdan. Of these 87 were officially declared
under the Act. Subsequently , 61 Gram Sabhas wer e formed.
In 1966, in the annual convention of the Sarva Seva Sangh held at
Gopuri, W ardha, it was decided to speed up the pace of Gramdan.
Gramdan Hurricane ( Gramdan T ufaan)  was to be the appr oach.
Subsequently the Rajasthan Sevak Sangh held its meeting in
Sitabdiyara village in Bihar where Jai Prakash Narayan had settled
down. In this meeting a target of 2000 Gramdan was set for Rajasthan
for the year 1966. The W orking Committee of the Sarva Seva Sangh
met in Jamshedpur . Vinoba pr esided and the tar get for Rajasthan
was confirmed. The Rajasthan Samagra Seva Sangh, a regional
organisation and the Sarvodaya group in its meeting held in
Ganeshpura in 1966 accepted the targets given to them and chalked
out an implementation programme. Gramdan related activities were
intensified in seven districts, namely Sikar , Sirohi, Jaipur , Dungarpur ,
Nagaur , Banswada and Chittodgadh. Selected Panchayat Samitis
became active. They wer e Neem ka Thana, Abu Road and Revdar ,
Chaksu, Dudu and Jobner , Dungarpur , Makrana, Bhookia, and
Chittodgadh and Begun r espectively . By the end of 1966, 942 villages
committed themselves for Gramdan of which 1 10 wer e officially
accorded the status and 62 Gram Sabhas were formed.
It should be noted that since the organisations and people in
Rajasthan showed high enthusiasm, many prominent persons
encouraged the movement. Some prominent leaders also emerged
from within the state Sarvodaya movement. Those who visited
the state frequently included Jai Prakash Narayan, Dayanidhi
Patnaik and Radhakrishna Bajaj. The state level people who actively74   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1participated and also emerged as regional and national Sarvodaya
leaders included Gokulbhai Bhatt, Siddhraj Daddha, Rameshwar
Agrawal, Chitarmal Goyal, Badri Prasad Swami, Sohan Lal Modi,
Yagnadatt Upadhyay , Manoharsingh Mehta and Bhogialaji Pandya.
The other important landmark event was that, in 1959, V inoba
was gifted with 1 19 Gramdans in Dungarpur district. The Gramdan
activity that started in 1955 continued for a very long time. The
last Gramdan was declared on 23 October 2003. The village was
Delasar in Jaisalmer district. The final tally of the Gramdan villages
by district is given in T able 1 below .
Gramdan Declaration Process in Rajasthan as per the Act
Village people obtain the Jamabandhi fr om the T ehsil of fice and village
residents and land owners fill up the declaration forms. Gramdan
Boar d scr utinises them and forwar ds it to the District Collector . The
revenue of ficers scr utinise the claims further and verify . Of the total
revenue land 50 per cent has to be declared as donated, and land
owners and landless labourers should account for 75 per cent of the
total number of people. W ith this basic r equir ement fulfilled, the
scrutinised and verified matter is readied for publication. It is then
published in the Gazetteer . The ef fective ownership is not disturbed
in case of donors.
After the declaration in the Gazetteer , the village is declar ed as a
Gramdan village. As per the Act the Boar d facilitates the election of
Executive and the President in the Gram Sabha. The number of
members in the Executive is determined by the Gram Sabha, but it
should not be less than five. Selection is made either by consensus or
by two thirds majority decision. The district development authorities
and the Panchayat Samitis consider the development plan requests
from the Gramdan villages on priority basis.
Special Features of a Gramdan V illage
In Gramdan, participation is a key factor . Since the pr operty is deemed
to be common, its management is envisaged to be done by Gram
Sabha of which  each adult village r esident is a member . The Gram
Sabha idea did not materialise in the country as a whole until the
constitutional amendments were introduced in 1993. It appears that
the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution have drawn on the
provisions that have been made to govern the Gramdan villages.
Some specific featur es of the Gramdan villages ar e given below .
GAll land of the villages donated and other than the one owned and
operated by individuals including revenue land, uncultivated land,Gramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   75
April–June 2012Sr.
No.DistrictNumber of Gramdan V illages
1960-70 1971-80 1981-90 1991-2000 2001-05 All
1. Chittodgadh 7 - - - - 7
2. Jaipur 22 - - - - 22
3. Tonk 1 1 - - - 2
4. Dungarpur 41 - - - - 41
5. Nagaur 7 3 - - - 10
6. Banswada 12 19 7 1 - 39
7. Bhilwada 2 1 1 - - 4
8. Sikar 36 - - - - 36
9. Sirohi 16 4 - - - 20
10. Udaipur - 4 - - - 4
11. Jaisalmer - - 15 1 2 18
12. Baran - - 2 - - 2
13. All 144 32 25 2 2 205
Source: Rajasthan Gramdan Board RecordsTable-1 : Distribution of Of ficially Declared Gramdan V illages in Rajasthan76   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1grazing land, land used for community purposes etc. is under the
governance of the Gram Sabha for the purpose of use and
redistribution. In the revenue villages governance rights continue
to be vested with the Revenue Department.
GIn Gramdan villages the Bhoodan land is also governed and
distributed by the Gram Sabha. The ownership and use rights are
awarded to Bhoodan holders by the Gram Sabha. 1/20th of the land
of the donors is distributed among the landless.
GComplete land records are transferred to the Gram Sabha by the
Tehsildar . The Patwari has no r ole in r evenue administration. All
functions relating to revenue collection, land transfers, name
transfers, collection of land revenue, collection of water charges etc.
become the responsibility of the Gram Sabha.
GRights to settle disputes related to land distribution also vest with
the Gram Sabha. The Bhoodan Gramdan Board is the appellate
authority in case of non- acceptance of the Gram Sabha judgements.
GThe Gram Sabha is vested with right to cultivate and distribute the
produce thereof.
GThe Gram Sabha collects 1/40th of income of every individual
annually to meet the development and relief related expenditure
assessed by it through planning processes.
GLand distributed by the Gram Sabha is legally owned and operated
by the recipient and the asset is bankable.
Distinction between Revenue and Gramdan V illages
Provisions in the Gramdan Act in Rajasthan, and per haps in other
states too, reflect the willingness of the government to recognise the
Gramdan villages as special units and the governments have tried to
make them decentralised governance units. Their status is obviously
better than the revenue villages. Some of the distinctions are the
following.
GGram Sabha has all the rights that the Panchayats have.
GGramdan village gets representation in the Panchayat. Gramdan
villages also get grants for development work.
GGram Sabha can distribute the revenue waste land for a period of
three years to the landless.
GThe President and the Executive Committee of the Gram Sabha are
elected once in thr ee years either by consensus or by 2/3rd majority .
GGram Sabha prepares amends and maintains its own voters list.
GAny part of the village, Dhani (hamlet in Rajasthan) or settlement
upon total agreement can be declared as Gramdan unit and it can
assume a separate identity . In case of a unit containing mor e than
100 persons, it can be declared as  a separate revenue village.
GGram Sabha can register as a primary cooperative society and
function as one.Gramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   77
April–June 2012GThe office bearers of the Gram Sabha have legal status and all
privileges under the Indian Penal Code Clause 21.
GThe Judgements delivered by the Gram Sabha cannot be challenged
in higher revenue or judicial system.
GGram Sabha can formulate rules and sub rules for its smooth
governance.
Functions of Gram Sabha in Gramdan V illage
Gram Sabha has to:
GEnsure that no able bodied person is without work and no family is
without land.
GDevelop best grazing land for preserving and maintaining best
animal breeds.
GUndertake tree plantation as per the needs of the village and grow
a good village forest.
GPromote cooperative farming among the Bhoodan land recipients
and arrange for bullocks, implements and irrigation facilities.
GStrive for all round development of the village including setting up
of the cottage and village industries, organising banking facilities
to set up industrial units, agriculture and land improvement, plan
and implement the schemes and programmes promoted and
supported by the Khadi and V illage Industries Commission, district
development  authorities and other development organisations.
GSet Shanti Dal for peace and organise and set up institutions for
education, health and welfare.
GSet up a Gram Kosh , a village Fund, to collect money from people
and use it for development work in the village and also use it for
leveraging funds from other sources for the village work or for the
work of individuals/groups.
GCollect dues on its own as stipulated under the Rajasthan Land
Revenue Act clause 229. Under the same provision it can request
the T ehsildar of fice to r ecover dues legally if it fails to do so.
It may be seen from the account above that the Rajasthan Gramdan
Act was devised with sound intentions to view the Gramdan village
units as decentralised units that could govern people and resources
in a village and achieve all round socio-economic development
autonomously . How much of this could be achieved in the Gramdan
villages would be explored in the case studies. But before closing
this sub section the situation that arose after the 73rd and 74th
Amendments were introduced is briefly discussed8.
As is known, the 73rd Amendment pr ovided considerable
autonomy to the Gram Panchayats for governance and development
of the villages. Each state government was supposed to formulate78   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1and pass state specific amendments to facilitate devolution of
governance functions and finance. The Rajasthan government did
not deliberate in depth on the proposed Panchayat provisions and
the pr ovisions it had made in the Gramdan Act. May be under the
pressure to bring uniformity in the decentralised structure, the
Rajasthan state’s provision for the Panchayat amendment quashed
section 43 of the Gramdan Act by which all the development functions
and autonomy wer e devolved to the Gram Sabha. W ith this the
identity of the Gramdan village has come to an end. This change has
been contested by the Rajsthan Samagra Sevak Sangh and it has also
appr oached the courts besides making a plea to the Governor . It
appears that the apex courts, that is the high court of the state and
the supreme court of India, have upheld the contention of the appeal
that Rajasthan Government’s Gramdan Act 1971 is valid and all the
functions can be performed by the Gram Sabha even after the 73rd
amendment. However , the Rajasthan government has not yet r estor ed
section 43 of the Gramdan Act.
There is another specific issue that deserves mention at this stage.
Its deeper implications will be discussed later in the next section. In
Jaipur district some villages that had undergone Gramdan, over time,
came under the Jaipur Urban Development Authority . This has
happened as the population has grown in most cities in the country
and the horizontal expansion has led to urbanisation of the villages
adjacent to the cities. In and around Jaipur 8 villages are affected in
this way . A Deputy Secr etary of the Revenue Department of the
Government of Rajasthan has written to the Rajasthan Gramdan Board
Chairperson seeking his opinion and objections about the proposed
conversion of the Gramdan villages back as regular revenue villages.
Unless this conversion is made effective land transactions cannot be
legally implemented. Pr esently , the Boar d has r egister ed objection
and protest stating that the Gram Sabhas in these villages have not
been heard. There appears to be a stalemate at present, but the problem
has to be r esolved in some way .
There are two other minor yet important developments that
deserve mention in this context. The Rajasthan Government through
an amendment in August 2007 has intr oduced simple majority as the
criterion for election in place of consensus or 2/3rds majority as was
the pr ovision initially . This has turned the Gramdan villages into a
normal village as far as political arrangement for governance is
concerned. The second point is about the reconstitution of the
Bhoodan–Gramdan Board. The term of the  Board Chairperson and
the members expired on December 13, 2004. It has not been
reconstituted. Rajasthan Samagra Seva Sangh views this as mala fide .Gramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   79
April–June 2012Since the Board does not exist, all the decisions and working of the
Gramdan are stalled.
III
A Review of Selected Gramdan V illages
It has been observed that, compared to many other states that
participated in the Bhoodan-Gramdan movement in the country ,
Rajasthan did r elatively well. Although a lar ge number of villages
came up with commitment, only 218 could complete the formalities
to be declar ed as Gramdan villages. This is not a small number . In a
study of the kind which is being pursued here it is not possible to
review the situation in all Gramdan villages. It was decided to take
up thr ee villages for a detailed r eview . Of the twelve districts that
report Gramdan villages, Dungarpur ranks first and Banswada ranks
second, the rank being shared by Bhilwada and Sirohi as well. One
village each from Dungarpur and Banswada has been selected because
they are also districts with high proportion of tribal population. The
third village selected is from Jaipur district and the reason for selection
is its pr oximity to the capital city of Jaipur . It must be stated at the
outset that all the three villages have been visited only once and that
too for a short duration - a day each. The present picture is rather
sketchy and analysis has its obvious limitations. The three villages
selected and r eported ar e Raghunathpura in Dungarpur , Sundrav in
Banswada and Badh Mahavatan in Jaipur .
Raghunathpura, Dungarpur
It is considered to be one of the best Gramdan villages. It is inhabited
mainly by tribal population of Bhils. Located about 25 km. away from
the Dungarpur district headquarters, its population at present is about
850. Known Sarvodaya worker Bhogilal Pandya worked with the
village people here. He worked for social reforms too. He persuaded
the Bhil leaders in the village then to come together and join the
Gramdan movement. Inter estingly , in Dungarpur ther e wer e no lar ge
landholders or Zamindars. Most tribal families held relatively small
pieces of land. But ther e was abject poverty , social backwar dness,
superstitions, addiction of various kinds and illiteracy . Pandya
worked relentlessly on all these fronts and it appears that he was
able to convince people in Raghunathpura to convert  their village
into a Gramdan village. His efforts were rewarded and on July 5,
1962 Raghunathpura was declared as a Gramdan village.
Reportedly , ther e was a kind of metamorphosis after the Gramdan.80   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1The Gram Sabha became a serious body . With the passage of time the
village became addiction free. This is no mean achievement
considering that culturally the Bhils brew and use intoxicating drinks.
People apparently also gave up drinking tea. Literacy levels improved
substantially . Women started getting literate. Khadi and village
industry units were set up. There were Charkhas in most houses.
Decision making was participatory and inclusive. Conflicts and
disputes were settled by the Gram Sabha and recourse to Police and
Court was hardly observed. The Gram Sabha used money to build
roads, schools and wells. Houses wer e constr ucted under Indira Awas
Yojna. Gram Kosh was set up and the funds wer e collected and used
well. The Sabha also set up Grain Bank or Anaj Kosh  to ensure food
security for the village.
All was well until 1990. In 1991-92 a serious irregularity was
reported in construction of a small bridge. Stones bought for the
works wer e sold away . Two or thr ee youth wer e involved in this
illegal deal. It was learnt that they had become regular migrant
labourers and went to Gujarat. It was alleged that their exposure to
the smart world in the neighbouring state might have prompted them
to commit fraud on the village work. This set in the rot. In 1993
section 43 was quashed fr om the Gramdan Act and hence the Gram
Sabha lost its control over resources. It became dependent on
Panchayat and its politics pushed Sabha’s priorities behind.
After three years of addiction free environment, addiction has
surfaced again in the village. T o a lar ge extent exposur e of the youth
to other areas and Rajasthan Government’s excise policy are
responsible for this, according to the village elders. There has been
further erosion on other fronts. The Gram Kosh  and Anaj Kosh  have
disappeared. Charkhas have been almost totally discarded.
Migration appears to be one of the main r easons for the decay .
Youth migrate to Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. They have also
brought HIV to the village. The only consolation is that all children
go to school. Agricultur e is still rain fed but people supplement it
with employment in service sector . It appears that Raghunathpura
has slipped back into the status of a revenue village.
Sundrav , Banswada
Sundrav is a historical village that was originally inhabited by two
brothers belonging to a Rajput Clan in the first decade of the sixteenth
century . Sundrav today is a village in Bhukhia block. V inoba had
visited Bhukhia during his padyatra and had named the village as
Andanpuri. Partapur Gadhi that comes next in size was also a centre
of the Bhoodan activity . Sundrav is located 41 km away fr om Partapur .Gramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   81
April–June 2012It was inhabited initially by Bhil. Later Thoris who manufactured
flour mill with stones came and settled. Similarly , Garasia and Damor
families also came and settled. The village has 351 hectares of land.
The population is ar ound 1200. Agricultur e was mainly rain fed, but
in the last seven years irrigation water from the Mahi river project
has been made available.
The village people were also influenced by the Gramdan idea
that was spread by the Sarvodaya workers such as Gokulbhai Bhatt
and others. Sundrav was declar ed as a Gramdan village on 25th April
1961. The pr esent status of the village appears to be very healthy .
The relationship with Panchayat Samiti appears to be very good. There
is a Gram Sabha Bhavan, Primary and secondary school, a Primary
Health sub centre where a nurse stays. It is not connected to other
parts through all weather roads. One has to walk for two kilometres
to board a bus. Literacy level is high. There are ten teachers in the
village. One person from the village works as a District Education
Officer .
The only notable thing that people reported about the Chairman
of the Gram Sabha was that one of them had facilitated digging of
wells during dr ought years. 1 13 wells wer e dug and ther e is water
today in all of them. Other activities relating to Gram Sabha were
not reported. Gram Kosh and Anaj Kosh  were set up, but at present
they are not functioning.
Badh Mahavataan, Jaipur
Badh Mahavataan is located 4 kilometres North East of Chaksu which
is the block headquarters. The village history suggests that the fields
in the village were used to graze horses and elephants of the Jaipur
Palace. This is one of the villages which joined the Gramdan status
relatively late. It was declared as Gramdan village on 25 May 1969. It
is a small village with a population of about 300. All the families ar e
agriculturists and belong to Bairva community which is a Scheduled
Caste. The total area of the village is 7244 hectares of which 6.12 is
grazing land. A tank has been constr ucted with the help of CASA,  a
mission organisation about 18 years back.
Gangaram was the first Chairperson of the Gram Sabha. He was
followed by Nathulal. He was a satsangi – a devout. He introduced
a community prayer programme in the village known as Kirtan-Bhajan
and it became a regular feature. This activity helped in checking the
incidence of addiction in the village. Even today the village people
practice strict vegetarianism and there is a Bhajan Mandali.  During
the time when Anopchand was Chairperson, r ooms in the school
building wer e added. W ells wer e dug under the Jeevandhara82   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1programme and houses for landless and poor were built under the
Indira Awas Yojna. He was succeeded by Prataplal who facilitated
constr uction of public well and r epair ed the r oads. Inter estingly , the
Gram Sabha building was constructed during the Chairpersonship
of Shyojiram, although  section 43 of the Gramdan had been repealed
by then!
In 1981, a devastating flood damaged the settlement badly .
Kumarpaa Gram Swaraj Sansthan, a Jaipur based Sarvodaya
organisation supported the Gram Sabha to build new wells, deepen
old wells, level land and rear buffalos. The agency also organised
women and a Mahila Mandal has been formed. Curr ently ,
Prabhunarayan Bairva is the Chairman of the Gram Sabha. But due
to the repealing of section 43, the financial control is with Chhoturam
Bairva who is the Sarpanch of Chhandol Gram Panchayat. The
development fund is now devolved to the Panchayat.
An interesting feature with respect to land ownership is that the
average holding is almost same with all holders. People are able to
reap two harvests,  one in Kharif and the second in Rabi. T ractor and
TV were also found in the village.  In recent past there have been
problems with irrigation. Both canal and well sources have dried up.
There is a school and enrolment and attendance were reportedly
good. Pr oportion of girl childr en in school was half. After Gramdan
there were three types of funds Gram Kosh, Anaj Kosh and Mahila
Kosh.  Curr ently , Anaj Kosh  has been discontinued. The other two ar e
managed relatively well.
IV
From Gramdan to Gram Swaraj
In Rajasthan, enthusiasm and efforts for Bhoodan and Gramdan have
been noteworthy . It was so because committed and gr eat social
workers who were also freedom fighters took the lead in organizing
the activities. V inoba r eceived very good r esponse to his call for
Bhoodan and his padyatra was very successful. A political leader
and committed Gandhian activist Mohan Lal Sukhadia supported
Gramdan and acquired one lakh acres of land under Bhoodan. By
1954, two lakh hectares of land had been gifted in Bhoodan. There
was an urgency to transfer the gifted land to landless and the
Rajasthan Bhoodan Act known as Rajasthan Bhoodan Y agna Adhiniyam,
1954  came into existence. A Bhoodan Yagna Boar d was constituted
with the consent of V inoba. A committed Gandhian Gokulbhai Bhatt
became the first President and Purnachandra Jain was the firstGramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   83
April–June 2012Secr etary . In 1960, the Gramdan Act was enacted. The Gramdan
activity picked up after this Act. A set of amendments wer e made in
the Gramdan Act in 1971. The Act was in for ce until 1993 when section
43 was r epealed. The Gramdan Act based governance has been in
crisis since then. There is a need to review the situation in this context
too.
It has been noted that although there were a large number of
villages that committed to join the Gramdan only 218 could be declared
as they alone could complete the legal formalities involved. It may
be inferred from this that the initial enthusiasm among people in the
villages prompted by the committed social workers could not be
sustained and the follow up work was nominal. Nevertheless, the
Gramdan Act insulated the villages cover ed under the Act fr om other
influences. The Act does not r ecognise private ownership of land by
individuals in Gramdan villages. The occupant has a right to cultivate,
but cannot sell. The ownership of land is deemed common. Gram
Sabha’s decisions are final.
The present case studies do not attempt to map the benefits or
limitations of community ownership. It would call for land distribution
data and changes therein to comment on the implementation and
impact of the provisions. Other provisions relating to setting up of
funds for the village development appear to have worked in favour
of villages. Although scanty evidence comes out of the thr ee villages,
it may be said that before the 73rd amendments were made Gramdan
villages had a distinct advantage over the revenue villages with respect
to preparation of their own village development plan and implement
them with financial resources. It was observed that in two villages,
Badh Mahavataan and Raghunathpura, the Gram Sabha was able to
improve the village infrastructure and developed the production
potential. Gramdan model should be seen as a precursor to the
provisions made under the 73rd Amendment with r espect to Panchayati
Raj administration. But there has been another fall out of the
Amendment. The Rajasthan government has not been able to see the
need for continued devolution of financial powers to the Gramdan
villages under section 43 of the Gramdan Act. In fact, ther e appears
to be ill considered judgement to repeal the section that provided
financial powers to the Gram Sabha. It appears that the government
has viewed that, with 73rd Amendment, Panchayats would perform
similar functions as the Gram Sabha did under the Gramdan Act and
hence the duplication need to be removed.
It is clear that the government did not give adequate thought to
repealing section 43 fr om the Gramdan Act. While it is tr ue that under
73rd Amendment Panchayats have financial powers, the unit for84   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1decision making is not co-terminus with the Gramdan villages. In
this process the autonomy which the Gramdan villages enjoyed in
planning their own development has been lost. All Gramdan villages
have by this repeal of section 43 have become part of revenue village.
This obviously reflects lack of insight and vision on the part of the
government. It could have continued with the provision of financial
power to the Gramdan villages and used these units for comparing
the performance of the Panchayat villages and the Gramdan villages.
This opportunity has been lost. More than fifteen years have lapsed
after the new Panchayat system came into existence and it would be
difficult to make any distinction between the two types of villages
now .
The only characteristic that Gramdan villages have perhaps
retained is the community ownership of land. There is a need to
examine whether the productivity in agriculture and allied sectors
has been different in Gramdan villages compared to the revenue
villages given comparable infrastructure, physical capital in the form
implements and technology . The case studies have not been able to
probe this aspect pr operly , but it needs to be attempted. However ,
even here the pressure exerted by the mainstream appears formidable.
As noted earlier , Gramdan villages located in the pr oximity of the
cities have experienced a very rapid and high upward valuation of
the land. Since the right to sell is not vested with the occupants of the
land, land markets have become non-operative. The stakes are very
high and it should be noted that even the state Cabinet had met
twice to bring amendment in the Gramdan Act to facilitate sale of
land by the occupants. The issue for consideration is whether this is
the only way out or the Gram Sabha can come out with an alternative
where it has right to sell and use the proceeds to invest in generating
livelihood for the Gram Sabha members. The Rajasthan Samagra Sevak
Samaj has registered a protest with the Governor resisting amendment
leading to facilitation of sale of land. The argument is that it is against
the basic philosophy of Gramdan. In the days and times when the
Act was drawn the clause for not selling was valid. In the new
situation, some people argue, there has to be a rethinking especially
for the villages that are now facing the urbanisation pressure.
Let us turn attention towards the movement of Gramdan villages
to Gram Swaraj. On the production front other than redistributing
land to landless and promoting common ownership of land, Gramdan
villages do not appear to have made any significant headway in
planning production and consumption in the village following the
principles of Gram Swaraj. The glimpses that we have been able to
capture tell that for facilitating production the Gram Sabhas haveGramdan to Gram Swaraj   G   85
April–June 2012also used the mainstr eam sour ces such as developing irrigation facility ,
building roads, schools, houses etc. Some efforts appear to have been
made to promote non-farm employment initially through setting up
khadi and village industry schemes. But they were all short-lived.
An opportunity to develop these Gramdan villages into a model
village appears to have been lost. The Board with the help of the
Sarvodaya workers could have made a serious attempt to work in
the dir ection of Swapta Swavlamban – concept pr omoted by V inoba.
This definitely has not been attempted.
In the initial phase a positive feature in the Gramdan villages
was efforts of the social workers to influence people to get rid of
addictions and other social ills. The village records show that in two
of the three villages the workers were successful although in
Dungarpur the liquor addiction has resurfaced. It can be argued with
some confidence that Gramdan villages offered better scope for
reducing social ills and promoting literacy and awareness among the
population. The state should have drawn positive lessons from this
and replicated the efforts in other villages also. In Gramdan villages
this aspect definitely moved the village towards Gram Swaraj.
The ultimate goal of the Gram Swaraj through Gramdan is to
move towards formation of Ahimsak Samaj.  What picture do the
villages surveyed pr esent in this r egar d? As long as the land ownership
is not privatised and the right to alienate is not granted, there is
some non-violence in individual’s relation with land. It is used with
respect and peace. The production relation to this extent is non-
violent. But if the technologies and other inputs that are used are
going to destroy the basic potential of the land as a factor of
production, it is violent use of the resource. It is obvious that Gramdan
villages have not taken car e of this aspect seriously .
Cooperation does not seem to be the basic operative principal in
organising production. The Gramdan villages studied do not reflect
any feature where a total plan for the village using the physical
resources and workers has been so organised so as to lead towards
a non-violent production system with inter individual and individual-
natur e cooperation. Gramdan village under the Act in Rajasthan had
an opportunity to work towards a model village. The Gramdan
experiment has hardly been able to move towards Gram Swaraj in a
meaningful way; movement towards Ahimsak Samaj  appears a very
distant dream.86   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Notes and  References
1.For str uctural violence see J. Galtung , “V iolence, Peace and Peace
Research”, Journal of Peace Research , 6 (3),1969, pp.167-191.
2.This specification is introduced well by Narayan Desai. See Narayan
Desai’s Introduction in Kanti Shah, Gandhi’s  Hind Swaraj: A Fresh
Look  (Mapusa Goa: Other India Press, 2009). [Rendered from
Gujarati by Hemkumar Mistry and Anand Mazgaonkar]
3.For the characteristics of property and use see Elinor Ostrom and
Edella Schlager , “The Formation of Pr operty Rights” in S. Hanna,
Carl Folke, and Karl-Goran Maler (eds.), Rights to Nature (Island
Press, W ashington D.C, 1996).
4.For a detailed elaboration see M.K. Gandhi, India of My Dreams
(1947), compiled by Krishna Kripalani and R.K. Prabhu
(Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 2006).
5.For mor e details see Sudarshan Iyengar , “Bhoodan Movement as a
Gandhian Approach to Resource Distribution and Development”,
Gandhi Marg, 28 (4) 2007, p.402.
6.For mor e details see V ishwanath T andon, “The Bhoodan-Gramdan
Movement (1951-74) – A Reivew”, in R.R. Diwakar and Mahendra
Agrawal (ed.) Vinoba: The Spiritual Revolutionary  (Gandhi Peace
Foundation, New Delhi, 1984).
7.T.P. Singh , Bhoodan and Gramdan in Orissa: An Analytical Study
(Varanasi: Sarva Seva Sangh, 1973)
8.T.P. Singh, op. cit.
9.Some details of the pr ocess may be had fr om Gram Swaraj ,  Volume
9 September 2002, p. 35.
SUDARSHAN IYENGAR is V ice Chancellor , Gujarat V idyapith,
Nr. Income T ax Of fice, Ashram Road, Ahmedabad - 380 014.
Email: vc@gujaratvidyapith.org
PARUL  TINA  DOSHI is a Freelance Gujarati Journalist and W riter .
She can be reached at CVM Bunglow No 1 1, Near Bhaikaka Statue,
VallabhV idyanagar -388 120 Gujarat; Email: parultina@gmail.com
HARI DESAI is  Director , Centre for Studies and Research on life
and W orks of Sardar V allabhbhai Patel (CERLIP),CVM Bungalow-
18, Opp. Bhaikaka Library , Vallabh V idyanagar – 388120, Gujarat;
email: haridesai@gmail.comDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   87
April–June 2012Defining and Interpreting
Non-V iolent Political Revolutions
Antonino Drago
ABSTRACT
In order to develop a new method for defining and interpreting the many
decisive revolutions that occurred in 20th Century, I construct a theoretical
framework by more accurately defining two notions introduced by Galtung,
i.e. the triangle A-B-C, representing the structure of a conflict, and the four
models of development (MoDvs). A  revolution is seen as a change in the MoDv ,
more than a change in State Constitution. Since a MoDv is rationalised by a
person through three representations (the motivational one, the objective one
and the subjective one, thr ee aspects corr esponding to Galtung’ s celebrated A-
B-C), the notion of a revolution is represented through these three
representations. The paper also distinguishes three different aspects of a
revolution, i.e. the statics, the kinematics and the dynamics.
I.  Introduction:
IN THE 20TH CENTUR Y a gr eat number of decisive r evolutions
occurr ed, mor e than thr ee hundr ed in number .1 Beyond the
decolonization revolutions, a lot of states in the world underwent
revolutions and changed. Altogether these r evolutions constituted a
decisive historical wave that changed the face of the political world.
Around one hundred of these have been non-violent revolutions
(NVRs). In particular , the most important NVRs occurr ed in the year
1989; these ones made r edundant the super power agr eement in Yalta
in 1945, which divided all peoples of the earth in inflexible “zones of
influence”.
In the past the historical methods suggested for interpreting these
revolutions did not achieve a certain degree of consensus even in the
interpretation of the French revolution.2 The new revolutions have88   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1been promoted and successfully led by movements that adopted non-
violence; this has led to the relative stability of the democratic regimes
that subsequently came to power .3  But even the most celebrated
NVR, i.e. the Gandhian revolution in India, lacks a commonly accepted
interpr etation. Although in r ecent times the non-violent movements
have become capable of taking on highly oppressive regimes, the
political theory informing such actions still does not offer  a convincing
interpretation of NVRs.4
In my opinion, a first hint in offering a credible explanation was
suggested by M. Nagler . He translated in political terms those
celebrated categories by which Kuhn interpreted the scientific
revolutions that occurred in the history of science.5 Nagler forecasts
the paradigm change that mankind has to perform in order to
establish peace in the world.6 But this successful application may
appear as a fortuitous or improper result, which was obtained by
ingenuity . Hence, in or der to of fer a convincing interpr etation of
NVRs, it is necessary to work within a formal, theoretical framework;
in other words, within a structural theory of non-violence.
In order to achieve this kind of theoretical framework, in section
2, I will suggest more accurate definitions of Galtung’s two notions,
i.e. the triangle A-B-C, which r epresents the str uctur e of a conflict,
and the Model of Development (MoDv); my revision of these notions
leads to a general theoretical framework qualifying non-violent
politics.7 In section 3, I will define both a revolution and a NVR by
means of the notion of a MoDv . In sect. 4, I will start to illustrate a
method for interpr eting a NVR. A NVR will be pr esented as a conflict
between two social groups who represent two MoDvs. In
correspondence to Galtung’s A-B-C, thr ee kinds of r epresentations
of an actor ’s viewpoint on a MoDv ar e possible – i.e., ef fective or
motivational, objective and subjective. In section 5, these
representations will be further subdivided according to an external
viewpoint which distinguishes three aspects - i.e. the static, the
kinematics and the dynamics - of a social event. W e will obtain nine
basic categories, which are appropriate for comprehending the
complex event of a NVR. In sections 5, 6 and 7 their conceptual contents
will be elaborated; In addition, the suitable academic disciplines for
studying the subjects belonging to each of the nine categories will be
listed. In section 8 this interpretative framework will be synthesised
by translating into political terms some celebrated interpretative
frameworks of traumatic events such as Fornari’s framework for
interpreting psycho-analytic trauma, Kuhn’s idea of scientific
revolutions and Koyré’s construct on the revolutionary birth of
modern science. In section 9, I will briefly apply the entireDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   89
April–June 2012interpretative apparatus to the Indian revolution in Gandhi’s time. I
will conclude with some general remarks on the import of the
illustrated theorisation on NVRs.
2. A new theoretical framework for non-violent politics
Among the several political viewpoints advanced  by peace
movements in the last century , the case for non-violent political action
is, in my opinion, the most sharply defined. In the history of the
teachers of non-violence, T olstoy , and then Gandhi and Martin L.
King jr . intended non-violence as an impr ovement of ethical, subjective
motivations, leading each person to be responsible about the
implications of his actions inside the society . Subsequently , G. Sharp
accomplished a Herculean effort for analysing, according to an objective
viewpoint, all past experiences of non-violent actions; he came up
with a comprehensive description of two hundred techniques applied
in the past in the name of non-violence .8 Galtung introduced structural
notions; in particular , the definition of a conflict as an A-B-C and the
notion of four MoDvs, as they are obtained by two dichotomic
variables.9  But Galtung did not link together his above-mentioned
notions; instead, he made use of the notion of a MoDv in a loose
way , without r eferring it to the two basic variables. Hence, the
structural level of non-violent theory was not apparent to people,
that is why they were more attracted towards Sharp’s view - stressing
the objective techniques only -, as the more refined theory of non-
violence10.
In order to achieve a more accurately defined theoretical
framework, first of all, I will suggest more accurate definitions of
Galtung’s notions. I start from his idea of representing a conflict
through its thr ee mutually interacting elements A, B and C.11 He made
use of inaccurate definitions, placing the whole idea inside a merely
subjective realm.12 Galtung defined the contents of vertex B of his
triangle as the “manifest, empirical, observed level” of the
“Behaviour” or “Facts” of the conflict. In my opinion, B corresponds
to the objective  element of a conflict. Galtung puts the “Assumptions...
attitudes…” as the content of the vertex A; as for me, A represents the
motivational  element. In the vertex C Galtung puts the notion of
“Contradiction”, which in my opinion characterises the subjective
element of a conflict. By summarizing, I reformulate his definition of
a conflict by means of three elements, the motivational, or effective element
(A), the objective element  (B) and the subjective element  (C).13
Mor eover , Galtung missed a cr ucial point; namely , which actor
the A-B-C triangle r efers to. The two opponents have dif ferent, if
not mutually diver gent, assumptions, A. The same holds tr ue for B;90   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1indeed, the behaviours of the two opponents surely are not the same.14
Mor eover , it is appar ent that each opponent suf fers his own
“contradiction” C. In order to obtain a well-defined theory of a
conflict it is necessary , in my opinion, to consider for each opponent
different contents in the thr ee elements. As a consequence, the thr ee
elements A, B and C ar e multiplied by the two opponents; a slightly
complex theory results (a synthesis is presented by a table in next
section).
A further crucial  innovation Galtung was to synthesise the
motivations A by following two dichotomic options15- “Either vertical
interpersonal relationships or horizontal relationships”; “Either
individual diversity or collective homogeneity”. But these definitions
make use of no more than subjective or interpersonal terms.
In order to define them in terms of the structural aspects of a
social conflict16, let us consider first the two opposite ways of
organising the economy of a society . Since two centuries, W estern
politics included two polarities, i.e. “freedom for the more capable
people” (the rightists) and “justice for all” (the leftists). W e see that
Galtung’s former dichotomic option - “Either vertical interpersonal
relationships or horizontal relationships” –, when considered in
structural terms, corresponds to the option on the kind of organization
of a society – i.e. either an authoritarian organisation  (AO), working
through laws emanated by the most capable men, left free to act at
their best; or an organisation , aimed at collectively looking for a new
method capable of solving a given general problem  (justice) (PO). The
history of three centuries of parliamentary life in the world shows
that it is impossible to unite in the same society these two kinds of
organisation.
Now let us consider the case of national defence. It is well-known
that a basic motivation of the military attitude is to entrust the conflict
to the experts and science, which incr eases Army’s military destr uctive
capability by ever increasing arms’ race. Instead, the basic motivation
of the non-violent attitude is to improve as much as possible the
personal relationships among the population, in order to achieve the
strongest solidarity . Her e we have an instance of two differ ent kinds of
social development or social improvement;  either an absolutist , mythical
increase (AI), or an increase of the inter personal relationships (PI).
The same structural dichotomic option can be seen in the area of
energy planning; it is the dichotomic option of whether to go for
nuclear power or solar power (or , mor e precisely , nuclear sour ce of
energy or renewable sources of energy); whereas the former one
relies upon improving the excellence of professional works, the latter
one relies upon improving the relationships in communitarian lifeDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   91
April–June 2012and even with Nature. Notice that the motivation for improving social
solidarity is incompatible with the motivation for pursuing arms race;
and vice versa . This option on the social increase generalises Galtung’s
dichotomic option - “Either individual diversity or collective
homogeneity”.
In the past, the latter option was ignor ed by the worker ’s
movement and its theorists. It was manifested by Gandhi’s movement
for Indian liberation. Then, the choice for an alternative to the social
increase was a specific featur e of non-violent politics. Later , both the
ecological movement and the anti-globalisation movement joined this
politics aimed to plan an alternative to W estern pr ogress.
On these two dichotomic options four pairs of choices are possible.
A pair of choices gives rise to a model of development (MoDv); by
construction, it includes all aspects, those ranging from the subjective
ones to the cultural and structural ones; hence, it is a global notion,
comprehensive  and inclusive of all  aspects of personal life and social
life.17
Let us illustrate these two dichotomic options in geometrical terms.
The former option, on the kind of society organisation, is represented
by an axis, whose extreme points denote the two traditional political
polarities. The latter option on the kind of social development, being
independent from the former one, may be represented by one more
axis which cuts transversally the previous axis. By making reference
to a specific kind of social development, such as defence development,
we obtain the figur e below . Each State or movement is distributed in
the four quadrants according to the MoDvs which it belongs to.
Galtung baptised the four MoDvs by means of colours; blue: USA;
red: USSR; yellow: Islam; green: Gandhian movements.
As an effect of the dichotomic nature of each option, a subjective
notion which is shar ed by two MoDvs – e.g., peace, defence, or der,
brotherhood, etc. –, undergoes a radical variation in its meaning.
E.g., whereas in the blue MODv “peace” means Si vis pacem, para
bellum , in the green MoDv it means the peaceful solutions for all
conflicts. The most radical variation in meaning occurs in the word
“non-violence”, because in this case the same logic is different; being
a double negation (of course, “violence” is a negation of life) which
is not equivalent to the corresponding affirmative word (e.g. love,
benevolence, charity , smoothness, etc.), the law “T wo negations
affirm” fails; hence, this word belongs to non-classical logic, namely
to an entirely different logical world. 18
Owing to both the antithetical nature of the two choices on each
option and the radical variations in meanings of the common basic
notions, two different MoDvs are mutually “incommensurable”.1992   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Since  conflicts are rooted in reality as well as in our minds, the
separations among the different MoDvs are effective; hence, the unity
among them has to be gained by a specific work. For example, in
order to have a dialogue, two persons belonging to different MoDvs
– say , a military general and a conscientious objector - have to cleverly
translate their basic notions.
As a consequence, we obtained a theoretical framework which is
essentially a conflictual one. The above theoretical framework includes
as a particular case Marx’ theory of class conflict, which is obtained
by making dummy the option on the kind of development , and
moreover by reducing the option on the kind of the social organisation
as a determinant of economic or ganisation only . Although it was basedFig. 1: Distribution of the main Countries, populations and
social movements according to the four models of development
BLUE
YELLOWRED
GREENPopular (PO) Autoritarian
(AO)URSS
China
Cubaformer -Yu
C.o.s.
Poor people
Gandhian nonv .
Non-violent (PI)Western nonv .Pacifists
Swi
JapanIslamIn e PakUSA
1 UK F Isr
Abbreviations: Isr = Israel; GB = Great Britain; F = France; In = India; Pak =
Pakistan; former -Yu = former -Yugoslavia; Swi = Switzerland; C.o.s =
conscientious obiectors; W estern nonv . = W estern non-violent people;
Gandhian nonv . = Gandhian non-violent people.
N.B.  Actually all the locations in the figure are wide areas, with blurred
boundaries. The location of a Country takes into account the consensus
reached by its population about its defence policy .Defining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   93
April–June 2012on an alternative concerning one option only , this theory inspir ed
the gr eat East-W est confr ontation which dominated international
affairs before 1989.
For the survival of political life it is necessary to have a non-
violent political theory , aimed to solve conflicts without destr oying
the opponent; this theory is of fered by the gr een MoDv , which, by
conceiving the political life according to fig. 1, supports political
pluralism.
The above representation of the political life (fig.1) became
appar ent since the year 1989. Although even at pr esent the gr een
MoDv is represented by no state (not even by India),20 in 1989 the
non-violent MoDv did r each a critical mass in Eastern Eur ope. After
1989 the politics of Islamic countries looked for a self-reliant political
development incompatible with the W estern one. W ith their politics
subordinated to religion, which in turn is subordinated to great
authorities (AO), this MoDv came to represent the yellow one.
Consequently , a new type of global politics began. Owing to the
collapse of the r ed MoDv r epresented by the USSR, the East/W est
confr ontation disappear ed; rather , the new US politics of globalisation
brought the North – South divisions into sharp focus. Among the
two MoDvs of the South, the gr een MoDv , represented by no state,
was ignor ed by the dominant blue MoDv , which identified the yellow
MoDv represented by the Islamic States as its violent opponent. Thus,
the blue MoDv  was able to transform  its confrontation with the
South into one with the  yellow MoDv; and it rationalised this
confrontation as “a clash of two civilisations”, where the “civilisation”
is a broad category pertaining to mainly the subjective realm.21
3. A new definition of a non-violent political revolution
In the following I will follow W eber ’s suggestion to intr oduce, as
interpretative categories of social phenomena, some ideal-types, which
are defined through the main characteristic features of the social
phenomena which they refer to.22
The notion of four MoDvs suggests a definition of a political
revolution which is more accurate, although more radical, than the
usual one, which refers to a change in State Constitution.
I define a political r evolution as a people’ s struggle for changing MoDv .23
I call such a social transformation a “change of a political paradigm”.
In fig. 1 a revolution is represented by a segment, crossing over at
least one axis.
Notice that a revolution may be undertaken, against more than a
single state, against even a world power by a global movement. In
fact, in the year 1989 a great number of people in Eastern Europe94   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1challenged the domination enshrined in the Yalta T reaty. Mor eover ,
in February 2003 the global protest against the “goodwill alliance”
that led to engagement in Iraq was in the line of a revolution. Seen
from this perspective, the global struggles by movements which did
not choose a change of their MoDvs such as the student movement in
the 60s and the feminist movement do not qualify as  revolutions .
By ignoring the notion of a MoDv , past political scholars of
revolutions referred them to the national conflicts between the
population and the state. Mor eover , given that the gr een MoDv not
represented by any state, the successful NVRs of the 20th century
have all been guided by ideas counter to the traditional political
theories.
Since the traditional political theories ignore the option on the
kind of social increase, no surprise if they have been unable to
understand the revolutions occurring along the corresponding vertical
axis in fig. 1 .24In fact, these theories take in account the revolutions
occurring on the horizontal axis only . The most important instance of
them was the communist Russian revolution, which have been
consider ed by the W estern political system as the highest thr eat and
which in fact generated for several decades a “cold war” between
East and W est.
Instead, a people struggle wanting to change no more than
Constitution – for instance, the introduction of national referenda -,
or some laws - e.g. the movement led by M.L. King’s -, is no more
than a r ebellion, an insur gence, a r evolt, an insurr ection. Vice versa , a
strong people’s struggle is not justified by the program of a mere
change in the State administration, without a change of the MoDv; in
such a case, people either ignore their power with respect to the
historical problems they are living, or they release their power in a
blind way . In fact, in the political history of Eur ope the r evolutions
born in 17th Century’s England and in 18th Century’s France and USA,
occurred when their respective people perceived that a change of the
MoDv , mor e than a State, was possible; and this tar get was pursued,
without being aware of it. Marx’ theory enhanced this perception by
qualifying it as the choice of the red MoDv; so that the more accurate
program for a revolution was shared by a great part of the population.
The dominant political theories attribute the main political role to
the State, i.e. the aggressed institution, rather than to the people
movement, which actually is the promoting actor of such event. In
such a way they tended to include in the same notion of a “State”
disparate structures of social power; i.e. the absolutist monarchy of
Louis XIV , the modern W estern State (e.g. England), the federative
State (Swiss, USA), the communist Party-State (USSR), the IslamicDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   95
April–June 2012State. Furthermore, they attribute a subordinated role to the deep
motivations leading the people to a harsh struggle with respect to
the state interest to assure its survival. By under evaluating people’s
political viewpoint, they define a revolution in the reductive terms
of a radical transition in the State25. It is not surprising that current
interpretations distort of French revolution, socialist revolutions and
Islamic revolutions, all originated from, and decisively conducted
by people movements. Mor eover , these partial interpr etations
misunderstand as more violent than they really were the revolutions,
because the State fears that the people’s initiatives question and then
possibly destroy its monopoly of the violence26.
In an even more reduced sense revolutions are defined by the
rightist political theories, as those social struggles which subvert the
ordinary political life of a Parliament. Hence, these theorists hastily
consider these struggles as illegal phenomena, arising from a
backward attitude of people, unrecognising the social achievements
already obtained by the W estern juridical development.
In recent times the political sciences focussed its attention on the
“good” revolutions, each defined as the “transition” from a
dictatorship of a whatsoever kind, to a formal democracy . Accor ding
to the four MoDvs, the initial political situation of this transition, i.e.
a dictatorship, r epresents an extr eme version of the basic choice AO
of either the blue MoDv (Fascism, Nazism), or the yellow MoDv
(theocracy), or even the red MoDv (inasmuch as it imposes the
proletariat’s dictatorship, although its claimed choice is PO). The final
situation of this transition, i.e. the formal democracy of human rights
plus free political elections, is commonly identified by these theorists
with the typical political life of the blue MoDv; which truly originated
these institutions as the social expressions of liberal democracy; but,
its formal version may be included by the current political life of
every MoDv27. Hence, this notion of a State transition is a very broad
one; it merely severs dictatorships from all different regimes.
Notice that the theoretical scheme of fig. 1, by relying upon the
incommensurability between two different MoDvs, involves in much
more radical changes in the actors than mere changes in their interests
or their basic needs; it includes traumatic changes of their basic
motivations with respect to both the political context and the personal
context. During a revolution, the personal motivations have first of
all to solve the two following problems, i.e. to accept or not  threats
to one’s  own life or to kill or not kill others persons. A change in
these motivations constitutes a conversion process; it may occur in
each participant in the revolutionary process, even in the mind of the
dictator (although desirable, his conversion is not an essential step96   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1for the success of a revolution, which essentially is a collective historical
process).
Let us now define a non-violent revolution according to the non-
violent political theory , which considers the people as a mor e
important political actor than a State: A non-violent r evolution is a people’ s
struggle (no matter how long in time), which is carried out through non-
violent techniques and which is aimed at moving from an oppressive MoDv
and embracing the gr een MoDv .28 In fig. 1 this kind of r evolution is
represented by a segment which, by crossing over at least one axis,
enters into the quadrant of the gr een MoDv .
Two events of the 20th Century seem to fulfil this definition of
NVR, i.e., Gandhi’s movement for Indian liberation and the W orld
liberations accomplished by the Eastern European countries in 1989.
Indeed, both movements made use of non-violent techniques only;
both succeeded in freeing themselves from an oppressive MoDv -
respectively , the blue MoDv of the British empir e and pr oletariat’s
dictatorships of the red MoDv; these MoDv actually were the
paradigms for W orld colonialism and the communist r egime
respectively; both revolutionary movements wanted to achieve a
MoDv envisaged in agreement with their non-violent actions
(although subsequent governments chose the blue MoDv). These give
evidence for the plausibility of both the above definition and the
above-illustrated theoretical scheme.
4. The three representations of a NVR: Effective, subjective and
objective
Let us now focus the attention on NVR. For simplicity’s sake, a NVR
is assumed to be a confr ontation between two political actors only ,
whose choices belong to two different MoDvs. Since the green MoDv
lacks both representative States and State institutions, all NVRs were
promoted by a grassroots movement challenging an oppressive
government which defended itself by means of military power . Hence,
these two political actors have respectively the choices  PI&PO and
AI&AO. Accor ding to them, the actors apply two dif ferent models
of conflict resolution, which are more clear in their resolutions of the
extreme conflict of national defence: the non-violent model,  and  the
military model , which is a true paradigm in conflict resolution, owing
to its str ong cultural influence on past society .29
The table below summarizes the main features of these two
models of conflict resolution; however the table  articulates these
models in their three representations of the conflict as they are
conceived by an actor; they detail Galtung’s thr ee elements A-B-C.30
In the following these two models for a national defence will beDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   97
April–June 2012A C B
EFFECTIVE SUBJECTIVE OBJECTIVE
Representation Representation Representation
(the options shaping (intuitive ideas for the (what textbooks present)
the solution) (subjective thinking)
Military Abstract Increase  in weapons Scientific strategy , security Destructive tools Compulsory
MoCR (AI) strength, to be first, authority ,behavior Analytical mind
(the dominant Authoritative Organization hierar chy, deterr ence, enemy ,Hierarchical society Classical
= a paradigm) (AO) traitor , “Scientific security logic (either A or not-A )
Non-violent Increase  of the Personal Brother hood, empathy , Non-violent techniques
MoCR relations (PI) equality , community , Human people’s rights
co-operation, non-violence, Community , co-operation
Organization  for solving a pluralism, democracy , Holistic mind Dialectical logic
universal Problem  by means “Democratization of defense (not-not-A  is not equivalent
of a solidarity movement and extinguishing of violence” to A)
(PO)Table-1: THE TWO MAIN MODELS OF  CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Legenda: MoCR = Model of Conflict Resolution98   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1applied to the case of a revolution, although in the latter case the
weapons are bounded to little more than the personal weapons and
moreover the image of the “enemy” is not so sharp as in the case of
national defence.31
5. The effective representation. The three aspects of a NVR: Static,
kinematics and dynamics
An NVR , being a complex phenomenon to be studied in an
inter disciplinary way , we have to take into account mor e than what
is per ceived by that actor ’s viewpoint.  A theory is obtained by adding
what is essentially per ceived fr om an outside viewpoint. W ithout
getting involved in an epistemological discussion on this point, we
will choose the kind of theoretical structure which is more common
in both natural and historical sciences; it is three-fold -  static,
kinematics and dynamics.32 By crossing them with the three
representations of the personal viewpoint one obtains 9 categories
as constituting a comprehensive viewpoint on a NVR33.
Now we start to describe the categories interpreting that complex
social event which is a NVR.
Under the light of the three representations of a model of conflict
resolution (see T able no. 1), we r ecognise that we have alr eady
introduced the effective  representation of a NVR by introducing the
two basic choices of a MoDvs and providing a definition of an  NVR.34
This representation of an NVR is improved by illustrating the
motivations of each of the two parties; in particular , to what extent
these motivations are rooted both in the personal lives (through the
cultural and religious aspects) and in the institutions (through mainly
the economico-ecological, juridical and defence social structures). In
order to perform a comprehensive illustration one has to apply several
disciplines – Psychology , Anthr opology , Economy , Sociology – in
mutual collaboration. However , we r ecognise that all ar e static in
nature.
In order to describe a kinematics  of this effective representation,
we have to consider the evolution which people may undergo with
respect to the two basic options; that is, all potential changes of MoDv
(in fig. 1 they are represented by all possible segments crossing over
at least one axis for appr oaching the gr een MoDv). A specific notion
concerning such evolutions is “strategy”, which here is defined as
the planned path to carry out a change of MoDv .35
In the same effective representation, the dynamics  of an NVR
consists in mainly describing the change of MoDv by means of the
temporal sequence of the social actions which determined the history
of a revolution. In other terms, this representation consists in aDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   99
April–June 2012sociological illustration of that opponents’ interaction which leads,
time after time, to change the basic choices either in agreement or in
disagreement with actors’ strategies.36 This illustration has therefore
to describe who causes changes in the MoDv , through which actions,
by whom these actions have been performed, when the change
occurr ed. Mor eover , it has to answer the two following questions:
Was the movement committed to choosing non-violent means only?
Did this result in a stable change?
History and Political sciences are the main disciplines describing
both the kinematics and the dynamics of the changes in the basic
choices. But in studying this dynamics a scholar meets a hard problem
pertaining to the historical method; a scholar has to investigate this
event by following a lot of divergent hypotheses, each relying upon
at least two documents. Yet, a non-violent pr ocess involves in a
decisive way inner variables which cannot always be testified by
written documents; for instance, when a non-violent viewpoint
evaluates a victory as obtained by a change in the personal choices of
the oppressors, i.e. by a true conversion (as, for instance, was maybe
the abrupt decision by the British Empire to grant freedom to Indian
people). Owing to the lack of documents, often a non-violent dynamics
is easily misinterpreted or even ignored by academic disciplines.
6. The objective representation of a non-violent revolution
Let us now consider the categories pertaining to the two more
representations of the conflict constituted by a NVR, namely the
subjective one and the objective one. T o this aim, we add first the
objective  representation of a NVR, as detailed according to static,
kinematics and dynamics.
There exists a well-known objective representation of the static of
a revolution; it is given by an accredited discipline, which illustrates
the objective featur es of the actors, i.e. Sociology . Its mor e relevant
notion is “the balance of power”, obtained by calculating the sum of
the gr oss tools of military , economicand bur eaucratic which each actor
disposes of.37 The sociological illustration of a revolution is the easiest
one; mor eover , it constitutes a useful support for all possible kinds
of interpretations of this historical event; but it alone suggests no
more than a mechanistic explanation, which is inadequate to explain
a NVR (remember for instance, the leftist interpretation of French
Revolution as caused by food scarcity). Instead, being an essentially
non-mechanist phenomenon, an NVR is better described by
Anthr opology , since this discipline illustrates human r elationships
inside communities, for instance human rights; namely , what is the
main concern of a method of analysing NVRs?100   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1In the objective representation the kinematic aspect  deals with the
actions each political actor conjectures to do in the future. It includes
the rules of common behaviour; whereas a non-violent movement
constructs them through a consensual process, an oppressive State
imposes them through hierarchical organisation. It includes also the
notion of tactics ; i.e. a planning, by starting from a given situation,
the list of nested actions to be accomplished in a short-term
perspective.
Let us now consider the third aspect,  the dynamic of the objective
representation. Of course, it includes a chronology of the main events.
Mor eover , it illustrates the dif ferent techniques elicited by each of
the two actors during the interaction among the political actors, their
sequence and their joined effects.
7. The subjective representation of a non-violent revolution:
Let us now complete the presentation of the categories by adding
those of the subjective representation; which is the more elusive
one, since it pertains to the interior realm; but it is also the most
suggestive one. This representation is studied mainly by going beyond
History , Anthr opology and Psychology .
In order to describe the static description of the  subjective
representation of a revolution let us remember that the
incommensurability of the two MoDvs relies upon mainly the logic;
the green MoDv makes use of a different way of thinking – through
double negated statements belonging to non-classical logic. That
implies that the green movement suggests exclusive slogans which
are specific to that situation (e.g. “ No more dictatorships !”), and even
a different language. This description includes also the psychological
elements, i.e. the interpretations of the collective experiences of each
participant, the collective perceptions of the opposing powers, the
subjective evaluation of the opportunities as well as the hindrances,
the collective traumas. The above elements may join personal choices
and social relationships, so as to exhibit his own will and targets
through static manifestations , which however influence the culture
of the opponent; i.e. to show off symbols, to passively resist, to declare
himself a conscientious objector , to do civil disobedience etc.
In the subjective  representation the kinematics  aspect includes
imagination, desires, prayers and all personal forecasts on the
revolutionary process; we read them on the diaries of the participants
in the revolutionary process. Some specific notions provide hints on
the evolution of the confrontation, e.g., “process of peace”, “mediation
talks”; “to knock down”, “agreement”; even the notion of “enemy” ,
for the future behaviour of a military person; the same holds true forDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   101
April–June 2012the word “brother” in a non-violent person. The subjective terms
one can list for each political actor is almost innumerable. In T able 1
the two statements between commas summarise them for the two
actors r espectively . These subjective ideas furnish to the social gr oup
the guidelines for inventing (inside the objective representation) a
tactic. Mor eover , to the interaction of the two opponents belong the
ideas of the both dialogue and diplomacy , as pr omoting the means to
an agreement. The kinematics of subjective representation is studied
by the theory of conflicts.
In the same subjective representation, the dynamic is illustrated
by a list of subjective phenomena, which may heavily influence both
behaviours and motivations of the two opponents;  i) the changing
image of the opponent and his social power during the revolution;  ii)
the appraisals on the influence of chance and causality on the sequence
of the events; iii) the psychological consequences of shocking events
caused by the actions elicited by both collective actors.38 This subjective
dynamics is so effective that when the revolution is successful, it
changes the meanings of the basic notions constituting the culture of
a people, e.g. freedom, justice, cooperation, efficiency (e.g., after the
year 1989 “the fall of a wall” is commonly intended as a positive fact,
instead of a perilous event).39 The dynamics of the subjective
representation of past NVRs is studied by History assisted by
Psychology .
8. Interpreting a non-violent revolution through subjective
categories of a synthetic kind
Although a complete account of a NVR has to include both the effective
representation and the objective representation of it, one has to
remember that each historical interpretation is evaluated at last at a
subjective level; indeed, the facts and the situations pertaining to a
complex historical event such as a NVR are innumerable; a synthesis
of all in a closed formula is possible at the subjective level only; it is
this formula which is received by a reading of the historical account.
To this aim the historian translates in the subjective r epresentation
each notion of both objective and effective representations; for
example, the subjective notion of “powerful” translates as the
superiority of an actor in the objective balance of power with his
opponent; or the qualification of “progressive” attributed to an actor
translates as a subjective term,  the motivation to follow the W estern
kind of development.
Hence, each of a great number of notions related to the subjective
dynamics, e.g. “struggle for justice”, or “freedom”, or “ liberté, fraternité,
égalité ”, may suggest a vivid illustration of the dramatic events of a102   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1revolution. The large number of subjective notions makes difficult to
choose, in a general way , the best ones to be pr omoted to interpr et a
revolution. However , from pr evious scholars who studied traumatic
events we will obtain three qualified suggestions for interpreting an
NVR in a synthetic way .
Psycho-analysis F . Fornari studied the development of a child,
during the first months of life, through the two subjective mottos:
“Mors tua, vita mea ” (Your death, my life) and “ Vita tua, vita mea ”
(Your life, my life).40 The first sentence is the first answer by a child
to the bad image of his mother , the second sentence expr esses his apt
attitude to overcome the crisis. Through them Fornari characterised
the respective attitudes of two conflicting persons - a military man
and a conscientious objector . By seeing these persons as the
representatives of the Blue MoCR and the Gr een one r espectively ,
we recognise that the above mottos are highly suggestive for a
synthetic interpr etation of an NVR. Unfortunately , they ar e so
synthetic to suggest little more than the respective basic attitudes of
the two opponents.
Instead a detailed representation of an NVR may be obtained by
translating into political terms T .S. Kuhn’s conceptual framework for
interpr eting a scientific r evolution. Accor ding to this author , for a
long time,  for the most part, scientists produced new scientific results
by applying the same paradigm. In this thinking science gradually
progresses by accumulating ever more solved problems and
experimental truths. But this evolution is interrupted by a crisis ,
occurring when the application of the paradigm to a particular case-
study leads to a sequence of unsuccessful results. This case-study is
called an anomaly , which gives rise to a scientific  revolution , troubling
the received version on the foundations of science. The revolution
ends when a change of paradigm occurs; i.e. when the minds of all
scientists jump, in a parallel way to a Gestalt  phenomenon, to a new
perception of the r eality .41
First Nagler translated this interpretative framework to social
sciences; his aim was to illustrate the hoped revolution which will
establish on the Earth a history of Peace.42 The old paradigm for
achieving peace is the military-nuclear one ( Si vis pacem para [nucleare]
bellum ). But since Hiroshima’s and Nagasaki’s devastations, people
became increasingly aware of an anomaly; i.e. the above paradigm
want to achieve peace by thr eatening a nuclear Armageddon ,
destr oying at the same time the defender and the aggr essor , which
is absurd. This anomaly started in the traditional military paradigm
of national defence during a period of crisis. The consequent political
revolution will end through a change of a Gestalt  kind, leading peopleDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   103
April–June 2012to conceive the solutions of the usual conflicts in a radically different
way from the destructive solutions suggested by the old paradigm.
Fortunately , this new conception is alr eady known; it is the non-
violent one, which may solve conflicts without destroying the
opponent; Gandhi taught it and successfully applied it.
It is easy to apply this interpretative framework (which relies
upon six basic notions only; i.e. normal course, paradigm, anomaly ,
period of crisis, revolution, Gestalt ) to an NVRs, which (likely to a
Gestalt phenomenon) does not destroy population (the basic inputs
to the eyes) but only the institutions (both visions and notions). Owing
to these two featur es, r emarkably , this interpr etative framework
apply to NVRs only .
One more synthetic subjective representation of an NVR is
suggested by the interpretative framework of the great historian of
science, A. Koyré. He summarised the r evolutionary birth of modern
science by means of two “characteristic pr ocesses” .43 By analogy , I
suggested the following two points characterising the guidelines of
the dominant MoDv of T ab. 1, i.e. the blue MoDv:44
Organizing national security (AO) in a scientific way (AI) and suppressing
(not PO) both individual passions and grassroots movements (not PI) .
This r epresents the attitude supported by the Blue MoDv . In
contrast , the second constitutes the green MoDv whose guidelines
are characterised by the following two points.
Organising people (PO) for just defence of people’ s values (PI) and
stressing the absurdity (not AO) of science- assisted  violence (not AI) .
I summarize the entire above theoretical apparatus by means of
Table 2. Its 9 cases show the theor etical complexity of an adequate
interpretation of an NVR; this interpretation requires an
inter disciplinary work, connecting History , Political Sciences,
Sociology , Anthr opology , Strategic sciences, Psychology , and  Conflict
Theory . In the above table the contents of each case suggest which
disciplines pertain to which ; mor eover , the table assigns, by its
structure, a specific role to the discipline of each case.
Notice that traditional political theory reduces table 1 to the last
column only , i.e. the objective r epresentation, plus some diplomatic
work, which pertains to the kinematical subjective case. As a
verification, let us consider two instances of this kind of reduction.
Usually , the military personnel choose to illustrate a conflict thr ough
its objective r epresentation only , because this r epresentation r efers
to the material elements, which are easily understood by people;
whereas, the same representation in the non-violent model of conflict
resolution concerns no more than the human relationships, which
seem an elusive subject for people. Mor eover , let us r ecall the104   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1
Effective R. Subjective R. Objective R.
Statics The revolution as a change Kind of logic. Slogans. Cultural Figures about the
of MoDv aspects. All omissive acts organisation and aims ofeach of the two actors
Kinematics Strategies of change of Dialog and diplomacy . Non-violent political
MoDv Forecasts interaction. T actics
Dynamics Evolution of the basic The subjective notions Social techniques of actors’
choices by both people synthesising the dynamics: interactions
and State dialog, process of peace, etc.Synthetic interpretationsà la: Fornari, Kuhn, Koryé)Table-2:
THE CONCEPTUAL TOOLS FOR INTERPRETING AN NVRDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   105
April–June 2012interpretation suggested by current political theories, and then spread
by mass media, on the events of the  year 1989: “The fall of Berlin
wall”. These wor ds, by r eferring to a material object only , belong to
the last column; they ignore the actors (the people), the immaterial
subjects of the fall (the mystified communist ideology , and, even mor e,
the Yalta partition of the W orld population) and the new political
motivation shared by the struggling people of all these countries
(non-violence). These two example prove that with respect to the
traditional political tradition, the culture of the non-violent conflict
resolution, by adding all the subjects listed in the first two columns,
constitutes a new , wider compr ehension of the decisive events in
mankind’s history .45
9. A cursory application to India’ s non-violent liberation from the
British Empire
In order to verify the above illustrated theoretical apparatus for
interpreting an NVR, let us apply it to the Indian non-violent liberation
from British Empire. I choose this case-study because it is well-known
to a wider public, and also because it marks the birth of mass non-
violence in the history of W orld politics. Furthermor e, the political
appraisal on this revolution is highly controversial. On one hand,
according to the opponents of non-violence, this revolution was
atypical, being determined if not by chance, by both a British tolerant
attitude and a backwardness of India of that time. On the other hand,
the supporters of non-violence see it as the first political great success.
But, whereas some non-violent theorists see India’s revolution as an
exemplary revolution in the history of non-violent politics, other non-
violent theorists see it as a revolution which was too dependent one
on both the religion and the charisma of Gandhi, who moreover had
in fact some personal wavering, and the movement too.46
For brevity’ sake I present an interpretation of this revolution,
rather than in a detailed way , by specifying the contents of all cases
of the previous table for representing the viewpoint of the Indian
movement (whereas the viewpoint of the British Empire is well-
known, since it pertains to the traditional politics).
I add the thr ee synthetic interpr etations of the Indian NVR . Sur ely,
Fornari’ slogans “ Mors tua, vita mea ” and “ Vita tua, vita mea ” apply
well to the two basic attitudes of the colonialist British Empire and
the Gandhian followers r espectively , as illustrated  by the celebrated
dialogue in Hind Swaraj48.
Mor eover , we r ecognise as a political paradigm (British Rule) the
colonialist British empir e, extending itself on the entir e World. In
1930 this paradigm underwent a crisis, caused by an anomaly ; i.e. the106   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1
Effective R. Subjective R. Objective R.
Statics Exit from an extreme Blue Non-classical logic. Non-violence Representative figures of
MoDv(AO and AI) in Renewal of the Indian culture the organisation and aims
order to begin the Green (Kadhi,  spinwheel, villages of each of the two actors;
MoDv (PO and PI) civilization vs. W estern Communitarian solidarity’s
civilisation). Civil disobedience. power vs. force’s power
Boycott. T o be imprisoned
Kinematics The strategy for reaching Forecasts on decolonization Tactics An ethical politics,
a new MoDv: Gandhi’s and self-reliance London instead of a pragmatic
constructive program diplomacy policy
Dynamics Processes of progressive The subjective notions New social techniques of
self-reliance and synthesising the dynamics: non-violent kind.
interiorising the non- Psychological images and
violent basic choices appraisals, traumas, etc.47
Synthetic interpretations àla: Fornari, Kuhn, KoyréTable-3:
THE CONCEPTUAL TOOLS FOR INTERPRETING THE INDIAN NVRDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   107
April–June 2012government was unable to apply force for repressing the mass
rebellion which was generated everywhere in India by Gandhi’s
struggle against the salt law , imposed by the British administration.
This fact started a non-violent  revolution , which continued through a
number of Indian actions destabilizing the British power; i.e. the
general mobilization of the Indian people, Gandhi’s meetings in
London, the political pr essur es by the Congr ess Party , the further
non-violent actions launched by Gandhi through the Campaign Quit
India!  in the years of WW2. The crisis of British colonisation ended
when, after W orld W ar T wo, a Gestalt phenomenon  led the British
administration to recognize that, on one hand, Indians’ rebellion made
this colony excessively costly in both political and military terms; on
the other hand, Indian people had become a politically matur e society .
Hence, in 1947 the British Empire granted independence to India.
On their side, Indians, being faithful to non-violence, underwent a
Gestalt  change in their vision of British people; they celebrated the
first day of national independence together with the representatives
of the British Empire; their adversaries had become their friends.
Let us now apply the interpretation à la Koyré. For our purposes
it is enough to observe that the two above couples of sentences
roughly apply to the Indian NVR.
10. Conclusion
In the history of last Century , non-violent political theory , which links
together the subjective aspects and the structural aspects, had as its
first challenge to lead people to face all political events by means of
non-violent personal techniques only and to show that it is possible
to win in such a way . The long series of past NVRs shows that this
challenge is won.
As a second challenge, it had to interpret the main historical
events of political life by means of a new theoretical apparatus. The
present paper suggests a theoretical apparatus which answers such a
challenge, also by exploiting previous celebrated efforts for
comprehending traumatic events, even in the most authoritative field
of human knowledge, i.e. science.
Remarkably , the categories of this apparatus qualify an NVR as
an ideal-type of revolution with respect to all the different kinds of
revolution; in particular , the violent ones; which her e appear as
immature or mislead.19
In retrospect, we see that past political scholars attempted to
define revolutions without reference to the MoDv they upheld. The
first scholar that theorised a revolution according to what at present
we call the r ed MoDv , Marx, r eceived gr eater authority than, as the108   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 11989 events proved, what he merited. On their part, people, being
unable to rationalise the true target of their revolutions, i.e. the change
in the MoDv , supported the r ed r evolution, although hoping to
achieve either the yellow MoDv or the gr een MoDv . The exit out of
this monopoly on the theory on revolutionary events by the red MoDv
started just a century ago, when Gandhi wrote the little book Hind
Swaraj , theorising as an alternative to the W estern civilisation (actually
the blue MoDv) an impr ovement of the Indian civilisation (actually ,
the green MoDv). Then Indian people applied his guidelines in a
successful NVR, which was an example for a great number of the
subsequent NVRs of the 20th century .  The pr esent paper pr oves that
by reflecting on this exemplary r evolution as a W eberian ideal-type
one can exit out the theoretical paradigm of the past political theory
of considering exclusively violent revolutions and bring in the  MoDv
as a new category to understand NVRs.
Acknowledgement
I gratefully acknowledge the assistance of David Braithwaite for
improving my poor English.
Notes and  References
1.Adrian Karatnycky and Peter Ackerman, How Freedom Is Won. From
Civil Resistance to a  Stable Democracy  (New York: Fr eedom House,
2005). Mary J. Stephan and Erica Chenoweth: “Why Civil Resistance
Works”, International Security , 35 (2008), pp. 7-44. I pr efer to call
“non-violent revolution” what in the Anglo-Saxon culture is called
“civile resistance”; this term seems to me appropriate to the old
episodes of people resistance under Nazi’s occupations in Norway
1944 and Denmark 1944-45 and in Czechoslovakia 1968, but not in
India liberation from British Empire, Iran liberation 1979 and the
following non-violent people liberations.
2.Jeff Goldstone, “Theories of revolutions: The third Generation”,
World Politics , 32 (1980) , pp. 425-453; “T owar ds a fourth generation
of revolutionary theory”, Annual Review of Political Science , 4 (2001),
pp.  139-187.
3.Adrian Karatnycky and Peter Ackerman, How Freedom Is Won,  op.
cit.,  p. 7-9;  Mary J. Stephan and Erica Chenoweth, “Why…”, op. cit.,
table 1, p. 21 .
4.A recent international conference brought together the most
prominent experts to ponder NVRs:  Civil Resistance and Power
Politics , St. Anthony College, Oxford, 15-18 March 2007 (the
proceedings ar e edited by Adam Roberts and T imothy G. Ash
(Oxfor d: Oxfor d U.P ., 2009)). As a pr eparation, a set of 20 questionsDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   109
April–June 2012was submitted to both the participants and the guest speakers;
these questions tried to exhaust all the issues of the subject. But
apparently they represent no more than an attempt to circumscribe
the subject. Mor eover , neither the or ganizer gr oup, nor any of the
guest speakers suggested a general interpretative framework. In
my opinion, the more theoretical suggestions have been presented
by Peter Ackerman, Mark Beissenger ,  Judith M. Br own, T im R.
Davies, Konrad Jarausch.
5.Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of the Scientific Revolutions  (Chicago:
Chicago U. P . 1969).
6.Michael Nagler , “Peace as a Paradigm-shift” , Bull. Atomic Sci. , 37,
December 1981, p.  23-35.
7.For a mor e detailed illustration of this framework, see my paper ,
“The birth of a non-violent political theory”, Gandhi Marg , 29 (Oct.-
Dec. 2007), pp. 275-295.
8.Gene Sharp, The Politics of Non-V iolent Action. V ol. II (Boston: Sar gent,
1979).
9.Johan Galtung, “Social structure and Science Structure”, in Ideology
and Methodology , (Copenhaven: Eijlers, 1976), pp. 13-40, 247-251;
Peace by peaceful means  (London: Pluto Press, 1996); “Peace by
peaceful conflict transformation. The TRANSCEND approach”, in
Handbook of Peace Studies , Johan Galtung and Charles W ebel eds.,
(London: Routledge, 2007),pp.  14-32.
10. Thomas W eber: “Non-violence is Who? Gandhi and Gene Sharp”,
Peace & Change , 28 (2003), pp.  250-280.
11.Johan Galtung, Peace by peaceful means , op. cit ., §. 2.1.2; “Peace by
peaceful conflict transformation….”, op. cit. , 14-32. Incidentally , let
us notice that with respect to Sharp’s view of a conflict, Galtung’s
innovation was to introduce the motivational element of a conflict
and then to put it on the same par of the objective one.
12. Mor eover , Galtung did not maintain a constant view about his A-B-
C; in the same book ( Peace by peaceful means, op.cit. ) he emphasized a
separation between B, representing the manifest element of a conflict,
and both A and C, representing the latent elements of a conflict.  But
this move may collapse his structural notion in a dualistic notion
of a subjective kind.
13. As a verification of its validity , this theor etical framework
successfully interprets the three great conflict: Freud’s theory of
psychoanalysis, Marx’ theory of social struggle and Clausewitz’
theory of strategy . Notice that these theories concern all types of
conflicts – internal conflicts, structural social conflicts and mass
conflicts. A. Drago, “The birth…”, op. cit. , 278-282.
14. In the aim to obviate a crude interpretation of a social conflict,
Galtung studies it by introducing a number of triangles A-B-C, of
an even different nature (deep, superficial, violent, non-violent,
cultural, etc.); but all they represent an outside viewpoint only with
respect to the conflict at issue.110   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 115. Johan Galtung, Ideology and Methodology , op. cit. .
16. My professional work as historian of Sciences independently
obtained  two similar , dichotomic options by impr oving past
historical analyses – mainly Alexander Koyré’s one ( From the Closed
World to the Infinite Universe  (Baltimor e: U. Maryland P ., 1959)) and
Thomas S. Kuhn’s one ( The Structure of the Scientific Theories , op. cit)
- of the conflicts among scientific theories; see my book Le due opzioni
(Molfetta BA: La Meridiana, 1991) or „A Gandhian Criticism to
Modern Science”, Gandhi Marg , 31 (no. 2, 2009), pp. 261-276). These
scientific dichotomic options suggested to me the best definitions
of the structural dichotomic options in political sciences.
17. This notion was intr oduced first by Lanza del V asto,  Les Quatr e
Fléaux (1959) (Monaco: Le Rocher , 1993): ch. IV , par . 60, and then
clarified by Johan Galtung,  Ideology and Methodology , op. cit. , pp. 13-
40, 247-251;  There are Alternatives!  (London: Pluto Press, 1983); he
baptised it  as “a Model of Development”.
18. Jean-Baptste Grize, “Logique” in Logique et connaissance scientifique ,
Éncyclopédie de la Pléiade, Jean Piaget ed. (Paris: Gallimard, 1970),
pp. 135-288, pp. 206-210; Michael Dummett, Elements of Intuitionism
(Oxford: Claredon, 1977), pp. 17-26; Dirk van Dalen, “Intuitionistic
Logic” in Handbook of Philosophical Logic , Dov Gabbey and Franz
Guenthner eds. (Dordrecht: Reidel, 2002): vol. II, 35.
19. Both notions of incommensurability and radical variation in
meaning have been introduced by Thomas S. Kuhn, The structure of
scientific revolutions,  op. cit., ch. 9. See: M. A. Khalidi:
“Incommensurability”, W .H. Newton-Smith (ed.): Blackwell
Companion to Philosophy. A Companion to the Philosophy of Science,
(Blackwell, London, 2001) , pp.  172-180.
20. At present non-violent movements did not achieve a definition of a
green State. Mor eover , no pr esent State in the W orld includes a non-
violent institution (one may conceive in such a sense a Civilian
service aimed to a national defence, a non-violent Army , an
alternative national market, a national Peace research institute
addressed in a non-violent direction, etc.). This lack of non-violent
institutions is the main reason why present States disregard as
ineffective the non-violent movements; mor eover , it is the main
reason why in political life the political elites usually divert non-
violent struggles to either different political aims or to a compromiser
results.
21. Samuel Huntington, The Clash of Civilisations  (New York: Simon &
Schuster , 1993).
22. Max W eber ( The Pr otestant Ethics and the Spirit of the W estern
Capitalism , 1905; also in internet http://xroads.virginia.edu/
~hyper/weber/cover .html  ). The notion of ideal-type suggests an
interesting parallelism between the conflict theory and the theory
of the impact of bodies (see my paper: “When the history of Physics
teaches non-violence: The shock of bodies as a metaphor of conflictDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   111
April–June 2012resolution”, Nonviolence and Spirituality  (n. 3, 1996), pp. 15-22. W allis
and Newton suggested an ideal-type; it was a so perfectly hard
body , that, just likely to a macho attitude, pr eserves its shape in all
kinds of impact; shortly , it makes violence to all other bodies. Instead,
Leibniz, in order to parallel the clever interpersonal relationships,
suggested the ideal-type of an elastic body . Although persisting
along two centuries, the former ideal-type was superseded by the
latter one. The parallelism leads to consider the military attitude
(corresponding to the hard body)  is to be superseded by  the non-
violent one (corresponding to the elastic body). Notice that Sharp’s
interpretation of a non-violent dynamics, relies on the notion of jiu-
jitsu (The theory of Non-V iolent Action , vol. III: The Dynamics of Non-
Violent  Action , op. cit., which is close to the notion of elasticity of a
body . The same holds tr ue for the notions of “r esilience” and
leverage” in K. Schock, Unarmed Insurrecions. People Power Movments
in Non-Democracies  (Minneapolis: U of Minnesota Press, 2005),
pp.140-142.
23. In particular , the ideal type of a NVR r efers to a fully awar e people
(that is, in Hegelian terms, a non-violent people in sich ); it excludes
an instrumentalized people (as it occurred in Lenin’s revolution)
or a people which merely carry out the 198 non-violent techniques
which have been listed by Gene Sharp,  The Politics of Non-V iolent
Action. V ol. II: The Methods of Non-V iolent Action, op. cit ..
24. An attempt of improving of this political view is to refer to a broadly
defined notion of “institutions”, which may include also the typical
institutions of development, although development is a more
widespread phenomenon in the society than a single institution.
25. See for instance, Jeff Goodwin’s definition of a revolution: “Any
and all instances in which a State or a political regime is overthrown
and ther eby transformed by a popular movement in an irr egular ,
extraconstitutional and/or violent fashion” ( No Other Way Out:
States and Revolutionary Movements, 1945-1991  (Cambridge:
Cambridge U.P ., 2001), p. 5.
26. It is the political view of Adrian Karatnycky and PeterAckerman,
How Freedom Is Won , op. cit. .
27. This point was proved by the recent “Arab revolutions”, which
sought to achieve (suitable) democracy in Islamic countries.
28. Actually , it is har d to conceive a r evolution wanting to achieve the
green MoDv by means of violent tools; but for clarity’s sake it is
useful to add this qualification; because the lack of violent tools
constitutes a first evidence for the choice of the gr een MoDv , a choice
which is more difficult to be objectively measured. See my paper: “A
paradigm-shift in conflict r esolution: W ar and peace fr om a history
of science viewpoint, P . Koller , H. Puhl (eds.): Curr ent Issues in Political
Philosophy. 19th Int. Wittgenstein Symposium , Kirchberg, 1996, 106-
114, and La Difesa popolar e non-violenta . Premesse  teoriche, principi
politici e nuovi scenari  (Turin: EGA, 2006), ch. 3.112   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 129. The well-known prisoner ’s dilemma r epresents the conflict of almost
the same attitudes, there qualified in subjective terms only; that is, a
pessimistic attitude vs. a cooperative attitude. Anatol Rapoport,
Strategy and Consciousness  (New York: Harper and Row , 1964).
30. A. Drago: “The birth of a non-violent political theory”, op. cit. . These
representations may be alternatively characterized as the realms of
respectively choices, notions, measurements.
31. A more detailed analysis distinguishes the scenario  in which a
revolution occurs, that is the framework synthesising the political
situation, including both the main cause of the conflict and the
main political actors. This framework may be a dictatorship, a
domination by a foreign State, a colonization, an aggression by
foreign countries.
32. This tripartite structure  resembles Galtung’s “Nature-Culture-
Structure” (see “Peace by peaceful conflict transformation. The
TRANSCEND approach”, op. cit. ). They mainly differ in their third
aspects.
33. Their number is intermediate between the 3 Galtung’s categories
A-B-C and the 27 categories he deploys in  “Peace by peaceful
conflict transformation. The TRANSCEND approach”, op. cit.
34. It gives a description which is similar to what Galtung calls the
“diagnosis” of a conflict. Some my papers applied no more than
the above illustrated categories for interpreting three study-cases of
revolutions: French Revolution (“La scienza e la rivoluzione
francese. La rivoluzione francese e la scienza”, in Atti del X Congr .
Naz. Storia Fisica, Fabio Bevilacqua ed. (Cagliari, 1989):  111-127),
Italian Resistance (1943-1945) (“L ’interpr etazione delle Quattr o
giornate di Napoli secondo due opzioni”, in Mezzogiorno 1943. La
scelta, la lotta, la speranza , Gloria Chianese ed.  (Napoli: ESI, 1995):
383-408), W orld political change in the year 1989 ( Difesa popolar e
non-violenta, op. cit ., sect.s 7.1-7.2; “The birth of nonviolence as a
political theory”, op. cit. ).
35. Galtung calls it the “prognosis” of a conflict.
36. The strategy to be applied to a NVR is called by Galtung a “therapy”
of the conflict. T o Galtung’s tripartited similitude between a conflict
resolution and health‘s care – diagnosis, prognosis and therapy - I
prefer the above tripartite notion - static, kinematics and dynamic -
for several reasons; i) a therapy implicitly assumes one external
actor who applies it to the conflicting actors; this hypothesis may
be improper in several case-studies, mainly when both actors are
self-reliant; ii) Galtung does not specify who is the physician
applying this therapy; surely not a historian, who cannot apply
any therapy to past events, apart from the therapy of the history of
the “as if…”; iii) a theorist has to represent the viewpoints of each of
the opponents within a conflict; instead both diagnosis and therapy
see the interactions only of the two different actors; iv) my tripartite
notion is suggested by the consolidated theoretical experienceDefining and Interpreting Non-Violent Political Revolutions  G   113
April–June 2012cumulated by the natural sciences, in particular the well-known
Newtonian theory of mechanics; v) mor eover , it qualifies the
common attitude to naively describe a phenomenon by means of
three corresponding viewpoints, i.e. before, after and during the
event, respectively corresponding to static, kinematics and
dynamics.
37. In Table 1 each of the main aspects of an objective r epresentation
may originate what is called a “revolution” in a much more weak
sense than the previous ones. For instance, it is commonly stated
that the birth of nuclear weapons constituted a “revolution” in
both the international scene and in the relationships between a
State and its population. Alco the introduction of the word “non-
violence”, together with its non-classical logic, evenly started a
“revolution” in the way of conceiving conflicts according to an
opposite viewpoint.
38. In describing NVRs Sharp’s basic innovation was to appeal to the
dynamic notion of jiu-jitsu . It essentially relies on psychological
factors; therefore, it belongs to the subjective representation. But it
pertains also to the motivational representation, because jiu-jitsu
may change the basic attitude of the aggr essor . Unfortunately , Sharp
never qualified this dynamics in detail, apart to give mere
descriptions of its successes or failures, positive or negative effects,
etc. (see Waging Nonviolent struggle (Boston: Porter Sargent, 2005)
ch. 32). I suggest to interpret this notion as connected to the taboos
acting in each human being. Even an oppressor is unable to
overcome some psychological limits pertaining to his inner culture,
owing to their blocking power on human behaviours. Hence, a
taboo pertains not only to subjective representation, but it also works
as a negative motivation inside the effective representation. As such,
it ought to be added into the effective representation.
39. Each of these notions suggests a very weaker meaning of the word
“revolution”.
40. Franco Fornari, Psychoanalysis of W ar (1966) (New York: Anchor
Press/Doubleday , 1974).
41. A Gestalt  may be defined in the following way . While the eyes
perceive the same visual stimulus, the mind may see two different
figures, but each one at a different moment; the mind jumps from
one figure to the other one, and viceversa . An example of this
phenomenon is the vision of the well-known drawing of two opposed
face profiles; the same drawing is also seen, but at a different
moment, as a goblet.
42. Michael Nagler , “Peace as a Paradigm-shift” , op. cit.
43. Alexander Koyré, From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe, op,
cit.. The two sentences are the following: “ Dissolution of the finite
Cosmos and geometrization of space ”. Notice that their notions are of
a subjective kind (e.g., “geometrization”, not the objective word
“geometry”). An accurate scrutiny of them (see my paper: “The114   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1several categories suggested for the “new historiography of
science”: An interpretative analysis from a foundational
viewpoint”, Epistemologia , 24 (2001), pp. 48-82 shows that the first
sentence translates in subjective terms the two positive choices of
the Newtonian paradigm, respectively for the absolutist increase
constituted by the actual infinity ( AI) belonging to the mathematics
of infinitesimal analysis, and for the organization based upon
axioms from which all scientific laws are drawn ( AO); whereas the
second sentence translates the rejection (“dissolution” is a negative
word about the organisation) of the ancient scientific organization
which was based on the problem (not PO) of understanding the
“finite Cosmos” (not PI). In order to translate these sentences in
social notions, one has to focus the attention on the notions which
express the military national defence, which too worked as a
paradigm along so many centuries. Then, by exchanging the
previously rejected choices for the positive choices, we obtain the
two sentences which express both the positive choices and the
rejection of the opposite choices characterising the model of the
non-violent conflict resolution.
44. Antonino Drago, Difesa popolare non-violenta, op. cit., pp. 142-153.
45. The table shows that even Sharp’s interpretation is confined to the
contents of some cases only; they are the three cases of the objective
representation (but in the second case he reduces the non-violent
political interaction to a pragmatic interaction, which is not so much
different from the usual one), plus the second cases of the effective
and the subjective representations.
46. Such a detached kind of interpretation may be recognised in both
Gene Sharp, Gandhi as a Political Strategist , (Boston: P . Sar gent Publ.,
1979), and Johan Galtung, Gandhi T oday  (Amhedabad, 1992).
47. Also popular accounts of the revolutions; for ex. David Lapierre
and Larry Collins,  Freedom at Midnight , (New York: Harper , 1971 on
Indian revolution.
48. Mohandas Karamchandra Gandhi, Hind Swaraj , Amhedabad, 1909.
49. This last appraisal is not original; since the year 1908 Sorel declared
“barbarous” a violent revolution, to which he suggested as an
alternative a general strike; which in fact, is a basic non-violent
technique. Geor ge Sor el, Reflections on V iolence (1908), (New York:
Dover 2004).
ANTONINO DRAGO is a Professor and a regular contributor to
Gandhi Marg . He is attached to Pisa University , via Benvenuti 5,
5601 1 Calci PI 050 937493, Italy . Email:  drago@unina.itNotes & Comments   G   115
April–June 2012  Notes & Comments
Gandhi and Pranami V aishnavism
Nagindas Sanghavi
OF ALL  THE P ARAMETERS that shaped the complex personality of
Gandhi, Religion, undoubtedly was the most potent and the most
compr ehensive for ce. Gandhi himself has defined the centrality of
spiritual aspirations that guided and goaded him thr oughout his adult
life.
Gandhi in his Autobiography has made copious r eferences to the
religious denominations to which he got exposed fr om early childhood.
Gandhi mentions his chanting Ramanama as a pr otection against his
fears of ghosts and he r ecited Ramraksha Stotra like other pious Hindus.
He used to be a silent listener to the r eligious discussions among Hindu,
Jain and Parsi friends of his father while Gandhi served him. As he
grew up intellectually in England and had his horizon widened in South
Africa, Gandhi fr eed himself fr om the shackles of his childhood fears
and rituals. But childhood impr essions might have lasted longer than
he was awar e of and such impr essions might have blossomed forth in
his attitudes and appr oaches that became the distinguishing
characteristics of Gandhian belief system. Ther e are amazing similarities
in Gandhi’s social philosophy and the social attitudes of the r eligious
sect to which his family belonged.
Gandhi has specifically mentioned that his par ents wer e Vaishnavas
and abhorr ed meat eating. But V aishnavism is much mor e than a mer e
matter of food. V aishnavism is a generic term and ther e are innumerable
sects under its umbr ella. These sects ar e mutually exclusive and ar e
intensely hostile to one another . The hymn [V aishanvjan T o Ten Re
Kahiye] that Gandhi loved so dearly and which describes in very lucid
terms the character and the qualities of a tr ue V aishnava, is tabooed by
all V aishanava sects and would not be allowed to be r ecited in their116   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1temples or during their rituals and festivals. Its author Narsinh, as also
Gandhi would be totally unacceptable to any of the sects of V aishnavism
as both r efuse to pay the necessary homage to the r espective Acharyas
of the sects concerned. Gandhi called himself a Hindu and a V aishnava
but he was too eclectic to be classified as either of them.
Vaishnavism, a vibrant manifestation of Bhakti is the most popular
stream of Hinduism today and it has played an immensely significant
role in the intellectual history of India. W e know almost nothing about
the emer gence and the early history of Bhakti. Bhagwat Puran, accepted
as authentic scriptur e by all V aishnav sects, declar es that Bhakti
originated in T amilnadu, matur ed in Karnatak and gr ew old and
decr epit in Gujarat. But it got r ejuvenated in V rindavan. It then spr ead
all over North India. The devotional cult of V aishnavism was immensely
popular in medieval India and it inspir ed intense activity in the fields
of literatur e, painting, sculptur e, music and dancing.
Shri sect of V aishnavism of T amilnadu is the second oldest sect of
Vaishnavism and traditionally , Ramajuja is acclaimed as the best known
Acharya of V aishanvism. V aishnavism, pr ofessed r ever ence for V edic
literatur e and all its Acharyas wer e great scholars of V edant; but it
quietly and firmly r ejected V edic ritualism, Upnishadic Intellectualism,
Buddhist Nihilism as also the Asceticism of Jains. The Acharyas of all
the V aishnav sects wer e Brahmins but V aishnavism denies hierar chy
of caste system and the dominant position of Brahmins ther ein.
Vaishnavism transcends the exclusivity of Brahminism by admitting
women, lower castes and even untouchables in its spiritual domain. Its
earliest pr opagators—the twelve Alwaras of T amilnadu include an
untouchable, a low caste r obber and a pr ostitute.
Gandhi has mentioned in passing the V aishnava denomination of
his family which has gone lar gely unnoticed by his biographers. Gandhi
has mentioned that his mother and his wife belonged to the Pranami
or Nijanandi sect of V aishnavism. Pr obably his entir e family was
Pranami. Gandhi belonged to the Modh sub-caste of V anias and many
Modhas in this r egion wer e and ar e Pranami V aishnavas. Immediately
after the marriage, Gandhi couple was taken to a Pranami T emple in
the neighbor hood to untie the nuptial knot so that the marriage can be
consummated.
The Pranami or Nijanandi is a less known sect and it belongs to the
Little T radition of V aishnavism. It emer ged in the first quarter of the
17th century at Jamnagar—-har dly 100 Kms away fr om Porbunder wher e
Gandhi was born and wher e he passed his early childhood. This sect
has several inter esting featur es which ar e not found in other V aishanav
sects. But these featur es ar e very similar to what Gandhi taught later .
This is the only V aishnava sect that claims to incorporate theNotes & Comments   G   117
April–June 2012teachings of Judaism, Christianity and Islam and copiously uses Arabic
words and Sufi terminology in its scriptur es. Most of their scriptur es
are written in Hindi language and Pranamis use Arabic and Devnagari
scripts for writing Hindi slogans in their temples. They ar e free fr om
gender discrimination and Kesarbai was installed as the second Acharya
of the sect in 1690. In theory , all V ishnava sects r eject Untouchabilty
but the theory is seldom put in practice. Ramanuja was the first Acharya
to allow temple entry to the Untouchables in 12th century . Nijanandi
sect is however the only V aishnav sect that has been permitting not
only temple entry but also inter -dining since 17th century . All castes
including untouchables sit together for food during their r eligious feasts
though ther e are no inter -caste marriages among them. Gandhi does
mention his asking his mother about untouchability but he has not
recorded her answer . Gandhi might have put her in a terrible dilemma
because the str ongly pr evalent social taboo contradicted her Nijanandi
faith.
Pranami teachers sidestepped the tradition of V aishnav Acharyas
to write scholastic tr eatises in Sanskrit and its scriptur e is written in the
then spoken languages like Gujarati, Sindhi, Jati but especially in Hindi
which Prananath declar ed to be easily understood by people all over
north India.
The history of Pranami V aishnavism stands in sharp contrast to
that of all other sects of V aishanvism. Devchand, the founder died [1654]
rather unknown and unsung. But the sect that had spr outed in Gujarat
survived him. His pupil Mehraj better known as Mahamati or Prananath
stayed in Arabia for five years [1647-52] as a business manager and got
acquainted with spoken Arabic language and with the tenets of Islam
and pr obably with Christianity and Judaism too. He admir ed some of
their concepts and mentions them in the books he wr ote.
He was char ged with misappr opriation of funds after the death of
his employer . He r eturned to Jamnagar to take up the post of the Diwan
of Jamnagar . [1655-58]. He was char ged with embezzlement of funds
and was imprisoned for a year . He was clear ed of the char ge but was
held a hostage by the Sultan of Junagadh for non - payment of dues.
After his r elease, he r esigned his post and devoted himself to the
propagation of the new faith. Such pr opagation is known in the sect as
Awareness or Jagani. He was 40.
The sectarian feuds soon dr ove him out of Saurashtra [1665] and
he traveled to Surat wher e he stayed for a year and a half. It was at
Surat that he br oke with the main branch and established the second
major centr e of Pranami sect. He now wr ote several books using two
nom de plums —Indravati while writing in Gujarati and Mahamati
while writing in Hindi. He himself has never used Prananath as a name118   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1and we do not know when and why this term of endearment r eserved
for husbands started getting used for him. He has, by now , replaced
Devchand as THE teacher for the sect.
His missionary travels to spr ead the teachings of Devchand in the
neighboring ar eas wer e interr upted as his second wife [T ejabai] was
kidnapped by Arab pirates and he spent two years [1668-71] visiting
various ports of Arabia arranging ransom to secur e her r elease.
A lifelong activist in contemporary politics, he traveled to Bhar uch
and then went to Delhi to pr otest against the imposition of Jezia tax on
Hindus by Aurangzeb, the last of the Gr eat Mughals. His ef forts to
rouse Rajput princes to fight against Aurangzeb failed; but he found
[1683] a kindr ed spirit in Chhatrasal of Panna who had been fighting
against the Mughals since 1671. Prananath settled at Panna and lived
there till his death in 1695. Panna is now the thir d major centr e of the
sect. Pranami sect languished in Gujarat but spr ead rapidly in Central
India and is now str ongly entr enched in Odisha [Orissa], Nepal and
Sikkim.
Those, who so wish, can draw a few parallels in the life stories of
Gandhi and Prannath but parallels ar e few . Gandhi certainly was not a
Pranami. Prannath claimed to be the Mehdi of the Muslims, Kalki of
the Hindus and Buddha all at the same time while Gandhi declined to
be called even a Mahatma.
Prananath  was a pr olific writer in a variety of languages Gujarati,
Hindi, Ur du, Sindhi, Jati. He had started writing while still in prison at
Jamnagar . He wr ote thr ee books ther e that wer e later accepted as
Nijanandi scriptur es and the r emaining 1 1 wer e written over the next
forty five years in or der to sustain his mission of awakening [Jagani] of
the kindr ed souls.
The Nijanandi appr oach to social stratification was pr ofoundly
influenced by the long pr ocess of amalgamation of the concepts of Islam
and Hinduism- a pr ocess that started with Kabir in 12th century and
ended with Prince Dara Shukoh, the eldest br other of Aurangzeb. Dara
was sentenced to death by the Muslim fundamentalists for writing a
book listing the similarities between Upnishads and Koran. The Mughal
Emper or Akber ’s pr olonged confer ences attempting to evolve a
universal r eligion- Sulah-e-Kul that would incorporate the best concepts
of Hindus, Jains, Muslims and Christians came to nothing. The Pranami
tradition mentions the close contact between Prananath and Chintamani
a follower of Kabir .
Prananr h does mention Bible, Koran and T orah but his acquaintance
with them appears to be extr emely tenuous as was his knowledge of
Vedic literatur e. He followed Kabir and Nanak in pr eaching the unity
of Hindus and Muslims and like Nanak, he  r eplaced the idol of KrishnaNotes & Comments   G   119
April–June 2012by a book. In Pranami temples the scriptural text is worshipped together
with symbolic r epresentation of  Krishna and Radha [a peacock feather ,
a flute and a cr own for Krshna and a blouse piece for Radha] .
It is quite appar ent that Gandhi had never r ead the scriptur es of
the sect to which his family belonged. The impact of Christianity and
of the V ictorian society on Gandhi might have made er otic and esoteric
aspects of Pranamis totally r epulsive to Gandhi. The sect had adopted
the er otic form of Bhakti fr om Chaitanya and Pushti sects and had made
it all the mor e voluptuous with its followers aiming at participating in
the eternal or gasm [Akhand Sukh]. All the leading celebrities of the
sect wer e the female attendants of Shyamaji the sexual partner of
Krishna in the continuous Raslila in the Paramdham. They ar e
mentioned in the literatur e of the sect only by their female names. They
claim that they have understood the esoteric implications of Ras better
than even Shukdev the traditional author of Bhagwat. The followers
call themselves Sundersath or the companions of Sunderbai the sect
name for Devchand. They ar e the chosen souls who have lost their
way in the world till they wer e awakened by Prannath. They alone
would be admitted in the Paramdham the abode of eternal bliss.
PROFESSOR  NAGINDAS SANGHA VI  obtained  his Master ’s degree
from the University of Mumbai and taught in three renowned colleges
in Mumbai for thirty years. [1950-81]. After his retirement he has
contributed to  Journals such as Economic and Political W eekly ,
Freedom First and India. He wrote Gujarat a Political Analysis   [The
center for developing Society South Gujarat University-Surat] and
his Gujarat at Cr oss Roads  Bhartiya V idya Bhavan]. His Agony of
Arrival-Gandhi in South Africa  [Rupa Publishers] has been acclaimed
as a work of considerable research. He was awarded the best
commentator on Political issues by the Government of Gujarat in 1996.
He  is a frequent visitor to Madison [W isconsin] to talk about the
philosophy of Y oga and allied subjects.
Email:   nagingujarat@gmail.com120   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Rs. 400.00                                      US $ 50.00   (Including Airmail
Char ges)
      Send your orders to:
GANDHI PEACE FOUNDA TION
221&223 Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg, New Delhi-1 10002 (India)
Phones: +91-1 1-23237491, 23237493, Fax: +91-1 1-23236734
e-mail: gpf18@redif fmail.com, W ebsite: www .gpfindia.orgNon-violent Struggles of the
Twentieth Century: Retrospect and Prospect
Edited by
Siby K. Joseph, Dean of Studies and Research, Institute of
Gandhian Studies, W ardha
John Moolakkattu, Gandhi-Luthuli Chair Professor in Peace
Studies, University of KwaZulu-Natal; Editor , Gandhi Marg
and V isiting Professor , Institute of Gandhian Studies, W ardha
Bharat Mahodaya, Director , Institute of Gandhian Studies,
Wardha
This book brings together sixteen scholars and practi-
tioners, all eminent in their field, to reflect on the experience
of violent action in the twentieth century and draw lessons
for the future. A  joint ef fort of the Institute of Gandhian Stud-
ies, W ardha and Gandhi Peace Foundation, New Delhi, the
book is another milestone in the ef forts of both the institu-
tions to disseminate research and practitioner -experience to a
wider audience.
Contributors: Ravindra V arma  /circle6  Jorgen Johansen  /circle6  G
Vijayam  /circle6  John Moolakkattu  /circle6  M.P . Mathai  /circle6  Usha Thakkar
/circle6  Sundarlal Bahuguna  /circle6  P.V. Rajgopal  /circle6  Sanat Mehta  /circle6
Sulak Sivaraksa  /circle6  Thubten Samphel  /circle6  S.M. Nurul Alam    /circle6
A.T. Ariyaratne  /circle6  Grazina Miniotate  /circle6  Elena Aleinikova  /circle6
Chris W alker  /circle6  Medha PatkarSpecial 25% Discount for the Readers of
Gandhi Mar gNotes & Comments   G   121
April–June 2012Mahatma Gandhi and T wo Attitudes
of Religion
Arvind Sharma
IT SEEMS THA T, WHEN one comes in contact with a r eligion other
than one’s own, one faces a basic choice: whether to accept it in
some way or another , or to r eject it all together .  Mahatma Gandhi’s
life pr ovides illustrations of both.  The following experience he had
with Mr . Coates, a Quaker , is r epresentative of the second attitude
of rejection.
But Mr . Coates was not the man easily to accept defeat.  He had gr eat
affection for me.  He saw , round my neck, the Vaishnava  necklace of
Tulasi-beads.  He thought it to be superstition and was pained by it.
“This superstition does not become you.  Come, let me br eak the
necklace.”
“No, you will not.  It is a sacr ed gift fr om my mother .”
“But do you believe in it?”
“I do not know its mysterious significance.  I do not think I should come to
harm if I did not wear it. But I cannot, without suf ficient r eason, give up a
necklace that she put r ound my neck out of love and in the conviction that
it would be conducive to my welfar e.  When, with the passage of time, it
wears away and br eaks of its own accor d, I shall have no desir e to get a
new one.  But this necklace cannot be br oken.”
Mr. Coates could not appr eciate my ar gument, as he had no r egar d for my
religion.  He was looking forwar d to delivering me fr om the abyss of
ignorance.  He wanted to convince me that, no matter whether ther e was
some tr uth in other r eligions, salvation was impossible for me unless I
accepted Christianity which r epresented the truth, and that my sins would
not be washed away except by the inter cession of Jesus, and that all good
works wer e useless.1
Mahatma Gandhi’s own attitude towar ds other r eligions, by
contrast, seems to imply a kind of acceptance.  This may be in part due
to his family backgr ound for he informs us how , as a child, he was
exposed to various r eligions in a hospitable way:
In Rajkot, however , I got an early gr ounding in toleration for all
branches of Hinduism and sister r eligions.  For my father and mother
would visit the Haveli  as also Shiva’s and Rama’s temples, and would122   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1take or send us youngsters ther e.  Jain monks also would pay fr equent
visits to my father , and would even go out of their way to accept food
from us—non-Jains.  They would have talks with my father on subjects
religious and mundane.
He had, besides, Musalman and Parsi friends, who would talk to him about
their own faiths, and he would listen to them always with r espect, and
often with inter est.  Being his nurse, I often had a chance to be pr esent at
these talks.  These many things combined to inculcate in me a toleration
for all faiths.2
Mahatma Gandhi subsequently r efers to r eading the Bible at the
instance of a Christian friend,3 of learning about “the pr ophet’s
greatness and bravery and auster e living,”4 and r eading W ashington
Irving’s Life of Mahomet and His Successors ,5 and of also r eading The
Sayings of Zarathustra .6  Contact with Abdulla Sheth also gave Mahatma
Gandhi “a fair amount of practical knowledge of Islam.”7
However , to describe one’s attitudes towar ds other r eligions
only in terms of r ejection and acceptance may be simplistic because
both the attitudes ar e capable of r efinement.  The attitude of
rejection for instance, may (1) extend to an entir e religious tradition
or (2) may be confined to those parts of it one considers
objectionable.  Thus a Christian might r eject Hinduism in its entir ety,
or reject those parts of it which as a Christian one finds (a) morally
or (b) theologically objectionable.
Similarly , the acceptance of another tradition is not such a
straightforwar d matter as it might appear at first sight.  After all,
one way of accepting it would be to accept it all together , to the
extent of converting to it!  Hence acceptance implies two levels:
accepting it for oneself or accepting it as a r eligion of the other on
the person’s own terms.  Her e again the latter attitude is capable of
being developed in two dir ections: (1) accepting a r eligion as a
religion of the other without further criticism or (2) even after
accepting it as the other ’s religion, distinguishing between those
parts of it which one thinks of as positive aspects of it and others
which one thinks of as negative.
This kind of “critical” acceptance, in a curious coincidence of
opposite, may not be far r emoved fr om “critical” r ejection!
Notes and  References
1.Mohandas K. Gandhi, An Autobiography: The Story of My
Experiments with T ruth (Boston: Beacon Pr ess, 1993) p. 123-124.Notes & Comments   G   123
April–June 20122.Ibid.,  p 33.
3.Ibid.,  p. 68.
4.Ibid.,  p. 69.
5.Ibid.,  p. 159.
6.Ibid.
7.Ibid.,  p. 106.
ARVIND SHARMA  is Birks Professor of Comparative Religion,
McGill University , Canada. Email: arvind.sharma@mcgill.ca124   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1Recent Publication of
GANDHI  PEACE  FOUNDA TION
“EXPLORING HIND SW ARAJ”
Edited by
M.P. M ATHAI
JOHN MOOLAKKA TTU
This is a collection of papers originally published in
Gandhi Mar g to commemorate the centenary of Hind
Swaraj , the first book that Gandhi wr ote, which is seminal
to his later writings. Besides contextualising the text, the
book assesses the r elevance of Hind Swaraj  in
contemporary social theory and practice. W ith as many
as eighteen scholars fr om five countries and drawn fr om
different disciplinary backgr ounds contributing, the
volume is expected to generate discussions centr ed on
some of the r ecurring pr oblems facing the world today ,
and the Gandhian appr oach to tackling themISBN: 978-81-8541 1-01-9 Published on: October 2009
Pp. 232, HB Price: Rs. 450.00 (in India)  US$ 35 (in Abr oad)
Special 30% discount for the r eaders of “GANDHI MARG”
send your orders to:
221-223 Deendayal Upadhyaya Mar g
New Delhi-1 10002
Phones: +91-1 1-23237491, 23237493, Fax: +91-1 1-23236734
Email: gpf18@r ediffmail.comGANDHI PEACE FOUNDA TION
Remittances by Bank Drafts or Postal or Money Orders only in favour of
GANDHI PEACE FOUNDA TION, NEW DELHIBook Reviews   G   125
April–June 2012  Book Reviews
Rekha T almaki, Socio-Economic Development of T ribal W omen:
Changes and Challenges , Delhi: The W omen Press, pages-xxiii+222,
2012,  price: Rs. 895
Rekha T almaki has made a serious and commendable ef fort at
conducting survey based research on socio-economic status of tribal
women in V alod (South Gujarat ) wher e committed Gandhian workers
have dedicated more than 5 decades of their lives in village
development activities based on Gandhian principles. Her personal
field visits have played a crucial role in bringing new insights and
analysis with gender lens. She has examined tribal women’s
predicament in the context of status of women in India in general
where main factors in determining socio-economic status have been
income, education and occupation. She has provided an exhaustive
literature review focusing on occupational life, health profile of tribal
women and tribal women’s status in decision making in the family .
She has also evaluated the situation to find out to what extent
Gandhian ideology of Antyodaya is implemented vis-a-vis tribal
women, who are the poorest of the poor in the economic ladder and
at the bottom of the pyramid.
The author has rightly used a conceptual framework of social
exclusion that includes socio-economic parameters of inequality ,
poverty , among others. She has highlighted indicators such as working
status and demographic aspects of tribes in Gujarat as well as size
and distribution of scheduled tribe.  She also reveals that sex ratio of
tribal women in Gujarat is r elatively higher than the r est of the country .
The question is, does that indicate that they enjoy better status in
socio-economic, cultural, educational and political lives? Social
geography of Surat reveals volatile changes due to industrialization,
urbanization and globalization. In what way have these factors affected
lives and survival strategies of tribal women? The author has made
an honest attempt to answer these mind boggling questions.
With the help of questionnair e for tribal women that was
administer ed on 498 women r espondents fr om 1 1 villages selected as
sample. They belonged to the age group of 18-59 years. Gandhian
institutions working among them and financial institutions located in126   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1the tribal areas also have been covered. She has revealed that large
number of Halpatis or Dublas is found very prominently in Surat
district. They ar e very poor , because they do not get permanent
employment.  They are very good in taking care of animals.  SUMUL
and local milk co-operatives encouraged them for animal husbandry
and since then they have started keeping cattle and other animals for
milk production. It emerges from this study that the tribal
communities, particularly women have been excluded from
mainstream economic development for long. The study was conducted
to find out the socio-economic status of tribal women in V alod. Though
their improved status is showing positive changes, it is also necessary
to pay attention on many other aspects for the better and overall
development of these women.
The most attractive feature of this study is that it  brings to the
fore the efforts of veteran Gandhians such as  Shri. Babubhai Shah,
Smt. Savitaben Chaudhari and Smt. Dashriben Choudhari. Popularly
known as  Dashariba, the eminent Gandhian and fr eedom-fighter ,
who was born in 1918 in a tribal family (as she told) has been the role
model for all tribal women in the r egion. At pr esent she is r esiding in
Vedchhi.  She took part in the fr eedom str uggle and taught r eading
and writing to Smt. Kasturba Gandhi.  It can be a very good example
of how these tribal men and women were actively participating in
the fr eedom str uggle.  After independence, also, Dashariben devoted
her full life to educate people.
The author states that women in V alod perform various income
generating activities.  They are either engaged in agricultural activities
or in Papad Udyog or in dairy pr oduction pr ominently .  Very few
women in this sample, i.e. 1 1, ar e engaged in Anganwadi activities
and only four women work in government jobs. Those women, who
are involved in agricultural activities, are also involved in Papad
Udyog or in milk production.  For example, Halpati women are
basically agricultural labourers but they are doing well in dairy
production.  W omen do not possess any land but those who ar e
members of Self Help Groups are managing livestock and are having
their own accounts in the banks.  They are owners of those animals,
who give them not only economic self-sufficiency but also make them
empowered.  Their economic status has been improved only because
of Lijjat Papad and Milk Co-operatives.  More than 50 per cent women
also know the market value of their pr oduct. W omen’s leadership in
micro finance has been a marked feature of the activities of Gandhian
institutions in the r egion. They ar e active in Vedchhi  Pradesh Seva
Samiti (VPSS),  V alod;  Lijjat   Papad  Grihaudyog, Sampoorna Kranti
Vidyalaya and  Gandhi V idyapith- V edchhi, Traditional agricultur eBook Reviews   G   127
April–June 2012sector could not give them better economic status and social status. 
However , because of the above mentioned occupations their economic
and social status has improved in the last two decades. There are
only 1 1 women working in Anganwadi, but today along with Papad
Udyog and Milk Co-operatives, Anganwadi activities ar e also
increasing as Sakhi Mandals ar e emer ging with the help of Anganwadi
workers.
Decision making, economic status and empowerment always go
hand in hand.  More than 70 per cent women told that their status
has changed drastically . They see themselves in a dif ferent perspective
and are thinking about the empowerment of their own daughters
and well-being of the entir e family .  Mor e than 50 per cent women
said that, improvement in the economic status gives them status in
the family and in the society . Remaining women, though their status
has not been improved, are well aware of their future.  They wish
that their future would be good.  They do not want their children to
suffer as they have suffered.  They demand good educational and
job facilities for their children.  They want good educated husbands
for their daughters.  The habit of alcohol is still persisting in tribal
communities; hence mothers want partners who are teetotalers for
their daughters.
It is so encouraging to note that r espondents fr om V edchhi want
to do something for their community and village.  Respondents from
Ranveri want their daughters to be educated, so that they would
teach their children.  It shows that, women from all the villages are
well aware of their status.  They have understood the importance of
education.  In the sample, there were very few widows, but nearly
50 per cent women said that there should be some special schemes
only for widows.  Those women, who stay below poverty line, want
to improve their economic status.
Educational pr ocess among tribals started with V edchhi Movement
and was later invigourated  by late Shri. Jugatram Dave, Founder of
Swaraj Ashram – V edchhi in 1930.  Udyogwadi Unit started in 1954
and various programmes were undertaken by late Shri Babubhai
Shah.  A separate women’s section was started in Udyogwadi Unit. 
Women started getting guidance, income generating activities and
vocational training from this Unit.  Lijjat Papad Unit provides
occupation based on self-suf ficiency .  All these institutions make
women empower ed in V alod.
Self Help Groups, milk co-operatives,  increasing participating of
women in political activities, agitation against deforestation and
alcohol by Self Help Groups, educational status of women and their
children, accessibility to all kinds of infrastructural activities,128   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1improved decision making capacity in all important aspects,
knowledge and use of contraceptives show positive changes in the
socio-economic status of tribal women in V alod.  This impr ovement
has not taken place overnight.  Gandhian ideology definitely played
a very important role in this respect.  Self Help Groups are emerging
on a very lar ge scale in V alod taluka.  Development fr om the grass-
root level, a dr eam of Gandhi, is now becoming a r eality .
The author recommends greater investment in tribal women’s
education, vocational training, meaningful participation of tribal
women in local self government bodies, anti alcohol efforts and
prevention of domestic violence among tribal families thrugh
collective efforts and social intervention.
I congratulate Ms. Rekha T almaki for her work and hope that
readers from a wide variety of backgrounds, social scientists, political
activists, researchers, policy makers and women’s organizations will
deliberate on the issues raised in this book.
VIBHUTI PA TEL
Head, Dept of Economics,
4th Floor , Annex Building,
SNDT W omen’s University ,
Smt Nathibai Road,
Churchgate Campus,
Mumbai 400020
Email: vibhuti.np@gmail.comObituary   G   129
April–June 2012  Obituary
Mrinal Gor e: A Unique and
Unassuming Personality
Prem Singh
MRINAL  GORE (1928-2012),  the socialist leader , passed away on July
17, 2012 in Mumbai. In the 84 years of her life, 70 wer e spent in political
struggle. She gave up her car eer in medicine in 1942 to join the Quit
India Movement. Ther eafter she became associated with Rashtra Sewa
Dal and joined the Socialist Party in 1948. In 1961 she was elected to
Bombay Municipal Corporation (BMC). She contested the Maharashtra
Assembly elections in 1972 fr om Gor egaon as Socialist Party candidate
and won with a str ong mar gin. In 1975  she opposed the Emer gency
while r emaining under ground. Later she was arr ested and imprisoned.
In the 1977 elections she won the Northern Bombay seat on a Janata
Party ticket with a r esounding mar gin and enter ed the Parliament. Once
again in 1985 she won the Maharashtra Assembly seat as a Janata Dal
candidate. She was an active participant in the Goa Liberation movement
and Samyukta Maharashtra movement.
As per the Maharashtrian tradition, people addr essed her
respectfully as Mrinaltai. After winning the BMC elections, she launched
a successful movement first at Gor egaon and then thr oughout the city
to ensur e the availability of drinking water for the common men and
women. The movement, made successful by gr eat public support and
participation, earned her fame as Pani W ali Bai. During the 90’s she
struggled r elentlessly against the new economic policies and their
negative impact. She was closely associated with peoples’ movements,
Narmada Bachao Andolan (NBA) in particular . She also fought against
the US multinational power sector company Enr on.
The unique featur e of Mrinal Gor e’s political work was that ther e130   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1was absolute clarity in her mind fr om the very beginning about the
section of people who needed her attention, about the issues/pr oblems
that had to be addr essed, and about the values that wer e to be upheld.
She always worked for the poor and deprived. Her focus was on life’s
basic needs and civic amenities. Her political work was based on the
values of democracy , socialism and secularism. For her politics was the
synonym for sacrifice not power . Morarji Desai, PM in the Janata Party
government, wanted to make her the Health Minister in his Cabinet.
But Mrinal Gor e said that instead of being a minister , she would pr efer,
like all times, to work among the common people. In this way , she never
lost sight of her mission and ar ea of work.
She was particularly sensitive towar ds the issues r elated to women
like gender equality , women’s rights and inter -caste marriage. She herself
had enter ed into an inter -caste marriage in 1948 with the well known
socialist leader keshav Gor e. At that time she was only twenty . Ten years
after marriage, Keshav Gor e passed away in 1958. But Mrinal Gor e
continued her life of str uggle, along with the CPI leader T ara Reddy
and CPM leader Ahilya Rangnekar . When she joined the Assembly for
the second time, Mrinal Gor e drew public attention towar ds female
foeticide thr ough a private member bill. The ban on sex-selective
abortions by the Maharashtra Assembly in 1986 was the consequence
of Mrinal Gor e’s serious ef forts.
One of the very special featur es of Mrinal Gor e’s personality was
that she r efused to believe that solutions lay in the passing laws. If the
leadership is not serious to the peoples’ pr oblems, mer ely passing laws
will be of no use. She believed that human concerns and sensitivity is a
necessary consideration for political leaders. Her own political str uggle
was always motivated by a humane and caring concern for the deprived
masses of the country .
In the pr esent times, socialist ideals and movement is going thr ough
a critical phase within India and also on the international scene. Crisis
is witnessed even on capitalism, but the possibility of socialism emer ging
as an alternative to capitalism is extr emely thin. The 3-4 Latin American
countries which have successfully pr otested against imperialist
capitalism ar e still in the grip of nationalist capitalism. The Arab
revolution too does not carry the socialist dr eam in its womb. In such
times, the passing away of a die-har d socialist leader like Mrinal Gor e is
definitely an irr eparable loss. This is particularly tr ue in India wher e all
governments and mainstr eam political parties have become the
facilitator of corporate capitalism and politics in itself has become
synonym of bar gaining.
It was her exceptional quality that during the last days when she
was seriously unwell and nearly unable to walk, Mrinal Gor e did notObituary   G   131
April–June 2012give up her positive frame of mind. She played an important r ole in the
formation of Socialist Party in Hyderabad on May 28 201 1. She was
present in the meetings held in Mumbai to discuss the r evival of the
Socialist Party and extended her full support for the move. She said
that she would be a natural member of the party following its formation.
This was my first meeting with her in person. She used to come to
the sitting r oom on her wheel chair and expr essed her views in a concise
manner .  One never had the opportunity for a detailed discussion with
her, beyond the r outine salutations. But it was adequate to leave a lasting
impact of her personality in one’s memory .
On July 19 , the Socialist Party or ganised a condolence meet in Delhi
to pay r espect to her . We had r equested the pr ess to cover the condolence
meet. Not one among the print and electr onic media arrived at the
meeting. Most speakers at the meeting noted with anger that the
country’s leaders and the media made har dly any note of her passing
away . The pr ess people or leaders who wr ote or spoke on her demise
called her a ‘social activist’ and not a socialist leader , which she r eally
was. In his condolence message on the net, Pr of. Kamal Nayan Kabra
wrote that although he did not undermine the importance of film artists,
it was beyond compr ehension how the media that gone overboar d to
report the demise of cine star Rajesh Khanna, totally ignor ed the passing
away of Mrinal Gor e. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, in calling her a
social worker in his condolence message, deprived her of her political
identity and str uggle. It seems obvious that accor ding to him ther e is no
need for socialist politics in today’s India.
But Mrinal Gor e is in no need of r ecognition and citations fr om
political leaders and media. She was tr uly unique and self-ef facing. Our
deepest r espects for Mrinaltai!
PREM SINGH , a former fellow , Indian Institute of Advanced Study ,
Shimla, teaches Hindi at Delhi University . He is also the General
Secretary of Socialist Party (India). Email: drpremsingh8@gmail.com132   G   GANDHI MARG
Volume 34 Number 1     Published by:
GANDHI  PEACE  FOUNDA TION
221 & 223 Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg, New Delhi-110 002
Phones: +91-11-23237491/93, Fax: +91 +11-23236734
E-mail: gpf18@rediffmail.com, gandhipeacefoundation18@yahoo.co.inVOLUME THIRTY       J        J        J        J        J      NUMBER TWO       J        J        J        J        J      JULY-SEPTEMBER 2008
Articles
Walter Earl Fluker: Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King
Jr.: Champions of a Nonviolent W orld  P.K. Shukla: Popular
Perception of Gandhi in Bihar: Khilafat to Non-Cooperation 
K. Sekhar , R.D. Sampath Kumar , C. Praseeda: Gandhi,
Hindustani, Nationalist Movement and Linguistic Unity 
Ignatius Jesudasan:  Violence veiled in Religious Metaphors 
B.N. Prasad: Non-V iolent Agrarian Mobilisation in 20th
Century Bihar: Constraints and Beyond
Review Article
Brian Martin: How Nonviolence is Misrepresented
Notes and Comments
Dhurjati Mukherjee: Rural Rejuvenation: Strategic Shift to Agro-
Industries Imperative  Reeta Bagchi : Scope of Interfaith Dia-
logue in Gandhian Thought  Jaya Prasad: Gandhi: The Unani-
mous Choice of the Colonizer and the Colonized
Book Reviews
Usha Thakkar:  Siby K. Joseph and Bharat Mahodaya, ed., Essays
on Conflict ResolutionQuarterly Journal of the
GANDHI PEACE FOUNDA TION