Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 1   
Hind Swaraj or Indian Home 
Rule 
 
By : M. K. Gandhi  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned wi th appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discarded many ideas  and learnt many 
new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feeling th at I have ceased to grow 
inwardly or that my growth will stop at the dissolutio n of the flesh. What I am 
concerned, with is my readiness to obey the call of  Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody finds any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still fa ith in my sanity, lie would 
do well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M. K. GANDHI 
Harijan, 29-4-’33, P. 2  Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION 
[In issuing this new edition of Hind Swaraj it may no t be inappropriate to 
publish the following that I wrote in the Harijan in  connection of the Hind 
Swaraj Special Number of the Aryan Path. Though Gan dhiji's views as 
expressed in the first edition of Hind Swaraj have rem ained in substance 
unchanged,- they have gone through a necessary evolut ion. My article copied 
below throws some light on this evolution. The proof copy of this edition has 
been revised by numerous friends to whom I am deeply  indebted. 
Wardha,11-12-38 
M. D.] 
AN IMPORTANT PUBLICATION 
Unique in its conception and beautifully successful1 in its execution is the 
Special Hind Swaraj Number of the Aryan Path. It ow es its appearance mainly 
to the devoted labours of that gifted sister Shrimati Sophia Wadia who sent 
copies of Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule) to numerous friends abroad and 
invited the most prominent of them to express their v iews on the book. She 
had herself devoted special articles to the book and se en in it the hope for 
future India, but she wanted the European thinkers a nd writers to say that it 
had in it the potency to help even Europe out of it s chaos, and therefore she 
thought of this plan. The result is remarkable. The spe cial number contains 
articles by Professor Soddy, G. D. H. Cole, C. Delisle  Burns, John Middleton 
Murry, J. D. Beresford, Hugh Fausset, Claude Houghton , Gerald Heard and 
Irene Rathbone. Some of these are of course well-know n pacifists and 
socialists. One wonders what the number would have been  like, if it had 
included in it articles by non-pacifist and non- socia list writers! The articles 
are so arranged "that adverse criticisms and objectio ns raised in earlier 
articles are mostly answered in subsequent ones". But th ere are one or two Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  criticisms which have been made practically by all t he writers, and it would 
be worth while considering them here. There are cert ain things which it 
would be well to recognize at once. Thus Professor So ddy remarks that, 
having just returned from a visit to India, he saw lit tle outwardly to suggest 
that the doctrine inculcated in the book had attain ed any considerable 
measure of success. That is quite true. Equally true is Mr G. D. H. Cole's 
remark that though Gandhiji is "as near as a man can  be to Swaraj in a purely 
personal sense", "he has never solved, to his own satisfa ction, the other 
problem—that of finding terms of collaboration that could span the gulf 
between man and man, between acting alone and helpi ng others to act in 
accordance with their lights, which involves acting w ith them and as one of 
them—being at once one's self and someone else, someone  one's self can and 
must regard and criticize and attempt to value." Also  as John Middleton Murry 
says, "the efficacy of non-violence is quickly exhau sted when used as a mere 
technique of political pressure",—when the question ar ises, 'Is nonviolence 
fante de mieux, really non-violence at all?' 
But the whole process is one of endless evolution. In w orking for the end, man 
also works for perfecting the means. The principle of  non-violence and love 
was enunciated by Buddha and Christ centuries ago. It has been applied 
through these centuries by individual people with succ ess on small clear-cut 
issues. As it has been recognized, and as Gerald Heard h as pointed out, "the 
world-wide and age-long interest of Mr. Gandhi's exp eriment lies in the fact 
that he has attempted to make the method work in wha t may be called the 
wholesale or national scale." The difficulties of tha t application are obvious, 
but Gandhiji trusts that they are not insurmountable. The experiment seemed 
impossible in India in 1921 and had to be abandoned, but what was then 
impossible became possible in 1930. Even now the questio n often arises: 
'What is a nonviolent means ?' It will take long prac tice to standardize the Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  meaning and content of this term. But the means there of is self-purification 
and more self-purification. What Western thinkers ofte n lose sight of is that 
the fundamental condition of non-violence is love, a nd pure unselfish love is 
impossible without unsullied purity of mind and body. 
The Attack on Machinery and Civilization 
What is a common feature of all the other appreciati ve reviews of the book is 
in the reviewers' opinion Gandhiji's unwarranted con demnation of machinery. 
"He forgets, in the urgency of his vision," says Middlet on Murry, "that the very 
spinning wheel he loves is also a machine, and also un natural. On his 
principles it should be abolished." "This," says Prof. D elisle Burns, "is a 
fundamental philosophical error. It implies that we a re to regard as morally 
evil any instrument which may be misused. But even th e spinning wheel is a 
machine; and spectacles on the nose are mere mechanisms for 'bodily' 
eyesight. The plough is a machine; and the very earli est mechanisms for 
drawing water are themselves only the later survivals of perhaps ten thousand 
years of human effort to improve the lives of men....  Any mechanism may be 
misused; but if it is, the moral evil is in the man who  misuses it, not in the 
mechanism." I must confess that in "the urgency of his vision" Gandhiji has 
used rather crude language about machinery, which if  he were revising the 
book he would himself alter. For I am sure Gandhiji would accept all the 
statements I have quoted here, and he has never attrib uted to mechanisms 
moral qualities which belong to the men who use them.  Thus in 1924 he used 
language which is reminiscent of the two writers I ha ve just quoted. I shall 
reproduce a dialogue that took place in Delhi. Repl ying to a question whether 
he was against all machinery, Gandhiji said: 
"How can I be when I know that even this body is a mo st delicate piece of 
machinery ? The spinning wheel is a machine; a littl e toothpick is a machine. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  What I object to is the craze for machinery, not mac hinery as such. The craze 
is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men g o on 'saving labour' till 
thousands are without work and thrown on the open stre ets to die of 
starvation. I want to save time and labour, not for a  fraction of mankind but 
for all. I want the concentration of wealth, not in  the hands of a few, but in 
the hands of all. Today machinery merely helps a few to ride on the backs of 
millions. The impetus behind it all is not the philant hropy to save labour, but 
greed. It is against this constitution of things that I am fighting with all my 
might.... The supreme consideration is man. The machin e should not tend to 
atrophy the limbs of, man. For instance, I would make  intelligent exceptions. 
Take the case of the Singer's Sewing Machine. It is one of the few useful things 
ever invented, and there is a romance about the devi ce itself."  
"But," asked the questioner, "there would have to be a factory for making 
these sewing machines, and it would have to contain p ower-driven machinery 
of ordinary type." 
"Yes," said Gandhiji, in reply. "But I am socialist e nough to say that such 
factories should be nationalized, State-controlled... . The saving of the labour 
of the individual should be the object, and not huma n greed the motive. 
Thus, for instance, I would welcome any day a machin e to straighten crooked 
spindles. Not that blacksmiths will cease to make spindle s; they will continue 
to provide spindles but when the spindle goes wrong e very spinner will have a 
machine to get it straight. Therefore replace greed by love and everything 
will be all right." 
"But," said the questioner, "if you make an exception  of the Singer's Sewing 
Machine and your spindle, where would these exceptio ns end?"  
"Just where they cease to help the individual and enc roach upon his 
individuality. The machine should not be allowed to cripple the limbs of man." Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  "But, ideally, would you not rule out all machinery ? When you except the 
sewing machine, you will have to make exceptions of t he bicycle, the motor 
car, etc." 
"No, I don't," he said, "because they do not satisfy a ny of the primary wants of 
man; for it is not the primary need of man to trave rse distances with the 
rapidity of a motor car. The needle on the contrary  happens to be an essential 
thing in life, a primary need." 
But he added: "Ideally, I would rule out all machin ery, even as I would reject 
this very body, which is not helpful to salvation, an d seek the absolute 
liberation of the soul. From that point of view I w ould reject all machinery, 
but machines will remain because, like the body, they  are inevitable. The 
body itself, as I told you, is the purest piece of mec hanism; but if it is a 
hindrance to the highest flights of the soul, it has to be rejected." 
I do not think any of the critics would be in funda mental disagreement with 
this position. The machine is, like the body, useful i f and only to the extent 
that it subserves the growth of the soul. 
Similarly about Western civilization Mr. G.D.H. Cole  counters the proposition 
that "Western civilization is of sharp necessity at enm ity with the human 
soul": "I say that the horrors of Spain and Abyssinia, the perpetual fear that 
hangs over us, the destitution in the midst of potentia l plenty, are defects, 
grave defects, of our Western civilization but are n ot of its very essence.... I 
do not say that we shall mend this civilization of ou rs; but I do not believe it 
to be past mending. I do not believe that it rests up on a sheer denial of what 
is necessary to the human soul." Quite so, and the defe cts Gandhiji pointed 
out were not inherent defects, but the defects of it s tendencies, and 
Gandhiji's object in the book was to contrast the tend encies of the Indian 
civilization with those of the Western. Gandhiji wo uld wholly agree with G. D. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  H. Cole that Western civilization is not past mendin g, also that the West will 
need a "Home Rule" after the fashion of the West, an d also conceived by 
"leaders who are masters of themselves, as Gandhi is, bu t masters after our 
Western fashion, which is not his, or India's."  
Limitations of the Doctrine 
G. D. H. Cole has put the following poser: "Is it so wh en German and Italian 
airmen are massacring the Spanish people, when Japan ese airmen are 
slaughtering thousands upon thousands in Chinese citie s, when German armies 
have marched into Austria and are threatening to mar ch into Czechoslovakia, 
when Abyssinia has been bloodily bombed into defeat ? Until two years or so 
ago, I believed myself opposed to war and death-deali ng violence under all 
circumstances. But today, hating war, I would risk w ar to stop these horrors." 
How acute is the struggle within himself is apparent f rom the sentences that 
follow: "I would risk war; and yet, even now, that se cond self of mine shrinks 
back appalled at the thought of killing a man. Pers onally, I would much sooner 
die than kill. But may it not be my duty to try to kill rather than to die? 
Gandhi might answer that no such dilemma could confr ont a man who had 
achieved his personal Swaraj. I do not claim to have achieved mine; but I am 
unconvinced that the dilemma would confront me, her e and now in Western 
Europe, less disturbingly if I had." 
Occasions like those Mr. Cole has mentioned test one's f aith, but the answer 
has been given by Gandhiji more than once, though he  has not completely 
achieved his Swaraj, for the simple reason that for h im Swaraj is incomplete 
so long as his fellow-beings are bereft of it. But he l ives in faith, and the faith 
in non-violence does not begin to shake at the mentio n of Italian or Japanese 
barbarities. For violence breeds the results of violen ce, and once you start the Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  game there is no limit to be drawn. Philip Mumford in the War Resister has 
replied as follows to a Chinese friend urging action o n behalf of China: 
"Your enemy is the Japanese Government and not the Ja panese 
peasants and soldiers—. unfortunate and uneducated pe ople who do not 
even know why they are being asked to fight. Yet, if  you use ordinary 
military methods of defending your country, it is the se guiltless people 
who are not your real enemies whom you must kill. If  only China would 
try and preserve herself by the nonviolent tactics use d by Gandhiji in 
India, tactics which are indeed far more in accordan ce with the 
teachings of her great religious leaders, she would, I venture to say, be 
far more successful than she will by copying the milit arist methods of 
Europe.... Surely it is a lesson to mankind in genera l that the Chinese, 
the most pacific people on earth, have preserved them selves and their 
civilization for a longer period in history than any  of the warlike races. 
Please do not think we do not honour those gallant Ch inese who are 
fighting in defence of their country. We honour the ir sacrifice and 
recognize that they hold different principles from o urselves. None the 
less, we believe that killing is evil in all circumstan ces and out of it 
good cannot come. Pacifism will not spare you from al l suffering, but in 
the long run, it is, I believe, a more effective wea pon against the 
would-be conqueror than all your fighting forces; an d what is most 
important, it will keep alive the ideals of your rac e."  
Miss Irene Rathbone poses a similar question: "What human  being on this 
earth, normal or saintlike, can endure that small bo ys and girls should perish 
if, by bowing to the tyrant and denying his own con science, he can save them? 
That question Gandhi does not answer. He does not eve n pose it.... Christ is 
clearer.... Here are his words: 'But whoso shall offe nd one of these little ones, 
which believe in me, it were better that a millstone  were hanged about his Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  neck and that he were drowned in the depth of the se a'.... Christ is a greater 
help to us than Gandhi...." I do not think Christ's wo rds express anything more 
than his wrath, and the action suggested is not by way of punishment to be 
imposed by another on the offender, but one to be im posed on himself by 
himself. And is Miss Rathbone sure that she can, by using  what she supposes to 
be Christ's method, save the child? She is wrong in thi nking that Gandhiji has 
not posed the question. He has posed it and answered it emphatically, as it 
was posed and answered in action by those immortal Musli m martyrs 1300 
years ago who suffered women and children to die of h unger and thirst rather 
than bow to the tyrant and deny their own conscience . For, in bowing to the 
tyrant and denying your own conscience, you encourag e the tyrant to, 
perpetrate further horrors. 
But even Miss Irene Rathbone calls Hind Swaraj "an eno rmously powerful 
book", and says that by virtue of it she has found "my self forced by its 
tremendous honesty to search my own honesty. I would i mplore people to 
read it." 
The Editors of the Aryan Path have done a distinct se rvice to the cause of 
peace and non-violence by issuing their Hind Swaraj S pecial Number. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  PREFACE 
When Lord Lothian was at Segaon he asked me if I co uld give him a copy of  
Hind Swaraj,  for, as he said, all that Gandhiji was teaching no w lay in the 
germ in that little book which deserved to be read a nd re-read in order to 
understand Gandhiji properly. 
Curiously enough, about the same time, Shrimati Soph ia Wadia was writing an 
article on the book exhorting all our Ministers and M . L. A.s, all the British and 
Indian Civil Servants, indeed everyone who wanted t he present non-violent 
experiment in democracy to succeed, to read and re-r ead the book. "How can 
a nonviolent man be a dictator in his own home?" she asks. "How can he be a 
wine-bibber? How can a lawyer advise his client to go to court and fight? The 
answers to all these questions raise highly important pra ctical issues. The 
people's education in  Hind Swaraj,  in which these problems are dealt with 
from the point of view of principles, should be exten sively carried on." 
Her appeal is timely. The book was written in 1908, d uring Gandhiji's return 
voyage from London, in answer to the Indian school o f violence and published 
serially in the columns of the  Indian Opinion , edited by Gandhiji. Then it was 
published in book form, to be proscribed by the Bomba y Government. 
Gandhiji had translated the book for Mr. Kallenbach.  In answer to the Bombay 
Government's action, he published the English translati on. When Gokhale saw 
the translation, on his visit to South Africa in 1912 , he thought it so crude and 
hastily conceived that he prophesied that Gandhiji hi mself would destroy the 
book after spending a year in India. With deference to the memory of the 
great teacher, I may say that his prediction has faile d to come true. In 1921, 
Gandhiji, writing about it, said: "It teaches the gosp el of love in place of that 
of hate. It replaces violence with self-sacrifice. I t pits soul force against brute 
force. I withdraw nothing except one word of it, an d that in deference to a Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  lady friend. The booklet is a severe condemnation of 'modern civilization'. It 
was written in 1908. My conviction is deeper today th an ever.... But I would 
warn the reader against thinking that I am today aim ing at the Swaraj 
described therein. I know that India is not ripe for it. It may seem an 
impertinence to say so. But such is my conviction. I am individually working 
for the self-rule pictured therein. But today my cor porate activity 
isundoubtedly devoted to the attainment of Parliamen tary Swaraj, in 
accordance with the wishes of the people of India." Even in 1938 he would 
alter nothing in the book, except perhaps the langua ge in some parts. It is 
being presented to the reader unabridged. 
But whether India may be ripe for it or not, it is b est for Indians to study the 
seminal book which contains the ultimate logical con clusion of the acceptance 
of the twin principles of Truth and Nonviolence, and  then decide whether 
these principles should be accepted or rejected. On be ing told that the book 
had been out of print for some time and that a few copies of its Madras 
edition were available at eight annas a copy, Gandhi ji said that it should be 
published immediately at a nominal price, so that it may be within easy reach 
of those who may wish to read it. The Navajivan Publ ishing House is therefore 
publishing it at practically the cost price. 
 
Wardha, 11-12-38 
Mahadev Desai Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  A WORD OF EXPLANATION 
It is certainly my good fortune that this booklet of  mine is receiving wide 
attention. The original is in Gujarati. It has a cheq uered career. It was first 
published in the columns of the  Indian Opinion  of South Africa. It was written 
in 1908 during my return voyage from London to Sout h Africa in answer to the 
Indian school of violence and its prototype in South Africa. I came in contact 
with every known Indian anarchist in London. Their bravery impressed me, 
but I felt that their zeal was misguided. I felt tha t violence was no remedy for 
India's ills, and that her civilization required the use of a different and higher 
weapon for self- protection. The Satyagraha of South  Africa was still an infant 
hardly two years old. But it had developed sufficient ly to permit me to write 
of it with some degree of confidence. What I wrote was so much appreciated 
that it was published as a booklet. It attracted some  attention in India. The 
Bombay Government prohibited its circulation. I repl ied by publishing its 
translation. I thought it was due to my English frien ds that they should know 
its contents. 
In my opinion it is a book which can be put into th e hands of a child. It 
teaches the gospel of love in place of that of hate. It replaces violence with 
self- sacrifice. It pits soul force against brute force.  It has gone through 
several editions and I commend it to those who would c are to read it. I 
withdraw nothing except one word of it, and that in  deference to a lady 
friend. 
The booklet is a severe condemnation of 'modern civil ization', it was written 
in 1908. My conviction is deeper today than ever. I feel that if - India will 
discard 'modern civilization', she can only gain by doing so. 
But I would warn the reader against thinking that I am today aiming at the 
Swaraj described therein. I know that India is not ri pe for it. It may seem an Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  impertinence to say so. But such is my conviction. I am  individually working 
for the self-rule pictured therein. But today my cor porate activity is 
undoubtedly devoted to the attainment of Parliament ary Swaraj in 
accordance with the wishes of the people of India. I am not aiming at 
destroying railways or hospitals, though I would certai nly welcome their 
natural destruction. Neither railways nor hospitals are  a test of a high and 
pure civilization. At best they are a necessary evil. Neither adds one inch to 
the moral stature of a nation. Nor am I aiming at a permanent destruction of 
law courts, much as I regard it as a 'consummation de voutly to be wished'. 
Still less am I trying to destroy all machinery and m ills. It requires a higher 
simplicity and renunciation than the people are toda y prepared for. 
The only part of the programme which is now being c arried out is that of non-
violence. But I regret to have to confess that even t hat is not being carried 
out in the spirit of the book. If it were, India wou ld establish Swaraj in a day. 
If India adopted the doctrine of love as an active part of her religion and 
introduced it in her politics, Swaraj would descend u pon India from heaven. 
But I am painfully aware that that event is far off as yet I offer these 
comments because I observe that much is being quoted f rom the booklet to 
discredit the present movement. I have even seen writ ings suggesting that I 
am playing a deep game, that I am using the present t urmoil to foist my fads 
on India, and am making religious experiments at Indi a's expense. I can only 
answer that Satyagraha is made of sterner stuff. There is nothing reserved 
and nothing secret in it. A portion of the whole the ory of life described in  
Hind Swaraj  is undoubtedly being carried into practice. There i s no danger 
attendant upon the whole of it being practised. But it is not right to scare 
away people by reproducing from my writings passages t hat are irrelevant to 
the issue before the country. 
Young India, January,1921      M. K. Gandhi Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  A MESSAGE 
I welcome your advertising the principles in defense of which Hind Swaraj 
was written. The English edition is a translation of t he original which was in 
Gujarati. I might change the language here and ther e, if I had to rewrite the 
booklet. But after the stormy thirty years through w hich I have since passed, I 
have seen nothing to make me alter the views expound ed in it. Let the reader 
bear in mind that it is a faithful record of conver sations I had with workers, 
one of whom was an avowed anarchist. He should also k now that it stopped 
the rot that was about to set in among some Indians in South Africa. The reader 
may balance against this the opinion of a dear frien d, who alas! is no more, that 
it was the production of a fool. 1 
Seagaon, July 14,1938 M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Reproduced from the Aryan Path-Special Hind Swaraj Number, published in September, 1938 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  01. THE CONGRESS & ITS OFFICIALS 
Reader : Just at present there is a Home Rule wave pa ssing over India. All our 
countrymen appear to be pining for National Indepen dence. A similar spirit 
pervades them even in South Africa. Indians seem to b e eager to acquire 
rights. Will you explain your views in this matter? 
Editor : You have put the question well, but the answ er is not easy. One of 
the objects of a newspaper is to understand popular fee ling and to give 
expression to it; another is to arouse among the people  certain desirable 
sentiments; and the third is fearlessly to expose popul ar defects. The exercise 
of all these three functions is involved in answering y our question. To a 
certain extent the people's will has to be expressed;  certain sentiments will 
need to be fostered and defects will have to be brou ght to light. But, as you 
have asked the question, it is my duty to answer it. 
Reader : Do you then consider that a desire for Hom e Rule has been created 
among us? 
Editor : That desire gave rise to the National Congr ess. The choice of the word 
"National" implies it. 
Reader : That surely, is not the case. Young India see ms to ignore the 
Congress. It is considered to be an instrument for p erpetuating British Rule. 
Editor : That opinion is not justified. Had not the G rand Old Man of India 
prepared the soil, our young men could not have even  spoken about Home 
Rule. How can we forget what Mr. Hume has written, h ow he has lashed us 
into action, and with what effort he has awakened us,  in order to achieve the 
objects of the Congress ? Sir William Wedderburn has gi ven his body, mind and 
money to the same cause. His writings are worthy of pe rusal to this day. 
Professor Gokhale in order to prepare the nation em braced poverty and gave 
twenty years of his life. Even now, he is living in po verty. The late Justice Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  Badruddin Tyebji was also one of those who, through  the Congress, sowed the 
seed of Home Rule. Similarly, in Bengal, Madras, the Punjab and other places, 
there have been lovers of India and members of the Congress, both Indian and 
English. 
Reader : Stay, stay; you are going too far, you are straying away from my 
question. I have asked you about Home- or Self- Rul e; you are discussing 
foreign rule. I do not desire to hear English names, a nd you are giving me such 
names. In these circumstances, I do not think we can ev er meet. I shall be 
pleased if you will confine yourself to Home Rule. Al l other talk will not 
satisfy me. 
Editor : You are impatient. I cannot afford to be l ikewise. If you will bear with 
me for a while, I think you will find that you will  obtain what you want. 
Remember the old proverb that the tree does not grow  in one day. The fact 
that you have checked me and that you do not want t o hear about the well-
wishers of India shows that, for you at any rate, Home  Rule is yet far away. If 
we had many like you, we would never make any advan ce. This thought is 
worthy of your attention. 
Reader : It seems to me that you simply want to put me  off by talking round 
and round. Those whom you consider to be well-wishers o f India are not such 
in my estimation. Why, then, should I listen to your d iscourse on such people? 
What has he whom you consider to be the Father of the  Nation done for it? He 
says that the English Governors will do justice and tha t we should cooperate 
with them. 
Editor  : I must tell you, with all gentleness, that it must be a matter of shame 
for us that you should speak about that great man in t erms of disrespect. Just 
look at his work. He has dedicated his life to the serv ice of India. We have 
learned what we know from him. It was the respected D adabhai who taught us Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  that the English had sucked our life-blood. What doe s it matter that, today, 
his trust is still in the English nation? Is Dadabhai l ess to be honoured because, 
in the exuberance of youth, we are prepared to go a  step further? Are we, on 
that account, wiser than he? It is a mark of wisdom no t to kick away the very 
step from which we have risen higher. The removal of a step from a staircase 
brings down the whole of it. When, out of infancy, w e grow into youth, we do 
not depise infancy, but, on the contrary, we recall with affection the days of 
our childhood. If, after many years of study, a teach er were to teach me 
something, and if I were to build a little more on t he foundation laid by that 
teacher, I would not, on that account, be considered  wiser than the teacher. 
He would always command my respect. Such is the case w ith the Grand Old 
Man of India. We must admit that he is the author of nationalism. 
Reader : You have spoken well. I can now understand t hat we must look upon 
Mr. Dadabhai with respect. Without him and men like  him, we should probably 
not have the spirit that fires us. How can the same b e said of Professor 
Gokhale? He has constituted himself a great friend of the English; he says that 
we have to learn a great deal from them, that we ha ve to learn their political 
wisdom, before we can talk of Home Rule. I am tired of reading his speeches. 
Editor : If you are tired, it only betrays your imp atience. We believe that 
those, who are discontented with the slowness of their parents and are angry 
because the parents would not run with their children , are considered 
disrespectful to their parents. Professor Gokhale occup ies the place of a 
parent. What does it matter if he cannot run with u s? A nation that is desirous 
of securing Home Rule cannot afford to despise its ance stors. We shall 
become useless, if we lack respect for our elders. Only men with mature 
thoughts are capable of ruling themselves and not the  hasty- tempered. 
Moreover, how many Indians were there like Professor Gokhale, when he gave 
himself to Indian education? I verily believe that whatever Professor Gokhale Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  does, he does with pure motives and with a view to serv ing India. His devotion 
to the Motherland is so great that he would give his l ife for it, if necessary. 
Whatever he says is said not to flatter anyone but be cause he believes it to be 
true. We are bound, therefore, to entertain the hig hest regard for him. 
Reader : Are we, then, to follow him in every respec t ? 
Editor  : I never said any such thing. If we conscientiously di ffered from him, 
the learned Professor himself would advise us to follo w the dictates of our 
conscience rather than him. Our chief purpose is not t o decry his work, but to 
believe that he is infinitely greater than we are, a nd to feel assured that 
compared with his work for India, ours is infinitesi mal. Several newspapers 
write disrespectfully of him. It is our duty to protes t against such writings. We 
should consider men like Professor Gokhale to be the p illars of Home Rule. It 
is bad habit to say that another man's thoughts are ba d and ours only are good 
and that those holding different views from ours are the enemies of the 
country. 
Reader  : I now begin to understand somewhat your meaning. I shall have to 
think the matter over. But what you say about Mr. H ume and Sir William 
Wedderburn is beyond my comprehension. 
Editor : The same rule holds good for the English as for the Indians. I can 
never subscribe to the statement that all Englishmen a re bad. Many 
Englishmen desire Home Rule for India. That the Engli sh people are somewhat 
more selfish than others is true, but that does not pro ve that every 
Englishman is bad. We who seek justice will have to do  justice to others. Sir 
William does not wish ill to India, that should be eno ugh for us. As we 
proceed, you will see that, if we act justly, India will be sooner free. You will 
see, too, that if we shun every Englishman as an enemy , Home Rule will be Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  delayed. But if we are just to them, we shall receive  their support in our 
progress towards the goal. 
Reader : All this seems to me at present to be simply no nsensical. English 
support and the obtaining of Home Rule are two contr adictory things. How 
can the English people tolerate Home Rule for us? Bu t I do not want you to 
decide this question for me just yet. To spend time over it is useless. When 
you have shown how we can have Home Rule, perhaps I shall understand your 
views. You have prejudiced me against you by discoursi ng on English help. I 
would, therefore, beseech you not to continue this subject. 
Editor : I have no desire to do so. That you are pre judiced against me is not a 
matter for much anxiety. It is well that I should say unpleasant things at the 
commencement. It is my duty patiently to try to rem ove your prejudice. 
Reader : I like that last statement. It emboldens me t o say what I like. One 
thing still puzzles me. I do not understand how the Co ngress laid the 
foundation of Home Rule. 
Editor : Let us see. The Congress brought together Ind ians from different parts 
of India, and enthused us with the idea of nationalit y. The Government used 
to look upon it with disfavour. The Congress has alway s insisted that the 
Nation should control revenue and expenditure. It ha s always desired self-
government after the Canadian model. Whether we can  get it or not, whether 
we desire it or not, and whether there is not somethi ng more desirable, are 
different questions. All I have to show is that the C ongress gave us a foretaste 
of Home Rule. To deprive it of the honour is not pro per, and for us to do so 
would not only be ungrateful, but retard the fulfil lment of our object. To 
treat the Congress as an institution inimical to our  growth as a nation would 
disable us from using that body. 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  02. THE PARTITION OF BENGAL 
Reader : Considering the matter as you put it, it seem s proper to say that the 
foundation of Home Rule was laid by the Congress. But  you will admit that 
this cannot be considered a real awakening. When and how did the real 
awakening take place? 
Editor : The seed is never seen. It works underneath th e ground, is itself 
destroyed, and the tree which rises above the ground i s alone seen. Such is 
the case with the Congress. Yet, what you call the rea l awakening took place 
after the Partition of Bengal. For this we have to b e thankful to Lord Curzon. 
At the time of the Partition, the people of Bengal,  reasoned with Lord Curzon, 
but in the pride of power he disregarded all their prayers. He took it for 
granted that Indians could only prattle, that they could never take any 
effective steps. He used insulting language, and in th e teeth of all opposition 
partitioned Bengal. That day may be considered to be  the day of the partition 
of the British Empire. The shock the British power rec eived through the 
Partition has never been equaled by any other act. This does not mean that 
the other injustices done to India are less glaring th an that done by the 
Partition. The salt-tax is not a small injustice. We shall see many such things 
later on. But the people were ready to resist the Par tition. At that time 
feeling ran high. Many leading Bengalis were ready t o lose their all. They 
knew their power; hence the conflagration. It is no w well-nigh unquenchable; 
it is not necessary to quench it either. The Partition  will go, Bengal will be 
reunited, but the rift in the English barque will re main; it must daily widen. 
India awakened is not likely to fall asleep. The dem and for the abrogation of 
the Partition is tantamount to a demand for Home Rul e. Leaders in Bengal 
know this. British officials realize it. That is why t he Partition still remains. As 
time passes, the Nation is being forged. Nations are not  formed in a day; the 
formation requires years. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  Reader : What, in your opinion, are the results of th e Partition ? 
Editor : Hitherto we have considered that for redress of grievances we must 
approach the throne, and if we get no redress we must  sit still, except that 
we may still petition. After the Partition, people sa w that petitions must be 
backed up by force, and that they must be capable of  suffering. This new 
spirit must be considered to be the chief result of the  Partition. That spirit 
was seen in the outspoken writings in the Press. That wh ich the people said 
tremblingly and in secret began to be said and to be written publicly. The 
Swadeshi movement was inaugurated. People, young and old, used to run 
away at the sight of an English face; it now no longe r awes them. They do not 
fear even a row, or being imprisoned. Some of the be st sons of India are at 
present in banishment. This is something different fro m mere petitioning. 
Thus are the people moved. The spirit generated in B engal has spread in the 
north to the Punjab, and in the south to Cape Comor in. 
Reader : Do you suggest any other striking result ? 
Editor : The Partition has not only made a rift in the English ship but has made 
it in ours also. Great events always produce great re sults. Our leaders are 
divided into two parties: the Moderates and the Extre mists. These may be 
considered as the slow party and the impatient party. Some call the 
Moderates the timid party, and the Extremists the bol d party. All interpret 
the two words according to their preconceptions. Thi s much is certain—that 
there has arisen an enmity between the two. The one distrusts the other and 
imputes motives. At the time of the Surat Congress ther e was almost a fight. I 
think that this division is not a good thing for the country, but I think also that 
such divisions will not last long. It all depends upon the leaders how long they 
will last. 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  03. DISCONTENT AND UNREST 
Reader : Then you consider the Partition to be a cau se of the awakening ? Do 
you welcome the unrest which has resulted from it? 
Editor : When a man rises from sleep, he twists his limbs  and is restless. It 
takes some time before he is entirely awakened. Simi larly, although the 
Partition has caused an awakening, the comatose cond ition has not yet 
disappeared. We are still twisting our limbs and are sti ll restless, and just as 
the state between sleep and awakening must be considere d to be necessary, 
so may the present unrest in India be considered a nec essary and therefore, a 
proper state. The knowledge that there is unrest will,  it is highly probable, 
enable us to outgrow it. Rising from sleep, we do not  continue in a comatose 
state, but according to our ability, sooner or later , we are completely 
restored to our senses. So shall we be free from the pr esent unrest which no 
one likes. 
Reader : What is the other form of unrest? 
Editor : Unrest is, in reality, discontent. The latte r is only now described as 
unrest. During the Congress- period it was labeled di scontent. Mr. Hume 
always said that the spread of discontent in India wa s necessary. This 
discontent is a very useful thing. As long as a man is c ontented with his 
present lot, so long is it difficult to persuade him to  come out of it. Therefore 
it is that every reform must be preceded by disconte nt. We throw away things 
we have, only when we cease to like them. Such discon tent has been 
produced among us after reading the great works of In dians and Englishmen. 
Discontent has led to unrest, and the latter has brough t about many deaths, 
many imprisonments, many banishments. Such a state o f things will still 
continue. It must be so. All these may be considered  good signs but they may 
also lead to bad results. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  04. WHAT IS SWARAJ? 
Reader : I have now learnt what the Congress has done to make India one 
nation, how the Partition has caused an awakening, an d how discontent and 
unrest have spread through the land. I would now lik e to know your views on 
Swaraj. I fear that our interpretation is not the sa me as yours. 
Editor : It is quite possible that we do not attach t he same meaning to the 
term. You and I and all Indians are impatient to ob tain Swaraj, but we are 
certainly not decided as to what it is. To drive the English out of India is a 
thought heard from many mouths, but it does not seem t hat many have 
properly considered why it should be so. I must ask you  a question. Do not 
think that it is necessary to drive away the English, if we get all we want? 
Reader : I should ask of them only one thing, that is:  "Please leave our 
country." If, after they have complied with this req uest, their withdrawal 
from India means that they are still in India. I sho uld have no objection. Then 
we would understand that, in their language, the wo rd "gone" is equivalent to 
"remained". 
Editor : Well then, let us suppose that the English hav e retired. What will you 
do then? 
Reader : That question cannot be answered at this sta ge. The state after 
withdrawal will depend largely upon the manner of i t. If, as you assume, they 
retire, it seems to me we shall still keep their constit ution and shall carry on 
the Government. If they simply retire for the askin g we should have an army, 
etc., ready at hand. We should, therefore, have no d ifficulty in carrying on 
the Government. 
Editor : You may think so; I do not. But I will not discuss the matter just now. 
I have to answer your question, and that I can do we ll by asking you several 
questions. Why do you want to drive away the English ? Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  Reader : Because India has become impoverished by thei r Government. They 
take away our money from year to year. The most impo rtant posts are 
reserved for themselves. We are kept in a state of slav ery. They behave 
insolently towards us and disregard our feelings. 
Editor : If they do not take our money away, become  gentle, and give us 
responsible posts, would you still consider their prese nce to be harmful? 
Reader : That question is useless. It is similar to the q uestion whether there is 
any harm in associating with a tiger if he changes h is nature. Such a question 
is sheer waste of time. When a tiger changes his natur e, Englishmen will 
change theirs. This is not possible, and to believe it t o be possible is contrary 
to human experience. 
Editor : Supposing we get Self-Government similar to what the Canadians and 
the South Africans have, will it be good enough? 
Reader : That question also is useless. We may get it wh en we have the same 
powers; we shall then hoist our own flag. As is Japan, so must India be. We 
must own our navy, our army, and we must have our ow n splendour, and then 
will India's voice ring through the world. 
Editor : You have drawn the picture well. In effect  it means this: that we 
want English rule without the Englishman. You want th e tiger's nature, but 
not the tiger; that is to say, you would make India E nglish. And when it 
becomes English, it will be called not Hindustan but Englistan. This is not the 
Swaraj that I want. 
Reader : I have placed before you my idea of Swaraj  as I think it should be. If 
the education we have received be of any use, if the  works of Spencer, Mill 
and others be of any importance, and if the English P arliament be the Mother 
of Parliaments, I certainly think that we should cop y the English people, and 
this to such an extent that, just as they do not allow others to obtain a Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  footing in their country, so we should not allow them  or others to obtain it in 
ours. What they have done in their own country has not been done in any 
other country. It is, therefore, proper for us to imp ort their institutions. But 
now I want to know your views. 
Editor : There is need for patience. My views will de velop of themselves in 
the course of this discourse. It is as difficult for me t o understand the true 
nature of Swaraj as it seems to you to be easy. I shal l, therefore, for the time 
being, content myself with endeavouring to show that what you call Swaraj is 
not truly Swaraj. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  05. THE CONDITION OF ENGLAND 
Reader : Then from your statement I deduce that the Government of England 
is not desirable and not worth copying by us. 
Editor : Your deduction is justified. The condition o f England at present is 
pitiable. I pray to God that India may never be in that plight. That which you 
consider to be the Mother of Parliaments is like a ster ile woman and a 
prostitute. Both these are harsh terms, but exactly fi t the case. That 
Parliament has not yet, of its own accord, done a si ngle good thing. Hence I 
have compared it to a sterile woman. The natural con dition of that 
Parliament is such that, without outside presure, it c an do nothing. It is like a 
prostitute because it is under the control of ministers who change from time 
to time. Today it is under Mr. Asquith, tomorrow it m ay be under Mr. Balfour. 
Reader : You have said this sarcastically. The term " sterile woman" is not 
applicable. The Parliament, being elected by the pe ople, must work under 
public pressure. This is its quality. 
Editor : You are mistaken. Let us examine it a little  more closely. The best 
men are supposed to be elected by the people. The me mbers serve without 
pay and therefore, it must be assumed, only for the p ublic weal. The electors 
are considered to be educated and therefore we should  assume that they 
would not generally make mistakes in their choice. S uch a Parliament should 
not need the spur of petitions or any other pressure. I ts work should be so 
smooth that its effects would be more apparent day by day. But, as a matter 
of fact, it is generally acknowledged that the membe rs are hypocritical and 
selfish. Each thinks of his own little interest. It is fe ar that is the guiding 
motive. What is done today may be undone tomorrow. I t is not possible to 
recall a single instance in which finality can be pr edicted for its work. When 
the greatest questions are debated, its members have be en seen to stretch Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  themselves and to doze. Sometimes the members talk away  until the listeners 
are disgusted. Carlyle has called it the "talking shop of the world". Members 
vote for their party without a thought. Their so-cal led discipline binds them 
to it. If any member, by way of exception, gives an  independent vote, he is 
considered a renegade. If the money and the time wast ed by Parliament were 
entrusted to a few good men, the English nation would  be occupying today a 
much higher platform. Parliament is simply a costly t oy of the nation. These 
views are by no means peculiar to me. Some great Engl ish thinkers have 
expressed them. One of the members of that Parliament  recently said that a 
true Christian could not become a member of it. Anot her said that it was a 
baby. And if it has remained a baby after an existen ce of seven hundred 
years, when will it outgrow its babyhood? 
Reader : You have set me thinking; you do not expect  me to accept at once 
all you say. You give me entirely novel views. T shal l have to digest them. 
Will you now explain the epithet "prostitute"? 
Editor : That you cannot accept my views at once is only right. If you will read 
the literature on this subject, you will have some ide a of it. Parliament is 
without a real master. Under the Prime Minister, its  movement is not steady 
but it is buffeted about like a prostitute. The Prim e Minister is more 
concerned about his power than about the welfare of Parliament. His energy 
is concentrated upon securing the success of his party.  His care is not always 
that Parliament shall do right. Prime Ministers are kn own to have made 
Parliament do things merely for party advantage. All  this is worth thinking 
over. 
Reader : Then you are really attacking the very men  whom we have hitherto 
considered to be patriotic and honest? Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  Editor : Yes, that is true; I can have nothing against  Prime Ministers, but what 
I have seen leads me to think that' they cannot be co nsidered really patriotic. 
If they are to be considered honest because they do n ot take what are 
generally known as bribes, let them be so considered, but they are open to 
subtler influences. In order to gain their ends, they  certainly bribe people 
with honours. I do not hesitate to say that they have neither real honesty nor 
a living conscience. 
Reader : As you express these views about Parliament, I  would like to hear 
you on the English people, so that I may have your v iew of their Government. 
Editor : To the English voters their newspaper is thei r Bible. They take their 
cue from their newspapers which are often dishonest. Th e same fact is 
differently interpreted by different newspapers, acc ording to the party in 
whose interests they are edited. One newspaper would c onsider a great 
Englishman to be a paragon of honesty, another would consider him 
dishonest. What must be the condition of the people w hose- newspapers are 
of this type? 
Reader : You shall describe it. 
Editor : These people change their views frequently. It is said that they 
change them every seven years. These views swing like t he pendulum of a 
clock and are never steadfast. The people would fol low a powerful orator or a 
man who gives them parties, receptions, etc. As are the  people, so is their 
Parliament. They have certainly one quality very st rongly developed. They 
will never allow their country to be lost. If any pe rson were to cast an evil 
eye on it, they would pluck out his eyes. But that d oes not mean that the 
nation possesses every other virtue or that it should be  imitated. If India 
copies England, it is my firm conviction that she will  be ruined. 
Reader : To what do you ascribe this state of Engla nd ? Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  Editor : It is not due to any peculiar fault of the English people, but the 
condition is due to modern civilization. It is a civi lization only in name. Under 
it the nations of Europe are becoming degraded and r uined day by day. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  06. CIVILIZATION 
Reader : Now you will have to explain what you mean  by civilization. 
Editor : It is not a question of what I mean. Several  English writers refuse to 
call that civilization which passes under that name. M any books have been 
written upon that subject. Societies have been forme d to cure the nation of 
the evils of civilization. A great English writer has written a work called  
Civilization: Its Cause and Cure.  Therein he has called it a disease. 
Reader : Why do we not know this generally ? 
Editor : The answer is very simple. We rarely find pe ople arguing against 
themselves. Those who are intoxicated by modern civili zation are not likely to 
write against it. Their care will be to find out fac ts and arguments in support 
of it, and this they do unconsciously, believing it t o to be true. A man whilst 
he is dreaming, believes in his dream; he is undeceived  only when he is 
awakened from his sleep. A man labouring under the b ane of civilization is 
like a dreaming man. What we usually read are the wo rks of defenders of 
modern civilization, which undoubtedly claims among its votaries very 
brilliant and even some very good men. Their writing s hypnotize us. And so, 
one by one, we are drawn into the vortex. 
Reader : This seems to be very plausible. Now will you tell me something of 
what you have read and thought of this civilization ? 
Editor : Let us first consider what state of things is de scribed by the word 
"civilization". Its true test lies in the fact that p eople living in it make bodily 
welfare the object of life. We will take some exampl es. The people of Europe 
today live in better-built houses than they did a hun dred years ago. This is 
considered an emblem of civilization, and this is also  a matter to promote 
bodily happiness. Formerly, they wore skins, and used  spears as their 
weapons. Now, they wear long trousers, and, for embel lishing their bodies, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  they wear a variety of clothing, and, instead of spea rs, they carry with them 
revolvers containing five or more chambers. If people  of a certain country, 
who have hitherto not been in the habit of wearing much clothing, boots, 
etc., adopt European clothing, they are supposed to h ave become civilized 
out of savagery. Formerly, in Europe, people plough ed their lands mainly by 
manual labour. Now, one man can plough a vast tract by means of steam 
engines and can thus amass great wealth. This is calle d a sign of civilization. 
Formerly, only a few men wrote valuable books. Now, anybody writes and 
prints anything he likes and poisons people's minds. Fo rmerly, men travelled 
in waggons. Now, they fly through the air in trains at the rate of four hundred 
and more miles per day. This is considered the height o f civilization. It has 
been stated that, as men progress, they shall be able t o travel in airship and 
reach any part of the world in a few hours. Men wil l not need the use of their 
hands and feet. They will press a button, and they wil l have their clothing by 
their side. They will press another button, and they w ill have their 
newspaper. A third, and a motor-car will be in waiti ng for them. They will 
have a variety of delicately dished up food. Everyth ing will be done by 
machinery. Formerly, when people wanted to fight wi th one another, they 
measured between them their bodily strength; now it i s possible to take away 
thousands of lives by one man working behind a gun fro m a hill. This is 
civilization. Formerly, men worked in the open air only as much as they liked. 
Now thousands of workmen meet together and for the sak e of maintenance 
work in factories or mines. Their condition is worse th an that of beasts. They 
are obliged to work, at the risk of their lives, at m ost dangerous occupations, 
for the sake of millionaires. Formerly, men were made  slaves under physical 
compulsion. Now they are enslaved by temptation of mo ney and of the 
luxuries that money can buy. There are now diseases o f which people never 
dreamt before, and an army of doctors is engaged in finding out their cures, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  and so hospitals have increased. This is a test of civiliz ation. Formerly, special 
messengers were required and much expense was incurred i n order to send 
letters; today, anyone can abuse his fellow by means of  a letter for one penny 
True, at the same cost, one can send one's thanks als o. 
Formerly, people had two or three meals consisting of  home-made bread and 
vegetables; now, they require something to eat every  two hours so that they 
have hardly leisure for anything else. What more need  I say? All this you can 
ascertain from several authoritative books. These are a ll true tests of 
civilization. And if anyone speaks to the contrary, know that he is ignorant. 
This civilization takes note neither of morality nor of religion. Its votaries 
calmly state that their business is not to teach religio n. Some even consider it 
to be a superstitious growth. Others put on the cloa k of religion, and prate 
about morality. But, after twenty years' experience,  I have come to the 
conclusion that immorality is often taught in the nam e of morality. Even a 
child can understand that in all I have described abo ve there can be no 
inducement to morality. Civilization seeks to increa se bodily comforts, and it 
fails miserably even in doing so. 
This civilization is irreligion, and it has taken such  a hold on the people in 
Europe that those who are in it appear to be half ma d. They lack real 
physical strength or courage. They keep up their ener gy by intoxication. 
They can hardly be happy in solitude. Women, who sho uld be the queens of 
households, wander in the streets or they slave away in factories. For the 
sake of a pittance, half a million women in England alone are labouring 
under trying circumstances in factories or similar insti tutions. This awful 
fact is one of the causes of the daily growing suffra gette movement. 
This civilization is such that one has only to be pati ent and it will be self-
destroyed. According to the teaching of Mahomed this  would be considered Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  a Satanic Civilization. Hinduism calls it the Black A ge. I cannot give you an 
adequate conception of it. It is eating into the vi tals of the English nation. 
It must be shunned. 
Parliaments are really emblems of slavery. If you will  sufficiently think over 
this, you will entertain the same opinion and cease t o blame the English. 
They rather deserve our sympathy. They are a shrewd n ation and I therefore 
believe that they will cast off the evil. They are e nterprising and 
industrious, and their mode of thought is not inheren tly immoral. Neither 
are they bad at heart. I therefore respect them. Ci vilization is not an 
incurable disease, but it should never be forgotten th at the English people 
are at present afflicted by it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  07. WHY WAS INDIA LOST ? 
Reader : You have said much about civilization — eno ugh to make me ponder 
over it. I do not now know what I should adopt and w hat I should avoid from 
the nations of Europe, but one question comes to my l ips immediately. If 
Civilization is a disease and if it has attacked Engla nd, why has she been able 
to take India, and why is she able to retain it? 
Editor : Your question is not very difficult to answe r, and we shall presently 
be able to examine the true nature of Swaraj; for I  am aware that I have still 
to answer that question. I will, however, take up yo ur previous question. The 
English have not taken India; we have given it to th em. They are not in India 
because of their strength, but because we keep them. Let us now see 
whether these propositions can be sustained. They came to our country 
originally for purposes of trade. Recall the Compan y Bahadur. Who made it 
Bahadur? They had not the slightest intention at the time of establishing a 
kingdom. Who assisted the Company's officers? Who was te mpted at the sight 
of their silver? 
Who bought their goods? History testifies that we did  all this. In order to 
become rich all at once we welcomed the Company's o fficers with open arms. 
We assisted them. If I am in the habit of drinking  bhang  and a seller thereof 
sells it to me, am I to blame him or myself? By blami ng the seller shall I be 
able to avoid the habit? And, if a particular retai ler is driven away will not 
another take his place? A true servant of India wil l have to go to the root of 
the matter. If an excess of food has caused me indigesti on, I shall certainly 
not avoid it by blaming water. He is a true physician  who probes the cause of 
disease, and if you pose as a physician for the disease o f India, you will have 
to find out its true cause. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  Reader : You are right. Now I think you will not ha ve to argue much with me 
to drive your conclusions home. I am impatient to kn ow your further views. 
We are now on a most interesting topic. I shall, there fore, endeavour to 
follow your thought, and stop you when I am in doub t. 
Editor : I am afraid that, in spite of your enthusiasm , as we proceed further, 
we shall have differences of opinion. Nevertheless, I sh all argue only when 
you- stop me. We have already seen that the English m erchants were able to 
get a footing in India because we encouraged them. W hen our Princes fought 
among themselves, they sought the assistance of Company  Bahadur. That 
corporation was versed alike in commerce and war. It  was unhampered by 
questions of morality. Its object was to increase its com merce and to make 
money. It accepted our assistance, and increased the n umber of its 
warehouses. To protect the latter it employed an arm y which was utilized by 
us also. Is it not then useless to blame the English for what we did at that 
time? The Hindus and the Mahomedans were at daggers d rawn. This, too, 
gave the Company its opportunity and thus we create d the circumstances that 
gave the Company its control over India. Hence it i s truer to say that we gave 
India to the English than that India was lost. 
Reader : Will you now tell me how, they are able to  retain India? 
Editor : The causes that gave them India enable them  to retain it. Some 
Englishmen state that they took and they hold India b y the sword. Both these 
statements are wrong. The sword is entirely useless for holding India. We 
alone keep them. Napolean is said to have described th e English as a nation 
of shopkeepers. It is a fitting description. They hol d whatever dominions they 
have for the sake of their commerce. Their army and  their navy are intended 
to protect it. When the Transvaal offered no such at tractions, the late Mr. 
Gladstone discovered that it was not right for the Eng lish to hold it. When it Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  became a paying proposition, resistance led to war. Mr . Chamberlain soon 
discovered that England enjoyed a suzerainty over the  Transvaal. It is related 
that someone asked the late President Kruger whether  there was gold in the 
moon. He replied that it was highly unlikely because , if there were, the 
English would have annexed it. Many problems can be so lved by remembering 
that money is their God. Then it follows that we keep  the English in India for 
our base self-interest. We like their commerce; they p lease us by their subtle 
methods and get what they want from us. To blame the m for this is to 
perpetuate their power. We further strengthen their hold by quarrelling 
amongst ourselves. If you accept the above statements,  it is proved that the 
English entered India for the purposes of trade. They remain in it for the 
same purpose and we help them to do so. Their arms and  ammunition are 
perfectly useless. In this connection I remind you that  it is the British flag 
which is waving in Japan and not the Japanese. The E nglish have a treaty 
with Japan for the sake of their commerce, and you w ill see that if they can 
manage it their commerce will greatly expand in tha t country. They wish to 
convert the whole world into a vast market for their  goods. That they cannot 
do so is true, but the blame will not be theirs. They will leave no stone 
unturned to reach the goal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  08. THE CONDITION OF INDIA 
Reader : I now understand why the English hold India.  I should like to know 
your views about the condition of our country. 
Editor : It is a sad condition. In thinking of it my eyes water and my throat 
gets parched. I have grave doubts whether I shall be able sufficiently to 
explain what is in my heart. It is my deliberate opin ion that India is being 
ground down, not under the English heel, but under t hat of modern 
civilization. It is groaning under the monster's terri ble weight. There is yet 
time to escape it, but every day makes it more and m ore difficult. Religion is 
dear to me and my first complaint is that India is bec oming irreligious. Here I 
am not thinking of the Hindu or the Mahomedan or th e Zoroastrian religion 
but of that religion which underlies all religions. W e are turning away from 
God. 
Reader : How so ? 
Editor : There is a charge laid against us that we ar e a lazy people and that 
Europeans are industrious and enterprizing. We have ac cepted the charge and 
we therefore wish to change our condition. Hinduism,  Islam, Zoroastrianism, 
Christianity and all other religions teach that we sho uld remain passive about 
worldly pursuits and active about godly pursuits, that we should set a limit to 
our worldly ambition and that our religious ambition  should be illimitable. 
Our activity should be directed into the latter cha nnel. 
Reader : You seem "to be encouraging religious charla tanism. Many a cheat 
has, by talking in a similar strain, led the people a stray. 
Editor : You are bringing an unlawful charge agains t religion. Humbug there 
undoubtedly is about all religions. Where there is li ght, there is also shadow. I 
am prepared to maintain that humbugs in worldly matt ers are far worse than Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  the humbugs in religion. The humbug of civilization that I am endeavouring to 
show to you is not to be found in religion. 
Reader : How can you say that? In the name of relig ion Hindus and 
Mahomedans fought against one another. For the same cause Christians 
fought Christians. Thousands of innocent men have bee n murdered, thousands 
have been burned and tortured in its name. Surely, t his is much worse than 
any civilization. 
Editor : I certainly submit that the above hardships are far more bearable 
than those of civilization. Everybody understands that  the cruelties you have 
named are not part of religion although they have b een practised in its name; 
therefore there is no aftermath to these cruelties. Th ey will always happen so 
long as there are to be found ignorant and credulous  people. But there is no 
end to the victims destroyed in the fire of civiliz ation. Its deadly effect is 
that people come under its scorching flames believing  it to be all good. They 
become utterly irreligious and, in reality, derive l ittle advantage from the 
world. Civilization is like a mouse gnawing while it  is soothing us. When its 
full effect is realized, we shall see that religious s uperstition is harmless 
compared to that of modern civilization. I am not p leading for a continuance 
of religious superstitions. We shall certainly fight the m tooth and nail, but we 
can never do so by disregarding religion. We can onl y do so by appreciating 
and conserving the latter. 
Reader : Then you will contend that the Pax Britann ica is a useless 
encumbrance? 
Editor : You may see peace if you like;  I see none. 
Reader : You make light of the terror that the Thug s, the Pindaris and the 
Bhils were to the country. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  Editor : If you give the matter some thought, you w ill see that the terror was 
by no means such a mighty thing. If it had been a ver y substantial thing, the 
other people would have died away before the English  advent. Moreover, the 
present peace is only nominal, for by it we have beco me emasculated and 
cowardly. We are not to assume that the English have changed the nature of 
the Pindaris and the Bhils. It is, therefore, better t o suffer the Pindari peril 
than that someone else should protect us from it and thus render us 
effeminate. I should prefer to be killed by the arro w of a Bhil than to seek 
unmanly protection. India without such protection wa s an India full of valour. 
Macaulay betrayed gross ignorance when he libelled In dians as being 
practically cowards. They never merited the charge. Cowards living in a 
country inhabited by hardy mountaineers and infested  by wolves and tigers 
must surely find an early grave. Have you ever visited  our fields ? I assure you 
that our agriculturists sleep fearlessly on their farm s even today; but the 
English and you and I would hesitate to sleep where th ey sleep. Strength lies 
in absence of fear, not in the quantity of flesh and  muscle we may have on 
our bodies. Moreover, I must remind you who desire Hom e Rule that, after 
all, the Bhils, the Pindaris, and the Thugs are our ow n countrymen. To 
conquer them is your and my work. So long as we fear our own brethren, we 
are unfit to reach the goal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  09. THE CONDITION OF INDIA (CONTINUED) : RAILWAYS 
Reader : You have deprived me of the consolation I used to have regarding 
peace in India. 
Editor : I have merely given you my opinion on the religious aspect, but when 
I give you my views as to the poverty of India, you will perhaps begin to 
dislike me because what you and I have hitherto consi dered beneficial for 
India no longer appears to me to be so. 
Reader : What may that be? 
Editor : Railways, lawyers and doctors have impoverishe d the country so much 
so that, if we do not wake up in time, we shall be ru ined. 
Reader  : I do now, indeed, fear that we are not likely to ag ree at all. You are 
attacking the very institutions which we have hithe rto considered to be good. 
Editor : It is necessary to exercise patience. The tru e inwardness of the evils 
of civilization you will understand with difficulty Doctors assure us that a 
consumptive clings to life even when he is about to di e. Consumption does not 
produce apparent hurt—it even produces a seductive c olour about a patient's 
face so as to induce the belief that all is well. C ivilization is such a disease 
and we have to be very wary. 
Reader : Very well, then.  I shall hear you on the railways. 
Editor : It must be manifest to you that, but for t he railways, the English 
could not have such a hold on India as they have. The  railways, too, have 
spread the bubonic plague. Without them, the masses cou ld not move from 
place to place. They are the carriers of plague ger ms. Formerly we had 
natural segregation. Railways have also increased the frequency of famines 
because, owing to facility of means of locomotion, pe ople sell out their grain 
and it is sent to the dearest markets. People become careless and so the Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  pressure of famine increases. Railways accentuate the e vil nature of man: Bad 
men fulfil their evil designs with greater rapidity. The holy places of India 
have become unholy. Formerly, people went to these p laces with very great 
difficulty. Generally, therefore, only the real dev otees visited such places. 
Nowadays rogues visit them in order to practise their r oguery. 
Reader : You have given a one-sided account. Good me n can visit these places 
as well as bad men. Why do they not take the fullest a dvantage of the 
railways ? 
Editor : Good travels at a snail's pace—it can, theref ore, have little to do with 
the railways. Those who want to do good are not selfish , they are not in a 
hurry, they know that to impregnate people with goo d requires a long time. 
But evil has wings. To build a house takes time. Its de struction takes none. So 
the railways can become a distributing agency for the  evil one only. It may be 
a debatable matter whether railways spread famines, b ut it is beyond dispute 
that they propagate evil. 
Reader : Be that as it may, all the disadvantages of r ailways are more than 
counterbalanced by the fact that it is due to them t hat we see in India the 
new spirit of nationalism. 
Editor  : I hold this to be a mistake. The English have taught us that we were 
not one nation before and that it will require cent uries before we become one 
nation. This is without foundation. We were one natio n before they came to 
India. One thought inspired us. Our mode of life wa s the same. It was because 
we were one nation that they were able to establish o ne kingdom. 
Subsequently they divided us. 
Reader : This requires an explanation. 
Editor : I do not wish to suggest that because we wer e one nation we had no 
differences, but it is submitted that our leading men  travelled throughout Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  India either on foot or in bullock-carts. They learn ed one another's languages 
and there was no aloofness between them. What do you think could have 
been the intention of those farseeing ancestors of ours  who established 
Setubandha (Rameshwar) in the South, Jagannath in th e East and Hardwar in 
the North as places of pilgrimage? You will admit the y were no fools. They 
knew that worship of God could have been performed just as well at home. 
They taught us that those whose hearts were aglow with righteousness had 
the Ganges in their own homes. But they saw that India  was one undivided 
land so made by nature. They, therefore, argued that  it must be one nation. 
Arguing thus, they established holy places in various  parts of India, and fired 
the people with an idea of nationality in a manner unknown in other parts of 
the world. And we Indians are one as no two Englishmen  are. Only you and I 
and others who consider ourselves civilized and superior  persons imagine that 
we are many nations. It was after the advent of rail ways that we began to 
believe in distinctions, and you are at liberty now to say that it is through the 
railways that we are beginning to abolish those dist inctions. An opium-eater 
may argue the advantage of opium-eating from the fa ct that he began to 
understand the evil of the opium habit after having eaten it. I would ask you 
to consider well what I had said on the railways. 
Reader : I will gladly do so, but one question occur s to me even now. You 
have described to me the India of the pre-Mahomedan  period, but now we 
have Mahomedans, Parsis and Christians. How can they be  one nation? Hindus 
and Mahomedans are old enemies. Our very proverbs prov e it. Mahomedans 
turn to the West for worship, whilst Hindus turn to the  East. The former look 
down on the Hindus as idolaters. The Hindus worship the cow, the 
Mahomedans kill her. The Hindus believe in the doctri ne of non-killing, the 
Mahomedans do not. We thus meet with differences at every step. How can 
India be one nation? Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  10. THE CONDITION OF INDIA (CONTINUED): THE HINDUS AND THE 
MAHOMEDANS 
Editor : Your last question is a serious one and yet, o n careful consideration, 
it will be found to be easy of solution. The question arises because of the 
presence of the railways, of the lawyers and of the do ctors. We shall 
presently examine the last two. We have already consid ered the railways. I 
should, however, like to add that man is so made by n ature as to require him 
to restrict his movements as far as his hands and feet w ill take him. If we did 
not rush about from place to place by means of railwa ys and such other 
maddening conveniences, much of the confusion that ar ises would be 
obviated. Our difficulties are of our own creation. God set a limit to a man's 
locomotive ambition in the construction of his body.  Man immediately 
proceeded to discover means of overriding the limit. God gifted man with 
intellect that he might know his Maker. Man abused it  so that he might forget 
his Maker. I am so constructed that I can only serve m y immediate 
neighbours, but in my conceit I pretend to have disc overed that I must with 
my body serve every individual in the Universe. In th us attempting the 
impossible, man comes in contact with different nature s, different religions, 
and is utterly confounded. According to this reasonin g, it must be apparent to 
you that railways are a most dangerous institution. Ow ing to them, man has 
gone further away from his Maker. 
Reader : But  I am impatient to hear your answer to my question. H as the 
introduction of Mahomedanism not unmade the nation? 
Editor : India cannot cease to be one nation because people belonging to 
different religions live in it. The introduction of foreigners does not 
necessarily destroy the nation; they merge in it. A co untry is one nation only 
when such a condition obtains in it. That country must  have a faculty for Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  assimilation. India has ever been such a country. In r eality there are as many 
religions as there are individuals; but those who are conscious of the spirit of 
nationality do not interfere with one another's reli gion. If they do, they are 
not fit to be considered a nation. If the Hindus bel ieve that India should be 
peopled only by Hindus, they are living in dream-lan d. The Hindus, the 
Mahomedans, the Parsis and the Christians who have made  India their country 
are fellow-countrymen, and they will have to live i n unity, if only for their 
own interest. In no part of the world are one nation ality and one religion 
synonymous terms; nor has it ever been so in India. 
Reader : But what about the inborn enmity between H indus and Mahomedans?  
Editor : That phrase has been invented by our mutual enemy. When the 
Hindus and Mahomedans fought against one another, they  certainly spoke in 
that strain. They have long since ceased to fight. Ho w, then, can there be any 
inborn enmity? Pray remember this too, that we did n ot cease to fight only 
after British occupation. The Hindus flourished under  Moslem sovereigns and 
Moslems under the Hindu. Each party recognized that m utual fighting was 
suicidal, and that neither party would abandon its re ligion by force of arms. 
Both parties, therefore, decided to live in peace. With the English advent 
quarrels recommenced. 
The proverbs you have quoted were coined when both w ere fighting; to quote 
them now is obviously harmful. Should we not remember  that many Hindus 
and Mahomedans own the same ancestors and the same blood  runs through 
their veins? Do people become enemies because they cha nge their religion? Is 
the God of the Mahomedan different from the God of the Hindu ? Religions 
are different roads converging to the same point. Wh at does it matter that 
we take different roads so long as we reach the same  goal? Wherein is the 
cause for quarrelling? Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  Moreover, there are deadly proverbs as between the fo llowers of Siva and 
those of Vishnu, yet nobody suggests that these two do n ot belong to the 
same nation. It is said that the Vedic religion is di fferent from Jainism, but 
the followers of the respective faiths are not differe nt nations. The fact is 
that we have become enslaved and, therefore, quarrel  and like to have our 
quarrels decided by a third party. There are Hindu i conoclasts as there are 
Mahomedan. The more we advance in true knowledge, t he better we shall 
understand that we need not be at war with those whose  religion we may not 
follow. 
Reader : Now  I would like to know your views about cow-protection . 
Editor  : I myself respect the cow, that is,  I look upon her with affectionate 
reverence. The cow is the protector of India because , being an agricultural 
country, she is dependent on the cow. The cow is a most  useful animal in 
hundreds of ways. Our Mahomedan brethren will admit this. 
But, just as I respect the cow, so do I respect my fe llow-men. A man is just as 
useful as a cow no matter whether he be a Mahomedan or a Hindu. Am I, 
then, to fight with or kill a Mahomedan in order to  save a cow? In doing so, I 
would become an enemy of the Mahomedan as well as of the cow. Therefore, 
the only method I know of protecting the cow is that  I should approach my 
Mahomedan brother and urge him for the sake of the c ountry to join me in 
protecting her. If he would not listen to me I should  let the cow go for the 
simple reason that the matter is beyond my ability. If  I were overfull of pity 
for the cow, I should sacrifice my life to save her bu t not take my brother's. 
This, I hold, is the law of our religion. 
When men become obstinate, it is a difficult thing. I f I pull one way, my 
Moslem brother will pull another. If I put on a supe rior air, he will return the 
compliment. If I bow to him gently, he will do it m uch more so; and if he does Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  not, I shall not be considered to have done wrong in having bowed. When the 
Hindus became insistent, the killing of cows increased. In my opinion, cow-
protection societies may be considered cow-killing s ocieties. It is a disgrace to 
us that we should need such societies. When we forgot h ow to protect cows, I 
suppose we needed such societies. 
What am I to do when a blood-brother is on the point  of killing a cow? Am I to 
kill him, or to fall down at his feet and implore hi m? If you admit that I should 
adopt the latter course, I must do the same to my Mosl em brother. 
Who protects the cow from destruction by Hindus when  they cruelly ill-treat 
her ? Whoever reasons with the Hindus when they merci lessly belabour the 
progeny of the cow with their sticks? But this has not prevented us from 
remaining one nation. 
Lastly, if it is be true that the Hindus believe in th e doctrine of non-killing and 
the Mahomedans do not, what, pray, is the duty of the  former? It is not 
written that a follower of the religion of Ahimsa (n on-killing) may kill a 
fellow-man. For him the way is straight. In order to save one being, he may 
not kill another. He can only plead—therein lies his sole duty. 
But does every Hindu believe in Ahimsa? Going to the  root of the matter, not 
one man really practises such a religion because we do  destroy life. We are 
said to follow that religion because we want to obtai n freedom from liability 
to kill any kind of life. Generally speaking, we may  observe that many Hindus 
partake of meat and are not, therefore, followers o f Ahimsa. It is, therefore, 
preposterous to suggest that the two cannot live toget her amicably because 
the Hindus believe in Ahimsa and the Mahomedans do no t. 
These thoughts are put into our minds by selfish and fa lse religious teachers. 
The English put the finishing touch. They have habit of writing history; they 
pretend to study the manners and customs of all peopl es. God has given us a Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  limited mental capacity, but they usurp the function  of the Godhead and 
indulge in novel experiments. They write about their  own researches in most 
laudatory terms and hypnotize us into believing them.  We in our ignorance 
then fall at their feet. 
Those who do not wish to misunderstand things may read  up the Koran, and 
they will find therein hundreds of passages acceptable to the Hindus; and the 
Bhagavadgita contains passages to which not a Mahomeda n can take 
exception. Am I to dislike a Mahomedan because there are passages in the 
Koran I do not understand or like? It takes two to ma ke a quarrel. If I do not 
want to quarrel with a Mahomedan, the latter will b e powerless to foist a 
quarrel on me; and, similarly, I should be powerless i f a Mahomedan refuse his 
assistance to quarrel with me. An arm striking the ai r will become disjointed. 
If everyone will try to understand the core of his o wn religion and adhere to 
it, and will not allow false teachers to dictate to him, there will be no room 
left for quarrelling. 
Reader : But will the English ever allow the two bod ies to join hands? 
Editor : This question arises out of your timidity. It betrays our shallowness. If 
two brothers want to live in peace, is it possible fo r a third party to separate 
them? If they were to listen to evil counsels we would  consider them to be 
foolish. Similarly, we Hindus and Mahomedans would ha ve to blame our folly 
rather than the English, if we allowed them to put u s asunder. A clay pot 
would break through impact, if not with one stone, t hen with another. The 
way to save the pot is not to keep it away from the d anger point but to bake 
it so that no stone would break it. We have then to make our hearts of 
perfectly baked clay. Then we shall be steeled against  all danger. This can be 
easily done by the Hindus. They are superior in number s; they pretend that Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  they are more educated; they are, therefore, better  able to shield themselves 
from attack on their amicable relations with the Mah omedans. 
There is mutual distrust between the two communities.  The Mahomedans, 
therefore, ask for certain concessions from Lord Morley . Why should the 
Hindus oppose this? If the Hindus desisted, the English would notice it, the 
Mahomedans would gradually begin to trust the Hindus, and brotherliness 
would be the outcome. We should be ashamed to take ou r quarrels to the 
English. Everyone can find out for himself that the H indus can lose nothing by 
desisting. That man who has inspired confidence in anot her has never lost 
anything in this world. 
I do not suggest that the Hindus and the Mahomedans wil l never fight. Two 
brothers living together often do so. We shall sometim es have our heads 
broken. Such a thing ought not to be necessary, but a ll men are not equitable. 
When people are in a rage, they do many foolish thin gs. These we have to put 
up with. But when we do quarrel, we certainly do no t want to engage counsel 
and resort to English or any law-courts. Two men fight ; both have their heads 
broken, or one only. How shall a third party distribu te justice amongst them? 
Those who fight may expect to be injured. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  11. THE CONDITION OF INDIA (CONTINUED): LAWYERS 
Reader : You tell me that when two men quarrel they  should not go to a law-
court. This is astonishing. 
Editor : Whether you call it astonishing or not, it  is the truth. And your 
question introduces us to the lawyers and the doctors.  My firm opinion is that 
the lawyers have enslaved India, have accentuated Hi ndu- Mahomedan 
dissensions and have confirmed English authority. 
Reader : It is easy enough to bring these charges, but it will be difficult for 
you to prove them. But for the lawyers, who would ha ve shown us the road to 
independence? Who would have protected the poor? Wh o would have secured 
justice? For instance, the late Manomohan Ghose defen ded many a poor man 
free of charge. The Congress, which you have praised so  much is dependent 
for its existence and activity upon the work of the l awyers. To denounce such 
an estimable class of men is to spell injustice, and you  are abusing the liberty 
of the press by decrying lawyers. 
Editor : At one time I used to think exactly like yo u. I have no desire to 
convince you that they have never done a single goo d thing. I honour Mr. 
Ghose's memory It is quite true that he helped the po or. That the Congress 
owes the lawyers something is believable. Lawyers are  also men, and there is 
something good in every man. Whenever instances of law yers having done 
good can be brought forward, it will be found that the good is due to them as 
men rather than as lawyers. All I am concerned with is to show you that the 
profession teaches immorality; it is exposed to temptat ion from which few are 
saved. 
The Hindus and the Mahomedans have quarrelled. An ord inary man will ask 
them to forget all about it; he will tell them that  both must be more or less at 
fault, and will advise them no longer to quarrel. Bu t they go to lawyers. The Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  latter's duty is to side with their clients and to find  out ways and arguments in 
favour of the clients to which they (the clients) ar e often strangers. If they do 
not do so they will be considered to have degraded t heir profession. The 
lawyers, therefore, will, as a rule, advance quarrels  instead of repressing 
them. Moreover, men take up that profession, not in o rder to help others out 
of their miseries, but to enrich themselves. It is one o f the avenues of 
becoming wealthy and their interest exists in multip lying disputes. It is within 
my knowledge that they are glad when men have disput es. Petty pleaders 
actually manufacture them. Their touts, like so many  leeches, suck the blood 
of the poor people. Lawyers are men who have little to do. Lazy people, in 
order to indulge in luxuries, take up such professions.  This is a true 
statement. Any other argument is a mere pretension. It  is the lawyers who 
have discovered that theirs is an honourable profession . They frame laws as 
they frame their own praises. They decide what fees th ey will charge and 
they put on so much side that poor people almost consi der them to be 
heaven-born. 
Why do they want more fees than common labourers? Why  are their 
requirements greater? In what way are they more prof itable to the country 
than the labourers? Are those who do good entitled t o greater payment ? And, 
if they have done anything for the country for the sake of money, how shall it 
be counted as good? 
Those who know anything of the Hindu- Mahomedan qua rrels know that they 
have been often due to the intervention of lawyers.  Some families have been 
ruined through them; they have made brothers enemies.  Principalities, having 
come under the lawyers' power, have become loaded wi th debt. Many have 
been robbed of their all. Such instances can be mult iplied. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  But the greatest injury they have done to the countr y is that they have 
tightened the English grip. Do you think that it wou ld be possible for the 
English to carry on their Government without law-cou rts? It is wrong to 
consider that courts are established for the benefit o f the people. Those who 
want to perpetuate their power do so through the co urts. If people were to 
settle their own quarrels, a third party would not be  able to exercise any 
authority over them. Truly, men were less unmanly whe n they settled their 
disputes either by fighting or by asking their relati ves to decide for them. 
They became more unmanly and cowardly when they res orted to the courts of 
law. It was certainly a sign of savagery when they set tled their disputes by 
fighting. Is it any the less so, if I ask a third party to decide between you and 
me? Surely, the decision of a third party is not alw ays right. The parties alone 
know who is right. We, in our simplicity and ignoranc e, imagine that a 
stranger, by taking our money, gives us justice. 
The chief thing, however, to be remembered is that without lawyers courts 
could not have been established or conducted and with out the latter the 
English could not rule. Supposing that there were onl y English judges, English 
pleaders and English police, they could only rule ove r the English. The English 
could not do without Indian judges and Indian pleade rs. How the pleaders 
were made in the first instance and how they were fa voured you should 
understand well. Then you will have the same abhorre nce for the profession 
that I have. If pleaders were to abandon their profe ssion, and consider it just 
as degrading as prostitution, English rule would brea k up in a day. They have 
been instrumental in having the charge laid against us that we love quarrels 
and courts as fish love water. What I have said with r eference to the pleaders 
necessarily applies to the judges; they are first cousi ns; and the one gives 
strength to the other. 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  12. THE CONDITION OF INDIA (CONTINUED) : DOCTORS 
Reader  : I now understand the lawyers; the good they may have done is 
accidental. I feel that profession is certainly hatefu l. You, however, drag in 
the doctors also, how is that? 
Editor : The views  I submit to you are those  I have adopted. They are not 
original. Western writers have used stronger terms rega rding both lawyers 
and doctors. One writer has linked the whole modern sy stem to the Upas 
tree. Its branches are represented by parasitical pr ofessions, including those 
of law and medicine, and over the trunk has been rai sed the axe of true 
religion. Immorality is the root of the tree. So you  will see that the views do 
not come right out of my mind but represent the comb ined experiences of 
many. I was at one time a great lover of the medical  profession. It was my 
intention to become a doctor for the sake of the cou ntry. I no longer hold 
that opinion, I now understand why the medicine men (the  vaids)  among us 
have not occupied a very honourable status. 
The English have certainly effectively used the medic al profession for holding 
us. English physicians are known to have used their prof ession with several 
Asiatic potentates for political gain. 
Doctors have almost unhinged us. Sometimes I think that  quacks are better 
than highly qualified doctors. Let us consider : the business of a doctor is to 
take care of the body, or, properly speaking, not e ven that. Their business is 
really to rid the body of diseases that may afflict it . How do these diseases 
arise? Surely by our negligence or indulgence. I ove reat, I have indigestion, I 
go to a doctor, he gives me medicine, I am cured. I overeat again, I take his 
pills again. Had I not taken the pills in the first in stance, I would have 
suffered the punishment deserved by me and I would not  have overeaten 
again. The doctor intervened and helped me to indul ge myself. My body Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  thereby certainly felt more at ease; but my mind be came weakened. A 
continuance of a course of medicine must, therefore,  result in loss of control 
over the mind. 
I have indulged in vice, I contract a disease, a doc tor cures me, the odds are 
that I shall repeat the vice. Had the doctor not int ervened, nature would 
have done its work, and I would have acquired master y over myself, would 
have been freed from vice and would have become hap py. 
Hospitals are institutions for propagating sin. Men take  less care of their 
bodies and immorality increases. European doctors are t he worst of all. For 
the sake of a mistaken care of the human body, they k ill annually thousands 
of animals. They practise vivisection. No religion san ctions this. All say that it 
is not necessary to take so many lives for the sake of o ur bodies. 
These doctors violate our religious instinct. Most of t heir medical 
preparations contain either animal fat or spirituous liquors; both of these are 
tabooed by Hindus and Mahomedans. We may pretend to b e civilized, call 
religious prohibitions a superstition and wantonly ind ulge in what we like. The 
fact remains that the doctors induce us to indulge, a nd the result is that we 
have become deprived of self-control and have become  effeminate. In these 
circumstances, we are unfit to serve the country. To  study European 
medicine is to deepen our slavery. 
It is worth considering why we take up the profession of medicine. It is 
certainly not taken up for the purpose of serving hum anity. We become 
doctors so that we may obtain honours and riches. I have endeavoured to 
show that there is no real service of humanity in the profession, and that it is 
injurious to mankind. Doctors make a show of their kno wledge, and charge 
exorbitant fees. Their preparations, which are intri nsically worth a few 
pence, cost shillings. The populace, in its credulity  and in the hope of ridding Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  itself of some disease, allows itself to be cheated. A re not quacks then whom 
we know, better than the doctors who put on an air of humaneness? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  13. WHAT IS TRUE CIVILIZATION? 
Reader : You have denounced railways, lawyers and do ctors. I can see that 
you will discard all machinery. What, then, is civili zation? 
Editor : The answer to, that question is not difficult . I believe that the 
civilization India has evolved is not to be beaten i n the world. Nothing can 
equal the seeds sown by our ancestors. Rome went, Greece  shared the same 
fate; the might of the Pharaohs was broken; Japan has become Westernized; 
of China nothing can be said; but India is still, som ehow or other, sound at 
the foundation. The people of Europe learn their le ssons from the writings of 
the men of Greece or Rome, which exist no longer in  their former glory. In 
trying to learn from them, the Europeans imagine tha t they will avoid the 
mistakes of Greece and Rome. Such is their pitiable co ndition. In the midst of 
all this India remains immovable and that is her glor y. It is a charge against 
India that her people are so uncivilized, ignorant a nd stolid, that it is not 
possible to induce them to adopt any changes. It is a c harge really against our 
merit. What we have tested and found true on the anv il of experience, we 
dare not change. Many thrust their advice upon India , and she remains 
steady. This is her beauty: it is the sheet-anchor of ou r hope. 
Civilization is that mode of conduct which points out  to man the path of duty. 
Performance of duty and observance of morality are c onvertible terms. To 
observe morality is to attain mastery over our mind an d our passions. So 
doing, we know ourselves. The Gujarati equivalent for  civilization means 
"good conduct". 
If this definition be correct, then India, as so many writers have shown, has 
nothing to learn from anybody else, and this is as it s hould be. We notice that 
the mind is a restless bird; the more it gets the more i t wants, and still 
remains unsatisfied. The more we indulge our passions the more unbridled Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  they become. Our ancestors, therefore, set a limit t o our indulgences. They 
saw that happiness was largely a mental condition. A m an is not necessarily 
happy because he is rich, or unhappy because he is poor . The rich are often 
seen to be unhappy, the poor to be happy. Millions wi ll always remain poor. 
Observing all this, our ancestors dissuaded us from lux uries and pleasures. We 
have managed with the same kind of plough as existed t housands of years 
ago. We have retained the same kind of cottages that  we had in former times 
and our indigenous education remains the same as before . We have had no 
system of life-corroding competition. Each followed h is own occupation or 
trade and charged a regulation wage. It was not tha t we did not know how to 
invent machinery, but our forefathers knew that, if  we set our hearts after 
such things, we would become slaves and lose our moral f ibre. They, 
therefore, after due deliberation decided that we sh ould only do what we 
could with our hands and feet. They saw that our re al happiness and health 
consisted in a proper use of our hands and feet. They further reasoned that 
large cities were a snare and a useless encumbrance and  that people would 
not be happy in them, that there would be gangs of thieves and robbers, 
prostitution and vice flourishing in them and that po or men would be robbed 
by rich men. They were, therefore, satisfied with smal l villages. They saw 
that kings and their swords were inferior to the sword of ethics, and they, 
therefore, held the sovereigns of the earth to be inf erior to the Rishis and the 
Fakirs. A nation with a constitution like this is fitt er to teach others than to 
learn from others. This nation had courts, lawyers and doctors, but they were 
all within bounds. Everybody knew that these professio ns were not 
particularly superior; moreover, these vakils and  vaids did not rob people; 
they were considered people's dependants, not their ma sters. Justice was 
tolerably fair. The ordinary rule was to avoid court s. There were no touts to 
lure people into them. This evil, too, was noticeabl e only in and around Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  capitals. The common people lived independently and followed their 
agricultural occupation. They enjoyed true Home Rul e. 
And where this cursed modern civilization has not reac hed, India remains as 
it was before. The inhabitants of that part of India will very properly laugh at 
your newfangled notions. The English do not rule ove r them, nor will you ever 
rule over them. Those in whose name we speak we do no t know, nor do they 
know us. I would certainly advise you and those like you who love the 
motherland to go into the interior that has yet bee n not polluted by the 
railways and to live there for six months; you might t hen be patriotic and 
speak of Home Rule. 
Now you see what I consider to be real civilization. Those who want to 
change conditions such as I have described are enemies of the country and 
are sinners. 
Reader : It would be all right if India were exactl y as you have described it, 
but it is also India where there are hundreds of child  widows, where two year 
old babies are married, where twelve year old girls a re mothers and 
housewives, where women practise polyandry, where the practice of Niyoga 
obtains, where, in the name of religion, girls dedica te themselves to 
prostitution, and in the name of religion sheep and g oats are killed. Do you 
consider these also symbols of the civilization tha t you have described? 
Editor : You make a mistake. The defects that you ha ve shown are defects. 
Nobody mistakes them for ancient civilization. They r emain in spite of it. 
Attempts have always been made and will be made to re move them. We may 
utilize the new spirit that is born in us for purging  ourselves of these evils. 
But what I have described to you as emblems of modern civilization are 
accepted as such by its votaries. The Indian civilizat ion, as described by me, 
has been so described by its votaries. In no part of t he world, and under no Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  civilization, have all men attained perfection. The  tendency of the Indian 
civilization is to elevate the moral being, that of the Western civilization is to 
propagate immorality. The latter is godless, the form er is based on a belief in 
God. So understanding and so believing, it behoves ev ery lover of India to 
cling to the old Indian civilization even as a child  clings to the mother's 
breast. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  14. HOW CAN INDIA BECOME FREE? 
Reader : I appreciate your views about civilization . I will have to think over 
them. I cannot take them in all at once. What, then , holding the views you 
do, would you suggest for freeing India? 
Editor : I do not expect my views to be accepted all  of a sudden. My duty is to 
place them before readers like yourself. Time can be trusted to do the rest. 
We have already examined the conditions for freeing India, but we have done 
so indirectly; we will now do so directly. It is a wo rld-known maxim that the 
removal of the cause of a disease results in the removal  of the disease itself. 
Similarly if the cause of India's slavery be removed,  India can become free. 
Reader : If Indian civilization is, as you say, the be st of all, how do you 
account for India's slavery? 
Editor : This civilization is unquestionably the best,  but it is to be observed 
that all civilizations have been on their trial. Th at civilization which is 
permanent outlives it. Because the sons of India were  found wanting, its 
civilization has been placed in jeopardy. But its stre ngth is to be seen in its 
ability to survive the shock. Moreover, the whole of India is not touched. 
Those alone who have been affected by Western civil ization have become 
enslaved. We measure the universe by our own miserable foot-rule. When we 
are slaves, we think that the whole universe is enslave d. Because we are in an 
abject condition, we think that the whole of India is in that condition. As a 
matter of fact, it is not so, yet it is as well to imp ute our slavery to the whole 
of India. But if we bear in mind the above fact, we  can see that if we become 
free, India is free. And in this thought you have a definition of Swaraj. It is 
Swaraj when we learn to rule ourselves. It is, therefo re, in the palm of our 
hands. Do not consider this Swaraj to be like a dream . There is no idea of 
sitting still. The Swaraj that I wish to picture is su ch that, after we have once Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  realized it, we shall endeavour to the end of our li fe-time to persuade others 
to do likewise. But such Swaraj has to be experienced,  by each one for 
himself. One drowning man will never save another. Slaves ourselves, it would 
be a mere pretension to think of freeing others. Now you will have seen that 
it is not necessary for us to have as our goal the expu lsion of the English. If 
the English become Indianized, we can accommodate th em. If they wish to 
remain in India along with their civilization, ther e is no room for them. It lies 
with us to bring about such a state of things. 
Reader : It is impossible that Englishmen should ever be come Indianized. 
Editor : To say that is equivalent to saying that th e English have no humanity 
in them. And it is really beside the point whether t hey become so or not. If 
we keep our own house in order, only those who are f it to live in it will 
remain. Others will leave of their own accord. Such things occur within the 
experience of all of us. 
Reader : But it has not occurred in history. 
Editor : To believe that what has not occurred in h istory will not occur at all is 
to argue disbelief in the dignity of man. At any rat e, it behaves us to try what 
appeals to our reason. All countries are not similar ly conditioned. The 
condition of India is unique. Its strength is immeasur able. We need not, 
therefore, refer to the history of other countries. I  have drawn attention to 
the fact that, when other civilizations have succumb ed, the Indian has 
survived many a shock. 
Reader : I cannot follow this. There seems little doub t that we shall have to 
expel the English by force of arms. So long as they a re in the country we 
cannot rest. One of our poets say that slaves cannot ev en dream of happiness. 
We are day by day becoming weakened owing to the pr esence of the English. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  Our greatness is gone; our people look like terrified men. The English are in 
the country like a blight which we must remove by e very means. 
Editor : In your excitement, you have forgotten all  we have been considering. 
We brought the English, and we keep them. Why do you  forget that our 
adoption of their civilization makes their presence i n India at all possible? 
Your hatred against them ought to he transferred to t heir civilization. But let 
us assume that we have to drive away the English by fig hting, how is that to 
be done? 
Reader : In the same way as Italy did it. What was po ssible for Mazzini and 
Garibaldi is possible for us. You cannot deny that the y were very great men. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  15. ITALY AND INDIA 
Editor : It is well that you have instanced Italy. Ma zzini was a great and good 
man; Garibaldi was a great warrior. Both are adorab le; from their lives we can 
learn much. But the condition of Italy was differen t from that of India. In the 
first instance, the difference between Mazzini and G aribaldi is worth noting. 
Mazzini's ambition was not and has not yet been real ized regarding Italy. 
Mazzini has shown in his writings on the duty of man t hat every man must 
learn how to rule himself. This has not happened in It aly. Garibaldi did not 
hold this view of Mazzini's. Garibaldi gave, and ever y Italian took arms. Italy 
and Austria had the same civilization; they were cou sins in this respect. It was 
a matter of tit for tat. Garibaldi simply wanted Ita ly to be free from the 
Austrian yoke. The machinations of Minister Cavour disg race that portion of 
the history of Italy. And what has been the result? 
If you believe that because Italians rule Italy the I talian nation is happy, you 
are groping in darkness. Mazzini has shown conclusivel y that Italy did not 
become free. Victor Emanuel gave one meaning to the  expression; Mazzini 
gave another. According to Emanuel, Cavour and even  Garibaldi, Italy meant 
the King of Italy and his henchmen. According to Maz zini, it meant the whole 
of the Italian people, that is, its agriculturists. Em anuel was only its servant. 
The Italy of Mazzini still remains in a state of slav ery. At the time of the so-
called national war, it was a game of chess between t wo rival kings with the 
people of Italy as pawns. The working classes in that l and are still unhappy. 
They, therefore, indulge in assassination, rise in revo lt, and rebellion on their 
part is always expected. What substantial gain did I taly obtain after the 
withdrawal of the Austrian troops? The gain was only  nominal. The reforms for 
the sake of which the war was supposed to have been und ertaken have not 
yet been granted. The condition of the people in ge neral sill remains the 
same. I am sure you do not wish to reproduce such a con dition in India. I Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  believe that you want the millions of India to be ha ppy, not that you want the 
reins of Government in your hands. If that be so, we have to consider only one 
thing: how can the millions obtain self-rule? You wil l admit that people under 
several Indian princes are being ground down. The lat ter mercilessly crush 
them. Their tyranny is greater than that of the Engl ish, and if you want such 
tyranny in India, then we shall never agree. My patr iotism does not teach me 
that I am to allow people to be crushed under the he el of Indian princes if 
only the English retire. If I have the power, I shoul d resist the tyranny of 
Indian princes just as much as that of the English. By patriotism I mean the 
welfare of the whole people, and if I could secure i t at the hands of the 
English, I should bow down my head to them. If any En glishman dedicated his 
life in securing the freedom of India, resisting tyr anny and serving the land, I 
should welcome that Englishman as an Indian. 
Again, India can fight like Italy only when she has arms. You have not 
considered this problem at all. The English are splendi dly armed; that does 
not frighten me, but it is clear that, to pit ourselv es against them in arms, 
thousands of Indians must be armed. If such a thing be  possible, how many 
years will it take? Moreover, to arm India on a larg e scale is to Europeanize it. 
Then her condition will be just as pitiable as that of Europe. This means, in 
short, that India must accept European civilization, and if that is what we 
want, the best thing is that we have among us those who  are so well trained 
in that civilization. We will then fight for a few rights, will get what we can 
and so pass our days. But the fact is that the Indian  nation will not adopt 
arms, and it is well that it does not. 
Reader : You are overstating the facts. All need not be armed. At first, we 
shall assassinate a few Englishmen and strike terror; the n, a few men who will 
have been armed will fight openly. We may have to l ose a quarter of a million Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  men, more or less, but we shall regain our land. We sha ll undertake guerilla 
warfare, and defeat the English. 
Editor : That is to say, you want to make the holy land of India unholy. Do you 
not tremble to think of freeing India by assassination ? What we need to do is 
to sacrifice ourselves. It is a cowardly thought, tha t of killing others. Whom 
do you suppose to free by- assassination? The millions of India do not desire it. 
Those who are intoxicated by the wretched modern ci vilization think these 
things. Those who will rise to power by murder will ce rtainly not make the 
nation happy. Those who believe that India has gaine d by Dhingra's act and 
other similar acts in India make a serious mistake. Dhin gra was a patriot, but 
his love was blind. He gave his body in a wrong way; i ts ultimate result can 
only be mischievous. 
Reader : But you will admit that the English have be en frightened by these 
murders, and that Lord Morley's reforms are due to f ear. 
Editor : The English are both a timid and a brave na tion. England is, I believe, 
easily influenced by the use of gunpowder. It is possib le that Lord Morley has 
granted the reforms through fear, but what is grant ed under fear can be 
retained only so long as the fear lasts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  16. BRUTE FORCE 
Reader : This is a new doctrine, that what is gained through fear is retained 
only while the fear lasts, Surely, what is given will not be withdrawn? 
Editor : Not so. The Proclamation of 1857 was given at the end of a revolt, 
and for the purpose of preserving peace. When peace w as secured and people 
became simple-minded its full effect was toned down. If I cease stealing for 
fear of punishment, I would recommence the operation  as soon as the fear is 
withdrawn from me. This is almost a universal experienc e. We have assumed 
that we can get men to do things by force and, ther efore, we use force. 
Reader : Will you not admit that you are arguing ag ainst yourself? You know 
that what the English obtained in their own country  they obtained by using 
brute force. I know you have argued that what they have obtained is useless, 
but that does not affect my argument. They wanted use less things and they 
got them. My point is that their desire was fulfilled . What does it matter what 
means they adopted? Why should we not obtain our goal , which is good, by 
any means whatsoever, even by using violence? Shall I think of the means 
when I have to deal with a thief in the house? My d uty is to drive him out 
anyhow. You seem to admit that we have received noth ing, and that we shall 
receive nothing by petitioning. Why, then, may we n ot do so by using brute 
force? And, to retain what we may receive we shall k eep up the fear by using 
the same force to the extent that it may be necessary . You will not find fault 
with a continuance of force to prevent a child from  thrusting its foot into fire? 
Somehow or other we have to gain our end. 
Editor : Your reasoning is plausible. It has deluded many. I have used similar 
arguments before now. But I think I know better now,  and I shall endeavour to 
undeceive you. Let us first take the argument that we  are justified in gaining 
our end by using brute force because the English gaine d theirs by using similar Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  means. It is perfectly true that they used brute force  and that it is possible 
for us to do likewise, but by using similar means we ca n get only the same 
thing that they got. You will admit that we do not want that. Your belief that 
there is no connection between the means and the end  is a great mistake. 
Through that mistake even men who have been considere d religious have 
committed grievous crimes. Your reasoning is the same a s saying that we can 
get a rose through planting a noxious weed. If I want  to cross the ocean, I can 
do so only by means of a vessel; if I were to use a car t for that purpose, both 
the cart and I would soon find the bottom. "As is th e God, so is the votary", is 
a maxim worth considering. Its meaning has been distort ed and men have 
gone astray. The means may be likened to a seed, the end to a tree; and 
there is just the same inviolable connection between  the means and the end 
as there is between the seed and the tree. I am not li kely to obtain the result 
flowing from the worship of God by laying myself prost rate before Satan. If, 
therefore, anyone were to say: "I want to worship God ; it does not matter 
that I do so by means of Satan," it would be set down  as ignorant folly. We 
reap exactly as we sow. The English in 1833 obtained greater voting power by 
violence. Did they by using brute force better appre ciate their duty? They 
wanted the right of voting, which they obtained by using physical force. But 
real rights are a result of performance of duty; th ese rights they have not 
obtained. We, therefore, have before us in England the force of everybody 
wanting and insisting on his rights, nobody thinking of  his duty. And, where 
everybody wants rights, who shall give them to whom? I  do not wish to imply 
that they do no duties. They don't perform the dutie s corresponding to those 
rights; and as they do not perform that particular du ty, namely, acquire 
fitness, their rights have proved a burden to them. In  other words, what they 
have obtained is an exact result of the means they ado pted. They used the 
means corresponding to the end. If I want to deprive you of your watch, I shall Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  certainly have to fight for it; if I want to buy yo ur watch, I shall have to pay 
you for it; and if I want a gift, I shall have to pl ead for it; and, according to 
the means I employ, the watch is stolen property, my  own property, or a 
donation. Thus we see three different results from thr ee different means. Will 
you still say that means do not matter? 
Now we shall take the example given by you of the t hief to be driven out. I do 
not agree with you that the thief may be driven out  by any means. If it is my 
father who has come to steal I shall use one kind of me ans. If it is an 
acquaintance I shall use another; and in the case of a  perfect stranger I shall 
use a third. If it is a white man, you will perhaps s ay you will use means 
different from those you will adopt with an Indian t hief. If it is a weakling, 
the means will be different from those to be adopted  for dealing with an 
equal in physical strength; and if the thief is armed  from top to toe, I shall 
simply remain quiet. Thus we have a variety of means between the father and 
the armed man. Again, I fancy that I should pretend to be sleeping whether 
the thief was my father or that strong armed man. Th e reason for this is that 
my father would also be armed and I should succumb to the strength 
possessed by either and allow my things to be stolen. T he strength of my 
father would make me weep with pity; the strength of  the armed man would 
rouse in me anger and we should become enemies. Such i s the curious 
situation. From these examples we may not be able to a gree as to the means 
to be adopted in each ease. I myself seem clearly to  see what should be done 
in all these cases, but the remedy may frighten you. I  therefore hesitate to 
place it before you. For the time being I will leav e you to guess it, and if you 
cannot, it is clear you will have to adopt different  means in each case. You 
will also have seen that any means will not avail to d rive away the thief. You 
will have to adopt means to fit each case. Hence it f ollows that your duty is 
not to drive away the thief by any means you like. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  Let us proceed a little further. That well-armed man  has stolen your property; 
you have harboured the thought of his act; you are f illed with anger; you 
argue that you want to punish that rogue, not for yo ur own sake, but for the 
good of your neighbours; you have collected a numbe r of armed men, you 
want to take his house by assault; he is duly informe d of it, he runs away; he 
too is incensed. He collects his brother robbers, and sen ds you a defiant 
message that he will commit robbery in broad daylight . You are strong, you do 
not fear him, you are prepared to receive him. Mean while, the robber pesters 
your neighbours. They complain before you. You reply  that you are doing all 
for their sake; you do not mind that your own goods have been stolen. Your 
neighbours reply that the robber never pestered them before, and that he 
commenced his depredations only after you declared ho stilities against him. 
You are between Scylla and Charybdis. You are full o f pity for the poor men. 
What they say is true. What are you to do? You will be disgraced if you now 
leave the robber alone. You, therefore, tell the po or men: "Never mind. 
Come, my wealth is yours, I will give you arms, I will  teach you how to use 
them; you should belabour the rogue; don't you leave  him alone." And so the 
battle grows; the robbers increase in numbers; your nei ghbours have 
deliberately put themselves to inconvenience. Thus th e result of wanting to 
take revenge upon the robber is that you have disturb ed your own peace; you 
are in perpetual fear of being robbed and assaulted;  your courage has given 
place to cowardice. If you will patiently examine t he argument, you will see 
that I have not overdrawn the picture. This is one of  the means. Now let us 
examine the other. You set this armed robber down as an ignorant brother; 
you intend to reason with him at a suitable opportun ity; you argue that he is, 
after all, a fellow-man; you do not know what promp ted him to steal. You, 
therefore, decide that, when you can, you will dest roy the man's motive for 
stealing. Whilst you are thus reasoning with yourself, the man comes again to Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70  steal. Instead of being angry with him you take pity on him. You think that 
this stealing habit must be a disease with him. Hencefor th, you, therefore, 
keep your doors and windows open, you change your sl eeping-place, and you 
keep your things in a manner most accessible to him. T he robber comes again 
and is confused as all this is new to him; nevertheless, h e takes away your 
things. But his mind is agitated. He inquires about you  in the village, he 
comes to learn about your broad and loving heart, he  repents, he begs your 
pardon, returns you your things, and leaves off the st ealing habit. He becomes 
your servant, and you find for him honourable employ ment. This is the second 
method. Thus, you see, different means have brought a bout totally different 
results. I do not wish to deduce from this that robb ers will act in the above 
manner or that all will have the same pity and love  like you, but I only wish to 
show that fair means alone can produce fair results, a nd that, at least in the 
majority of cases, if not indeed in all, the force o f love and pity is infinitely 
greater than the force of arms. There is harm in the exercise of brute force, 
never in that of pity. 
Now we will take the question of petitioning. It is a  fact beyond dispute that a 
petition, without the backing of force, is useless. Ho wever, the late Justice 
Ranade used to say that petitions served a useful pur pose because they were 
a means of educating people. They give the latter an  idea of their condition 
and warn the rulers. From this point of view, they a re not altogether useless. 
A petition of an equal is a sign of courtesy; a petit ion from a slave is a symbol 
of his slavery. A petition backed by force is a petit ion from an equal and, 
when he transmits his demand in the form of a petiti on, it testifies to his 
nobility. Two kinds of force can back petitions. "We shall hurt you if you do 
not give this," is one kind of force; it is the force  of arms, whose evil results 
we have already examined. The second kind of force c an thus be stated: "If 
you do not concede our demand, we shall be no longer  your petitioners. You Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  can govern us only so long as we remain the governed; we shall no longer have 
any dealings with you." The force implied in this ma y be described as love- 
force, soul-force or, more popularly but less accurate ly, passive resistance. 
This force is indestructible. He who uses it perfectly understands his position. 
We have an ancient proverb which literally means: "O ne negative cures thirty-
six diseases." The force of arms is powerless when matched  against the force 
of love or the soul. 
Now we shall take your last illustration, that of the child thrusting its foot 
into fire. It will not avail you. What do you reall y do to the child ? Supposing 
that it can exert so much physical force that it re nders you powerless and 
rushes into fire, then you cannot prevent it. There are only two remedies 
open to you — either you must kill it in order to pr event it from perishing in 
the flames, or you must give your own life because yo u do not wish to see it 
perish before your very eyes. You will not kill it. If your heart is not quite full 
of pity, it is possible that you will not surrender you rself by preceding the 
child and going into the fire yourself. You, therefo re, helplessly allow it to go 
into the flames. Thus, at any rate, you are not using physical force. I hope you 
will not consider that it is still physical force, th ough of a low order, when you 
would forcibly prevent the child from rushing towar ds the fire if you could. 
That force is of a different order and we have to u nderstand what it is. 
Remember that, in thus preventing the child, you are  minding entirely its own 
interest; you are exercising authority for its sole be nefit. Your example does 
not apply to the English. In using brute force against  the English you consult 
entirely your own that is the national, interest. The re is no question here 
either of pity or of love. If you say that the acti ons of the English, being evil, 
represent fire, and that they proceed to their actio ns through ignorance, and 
that therefore they occupy the position of a child a nd that you want to 
protect such a child, then you will have to overtake  every evil action of that Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  kind by whomsoever committed and, as in the case of t he evil child, you will 
have to sacrifice yourself. If you are capable of suc h immeasurable pity, I wish 
you well in its exercise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  17. PASSIVE RESISTANCE 
Reader : Is there any historical evidence as to the success of what you have 
called soul-force or truth-force? No instance seems t o have happened of any 
nation having risen through soul-foree. I still think  that the evil-doers will not 
cease doing evil without physical punishment. 
Editor : The poet Tulsidas has said: "Of religion, pit y, or love, is the root, as 
egotism of the body. Therefore, we should not aband on pity so long as we are 
alive." This appears to me to be a scientific truth. I  believe in it as much as I 
believe in two and two being four. The force of lov e is the same as the force 
of the soul or truth. We have evidence of its working  at every step. The 
universe would disappear without the existence of that  force. But you ask for 
historical evidence. It is, therefore, necessary to kno w what history means. 
The Gujarati equivalent means: "It so happened." If that is the meaning of 
history, it is possible to give copious evidence. But, i f it means the doings of 
kings and emperors, there can be no evidence of soul-f orce or passive 
resistance in such history, You cannot expect silver or e in a tin mine. History, 
as we know it, is a record of the wars of the world, a nd so there is a proverb 
among Englishmen that a nation which has no history, t hat is, no wars, is a 
happy nation. How kings played, how they became enem ies of one another, 
how they murdered one another, is found accurately recorded in history, and 
if this were all that had happened in the world, it would have been ended 
long ago. If the story of the universe had commenced with wars, not a man 
would have been found alive today. Those people who have been warned 
against have disappeared as, for instance, the native s of Australia of whom 
hardly a man was left alive by the intruders. Mark, p lease, that these natives 
did not use soul-force in self-defence, and it does not  require much foresight 
to know that the Australians will share the same fate a s their victims. "Those Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  that take the sword shall perish by the sword." With u s the proverb is that 
professional swimmers will find a watery grave. 
The fact that there are so many men still alive in t he world shows that it is 
based not on the force of arms but on the force of tr uth or love. Therefore, 
the greatest and most unimpeachable evidence of the success of this force is 
to be found in the fact that, in spite of the wars o f the world, it still lives on. 
Thousands, indeed tens of thousands, depend for their e xistence on a very 
active working of this force. Little quarrels of mill ions of families in their 
daily lives disappear before the exercise of this for ce. Hundreds of nations 
live in peace. History does not and cannot take note of this fact. History is 
really a record of every interruption of the even w orking of the force of love 
or of the soul. Two brothers quarrel; one of them r epents and reawakens the 
love that was lying dormant in him; the two again b egin to live in peace; 
nobody takes note of this. But if the two brothers, th rough the intervention of 
solicitors or some other reason take up arms or go to l aw—which is another 
form of the exhibition of brute force,— their doing s would be immediately 
noticed in the press, they would be the talk of thei r neighbours and would 
probably go down to history. And what is true of fami lies and communities is 
true of nations. There is no reason to believe that there is one law for 
families and another for nations. History, then, is a r ecord of an interruption 
of the course of nature. Soul-force, being natural, is not noted in history. 
Reader : According to what you say, it is plain tha t instances of this kind of 
passive resistance are not to be found in history. It is necessary to understand 
passive resistance more fully. It will be better, ther efore, if you enlarge upon 
it. 
Editor : Passive resistance is a method of securing rig hts by personal 
suffering; it is the reverse of resistance by arms. When I refuse to do a thing Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  that is repugnant to my conscience, I use soul-force. For instance, the 
Government of the day has passed a law which is applic able to me. I do not 
like it. If by using violence I force the Government  to repeal the law, I am 
employing what may be termed body-force. If I do no t obey the law and 
accept the penalty for its breach, I use soul-force. I t involves sacrifice of self. 
Everybody admits that sacrifice of self is infinitely superior to sacrifice of 
others. Moreover, if this kind of force is used in a c ause that is unjust, only 
the person using it suffers. He does not make others su ffer for his mistakes. 
Men have before now done many things which were sub sequently found to 
have been wrong. No man can claim that he is absolute ly in the right or that a 
particular thing is wrong because he thinks so, but it is wrong for him so long 
as that is his deliberate judgment. It is therefore me et that he should not do 
that which he knows to be wrong, and suffer the con sequence whatever it 
may be. This is the key to the use of soul-force. 
Reader : You would then disregard laws—this is rank di sloyalty We have 
always been considered a law- abiding nation. You seem  to be going even 
beyond the extremists. They say that we must obey the l aws that have been 
passed, but that if the laws be bad, we must drive out  the law-givers even by 
force. 
Editor : Whether  I go beyond them or whether  I do, not is a matter of no 
consequence to either of us. We simply want to find o ut what is right and to 
act accordingly. The real meaning of the statement that we are a law-abiding 
nation is that we are passive resisters. When we do not  like certain laws, we 
do not break the heads of law-givers but we suffer an d do not submit to the 
laws. That we should obey laws whether good or bad is a  newfangled nation. 
There was no such thing in former days. The people di sregarded those laws 
they did not like and suffered the penalties for thei r breach. It is contrary to Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  our manhood if we obey laws repugnant to our conscien ce. Such teaching is 
opposed to religion and means slavery. If the Governme nt were to ask us to 
go about without any clothing, should we do so? If I  were a passive resister, I 
would say to them that I would have nothing to do wi th their law. But we 
have so forgotten ourselves and become so compliant t hat we do not mind 
any degrading law. 
A man who has realized his manhood, who fears only Go d, will fear no one 
else. Man-made laws are not necessarily binding on him.  Even the 
Government does not expect any such thing from us. Th ey do not say: "You 
must do such and such a thing," but they say: "If you d o not do it, we will 
punish you." We are sunk so low that we fancy that it  is our duty and our 
religion to do what the law lays down. If man will o nly realize that it is 
unmanly to obey laws that are unjust, no man's tyran ny will enslave him. This 
is the key to self- rule or home-rule. 
It is a superstition and ungodly thing to believe tha t an act of a majority binds 
a minority. Many examples can be given in which acts of majorities will be 
found to have been wrong and those of minorities to h ave been right. All 
reforms owe their origin to the initiation of minori ties in opposition to 
majorities. If among a band of robbers knowledge of robbing is obligatory, is a 
pious man to accept the obligation? So long as the sup erstition that men 
should obey unjust laws exists, so long will their slaver y exist. And a passive 
resister alone can remove such a superstition. 
To use brute force, to use gunpowder, is contrary to passive resistance, for it 
means that we want our opponent to do by force that which we desire but he 
does not. And if such a use of force is justifiable, sur ely he is entitled to do 
likewise by us. And so we should never come to an agre ement. We may simply 
fancy, like the blind horse moving in a circle round  a mill, that we are making Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  progress. Those who believe that they are not bound t o obey laws which are 
repugnant to their conscience have only the remedy of passive resistance 
open to them. Any other must lead to disaster. 
Reader : From what you say I deduce that passive resist ance is a splendid 
weapon of the weak, but that when they are strong th ey may take up arms. 
Editor : This is gross ignorance. Passive resistance, tha t is, soul-force, is 
matchless. It is superior to the force of arms. How, th en, can it be considered 
only a weapon of the weak? Physical-force men are str angers to the courage 
that is requisite in a passive resister. Do you believe t hat a coward can ever 
disobey a law that he dislikes? Extremists are consider ed to be advocates of 
brute force. Why do they, then, talk about obeying laws? I do not blame 
them. They can say nothing else. When they succeed in  driving out the English 
and they themselves become governors, they will want you and me to obey 
their laws. And that is a fitting thing for their co nstitution. But a passive 
resister will say he will not obey a law that is again st his conscience, even 
though he may be blown to pieces at the mouth of ca nnon. 
What do you think? Wherein is courage required— in b lowing others to pieces 
from behind a cannon, or with a smiling face to app roach a cannon and be 
blown to pieces? Who is the true warrior — he who ke eps death always as a 
bosom-friend, or he who controls the death of others?  Believe me that a man 
devoid of courage and manhood can never be a passive resister. 
This however, I will admit: that even a man weak in body is capable of 
offering this resistance. One man can offer it just as w ell as millions. Both 
men and women can indulge in it. It does not require  the training of an army; 
it needs no jiu-jitsu. Control over the mind is alone necessary, and when that 
is attained, man is free like the king of the forest a nd his very glance withers 
the enemy. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  Passive resistance is an all-sided sword, it can be used a nyhow; it blesses him 
who uses it and him against whom it is used. Without drawing a drop of blood 
it produces far-reaching results. It never rusts and cannot be stolen. 
Competition between passive resisters does not exhaust. The sword of passive 
resistance does not require a scabbard. It is strange i ndeed that you should 
consider such a weapon to be a weapon merely of the w eak. 
Reader : You have said that passive resistance is a spec iality of India. Have 
cannons never been used in India? 
Editor : Evidently, in your opinion, India means its few princes. To me it 
means its teeming millions on whom depends the existenc e of its princes and 
our own. 
Kings will always use their kingly weapons. To use force  is bred in them. They 
want to command, but those who have to obey commands do not want guns: 
and these are in a majority throughout the world. Th ey have to learn either 
body-force or soul-force. Where they learn the form er, both the rulers and 
the ruled become like so many madmen; but but where  they learn soul force, 
the commands of the rulers do not go beyond the point  of their swords, for 
true men disregard unjust commands. Peasants have never been subdued by 
the sword, and never will be. They do not know the u se of the sword, and 
they are not frightened by the use of it by others. T hat nation is great which 
rests its head upon death as its pillow. Those who defy death are free from all 
fear. For those who are labouring under the delusive charms of brute-force, 
this picture is not overdrawn. The fact is that, in India, the nation at large 
has generally used passive resistance in all departments of life. We cease to 
co-operate with our rulers when they displease us. This is passive resistance. 
I remember an instance when, in a small principalit y, the villagers were 
offended by some command issued by the prince. The for mer immediately, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  began vacating the village. The prince became nervo us, apologized to his 
subjects and withdrew his command. Many such instances ca n be found in 
India. Real Home Rule is possible only where passive resi stance is the guiding 
force of the people. Any other rule is foreign rule . 
Reader : Then you will say that it is not at all nec essary for us to train the 
body? 
Editor  : I will certainly not say any such thing. It is difficu lt to become a 
passive resister unless the body is trained. As a rule, th e mind, residing in a 
body that has become weakened by pampering, is also weak, and where there 
is no strength of mind there can be no strength of so ul. We shall have to 
improve our physique by getting rid of infant marria ges and luxurious living. If 
I were to ask a man with a shattered body to face a c annon's mouth I should 
make a laughing-stock of myself 
Reader : From what you say, then, it would appear t hat it is not a small thing 
to become a passive resister, and, if that is so, I shou ld like you to explain 
how a man may become one. 
Editor : To become a passive resister is easy enough but  it is also equally 
difficult. I have known a lad of fourteen years bec ome a passive resister; I 
have known also sick people do likewise; and I have a lso known physically 
strong and otherwise happy people unable to take up p assive resistance. After 
a great deal of experience it seems, to me that those who want to become 
passive resisters for the service of the country have to observe perfect 
chastity, adopt poverty, follow truth, and cultivat e fearlessness. 
Chastity is one of the greatest disciplines without wh ich the mind cannot 
attain requisite firmness. A man who is unchaste loses st amina, becomes 
emasculated and cowardly. He whose mind is given over  to animal passions is 
not capable of any great effort. This can be proved by innumerable instances. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  What, then, is a married person to do is the question that arises naturally; 
and yet it need not. When a husband and wife gratify  the passions, it is no 
less an animal indulgence on that account. Such an in dulgence, except for 
perpetuating the race, is strictly prohibited. But a  passive resister has to 
avoid even that very limited indulgence because he c an have no desire for 
progeny. A married man, therefore, can observe perfe ct chastity. This subject 
is not capable of being created at greater length. S everal questions arise: 
How is one to carry one's wife with one, what are her  rights, and other similar 
questions. Yet those who wish to take part in a great  work are bound to solve 
these puzzles. 
Just as there is necessity for chastity, so is there for p overty. Pecuniary 
ambition and passive resistance cannot well go togeth er. Those who have 
money are not expected to throw it away, but they a re expected to be 
indifferent about it. They must be prepared to lose e very penny rather than 
give up passive resistance. 
Passive resistance has been described in the course of ou r discussion as truth-
force. Truth, therefore, has necessarily to be follo wed and that at any cost. 
In this connection, academic questions such as whether a  man may not lie in 
order to save a life, etc., arise, but these questions occur only to those who 
wish to justify lying. Those who want to follow trut h every time are not 
placed in such a quandary; and if they are, they are  still saved from a false 
position. 
Passive resistance cannot proceed a step without fearle ssness. Those alone 
can follow the path of passive resistance who are fre e from fear, whether as 
to their possessions, false honour, their relatives, the government, bodily 
injuries or death. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  These observances are not to be abandoned in the belie f that they are 
difficult. Nature has implanted in the human breast ability to cope with any 
difficulty or suffering that may come to man unprovo ked. These qualities are 
worth having, even for those who do not wish to serve the country. Let there 
be no mistake, as those who want to train themselves in the use of arms are 
also obliged to have these qualities more or less. Eve rybody does not become 
a warrior for the wish. A would-be warrior will have  to observe chastity and to 
be satisfied with poverty as his lot. A warrior withou t fearlessness cannot be 
conceived of. It may be thought that he would not n eed to be exactly 
truthful, but that quality follow real fearlessness. Wh en a man abandons 
truth, he does so owing to fear in some shape or form The above four 
attributes, then, need not frighten anyone. It may b e as well here to note 
that a physical- force man has to have many other usel ess qualities which a 
passive resister never needs. And you will find that wh atever extra effort a 
swordsman needs is due to lack of fearlessness. If he is an embodiment of the 
latter, the sword will drop from his hand that very m oment. He does not need 
its support. One who is free from hatred requires no sw ord. A man with a 
stick suddenly came face to face with a lion and insti nctively raised his 
weapon in self-defence. The man saw that he had only prated about 
fearlessness when there was none in him. That moment he dropped the stick 
and found himself free from all fear. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  18. EDUCATION 
Reader : In the whole of our discussion, you have no t demonstrated the 
necessity for education; we always complain of its absen ce among us. We 
notice a movement for compulsory education in our c ountry. The Maharaja 
Gaekwar has introduced it in his territories. Every ey e is directed towards 
them. We bless the Maharaja for it. Is all this effort then of no use? 
Editor : If we consider our civilization to be the h ighest, I have regretfully to 
say that much of the effort you have described is of n o use. The motive of the 
Maharaja and other great leaders who have been work ing in this direction is 
perfectly pure. They, therefore, undoubtedly deserve  great praise. But we 
cannot conceal from ourselves the result that likely t o flow from their effort. 
What is the meaning of education? It simply means a kn owledge of letters. It 
is merely an instrument, and an instrument may be well  used or abused. The 
same instrument that may be used to cure a patient may  be used to take his 
life, and so may a knowledge of letters. We daily obse rve that many men 
abuse it and very few make good use of it; and if thi s is a correct statement, 
we have proved that more harm has been done by it th an good.  
The ordinary meaning of education is a knowledge of letters. To teach boys 
reading, writing and arithmetic is called primary ed ucation. A peasant earns 
his bread honestly. He has ordinary knowledge of the w orld. He knows fairly 
well how he should behave towards his parents, his wife,  his children and his 
fellow villagers. He understands and observes the rul es of morality But he 
cannot write his own name. What do you propose to do by giving him a 
knowledge of letters ? Will you add an inch to his h appiness? Do you wish to 
make him discontented with his cottage or his lot? And  even if you want to do 
that, he will not need such an education. Carried aw ay by the flood of Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83  western thought we came to the conclusion, without weighing  pros  and  cons,  
that we should give this kind of education to the pe ople. 
Now let us take higher education. I have learned Geo graphy, Astronomy, 
Algebra, Geometry, etc. What of that ? In what way have. I benefited myself 
or those around me? Why have I learned these things ?  Professor Huxley has 
thus defined education: "That man I think has had a l iberal education who has 
been so trained in youth that his body is the ready ser vant of his will and does 
with ease and pleasure all the work that as a mechan ism it is capable of; 
whose intellect is a clear, cold, logic engine with a ll its parts of equal 
strength and in smooth working order... whose mind is stored with a 
knowledge of the fundamental truths of nature... who se passions are trained 
to come to heel by a vigorous will, the servant of a  tender conscience... who 
has learnt to hate all vileness and to respect others a s himself. Such a one and 
no other, I conceive, has had a liberal education, f or he is in harmony with 
nature. He will make the best of her and she of him. " 
If this is true education, I must emphatically say t hat the sciences I have 
enumerated above I have never been able to use for c ontrolling my senses. 
Therefore, whether you take elementary education or  higher education, it is 
not required for the main thing. It does not make m en of us. It does not 
enable us to do our duty. 
Reader : If that is so, I shall have to ask you - anot her question. What enables 
you to tell all these things to me? If you had not re ceived higher education, 
how would you have been able to explain to me the t hings that you have? 
Editor : You have spoken well. But my answer is simple:  I do not for one 
moment believe that my life would have been wasted, had I not received 
higher or lower education. Nor do I consider that I necessarily serve because I 
speak. But I do desire to serve and in endeavouring to  fulfill that desire, I Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  make use of the education I have received. And, if I  am making good use of it, 
even then it is not for the millions, but I can use i t only for such as you, and 
this supports my contention. Both you and I have come under the bane of 
what is mainly false education. I claim to have becom e free from its ill effect, 
and I am trying to give you the benefit of my exper ience and in doing so, I am 
demonstrating the rottenness of this education. 
Moreover, I have not run down a knowledge of letter s in all circumstances. All 
I have now shown is that we must not make of it a fet ish. It is not our 
Kamadhuk.  In its place it can be of use and it has its place w hen we have 
brought our senses under subjection and put our ethics on a firm foundation. 
And then, if we feel inclined to receive that educa tion, we may make good 
use of it. As an ornament it is likely to sit well on u s. It now follows that it is 
not necessary to make this education compulsory. Our a ncient school system 
is enough. Character-building has the first place in it and that is primary 
education. A building erected on that foundation wi ll last. 
Reader : Do I then understand that you do not consi der English education 
necessary for obtaining Home Rule? 
EDITOR  : My answer is yes and no. To give millions a knowled ge of English is to 
enslave them. The foundation that Macaulay laid of e ducation has enslaved 
us. I do not suggest that he has any such intention, but  that has been the 
result. Is it not a sad commentary that we should hav e to speak of Home Rule 
in a foreign tongue? 
And it is worthy of note that the systems which the Eu ropeans have discarded 
are the systems in vogue among us. Their learned men  continually make 
changes. We ignorantly adhere to their cast-off syste ms. They are trying each 
division to improve its own status. Wales is a small po rtion of England. Great 
efforts are being made to revive a knowledge of Welsh  among Welshmen. The Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  English Chancellor, Mr. Llyod George is taking a lead ing part in the movement 
to make Welsh children speak Welsh. And what is our con dition? We write to 
each other in faulty English, and from this even our M.A.s are not free; our 
best thoughts are expressed in English; the proceedings o f our Congress are 
conducted in English; our best newspapers are printed in English. If this state 
of things continues for a long time, posterity will—i t is my firm opinion—
condemn and curse us. 
It is worth noting that, by receiving English educat ion, we have enslaved the 
nation. Hypocrisy, tryanny, etc., have increased; En glish-knowing Indians have 
not hesitated to cheat and strike terror into the pe ople. Now, if we are doing 
anything for the people at all, we are paying only a portion of the debt due to 
them. 
Is it not a painful thing that, if I want to go to a  court of justice, I must 
employ the English language as a medium, that when I become a barrister, I 
may not speak my mother tongue and that someone else  should have to 
translate to me from my own language? Is not this ab solutely absurd? Is it not 
a sign of slavery? Am I to blame the English for it or  myself? It is we, the 
English-knowing Indians, that have enslaved India. The  curse of the nation will 
rest not upon the English but upon us. 
I have told you that my answer to your last question i s both yes and no. I have 
explained to you why it is yes. I shall now explain w hy it is no. 
We are so much beset by the disease of civilization, t hat we cannot 
altogether do without English-education. Those who h ave already received it 
may make good use of it wherever necessary. In our de alings with the English 
people, in our dealings with our own people, when w e can only correspond 
with them through that language, and for the purpos e of knowing how 
disgusted they (the English) have themselves become with  their civilization Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  we may use or learn English, as the case may be. Those w ho have studied 
English will have to teach morality to their progeny  through their mother 
tongue and to teach them another Indian language; b ut when they have grown 
up, they may learn English, the ultimate aim being that we should not need 
it. The object of making money thereby should be esch ewed. Even in learning 
English to such a limited extent we shall have to cons ider what we should 
learn through it and what we should not. It will be necessary to know what 
sciences we should learn. A little thought should show you that immediately 
we cease to care for English degrees, the rulers will p rick up their ears. 
Reader : Then what education shall we give? 
Editor : This has been somewhat considered above, but we will consider it a 
little more. I think that we have to improve all ou r languages. What subjects 
we should learn through them need not be elaborated here. Those English 
books which are valuable, we should translate into th e various Indian 
languages. We should abandon the pretension of learni ng many sciences. Re-
ligious, that is ethical, education will occupy the f irst place. Every cultured 
Indian will know in addition to his own provincial l anguage, if a Hindu, 
Sanskrit; if a Mahomedan, Arabic; if a Parsee, Persian ; and all, Hindi. Some 
Hindus should know Arabic and Persian; some Mahomedans  and Parsees, 
Sanskrit. Several Northerners and Westerners should lear n Tamil. A universal 
language for India should be Hindi, with the option of writing it in Persian or 
Nagari characters. In order that the Hindus and the M ahomedans may have 
closer relations, it is necessary to know both the char acters. And, if we can do 
this, we can drive the English language out of the fi eld in a short time. All this 
is necessary for us, slaves. Through our slavery the natio n has been enslaved, 
and it will be free with our freedom. 
Reader : The question of religious education is very d ifficult. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  Editor : Yet we cannot do without it. India will ne ver be godless. Rank 
atheism cannot flourish in this land. The task is indeed  difficult. My head 
begins to turn as I think of religious education. Our religious teachers are 
hypocritical and selfish; they will have to be approa ched. The Mullas, the 
Dasturs and the Brahmins hold the key in their hands, but if they will not have 
the good sense, the energy that we have derived from English education will 
have to be devoted to religious education. This is not  very difficult. Only the 
fringe of the ocean has been polluted and it is those who are within the fringe 
who alone need cleansing. We who come under this cat egory can even cleanse 
ourselves because my remarks do not apply to the millio ns. In order to restore 
India to its pristine condition, we have to return t o it. In our own civilization 
there will naturally be progress, retrogression, refor ms, and reactions; but 
one effort is required, and that is to drive out West ern civilization. All else 
will follow. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  19. MACHINERY 
Reader : When you speak of driving out Western civili zation, I suppose you 
will also say that we want no machinery. 
Editor : By raising this question, you have opened th e wound I have received. 
When I read Mr. Dutt's Economic History of India , I wept; and as I think of it 
again my heart sickens. It is machinery that has impove rished India. It is 
difficult to measure the harm that Manchester has done  to us. It is due to 
Manchester that Indian handicraft has all but disappe ared. 
But I make a mistake. How can Manchester be blamed?  We wore Manchester 
cloth and this is why Manchester wove it. I was deligh ted when I read about 
the bravery of Bengal. There were no cloth-mills in that presidency. They 
were, therefore, able to restore the original hand w eaving occupation. It is 
true Bengal encourages the mill-industry of Bombay. I f Bengal had proclaimed 
a boycott of all machine-made goods, it would have been much better. 
Machinery has begun to desolate Europe. Ruination is  now knocking at the 
English gates, Machinery is the chief symbol of modern  civilization; it 
represents a great sin. 
The workers in the mills of Bombay have become slaves.  The condition of the 
women working in the mills is shocking. When there we re no mills, these 
women were not starving. If the machinery craze grow s in our country, it will 
become an unhappy land. It may be considered a heresy , but I am bound to 
say that it were better for us to send money to Manche ster and to use flimsy 
Manchester cloth than to multiply mills in India. By using Manchester cloth we 
only waste our money; but by reproducing Manchester in India, we shall keep 
our money at the price of our blood, because our ver y moral being will be 
sapped, and I call in support of my statement the ver y mill-hands as 
witnesses. And those who have amassed wealth out of fact ories are not likely Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  to be better than other rich men. It would be folly  to assume that an Indian 
Rockefeller would be better than the American Rocke feller. Impoverished 
India can become free, but it will be hard for any India made rich through 
immorality to regain its freedom. I fear we shall hav e to admit that moneyed 
men support British rule; their interest is bound up w ith its stability. Money 
renders a man helpless. The other thing which is equall y harmful is sexual 
vice. Both are poison. A snake-bite is a lesser poison than these two, because 
the former merely destroys the body but the latter d estroy body, mind and 
soul. We need not, therefore, be pleased with the pro spect of the growth of 
the mill-industry. 
Reader : Are the mills, then, to be closed down? 
Editor : That is difficult. It is no easy task to do aw ay with a thing that is 
established. We, therefore, say that the non-beginnin g of a thing is supreme 
wisdom. We cannot condemn mill-owners; we can but pit y them. It would be 
too much to expect them to give up their mills, but we may implore them not 
to increase them. If they would be good they would g radually contract their 
business. They can establish in thousands of households the ancient and 
sacred handlooms and they can buy out the cloth that may be thus woven. 
Whether the mill-owners do this or not, people can ce ase to use machine-
made goods. 
Reader : You have so far spoken about machine- made  cloth, but there are 
innumerable machine-made things. We have either to i mport them or to 
introduce machinery into our country. 
Editor : Indeed, our gods even are made in Germany. What need, then, to 
speak of matches, pins and glassware? My answer can be only one. What did 
India do before these articles were introduced? Prec isely the same should be 
done today. As long as we cannot make pins without ma chinery so long will Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  we do without them. The tinsel splendour of glassware we will have nothing 
to do with, and we will make wicks, as of old, with home grown cotton and 
use handmade earthen saucers for lamps. So doing we sh all save our eyes and 
money and support Swadeshi and so shall we attain Home  Rule. 
It is not to be conceived that all men will do all t hese things at one time or 
that some men will give up all machine-made things at  once. But, if the 
thought is sound, we shall always find out 'what we can  give up and gradually 
cease to use it. What a few may do, others will copy; and the movement will 
grow like the coconut of the mathematical problem. What the leaders do, the 
populace will gladly do in turn. The matter is neith er complicated nor 
difficult. You and I need not wait until we can car ry others with us. Those will 
be the losers who will not do it, and those who will  not do it, although they 
appreciate the truth, will deserve to be called cowa rds. 
Reader : What, then, of the tram-cars and electrici ty? 
Editor : This question is now too late. It signifies not hing. If we are to do 
without the railways we shall have to do without the  tram-cars. Machinery is 
like a snake-hole which may contain from one to a h undred snakes. Where 
there is machinery there are large cities; and where  there are large cities, 
there are tram-cars and railways; and there only do es one see electric light. 
English villages do not boast of any of these things. Honest physicians will tell 
you that where means of artificial locomotion have increased, the health of 
the people has suffered. I remember that when in a Eu ropean town there was 
a scarcity of money, the receipts of the tramway co mpany, of the lawyers and 
of the doctors went down and people were less unhealth y. I cannot recall a 
single good point in connection with machinery. Book s can be written to 
demonstrate its evils. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  Reader : Is it a good point or a bad one that all y ou are saying will be printed 
through machinery? 
Editor : This is one of those instances which demonstrat e that sometimes 
poison is used to kill poison. This, then, will not be a good point regarding 
machinery. As it expires, the machinery, as it were, says to us: "Beware and 
avoid me. You will derive no benefits from me and th e benefit that may 
accrue from printing will avail only those who are i nfected with the 
machinery-craze." 
Do not, therefore, forget the main thing. It is nece ssary to realize that 
machinery is bad. We shall then be able gradually to  do away with it. Nature 
has not provided any way whereby we may reach a desir ed goal all of a 
sudden. If, instead of welcoming machinery as a boon,  we should look upon it 
as an evil, it would ultimately go. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  20. CONCLUSION 
Reader : From your views I gather that you would for m a third party. You are 
neither an extremist nor a moderate. 
Editor : That is a mistake. I do not think of a thir d party at all. We do not all 
think alike. We cannot say that all the moderates h old identical views. And 
how can those who want only to serve have a party? I would serve both the 
moderates and the extremists. Where I differ from them , I would respectfully 
place my position before them and continue my service . 
Reader : What, then, would you say to both the part ies? 
Editor : I would say to the extremists: "I know that y ou want Home Rule for 
India; it is not to be had for your asking. Everyone will have to take it for 
himself. What others get for me is not Home Rule but f oreign rule; therefore, 
it would not he proper for you to say that you have  obtained Home Rule if you 
have merely expelled the English. I have already des cribed the true nature of 
Home Rule. This you would never obtain by force or a rms. Brute-force is not 
natural to Indian soil. You will have, therefore, to  rely wholly on soul-force. 
You must not consider that violence is necessary at any stage for reaching our 
goal." 
I would say to the moderates: "Mere petitioning is de rogatory; we thereby 
confess inferiority. To say that British rule is indispe nsable, is almost a denial 
of the Godhead. We cannot say that anybody or anythi ng is indispensable 
except God. Moreover, common sense should tell us that  to state that, for the 
time being, the presence of the English in India is a  necessity, is to make 
them conceited. 
"If the English vacated India, bag and baggage, it m ust not be supposed that 
she would be widowed. It is possible that those who are  forced to observe 
peace under their pressure would fight after their wi thdrawal. There can be Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  no advantage in suppressing an eruption; it must have i ts vent. If, therefore, 
before we can remain at peace, we must fight amongst ourselves, it is better 
that we do so. There is no occasion for a third party to protect the weak. It is 
this so-called protection which has unnerved us. Such protection can only 
make the weak weaker. Unless we realize this, we canno t have Home Rule. I 
would paraphrase the thought of an English divine an d say that anarchy under 
Home Rule were better than orderly foreign rule. On ly, the meaning that the 
learned divine attached to Home Rule is different fr om Indian Home Rule 
according to my conception. We have to learn, and t o teach others, that we 
do not want the tyranny of either English rule or In dian rule." 
If this idea were carried out, both the extremists an d the moderates could 
join hands. There is no occasion to fear or distrust one  another. 
Reader : What, then, would you say to the English? 
Editor : To them I would respectfully say: "I admit you are my rulers. It is not 
necessary to debate the question whether, you hold Ind ia by the sword or by 
my consent. I have no objection to your remaining in  my country, but 
although you are the rulers, you will have to remain  as servants of the people. 
It is not we who have to do as you wish, but it is you  who have to do as we 
wish. You may keep the riches that you have drained a way from this land, but 
you may not drain riches henceforth. Your function w ill be, if you so wish, to 
police India; you must abandon the idea of deriving any commercial benefit 
from us. We hold the civilization that you support to  be the reverse of 
civilization. We consider our civilization to be fa r superior to yours. If you 
realize this truth, it will be to your advantage and , if you do not, according to 
your own proverb, you should only live in our countr y in the same manner as 
we do. You must not do anything that is contrary to o ur religions. It is your 
duty as rulers that for the sake of the Hindus you shoul d eschew beef, and for Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  the sake of Mahomedans you should avoid bacon and ham.  We have hitherto 
said nothing because we have been cowed down, but you  need not consider 
that you have not hurt our feelings by your conduct.  We are not expressing 
our sentiments either through base selfishness or fear, b ut because it is our 
duty now to speak out boldly. We consider your school s and law courts to be 
useless. We want our own ancient schools and courts to b e restored. 
The common language of India is not English but Hindi . You should, therefore, 
learn it. We can hold communication with you only i n our national language. 
"We cannot tolerate the idea of your spending money on railways and the 
military. We see no occasion for either. You may fea r Russia; we do not. 
When she comes we shall look after her. If you are wi th us, we may then 
receive her jointly. We do not need any European cl oth. We shall manage 
with articles produced and manufactured at home. You  may not keep one eye 
on Manchester and the other on India. We can work to gether only if our 
interests are identical. 
"This has not been said to you in arrogance. You have great military 
resources. Your naval power is matchless. If we wanted  to fight with you on 
your own ground, we should be unable to do so, but i f the above submissions 
be not acceptable to you, we cease to play the part  of the ruled. You may, if 
you like, cut us to pieces. You may shatter us at the cannon's mouth. If you 
act contrary to our will, we shall not help you; and  without our help, we know 
that you cannot move one step forward. 
"It is likely that you will laugh at all this in' the  intoxication of your power. We 
may not be able to disillusion you at once; but if th ere be any manliness in us, 
you will see shortly that your intoxication is suicida l and that your laugh at 
our expense is an aberration of intellect. We believe  that at heart you belong 
to a religious nation. We are living in a land which  is the source of religions. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  How we came together need not be considered, but we can make mutual 
good use of our relations. 
"You, English, who have come to India are not good sp ecimens of the English 
nation, nor can we, almost half-Anglicized Indians, b e considered good 
specimens of the real Indian nation. If the English na tion were to know all you 
have done, it would oppose many of your actions. The  mass of the Indians 
have had few dealings with you. If you will abandon your so-called civilization 
and search into your own scriptures, you will find th at our demands are just. 
Only on condition of our demands being fully satisf ied may you remain in 
India; and if you remain under those conditions, we sh all learn several things 
from you and you will learn many from us. So doing w e shall * benefit each 
other and the world. But that will happen only when  the root of our 
relationship is sunk in a religions soil." 
Reader : What will you say to the nation? 
Editor : Who is the nation ? 
Reader : For our purposes it is the nation that you an d I have been thinking 
of, that is those of us who are affected by European civilization, and who are 
eager to have Home Rule. 
Editor : To these I would say, "It' is only those Indi ans who are imbued with 
real love who will be able to speak to the English i n the above strain without 
being frightened, and only those can be said to be s o imbued who 
conscientiously believe that Indian civilization is t he best and that the 
European is a nine days' wonder. Such ephemeral civi lizations have often 
come and gone and will continue to do so. Those only  can be considered to be 
so imbued who, having experienced the force of the so ul within themselves, 
will not cower before brute-force, and will not, on  any account, desire to use 
brute-force. Those only can be considered to have be en so imbued who are Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  intensely dissatisfied with the present pitiable condi tion, having already 
drunk the cup of poison. 
"If there be only one such Indian, he will speak as a bove to the English and the 
English will have to listen to him. 
"These are not demands, but they show our mental state . We shall get nothing 
by asking; we shall have to take what we want, and w e need the requisite 
strength for the effort and that strength will be av ailable to him only who will 
act thus: 
1.  He will only on rare occasions make use of the English language; 
2.  If a lawyer, he will give up his profession, and take up a hand-loom; 
3.  If a lawyer, he will devote his knowledge to enlight ening both his people 
and the English; 
4.  If a lawyer, he will not meddle with the quarrels be tween parties but will 
give up the courts, and from his experience induce th e people to do 
likewise; 
5.  If a lawyer, he will refuse to be a judge, as he wil l give up his profession; 
6.  If a doctor, he will give up medicine, and understan d that rather than 
mending bodies, he should mend souls; 
7.  If a doctor, he will understand that no matter to wh at religion he 
belongs, it is better that bodies remain diseased rathe r than that they 
are cured through the instrumentality of the diaboli cal vivisection that is 
practised in European schools of medicine; 
8.  Although a doctor, he will take up a hand-loom, and  if any patients come 
to him, will tell them the cause of their diseases, and  will advise them to 
remove the cause rather than pamper them by giving u seless drugs; he 
will understand that if by not taking drug, perchanc e the patient dies, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  the world will not come to grief and that he will h ave been really 
merciful to him; 
9.  Although a wealthy man, yet regardless of his wealth,  he will speak out 
his mind and fear no one; 
10.  If a wealthy man, he will devote his money to establi shing hand-looms, 
and encourage others to use hand-made goods by wearin g them himself; 
11.  Like every other Indian, he will know that this is a time for repentance, 
expiation and mourning; 
12.  Like every other Indian, he will know that to blame  the English is useless, 
that they came because of us, and remain also for the  same reason, and 
that they will either go or change their nature onl y when we reform 
ourselves; 
13.  Like others, he will understand that at a time of m ourning, there can be 
no indulgence, and that, whilst we are in a fallen st ate, to be in gaol or 
in banishment is much the best; 
14.  Like others, he will know that it is superstition to i magine it necessary 
that we should guard against being imprisoned in ord er that we may deal 
with the people; 
15.  Like others, he will know that action is much bette r than speech; that it 
is our duty to say exactly what we think and face th e consequences and 
that it will be only then that we shall be able to i mpress anybody with 
our speech; 
16.  Like others, he will understand that we shall become f ree only through 
suffering; 
17.  Like others, he will understand that deportation for life to the Andamans 
is not enough expiation for the sin of encouraging Eu ropean civilization; Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98  18.  Like others, he will know that no nation has risen wit hout suffering; that, 
even in physical warfare, the true test is suffering an d not the killing of 
others, much more so in the warfare of passive resistan ce; 
19.  Like others, he will know that it is an idle excuse t o say that we shall do 
a thing when the others also do it: that we should d o what we know to be 
right, and that others will do it when they see the way; that when I fancy 
a particular delicacy, I do not wait till others ta ste it: that to make a 
national effort and to suffer are in the nature of d elicacies; and that to 
suffer under pressure is no suffering." 
Reader : This is a large order. When will all carry it out? 
Editor : You make a mistake. You and I have nothing to do with the others. 
Let each do his duty. If I do my duty, that is, serve myself, I shall be able to 
serve others. Before I leave you, I will take the li berty of repeating: 
1.  Real home-rule is self-rule or self-control. 
2.  The way to it is passive resistance: that is soul- force o r love-force. 
3.  In order to exert this force, Swadeshi in every sense i s necessary. 
4.  What we want to do should be done, not because we ob ject to the 
English or because we want to retaliate but because it  is our duty to do 
so. Thus, supposing that the English remove the salt-ta x, restore our 
money, give the highest posts to Indians, withdraw th e English troops, 
we shall certainly nor use their machine-made goods, nor use the 
English language, nor many of their industries. It is w orth noting that 
these things are, in their nature, harmful; hence we do not want them. 
I bear no enmity towards the English but I do toward s their civilization. 
In my opinion, we have used the term 'Swaraj" withou t understanding its real 
significance. I have endeavoured to explain it as I u nderstand it, and my 
conscience testifies that my life henceforth is dedicat ed to its attainment. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  APPENDICES SOME AUTHORITIES AND TESTIMONIES BY EMIN ENT MEN 
I. Some Authorities  
The following books are recommended for perusal to f ollow up the study of 
the foregoing: 
The Kingdom of God Is within You —Tolstoy 
What Is Art  Tolstoy 
The Slavery of Our Times —Tolstoy 
The First Step— Tolstoy 
How Shall We Escape ?— Tolstoy 
Letter to a Hindoo —Tolstoy 
The White Slaves of England —Sherard 
Civilization, Its Cause and Cure —Carpenter 
The Fallacy of  Speed—Taylor 
A New Crusade —Blount 
On the Duty of Civil Disobedience —Thoreau 
Life without Principle —Thoreau 
Unto This Last —Ruskin 
A Joy for Ever —Ruskin 
Duties of Man —Mazzini 
Defence and Death of Socrates —From Plato 
Paradoxes of Civilization—Max  Nordau 
Poverty and Un-British Rule in India —Naoroji 
Economic History of India —Dutt 
Village Communities —Maine 
 
 
 Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  II. Testimonies by Eminent Men 
The following extracts from Mr. Alfred Webb's valuabl e collection show that 
the ancient Indian civilization has little to learn  from the modern: 
J.  SEYMOUR KEAY , M.  P. 
Banker in India and India Agent 
(Writing in 1883)  
"It cannot be too well understood that our position in India has never been 
in any degree that of civilians bringing civilizatio n to savage races. When we 
landed in India we found there a hoary civilization , which, during the progress 
of thousands of years, had fitted itself into the char acter and adjusted itself 
to the wants of highly intellectual races. The civil ization was not perfunctory, 
but universal and all-pervading—furnishing the count ry not only with political 
systems, but with social and domestic institutions of th e most ramified 
description. The beneficent nature of these institutio ns as a whole may be 
judged from their effects on the character of the H indu race. Perhaps there 
are no other people in the world who show so much in  their characters the 
advantageous effects of their own civilization. They  are shrewd in business, 
acute in reasoning, thrifty, religious sober, charita ble, obedient to parents, 
reverential to old age, amiable, law-abiding, compa ssionate towards the 
helpless and patient under suffering." 
VICTOR COUSIN (1792-1867) 
Founder of Systematic Electicism in Philosophy  
"On the other hand when we read with attention the poetical and hilosophical 
movements of the East, above all, those of India, whi ch are beginning to 
spread in Europe, we discover there so many truths, an d truths, so profound, 
and which make such a contrast with the meanness of the  results at which the Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  European genius has some times stopped, that we are const rained to bend the 
knee before that of the East, and do see in this cradl e of the human race the 
native land of the highest philosophy." 
FR IEDRICH MAX MULLER  
"If I were to ask myself from what literature we her e in Europe, we who 
have been nurtured almost exclusively on the thought s of (Greeks and 
Romans, and of one Semitic race, the Jewish, may dra w that corrective which 
is most wanted in order to make our inner life more perfect, more 
comprehensive, more universal, in fact more truly hu man, a life, not for this 
life only, but a transfigured and eternal life—agai n I should point to India." 
FREDERICK VON SCHLEGEL  
"It cannot be denied that the early Indians possessed a knowledge of the true 
God; all their writings are replete with sentiments an d expressions, noble, 
clear and severely grand, as deeply conceived and rev erently expressed as in 
any human language in which men have spoken of their  God.... Among 
nations possessing indigenous philosophy and metaphysics t ogether with an 
innate relish for these pursuits, such as at present cha racterizes Germany, 
and in olden times was the proud distinction of Gree ce, Hindustan holds the 
first rank in point of time." 
ABBE J.  A.  DUBOIS  
Missionary in Mysore: Extracts from a letter dated Ser ingapatan, 15th 
December, 1820.  
"The authority of married women within their houses  is chiefly exerted in 
preserving good order and peace among the persons who  compose their 
families; and a great many among them discharge this i mportant duty with a 
prudence and a discretion which have scarcely a para llel in Europe. I have Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  known families composed of between thirty and forty p ersons, or more, 
consisting of grown up sons and daughters, all married and all having children, 
living together under the superintendence of an old matron—their mother or 
mother-in-law. The latter, by good management, and by accommodating 
herself to the temper of the daughters-in-law, by usi ng, according to 
circumstances firmness or forbearance, succeeded in prese rving peace and 
harmony during many years amongst so many females, who  had all jarring 
tempers. 1 ask you whether it would be possible to att ain the same end, in 
the same circumstances, in our countries, where it is sc arcely possible to 
make two women living under the same roof to agree t ogether 
"In fact, there is perhaps no kind of honest employme nt in a civilized country 
in which the Hindu females have not a due share. Besid es the management of 
the household, and the care of the family which (as a lready noticed) is under 
their control the wives and daughters of husbandmen at tend and assist their 
husbands and fathers in the labours of agriculture. T hose of tradesmen assist 
theirs in carrying on their trade. Merchants are atte nded and assisted by 
theirs in their shops. Many females are shopkeepers on their own account; 
and  without a knowledge of the alphabet  or of the decimal scale, they keep 
by other means their accounts in excellent order, a nd are considered as still 
shrewder than the males themselves in their commercial dealings." 
J.  YOUNG  
Secretary, Savon Mechanics Institutes 
(Within recent years)  
"Those races (the Indian viewed from a moral aspect) are perhaps the most 
remarkable people in the world. They breathe an atm osphere of moral purity, 
which cannot but excite admiration, and this is espec ially the case with the 
poorer classes, who, notwithstanding the privations of t heir humble lot, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  appear to be happy and contented. True children of nature, they live on from 
day to day, taking no thought for the morrow and th ankful for the simple fare 
which Providence has provided for them. It is curiou s to witness the spectacle 
of coolies of both sexes returning home at nightfall a fter a hard day's work 
often lasting from sunrise to sunset. In spite of fatig ue from the effects of the 
unremitting toil, they are, for the most part gay an d animated, conversing 
cheerfully together and occasionally breaking into s natches of light-heartec 1 
song. Yet what awaits them on their return to the hov els which they call 
home ? A dish of rice for food, and the floor for a bed. Domestic felicity 
appears to be the rule among the Natives, and this is the more strange when 
the customs of marriage are taken into account, paren ts arranging all such 
matters. Many Indian households afford examples of th e married state in its 
highest degree of perfection. This may be due to the teachings of the 
Shastras, and to the strict injunctions which they inc ulcate with regard to 
marital obligation; but it is no exaggeration to say that husbands are generally 
devotedly attached to their wives, and in many instan ces the latter have the 
most exalted conception of their duties towards their husbands." 
COLONEL THOMAS MUNRO  
(Thirty-two Years' Service in India)  
"If a good system of agriculture, unrivalled manufac turing skill, a capacity to 
produce whatever can contribute to convenience or l uxury; schools 
established in every village, for teaching reading, w riting and arithmetic; the 
general practice of hospitality and charity among ea ch other; and, above all, 
a treatment of the female sex, full of confidence, r espect and delicacy, are 
among the signs which denote a civilized people, the n the Hindus are not 
inferior to the nations of Europe; and if civilizati on is to become an article of Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule 
 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  trade between the two countries, I am convinced that  this country (England) 
will gain by the import cargo." 
SIR  WILLIAM  WEDDERBURN,  BART. 
"The Indian village has thus for centuries remained a  bulwark against 
political disorder, and the home of the simple domest ic and social virtues. No 
wonder, therefore, that philosophers and historians h ave always dwelt 
lovingly on this ancient institution which is the nat ural social unit and the 
best type of rural life: self-contained, industrious, peace-loving, conservative 
in the best sense of the word.... I think you will ag ree with me that there is 
much that is both picturesque and attractive in this g limpse of social and 
domestic life in an Indian village. It is a harmless and happy form of human 
existence. Moreover, it is not without good practica l outcome." 
 
 
 
 
 
 