 
India of My Dreams 
 
 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled by : R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
With a Foreword by : Dr. Rajendra Prasad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014  (INDIA) India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
FOREWORD  
It is a happy idea to place before the world and th e country at the present moment when 
we are entering upon a new era a picture of the Ind ia of Mahatma Gandhi’s dreams. The 
freedom which we have won is throwing upon us the r esponsibilities of making or marring 
the future of India. It is in no small measure the achievement of Mahatma Gandhi’s 
leadership. The matchless weapon of truth and non-v iolence which he has used is needed 
by the world to cure it of many of its ills. We are  aware how imperfect have been the 
instruments that had to be used by Gandhiji, and ye t history will record that our object 
has been gained with the least possible sacrifice w hich any other country similarly 
situated could have been called upon to make. As th e weapon has been unique, the 
opportunities which the achievement of freedom offer s are equally unique. In our hour of 
victory and rejoicing we cannot afford to ignore eit her the leader who has led us or the 
undying principles which have inspired him. Freedom  is only the means to a greater and 
nobler end, and the achievement of India of Mahatma Gandhi’s dreams will be the fitting 
consummation of all that he has worked for and stan ds for. At this juncture we need to 
be reminded of the basis and fundamentals of his te achings. A book, which places before 
the reader not only those basic and fundamental pri nciples, but also indicates how we 
can help to fulfill them through our freedom by est ablishing a polity and social life, and 
through the instrumentality of a constitution and t he dedication of the human material 
which this vast country will now throw up to work wi thout any external fetters or internal 
inhibitions, will be welcomed by all. Shri R. K. Pr abhu has proved his skill in making a 
selection of the most telling and significant passa ge from Mahatma Gandhi’s writings and 
have no doubt that this volume will be a useful addit ion to the literature on the subject. 
New Delhi, 
8th  August 1947                                         Rajendra Prasad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
PREFACE TO THE REVISED EDITION 
Since the first edition of this work was published on 15 th  August, 1947, the day of the 
country’s Declaration of Independence, much water t he flown under the Indian bridge. 
With the attainment of the freedom and the passing away of the father of the Nation, 
some of the major problems facing the country have suffered a new orientation, while a 
few, like those of the Princes and the dominant Bri tish community, civilian and 
mercantile, have been entirely eliminated. In these radically altered circumstances it has 
been found necessary to overhaul almost completely t he structure of first edition of the 
book, to drop out some of the old anachronistic cha pters and add as many as forty new 
ones, so as to make the work as comprehensive as pos sible. It has been my aim and 
earnest endeavor in this revised and enlarged editio n to present to the reader a concise 
but authoritative source-book of Gandhiji’s essentia l views on all important Indian 
problems, so that the same may prove helpful not onl y to all students of Gandhian 
through but also to active constructive workers in th e country. In spite of all the 
shortcomings of the work, engendered by limitations  of space, etc., let me hope that my 
labours have not been in vain. 
R. K. P. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 
In this work attempt has been made, by assembling t ogether passages from writings and 
speeches of Mahatma Gandhi, to give the reader an id ea of the part which he expects a 
completely free and independent India of his concep tion to play in her own domestic 
affairs as well as in her relations with the rest o f the world. On 15 th  August, 1947, India 
will have finally shaken off the yoke of foreign whi ch for the past century and half had 
held her soil in bondage and well-nigh ruined her m aterially, morally and spiritually. In 
the process of achieving her independence, however, her unit has been broken in many 
places and her soul has been badly bruised, owing t o internecine quarrels, and the shape 
of ‘Swaraj’ that is emerging is not at all what her  patriotic sons and daughters had 
ardently longed for and struggled for all these dec ades. It is quite natural, therefore, 
that Gandhiji, the Father of Indian Independence, s hould feel little inclined to enthuse 
over the Independence that is drawing; and cry out, like the vedic seer, ‘Lead us from 
darkness unto Light.’ 
Gandhiji has refused to subscribe to the fantastic theory that the Muslims of India are ‘a 
separate nation.’ My whole soul rebels against the idea that Hinduism and Islam represent 
two antagonistic cultures and doctrines,’ he said. To assent to such a doctrine is for me a 
denial of God. For I believe with my whole soul that  the God of the Quran is also the God 
of the Gita, and that we are all, no matter by what  name designated, children of the 
same God. I must rebel against the idea that millio ns of Indians who were Hindus the 
other day changed their nationality on adopting Isl am as their religion.’ He refuses to 
believe that India will remain for ever partitioned , either geographically or spiritually, in 
the manner that is being sought to be done at prese nt. ‘India does not become two 
nations,’ he says, ‘because it has been cut up into  two sovereign states.’ He lives in the 
hope and will work in the hope that with the remova l of the most serious obstacle in the 
way of her unity-the wedge driven by her alien rule rs-and the healing of the wounds 
recently inflicted on her, the India of his dream w ill yet emerge into reality in the distant 
future. 
The compiler of the present work, cognizant of the onerousness of the task before him 
and of his own shortcomings, is fully aware of the risks involved in trying to convey to the 
readers a conception of ‘India of Gandhiji’s dreams ’ which may fall short, far short, of 
the picture which the master artist has drawn in th e immortal pages of Young India and 
Harijan and in the collections of his writings spee ches. The compiler expresses the hope 
that he may not have deviated far from the correctne ss as well as comprehensiveness of 
that picture, inasmuch as the attempt to redraw the  picture, on a reduced scale, has 
been made in Gandhiji’s own words. For whatever sho rtcomings there still remain in the 
present work the compiler tenders his profuse apolo gies both to Gandhiji and to the 
reader. 
August, 1947                                                                     R.K.P. 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5   
CONTENTS 
Foreword-Rajendra Prasad 
Preface To The Revised Edition 
Preface To The First Edition 
To The Reader 
1. India of my Dreams 
2. The Meaning of Swaraj 
3. In Defense of Nationalism 
4. Democracy in India 
5. India and Socialism 
6. India and Communism 
7. The Curse of Industrialism 
8. Class war 
9. Strikes 
10. Choice Before Labour 
11. Rights or Duties 
12. The Problem of Unemployment 
13. Daridranarayan 
14. The Gospel of Bread Labour 
15. Sarvodaya 
16. Theory of Trusteeship 
17. Non-violent Economy 
18. The Way to Equal Distribution 
19. India’s Record of Non-violence 
20. The Sarvodaya State 
21. Satyagraha and Duragraha 
22. The Tiller of the Soil 
23. Back to the Village 
24. Every village a Republic 
25. Panchayat Raj 
26. Village Industries 
27. What the Government can do 
28. Village Exhibitions 
29. The Music of the Spinning Wheel 
30. The Mill Industry 
31. The Gospel of Swadeshi 
32. Cow Protection 
33. Co-operative Cattle-Farming 
34. Village Sanitation 
35. Village Health India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  36. Village Diet 
37. The Village Worker 
38. All-around Village Service 
39. A Call to Youth 
40. The Nation’s Health, Hygiene and Diet 
41. Drink and Drugs 
42. Urban Sanitation 
43. Evil Wrought by the Foreign Medium 
44. My Own Experience 
45. India’s Cultural Heritage 
46. The New Education 
47. Basic Education 
48. Higher Education 
49. Ashram Ideal of Education 
50. National Language and Script 
51. Provincial Languages 
52. Hindi in the South 
53. A Code for Students 
54. Regeneration of Indian Women 
55. Women’s Education 
56. Birth-Control 
57. Sex Education 
58. Children 
59. Communal Unity 
60. Varnashrama Dharma 
61. The Curse of Untouchability 
62. Religious Tolerance in India 
63. Proselytization 
64. Problems of Administration 
65. Reorganization of Provinces 
66. The Problem of Minorities 
67. An India Governor 
68. The Press 
69. Peace Brigades 
70. Indian Nation Congress 
71. India, Pakistan and Kashmir 
72. Foreign Settlements in India 
73. India and World Peace 
74. The message of the East 
75. Obiter Dicta 
Glossary 
Sources 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7   
 
TO THE READER 
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are interested 
in them that I am not at all concerned with appeari ng to be consistent. In my search after 
Truth I have discarded many ideas and learnt many ne w things. Old as I am in age, I have 
no feeling that I have ceased to grow inwardly or t hat my growth will stop at the 
dissolution of the flesh. What I am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of 
Truth, my God, from moment to moment, and, therefor e, when anybody finds any 
inconsistency between any two writings of mine, if he has still faith in my sanity, he 
would do well to choose the later of the two on the  same subject. 
Harijan, 29-4-’33, p. 2                           M .K.GANDHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8   
Chapter 01 
INDIA OF MY DREAMS 
verything in India attracts me. It has everything th at a human being with the highest 
possible aspirations can want. 
Young India, 21-2-‘29  
 
India is essentially karmabhumi (land of duty) in c ontradistinction to bhogabhumi (land 
of enjoyment). 
Young India, 5-2-‘25  
 
India is one of the few nations on the earth which have retained some of their ancient 
institutions although they have been overlaid with superstition and error. But she has 
hitherto shown an inherent capacity for purging her self of error and superstition. My 
faith in her ability to solve the economic problems that face her millions has never 
been so it is today. 
Young India, 6-8-‘25  
 
I feel that India’s mission is different from that of others. India it fitted for the 
religious supremacy of the world. There is no paral lel in the world for the process of 
purification that this country has voluntarily under gone. India is less in need of steel 
weapons, it has fought with divine weapons, it can still do so. Other nations have been 
votaries of brute force. The terrible war going on i n Europe furnishes a forcible 
illustration of the truth. India can win all by sou l force. History supplies numerous 
instances to prove that brute force is as nothing b efore soul force. Poets have sung 
about it and seers have described their experiences . 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 405  
 
If India takes up the doctrine of the sword, she ma y gain momentary victory. Then 
India will cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to India because I owe my all 
to her. I believe absolutely that she has a mission for all the world. She is not to copy India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  Europe blindly. India’s acceptance of the sword wil l be the hour of my trial. I hope I 
shall not be fund wanting. My religion has no geogr aphical limits. If I have a living faith 
in it, it will transcend my love for India herself. My life dedicated to service of India 
through the religion of non-violence. 
Young India, 11-8-‘20  
 
If India makes violence her creed, and I have survived , I would not care to live in India. 
She will cease to evoke any pride in me. My patrioti sm is subservient to my religion. I 
cling to India like a child to its mother’s breast,  because I feel that she gives me the 
spiritual nourishment I need. She has the environme nt that responds to my highest 
aspirations. When that faith is gone, I shall feel like an orphan without hope of ever 
finding a guardian. 
Young India, 6-4-‘21  
 
I would like to see India free and strong so that s he may offer herself a willing and 
pure sacrifice for the betterment of the world. Ind ia’s freedom must revolutionize the 
world’s outlook upon peace and war. Her importance affects of mind. 
Young India, 17-9-‘25  
 
I am humble enough to admit that there is much that  we can profitably assimilate from 
the West. Wisdom is no monopoly of one continent or  one race. My resistance to 
Western civilization is really a resistance to its i ndiscriminate and thoughtless imitation 
based on the assumption that Asiatics are fit only to copy every thing that comes from 
the West….I do believe that if India has patience e nough to go through the fire of 
suffering and to resist any unlawful encroachment u pon her own civilization which, 
imperfect though it undoubtedly is, has hitherto st ood the ravages of time, she can 
make a lasting contribution to the peace and solid progress of the world. 
Young India, 11-8-‘27  
 
India’s destiny lies not along the bloody way of th e West, of which she shows signs of 
tiredness, but along the bloodless way of peace tha t comes from a simple and godly India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  life. India is in danger of losing her soul. She ca nnot lose it and live. She must not, 
therefore, lazily and helplessly say, “I cannot esc ape the onrush from the West.” She 
must be strong enough to resist it for her own sake  and that of the world. 
Young India, 7-10-‘26  
 
European civilization is no doubt suited for the Eur opeans but it will mean ruin for 
India, if we endeavour to copy it. This is not to s ay that we may not adopt and 
assimilate whatever may be good and capable of assi milation by us as it does not also 
mean that even the Europeans will not have to part w ith whatever evil might have 
crept into it. The incessant search for material co mforts and their multiplication is 
such an evil, and I make bold to say that the Europe ans themselves will have to 
remodel their outlook, if they are not to perish un der the weight of the comforts to 
which they are becoming slaves. It may be that my re ading is wrong, but I know that 
for India to run after the Golden Fleece is to cour t certain death. Let us engrave in our 
hearts the motto of a Western philosopher, ‘plain l iving and high thinking.’ Today it is 
certain that the millions cannot have high living and  we the few who profess to do the 
thinking for the masses run the risk, in a vain sear ch after high living, of missing high 
thinking. 
Young India, 30-4-‘31  
 
I shall strive for a constitution, which will releas e India from all thralldom and 
patronage, and give her, if need be, the right to si n, I shall work for an India, in which 
the poorest shall it is their country in whose maki ng they have an effective voice; an 
India in which there shall be no high class and low  class of people; an India in which all 
communities shall live in perfect harmony. There can  be no room in such an India for 
the curse of untouchability or the curse of the int oxicating drinks and drugs. Women 
will enjoy the same rights as men. Since we shall n ot be at peace with all the rest of 
the world, exploiting, nor being exploited, we shou ld have the smallest army 
imaginable, all interests not in conflict with the interests of the dumb millions will be 
scrupulously respected, whether foreign or indigeno us. Personally, I hate distinction 
between foreign and indigenous. This is the India o f my dreams….I shall be satisfied 
with nothing less.                                                                   Young India, 10-9-‘31  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11   
Chapter 02 
THE MEANING OF SWARAJ 
The word Swaraj is a sacred word, a Vedic word, mea ning self-rule and self-restraint, 
and not freedom from all restraint which ‘independe nce’ often means. 
Young India, 19-3-‘31  
 
By Swaraj I mean the government of India by the cons ent of the people as ascertained 
by the largest number of the adult   population, ma le or female, native born or 
domiciled, who have contributed by manual labour to  the service of the State and who 
have taken the trouble of having registered their na mes as voters….Real Swaraj will 
come not by the acquisition of authority by a few b ut by the acquisition of the capacity 
by all to resist authority when it is abused. In ot her words, Swaraj is to be obtained by 
education the masses to a sense of their capacity t o regulate and control authority. 
Young India, 29-1-‘25  
 
Self-government depends entirely upon our internal strength, upon our ability to fight 
against the heaviest odds. Indeed, self-government w hich does not require that 
continuous striving to attain it and to sustain it is not worth the name. I have, 
therefore, endeavoured to show both in the word and deed, that, political self-
government, that is, Self-government for a large num ber of men and women, is no 
better than individual self-government, and therefore , it is to be attained by precisely 
the same means that are required for individual sel f-government or self-rule. 
Young India, 1-12-‘27  
 
Self-government means, continuous effort to be inde pendent of government control, 
whether it is foreign government or whether it is na tional. Swaraj government will be a 
sorry affair if people look up to it for the regula tion of every detail of life. 
Young India, 6-8-‘25  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  My Swaraj is to intact the genius of our civilizatio n. I want to write many new things 
but they must all be written on the Indian slate. I  would gladly borrow from the West 
when I can return the amount with decent interest. 
Young India, 26-6-‘24  
 
Swaraj can be maintained, only where there is major ity of loyal and patriotic people to 
whom the good of the nation is paramount above all o ther considerations whatever 
including their personal profit. Swaraj means govern ment by the many. Where the 
many are immoral or selfish, their government can s pell anarchy and nothing else. 
Young India, 28-7-‘21  
 
The Swaraj of my…our…dream recognizes no race or re ligious destinations. Nor is it to 
be the monopoly of the lettered persons nor yet of moneyed men. Swaraj is to be for 
all, including the farmer, but emphatically includi ng the maimed, the blind the 
starving toiling millions. 
Young India, 26-3-‘31  
 
It has been said that Indian Swaraj will be the rul e of the majority community, i. e. the 
Hindus. There could not be a greater mistake than t hat. If it were to be true, I for one 
would refuse to call it Swaraj and would fight it w ith all the strength at my command, 
for to me Hind Swaraj is the rule of all people, is  the rule of justice. 
Young India, 16-4-‘31  
 
If Swaraj was not meant to civilize us, and to puri fy and stabilize our civilization, it 
would be nothing worth. The very essence of our civi lization is that we give a 
paramount place to morality in all our affairs, pub lic or private. 
Young India, 23-1-‘30  
 
Poorna Swaraj….’Poorna’ complete because it is as m uch for the prince as for the 
peasant, as much for the rich landowner as for the landless tiller of the soil, as much India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  for the Hindus as for the Musalmans, as much for Pa rsis and Christians as for the Jains, 
Jews and Sikhs, irrespective of any distinction of c aste or creed or status in life. 
Young India, 5-3-‘31  
 
The very connotation of the word and the means of it s attainment to which we are 
pledged- truth and non-violence-precludes all possib ility of that Swaraj being more for 
some one than for the other, being partial to some one than for the other, being 
partial to some and prejudicial to others. 
Young India, 5-3-‘31  
 
The Swaraj of my dream is the poor man’s Swaraj. Th e necessaries of life should be 
enjoyed by you in common with those enjoyed by the princes and the moneyed men. 
But that does not mean that you should have palaces like theirs. They are not 
necessary for happiness. You or I would be lost in them. But you ought t get all-the 
ordinary amenities of life that a rich man enjoys. I have not the slightest doubt that 
Swaraj is not Poorna Swaraj until these amenities a re guaranteed to you under it. 
Young India 26-3-‘31  
 
My notion of Poorna Swaraj is not isolated independ ence but healthy and dignified 
independence. My nationalism, fierce though it is, is not exclusive, is not devised to 
harm any nation or individual. Legal maxims are not so legal as they are moral. I 
believe in the eternal truth of ‘sic utere tuo ut a lienum non laedas’ (‘Use thy own 
property so as not to injure thy neighbour’s’).                       Young India, 26-3-‘31  
 
It all depends upon what we mean by and want throug h Poorna Swaraj. If we mean an 
awakening among the masses, a knowledge among them of their true interest and 
ability to serve that interest against the whole wor ld and if through Poorna Swaraj we 
want harmony, freedom from aggression from within o r without, and a progressive 
improvement in the economic condition of the masses , we can gain our end without 
political power and by directly acting upon the pow ers that be. 
Young India, 18-6-‘31  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
Let there be no mistake about my conception of Swar aj. It is complete economic 
independence of alien control and complete economic  independence. So at one end 
you have political independence, at the other the e conomic. It has two other ends. 
One of them is moral and social, the corresponding end is Dharam, i.e. religion in the 
highest sense of the term. It includes Hinduism, Is lam, Christianity, etc., but is 
superior to them all…. Let us call this the square of Swaraj, which will be out of shape 
if any of its angles is untrue. 
Harijan, 2-1-‘37  
 
The Swaraj of my conception will come only when all  of us are firmly persuaded that 
out Swaraj has got to be won, worked and maintained  through truth and Ahimsa alone. 
True democracy or Swaraj of the masses can never com e through untruthful and 
violent means, for the simple reason that the natura l corollary to their use would be to 
remove all opposition through the suppression or ext ermination of the antagonists. 
That does not make for individual freedom. Individua l freedom can have the fullest 
play only under a regime of unadulterated Ahimsa. 
Harijan, 27- 5-‘39  
 
In Swaraj based on Ahimsa people need not know thei r rights, but it is necessary for 
them to know their duties. There is no duty but cre ates a corresponding right, and 
those only are true rights which flow from a due pe rformance of one’s duties Hence 
rights of citizenship accrue only to those who serve  the State to which they belong. 
And they alone can do justice to the rights that ac crue to them. Everyone possesses 
the right to tell lies or resort to goondaism. But the exercise of such a right is harmful 
both to the exerciser and society. But to him who o bserves truth and non-violence 
comes prestige, and prestige brings rights. And peo ple who obtain rights as a result of 
performance of duty, exercise them only for the ser vice of society, never for 
themselves. Swaraj of a people means the sum total o f the Swaraj (self-rule) of 
individuals. And such Swaraj comes only from perform ance by individuals of their duty 
as citizens. In it no one thinks of his rights. The y come, when they are needed, for 
better performance of duty.                                                          Harijan, 25-3-‘39  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
Under Swaraj based on non-violence nobody is anybody ’s enemy, everybody 
contributes his or her due quota to the common goal , all can read and write, and their 
knowledge keeps growing from day to day. Sickness a nd disease are reduced to the 
minimum. No one is a pauper and labour can always f ind employment. There is no 
place under such a government for gambling, drinking  and immortality or for class 
hatred. The rich will use their riches wisely and u sefully, and not squander them in 
increasing their pomp and worldly pleasures. It sho uld not happen that a handful of 
rich people should live in jewelled places and the m illions in miserable hovels devoid 
of sunlight or ventilation. In non-violent Swaraj th ere can be no encroachment upon 
just rights; contrariwise no one can possess unjust  rights. In a well organized State, 
usurpation should be impossibility and it should be  unnecessary to resort to force for 
dispossessing an usurper. 
Harijan, 25-3-‘39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16   
Chapter 03 
IN DEFENCE OF NATIONALISM 
For me patriotism is the same as humanity. I am pat riotic because I am human and 
humane. It is not exclusive. I will not hurt England  or Germany to serve India. 
Imperialism has no place in my scheme of life. The law of a patriot is not different 
from that of the patriarch. And a patriot is so muc h the less a patriot if he is a 
lukewarm humanitarian. There is no conflict between  private and political law. 
Young India, 16-3-‘21  
 
Just as the cult of patriotism teaches us today tha t the individual has to die for the 
family, the family has to die for the village, the village for the district, the district for 
the province, and the province for the country, even s o a country has to be free in 
order that it may die, if necessary, for the benefi t of the world. My love, therefore, of 
nationalism or my idea of nationalism is that my co untry may become free, that if 
need be the whole of the country may die, so that t he human race may live. There is 
no room for race hatred there. Let that be our nati onalism. 
Gandhiji in Indian Villages, p. 170  
 
I want India’s rise so that the whole world may ben efit. I do not want India to rise on 
the ruin of other nations. 
Young India, 12-3-‘25  
 
An India prostrate at the feet of Europe can give no  hope for humanity. An India 
awakened and free has a message of peace and goodwi ll to a groaning world. 
Young India, 1-6-‘21  
 
It is impossible for one to be inter-nationalist wi thout being a nationalist. 
Internationalism is possible only when nationalism becomes a fact, i.e. when peoples 
belonging to different countries have organized the mselves and are able to act as one 
man. It is not nationalism that is evil, it is the n arrowness, selfishness, exclusiveness India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  which is the bane of modern nations which is evil. E ach wants to profit at the expense 
of, and rise on the ruin of, the other. Indian nati onalism has struck a different path. It 
wants to organize itself or to find full self-expre ssion for the benefit and service of 
humanity at large.                                                               Young India, 18-6-‘25  
 
God having cast my lot in the midst of the people of  India, I should be untrue to my 
Maker if I failed to serve them. If I do not know ho w to serve them I shall never know 
how to serve humanity. And I cannot possibly go wron g so long as I do not harm other 
nations in the act of serving my country. 
Young India, 18-6-‘25  
 
My patriotism is not an exclusive thing. It is all-e mbracing and I should reject that 
patriotism which sought to mount upon the distress or exploitation of other 
nationalities. The conception of my patriotism is n othing if it is not always, in every 
case without exception, consistent with the broades t good of humanity at large. Not 
only that, but my religion and my patriotism derive d from my religion embrace all life. 
I want to realize brotherhood or identity not merel y with the beings called human, but 
I want to realize identity with all life, even with  such things as crawl upon 
earth…because we claim descent from the same God, a nd that being so, all life in 
whatever from it appears must be essentially one. 
Young India, 4-4-‘29  
 
Our nationalism can be no peril to other nations in asmuch as we will exploit none, just 
as we will allow none to exploit us. Though Swaraj we will serve the whole world. 
Young India, 16-4-‘31  
 
After nearly 50 years of public life, I am able to say today that my faith in the doctrine 
that the service of one’s nation is not inconsistent  with the service of the world has 
grown. It is a good doctrine. Its acceptance alone will ease the situation in the world 
and stop the mutual jealousies between nations inha biting this glob of ours. 
Harijan, 17-11-‘33 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
Chapter 04 
DEMOCRACY IN INDIA 
The highest from of freedom carries with it the gre atest measure of discipline and 
humility. Freedom that comes from discipline and hu mility cannot be denied, 
unbridled license is a sign of vulgarity injurious a like to self and one’s neighbours. 
Young India, 3-6-‘26  
 
There is no human institution but has its dangers. The greater the institution the 
greater the chances of abuse. Democracy is a great institution and therefore it is liable 
to be greatly abused. The remedy, therefore, is not  avoidance of democracy but 
reduction of possibility of abuse to a minimum. 
Young India, 7-5-‘31  
 
A popular State can never act in advance of public o pinion. If it goes against it, it will 
be destroyed. Democracy disciplined and enlightened  is the finest thing in the world. A 
democracy prejudiced, ignorant, superstitious, will  land itself in chaos and may be 
self-destroyed. 
Young India, 30-7-‘31  
 
I have repeatedly observed that no school of thought can claim a monopoly of right 
judgements. We are all liable to err and are often obliged to revise our judgements. In 
a vast country like this, there must be room for all  schools of honest thought. And the 
least, therefore, that we owe to ourselves as to oth ers is to try to understand the 
opponent’s view-point and, if we cannot accept it, r espect it as fully as we expect him 
to respect ours. It is one of the indispensable tes ts of a healthy public life and 
therefore fitness for Swaraj. If we have no charity,  and no tolerance, we shall never 
settle our differences amicably and must, therefore , always submit to the arbitration 
of a third party, i.e. to foreign domination. 
Young India, 17-4-‘24  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  When people come into possession of political power , the interference with the 
freedom of the people is reduced to a minimum. In o ther words a nation that runs its 
affairs smoothly and effectively without much State interference is truly democratic. 
Where such a condition is absent, the form of Govern ment is democratic in name. 
Harijan, 11-1-‘36  
 
Democracy and violence can ill go together. The Stat e that are today nominally 
democratic have either to become frankly totalitari an or, if they are to become truly 
democratic, they must become courageously non-viole nt. It is a blasphemy to say that 
non-violence can only be practiced by individuals a nd never by nations which are 
composed of individuals. 
Harijan, 12-11-‘38  
 
The very essence of democracy is that every person re presents all the varied interests 
which compose the nation. It is true that it does n ot exclude and should not exclude 
special representation of special interests, but su ch representation is not its test. It is 
a sign of its imperfection. 
Harijan, 22-4-‘39  
 
The democracy or the Swaraj of the masses can never come through untruthful and 
violent means, for the simple reason that the natura l corollary to their use would be to 
remove all opposition through the suppression or ext ermination of the antagonists. 
That does not make for individual freedom can have th e fullest play only under a 
regime of unadulterated Ahimsa. 
Harijan, 27-5-’39  
 
A free democratic India will gladly associate herse lf with other free nations for mutual 
defence against aggression and for economic co-oper ation. She will work for the 
establishment of a real world order based on freedo m and democracy, utilizing the 
world’s knowledge and resources for the progress an d advancement of humanity. 
Harijan, 23-9-‘39  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
My notion of democracy is that under it the weakest  should have the same opportunity 
as the strongest. That can never happen except throu gh non-violence. No country in 
the world today shows any but patronizing regard fo r the weak….Western democracy, 
as it functions today, is diluted Nazism or Fascism . At best it is merely a cloak to hide 
the Nazi and the Fascism tendencies of imperialism… .India are trying to evolve true 
democracy, i.e. without violence. Our weapons are th ose of Satyagraha expressed 
through the charkha, the village industries, removal of untouchability, communal 
harmony, prohibition, and non-violent organization of labour as in Ahmedabad. These 
mean mass effort and mass education. We have big age ncies for conducting these 
activities. They are purely voluntary, and their only  sanction is service of the lowliest. 
Harijan, 18-5-‘40  
 
A born democrat is a born disciplinarian. Democracy  comes naturally to him who is 
habituated normally to yield willing obedience to a ll laws, human or divine….Let those 
who are ambitious to serve democracy qualify themsel ves by satisfying first this acid 
test of democracy. Moreover, a democrat must be utte rly selfless. He must think and 
dream not in terms of self or party but only of dem ocracy. Only then does he acquire 
the right of civil disobedience…. I value individual freedom but you must not forget 
that man is essentially a social being. He has rise n to his present status by learning to 
adjust his individualism to the requirements of soci al progress. Unrestricted 
individualism is the law of the beast of the jungle.  We have to learn to strike the mean 
between individual freedom and social restraint. Wi lling submission to social restraint 
for the sake of the wellbeing of the whole society,  enriches both the individual and the 
society of which one is a member. 
Harijan, 27-5-‘39  
 
Rights accrue automatically to him who duly perform s his duties. In fact the right to 
perform one’s duties is the only right that is wort h living for and dying for. It covers all 
legitimate and contains in it seeds of Himsa. 
Harijan, 27-5-‘39  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  In a democracy the individual will is governed and li mited by the social will which is 
the State, which is governed by and for democracy. I f every individual takes the law 
into his own hands there is no State. That way lies  destruction of liberty. Therefore, 
they should subdue their anger and let the State se cure justice. 
Delhi Diary, p. 18  
 
People in a democracy should be satisfied with draw ing the government’s attention to 
mistakes, if any. They could remove the Government i f they wished to. But they should 
not obstruct them by agitating against them. Ours i s not a foreign Government having a 
mighty army and navy to support them. They have to de rive their strength from the 
people. 
Delhi Diary, p. 86  
 
True democracy cannot be worked by twenty men sitti ng at the centre. It has to be 
worked from below by the people of every village. 
Harijan, 18-1-‘48  
 
 
Mobocracy  
Personally I do not mind Government fury as I mind mob fury. The latter is a sign of 
national distemper and therefore more difficult to deal with than the former which is 
confined to a small corporation. It is easier to ou st a Government that has rendered 
itself unfit to govern than it is to cure unknown p eople in a mob of their madness. 
Young India, 28-7-‘20  
 
Nothing is so easy as to train mobs, for the simple  reason that they have no mind, no 
premeditation. They act in frenzy. They repent quic kly. Non-co-operation I am using in 
order to evolve democracy. 
Young India, 8-9-‘20  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  We must train these masses of men who have a heart of gold, who feel for the country, 
who want to be taught and led. But a few intelligen t, sincere workers are needed, and 
the whole nation can be evolved out of mobocracy.                    Young India, 22-9-‘20  
 
The spirit of democracy cannot be establishment in the midst of terrorism whether 
governmental or popular. In some respect popular ter rorism is more antagonistic to the 
growth of the democratic spirit than the governmenta l. For the latter strengthens the 
spirit of democracy, whereas the former kills it. 
Young India, 23-2-‘21  
 
Majority and Minority  
If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy,  we cannot afford to be intolerant. 
Intolerance betrays want of faith in one’s cause. 
Young India, 2-2-‘21  
 
Claiming the right of free opinion and free action as we do, we must extend the same 
to others. The rule of majority when it becomes coe rcive, is as intolerable as that of a 
bureaucratic minority. We must patiently try to bri ng round the minority to our view 
by gentle persuasion and argument.                                         Young India, 26-1-‘22  
 
The rule of majority has a narrow application, i. e . one should yield to the majority in 
matters of detail. But it is slavery to be amenable  to the majority, no matter what its 
decisions are. Democracy is not a state in which pe ople act like sheep. Under 
democracy, individual liberty of opinion and action  is jealously guarded. I, therefore, 
believe that the minority has a perfect right to ac t differently from the majority. 
Young India, 2-3-‘32  
 
If the individual ceases to count, what is left of s ociety? Individual freedom alone can 
make a man voluntarily surrender himself completely  to the service of society. If it is 
wrested from him, he becomes an automaton and socie ty is ruined. No society can 
possible be built on a denial of individual freedom .                           Harijan, 1-2-‘42 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
Chapter 05 
INDIA AND SOCIALISM 
Socialism was not born with the discovery of the mis use of capital by capitalists. As I 
have contended, socialism, even communism, is explic it in the first verse of 
Ishopanishad. What is true is that when some reform ers lost faith in the method of 
conversion, the technique of what is known as scien tific socialism was born. I am 
engaged in solving the same problem that faces scien tific socialists. It is true, 
however, that my approach is always and only through  unadulterated non-violence. It 
may fail. If it dies, it will be because of my igno rance of technique of non-violence. I 
may be a bad exponent of the doctrine in which my f aith is daily increasing. The A. I. 
S. A. and the A. I. V. I. A. are organizations thro ugh which the technique of non-
violence is being tested on an all-India scale. They  are special autonomous bodies 
created by the vicissitudes of policy to which a wh olly democratic body like the 
Congress is always liable. 
Harijan, 20-2-‘37  
 
Real socialism has been handed down to us by our an cestors who taught: “All land 
belongs to Gopal; where then is the boundary line? Man is the maker of that line and 
he can, therefore, unmake it.” Gopal literally mean s shepherd; it also means God. In 
modern language it means the State, i. e. the peopl e. That the land today does not 
belong to the people is true. But the fault is not in the teaching. It is in us who have 
not lived up to it. I have no doubt that we can make as good an approach to it as is 
possible for any nation, not excluding Russia, and that without violence. The most 
effective substitute for violent dispossession is th e wheel with all its implications. Land 
and all property is his who will work for it. Unfor tunately the workers are or have been 
kept ignorant of this simple fact. 
Harijan, 2-1-‘37  
 
I have always held that social justice, even to the least and the lowliest is impossible 
of attainment by force. I have further believed that  it is possible by further training of 
the lowliest by non-violent means to secure redress of the wrongs suffered by them. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  That means is non-violent non-co-operation. At times  non-co-operation becomes as 
much a duty as co-operation. No one is bound to co- operate in one’s own undoing or 
slavery. Freedom received through the effort of other s, however benevolent, cannot 
be retained when such effort is withdrawn. In other  words, such freedom is not real 
freedom. But the lowliest can feel its glow as soon  as they learn the art of attaining it 
through non-violent non-co-operation….I am quite sur e that non-violent non-co-
operation can secure what violence the trial it has deserved. The marvel is that we 
have attained so much even with our mixed non-violenc e. 
Harijan, 20-4-‘40  
 
No man should have more land than he needs for dign ified sustenance. Who can 
dispute the fact that the grinding poverty of the ma sses is due to their having no land 
that they can call their own? 
But it must realized that the reform cannot be rush ed. If it is to be brought about by 
non-violent means, it can only be done by education  both of the ‘haves’ and the ‘have-
nots.’ The former should be assured that there never  will be force used against them. 
The have-nots must be educated to know that no one can really compel them to do 
anything against their will, and that they can secu re their freedom by learning the art 
of non-violence, i. e. self-suffering. If the end in  view is to be achieved, the education 
I have adumbrated has to be commenced now. An atmosp here of mutual respect and 
trust has to be established as the preliminary step . There can then be no violent 
conflict between the classes and the masses. 
Harijan, 20-4-‘40  
 
Who is a Socialist?  
Socialism is a beautiful word and so far as I am aw are in socialism all the members of 
society are equal-none low, non-high. In the individ ual body, the head is not high 
because it is the top of the body, nor are the sole s of the feet low because they touch 
the earth. Even as members of the individual body a re equal, so are the members of 
society. This is socialism. 
 In it the prince and the peasant, the wealthy and the poor, the employer and 
employee are all on the same level. In terms of reli gion there is no duality in socialism. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  It is all unity. Looking at society all the world o ver there is nothing but duality or 
plurality. Unity is conspicuous by its absence. Thi s man is high, that one is low, that is 
a Hindu, that a Muslim, third a Christian, fourth a  Parsi, fifth a Sikh, sixth a Jew. Even 
among these there are sub-divisions. In the unity o f my conception there is perfect 
unity in the plurality of designs. 
In order to reach this state we may not look on thi ngs philosophically and say that we 
need not make a move until all are converted to soc ialism. Without changing our life 
we may go on giving addresses, forming parties and h awk-like seize the game when it 
comes our way. This is no socialism. The more we tr eat it as game to be seized the 
further it must recede from us. 
Socialism begins with the first convert. It there is  one such, you can add zeroes to the 
one and the first zero will count for ten and every addition will count for ten times the 
previous number. If, however, the beginner is a zero,  in other words, no one makes the 
beginning, multiplicity of zeroes will also produce  zero value. Time and paper occupied 
in writing zeroes will be so much waste. 
This socialism is as pure as crystal. If, therefore , requires crystal-like means to achieve 
it. Impure means result in an impure end. Hence the  prince and the peasant will not be 
equalized by cutting off the prince’s head, nor can  the process of cutting off equalize 
the employer and the employed. One cannot reach tru th by untruthfulness. Truthful 
conduct alone can reach truth. Are not non-violence and truth twins? The answer is an 
emphatic ‘no’. Non-violence is embedded in truth an d vice versa . Hence has it been 
said that they are faces of the same coin. Either i s inseparable from the other. Read 
the coin either way. The spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. 
This blessed state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbour impurity of mind or 
body and you have untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore, only truthful, non-violent and pure-hear ted Socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the wo rld. To my knowledge there is no 
country in the world which is purely socialist. Wit hout the means described above the 
existence of such a society is impossible. 
Harijan, 13-7-‘47  
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26   
Chapter 06 
INDIA AND COMMUNISM 
I must confess that I have not yet been able to full y understand the meaning of 
Bolshevism. All that I know is that it aims at the a bolition of the institution of private 
property. This is only an application of the ethica l ideal of non-possession in the realm 
of economics and if the people adopted this ideal o f their own accord or could be 
made to accept it by means of peaceful persuasion, there would be nothing like it. But 
form what I know of Bolshevism it not only does not  preclude the use of force, but 
freely sanctions it for the expropriation of private  property and maintaining the 
collective State ownership of the same. And if that is so, I have no hesitation in saying 
that the Bolshevik regime in its present form cannot  last for long. For it is my firm 
conviction that nothing enduring can be built on vio lence. But, be that as it may, there 
is no questioning the fact that is Bolshevik ideal h as behind it the purest sacrifice of 
countless men and women who have given up their all for its sake, and an ideal that is 
sanctioned by the sacrifices of such master spirits  as Lenin cannot go in vain; the noble 
example of their renunciation will be emblazoned fo r ever and quicken and purify the 
ideal as time passes. 
Young India, 15-11-‘28  
 
Socialism and communism of the West are based on ce rtain conceptions which are 
fundamentally different from ours. One such concept ion is their belief in the essential 
selfishness of human nature. I do not subscribe to it for I know that the essential 
difference between man and the brute is that the fo rmer can respond to the call of 
the spirit in him, can rise superior to the passion s that he owns in common with the 
brute and, therefore, superior to selfishness and vi olence, which belong to the brute 
nature and not to the immortal spirit of man. That the fundamental conception of 
Hinduism, which has years of penance and austerity at the back of discovery of this 
truth. That is why, whilst we have had saints who h ave worn out their bodies and laid 
down their lives in order to exploring the remotest  or the highest regions of the earth. 
Our socialism or communism should, therefore, be ba sed on non-violence and on 
harmonious co-operation of labour and capital, land lord and tenant. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-‘34  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
What does communism mean in the last analysis? It m eans a classless society-an ideal 
that is worth striving for. Only I part company wit h it when force is called to aid for 
achieving it. We are all born equal, but we have all  these centuries resisted the will of 
God. The idea of inequality, of ‘high and low’, is an evil, but I do not believe in 
eradicating evil from the human breast at the point  of the bayonet. The human breast 
does not lend itself to that means. 
Harijan, 13-3-‘37  
 
Communism of the Russian type, that is communism wh ich is imposed on a people, 
would be repugnant to India. If communism came with out any violence, it would be 
welcome. For then no property would be held by anyb ody except on behalf of the 
people and for the people. A millionaire may have hi s millions but he will hold then, 
whenever they would need them for the common cause.  
Harijan, 13-3-‘37  
 
The Socialists and Communists say they can do nothi ng to bring about economic 
equality today. They will just carry on propaganda in its favour and to that end they 
believe in generating and accentuating hatred. They  say, when they get control over 
the State they will enforce equality. Under my plan  the State will be there to carry out 
the will of the people, not to dictate to them or f orce them to do its will. I shall bring 
about economic equality through non-violence, by con verting the people to my point 
of view by harnessing the forces of love as against h atred. I will not wait till I have 
converted the whole society to my view but will stra ight away make a beginning with 
myself. It goes without saying that I cannot hope t o bring about economic equality of 
my conception, if I am the owner of fifty motor car s or even of ten bighas of land. For 
that I have to reduce myself to the level of the poo rest of the poor. That is what I 
have been trying to do for the last fifty years or m ore, and so I claim to be a foremost 
Communist although I make use of cars and other fac ilities offered to me by the rich. 
They have no hold on me and I can shed them at a mo ment’s notice, if the interests of 
the masses demand it. 
Harijan, 31-3-‘46  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
We must have the ability and courage to subsist on w hat our soil can give us rather 
than depend on foreign charity. Otherwise we shall not deserve to exist as an 
independent country. The same applies to foreign id eologies. I would accept them only 
to the extent that I can assimilate them and adapt them to the Indian scene. But I 
must refuse to go under them. 
Harijan, 6-10-‘46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29   
Chapter 07 
THE CURSE OF INDUSRIALISM 
There is a growing body of enlightened opinion whic h distrusts this civilization which 
has insatiable material ambition at one end and con sequent war at the other. But 
whether good or bad, why must India become industri al in the Western sense? The 
Western civilization is urban. Small countries like England or Italy, may afford to 
urbanize their systems. A big country like America with a very sparse population, 
perhaps, a big country, with a teeming population w ith an ancient rural tradition which 
has hitherto answered its purpose, need not, must n ot copy the Western model. What 
is good for one nation situated in one condition is  not necessarily good enough for 
another differently situated. One man’s food is oft en another man’s poison. Physical 
geography of a country has a predominant share in d etermining its culture. A fur coat 
may be a necessity for the dweller in the Polar reg ions, it will smother those living in 
the equatorial regions.                                                             Young India, 25-7-‘29  
 
I would categorically state my conviction that the mania for mass-production is 
responsible for the world crisis. Granting for the moment that machinery may supply 
all the needs of humanity, still it would concentra te production in particular areas, so 
that you would have to go about in a roundabout way  to regulate distribution; 
whereas, if there is production and distribution bo th in the respective areas where 
things are required, it is automatically regulated,  and there is less chance for fraud, 
none for speculation. 
You see that these nations (Europe and America) are  able to exploit the so-called 
weaker or unorganized races of the world. Once thes e races gain an elementary 
knowledge and decide that they are no more going to  be exploited, they will simply be 
satisfied with what they can provide themselves. Mass -production, then at least where 
the vital necessities are concerned, will disappear . 
When production and consumption both become localiz ed, the temptation, the 
temptation to speed up production, indefinitely and  at any price, disappears. All the 
endless difficulties and problems that our present- day economic system presents, too, 
would then come to an end. 
Harijan, 2-11-‘34  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30   
Machinery has its place; it has come to stay. But i t must not be allowed to displace 
necessary human labour. I would welcome every improv ement in the cottage machine, 
but I know that it is criminal to displace hand lab our by the introduction of power-
driven spindles unless one is at the same time ready  to give millions of farmers some 
other occupation in their houses. 
Young India, 5-11-‘25  
 
I refuse to be dazzled by the seeming triumph of ma chinery. I am uncompromisingly 
against all destructive machinery. But simple tools  and instruments and such 
machinery as saves individual labour and lightens the  burden of the millions of 
cottages, I should welcome. 
Young India, 17-6-‘26  
 
Dead machinery must not be pitted against the milli ons of living machines represented 
by the villagers scattered in the seven hundred thous and villages of India. Machinery to 
be well used has to help and ease human effort. The  present use of machinery tends 
more and more to concentrate wealth in the hands of  a few in total disregard of 
millions of men and women whose bread is snatched b y it out of their mouths. 
Harijan, 14-9-‘35  
 
Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily lead to passive or active exploitation 
of the villagers as the problems of competition and  marketing come in. Therefore, we 
have to concentrate on the village being self-contai ned, manufacturing mainly for use. 
Provided this character of the industry is maintaine d, there would be no objection to 
villagers using even the modern machines and tools th at they can make and can afford 
to use. Only they should not be used as a means of exploitation of others. 
Harijan, 29-8-‘36  
 
I do not believe that industrialization is necessary  in any case for any country. It is 
much less so for India. Indeed, I believe that Inde pendent India can only discharge her India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  duty towards a groaning world by adopting a simple but ennobled life by developing 
her thousands of cottages and living at peace with t he world. High thinking is 
inconsistent with complicated material life based o n high speed imposed on us by 
Mammon worship. All the grace of life are possible only when we learn the art of living 
nobly. 
There may be sensation in living dangerously. We mus t draw the distinction between 
living in the face of danger and living dangerously. A man who dares to live alone in a 
forest infested by wild beasts and wilder men witho ut a gum and with God as his only 
Help, lives in the face of danger. A man who lives pe rpetually in mid-air and dives to 
the earth below to the admiration of a gaping world  lives dangerously. One is a 
purposeful, the other a purposeless life. 
Whether such plain living is possible for an isolat ed nation, however large 
geographically and numerically in the face of a wor ld, armed to the teeth, and in the 
midst of pomp and circumstances, is a question open  to the doubt of a sceptic. The 
answer is straight and simple. If plain life is wor th living, then the attempt is worth 
making, even though only an individual or a group ma kes the effort. 
At the same time I believe that some key industries are necessary. I do not believe in 
armchair or armed socialism. I believe in action acc ording to my belief, without 
waiting for wholesale conversion. Hence, without ha ving to enumerate key industries, I 
would have State ownership, where a large number of people have to work together. 
The ownership of the products of their labour, whet her skilled or unskilled, will vest in 
them through the State. But as I can conceive such a State only based on non-violence, 
I would not dispossess moneyed men by force but wou ld invite their co-operation in the 
process of conversion to State ownership. There are no pariahs of society, whether 
they are millionaires or paupers. The two are sores  of the same disease. And all are 
men “for a’ that”. 
And I avow this belief in the face of the inhumaniti es we have witnessed and may still 
have to witness in India as elsewhere. Let us live in  the face of danger. 
Harijan, 1-9-‘46 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32   
Chapter 08 
CLASS WAR 
I do not teach the masses to regard the capitalists  as their enemies, but I teach them 
that they are their own enemies. 
Young India, 26-11-‘31  
 
The class war is foreign to the essential genius of  India which is capable of evolving 
communism broad-based on fundamental rights of all on equal justice. The Ramarajya 
of my dream ensures the right alike of prince and p auper. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 2-8-‘34  
 
I never said that there should be co-operation betwe en the exploiter and the exploited 
so long as exploitation and the will to exploit per sists. Only I do not believe that the 
capitalists and the landlords are all exploiters by  an inherent necessity, or that there is 
a basic or irreconcilable antagonism between their interests and those of the masses. 
All exploitation is based on co-operation, willing or forced, of the exploited. However 
much we detest admitting it, the fact remains that there would be no exploitation if 
people refuse to obey the exploiter. But self comes  in and we hug the chains that bind 
us. This must cease. What is needed is not the exti nction of landlords and capitalists, 
but a transformation of the existing relationship b etween them and the masses into 
something healthier and purer. 
The idea of class war does not appeal to me. In Ind ia a class war is not only not 
inevitable, but it is avoidable if we have understoo d the message of non-violence. 
Those who talk about class war as being inevitable have not understood the 
implications of non-violence or have understood them  only skin-deep. 
Let us not be obsessed with catchwords and seductive  slogans imported from the West. 
Have we not our distinct Eastern tradition? Are we n ot capable of finding our own 
solution to the question of labour and capital? Wha t is the system of Varnashrama but a 
means of harmonizing the difference between high an d low, as well as between capital 
and labour? All that comes from the West on this su bject is tarred with the brush of 
violence. I object to it because I have seen the wrec kage that lies at the end of this India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  road. The more thinking set even in the West today s tand aghast at the abyss for which 
their system is heading. And I owe whatever influenc e I have in the West to my 
ceaseless endeavour to find a solution which promis es an escape from the vicious circle 
of violence and exploitation. I have been a sympathe tic student of the Western social 
order and I have discovered that underlying the fever that fills the soul of the West 
there is a restless search for truth. I value that s pirit. Let us study our Eastern 
institutions in that spirit of scientific enquiry a nd we shall evolve a truer socialism and 
a truer communism than the world has yet dreamed of . It is surely wrong to presume 
that Western socialism or communism is the last wor d on the question of mass poverty. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 3-8-‘34  
 
I do not want to destroy the zamindar, but neither do I feel that the zamindar is 
inevitable. I expect to convert the zamindar and ot her capitalists by the non-violent 
method, and therefore there is for me nothing like an inevitable of class conflict. For it 
is an essential part of non-violence to go along th e line of least resistance. The 
moment the cultivators of the soil realize their pow er, the zamindari evil will be 
sterilized. What can the poor zamindar do when they  say that they will simply not work 
the land unless they are paid enough to feed and cl othe and educate themselves and 
their children in a decent manner? In reality the t oiler is the owner of what he 
produces. If the toilers intelligently combine, the y will become an irresistible power. 
That is how I do not see the necessity of class con flict. If I thought it inevitable, I 
should not hesitate to preach it and teach it. 
Harijan, 5-12-‘36  
 
The problem is not to set class against class, but to educate labour to a sense of its 
dignity. Moneyed men after all form microscopic min ority in the world. They will act 
on the square, immediately labour realizes its powe r and yet acts on the square. To 
inflame labour against moneyed men is to perpetuate  class hatred and all the evil 
consequences flowing form it. The strife is a viciou s circle to be avoided at any cost. It 
is an admission of weakness, a sign of inferiority complex. The moment labour 
recognizes its own dignity, money will find its rig htful place, i.e. it will be held in trust 
for labour. For labour is more than money.                                       Harijan, 19-10-‘35 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
Chapter 09 
STRIKES 
Strikes are the order of the day. They are a sympto m of the existing unrest. All kinds of 
vague ideas are floating in the air. A vague hope ins pires all, and great will be the 
disappointment if that vague hope does not take defi nite shape. The labour world in 
India, as elsewhere, is at the mercy of those who s et up as adviser and guides. The 
latter are not always scrupulous and not always wis e even when they are scrupulous. 
The labourers are dissatisfied with their lot. They  have every reason for dissatisfaction. 
They are being taught, and justly, to regard themse lves as being chiefly instrumental 
in enriching their employers. And so it requires li ttle effort to make them lay down 
their tools. The political situation too is beginni ng to affect the labourers of India. And 
there are not wanting labour leaders who consider t hat strikes may be engineered for 
political purposes. 
In my opinion, it will be a most serious mistake to  make use of labour strikes for such a 
purpose. I don’t deny that such strikes can serve po litical ends. But they do not fall 
within the plan of non-violent non-co-operation. It does not require much effort of the 
intellect to perceive that it is a most dangerous th ing to make political use of labour 
until labourers understand the political condition of the country and are prepared to 
work for the common good. This is hardly to be expe cted of them all of a sudden and 
until they have bettered their own condition so as to enable them to keep body and 
soul together in a decent manner. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p.1049  
 
The greatest political contribution that labourers can make is to improve their own 
condition, to become better informed, to insist on their rights, and even to demand 
proper use by their employers of the manufactures i n which they have had such an 
important hand. The proper evolution, therefore, wou ld be for the labourers to raise 
themselves to the status of proprietors. 
Strikes, therefore, for the present should only tak e place for the direct betterment of 
the labourers’ lot, and when they have acquired the spirit of patriotism, for the 
regulation of prices of the manufactures. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  The conditions of a successful strike are simple. A nd when they are fulfilled a strike 
never need fail. 
1. The cause of the strike must be just. 
2. There should be practical unanimity among the st rikers. 
3. There should be no violence used against non-stri kers. 
4. Strikers should be able to maintain themselves du ring the strike period without 
falling back upon union funds and should therefore occupy themselves in some useful 
and productive temporary occupation. 
5. A strike is no remedy when there is enough other  labour to replace strikers. In that 
case in the event of unjust treatment or inadequate wages or the like, resignation is 
the remedy. 
6. Successful strikes have taken place even when the  above conditions have not been 
fulfilled, but that merely proves that the employer s were weak and had a guilty 
conscience. 
Young India, 16-2-‘21  
 
Obviously there should be no strike which is not jus tifiable on merits. No unjust strike 
should succeed. All public sympathy must be withhel d from such strikes. The public has 
no means of judging the merits of a strike, unless it is backed by impartial persons 
enjoying public confidence. Interested men cannot j udge the merits of their own case. 
Hence, there must be an arbitration accepted by the  parties or a judicial 
adjudication…. 
As a rule, the matter does not come before the publ ic when there is accepted 
arbitration or adjudication. Cases have, however, ha ppened when haughty employers 
have ignored awards or misguided employees, consciou s of their power to assert 
themselves, have done likewise and have decided upon f orcible extortion. 
Harijan, 11-8-‘46  
 
Strikes for economic betterment should never have a p olitical end as an ulterior 
motive. Such a mixture never advances the political  end and generally brings trouble 
upon strikers, even when they do not dislocate publi c life, as in the case of public India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  utility services, such as the postal strike. The Gov ernment may suffer some 
inconvenience, but will not come to a stand-still. R ich persons will put up expensive 
postal services but the vast mass of the poor people  will be deprived during such a 
strike of a convenience of primary importance to wh ich they have become used for 
generations. Such strikes can only take place when every other legitimate means has 
been adopted and failed. 
It follows from the foregoing that political strike s must be treated on their own merits 
and must never be mixed up with or related to econom ic strikes. Political strikes have 
a definite place in non-violent action. They are nev er taken up haphazard. They must 
be open, never led by goondaism . They are calculated never to lead to violence. 
Harijan, 11-8-‘46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37   
Chapter 10 
CHOICE BEFORE LABOUR 
Two paths are open before India today, either to in troduced the Western principle of 
“Might is Right” or to uphold the Eastern principle  that truth alone conquers, that 
truth knows no mishap, that the strong and the weak  have alike a right to secure 
justice. The choice is to begin with the labouring class. Should the labourers obtain an 
increment in their wages by violence, even if that b e possible? They cannot resort to 
anything like violence howsoever legitimate may be th eir claims. To use violence for 
securing rights may seem an easy path, but it proves  to be thorny in the long run. 
Those who live by the sword die also by sword. The s wimmer often dies by drowning. 
Look at Europe. No one seems to be happy there, for , not one is contended. The 
labourer does not trust the capitalist and the capi talist has no faith in labourer. Both 
have a sort of vigour and strength but even the bulls have it. They fight to the very 
bitter end. All motion is not progress. We have got no reason to believe that the 
people of Europe are progressing. Their possession of wealth does not argue the 
possession of any moral or spiritual qualities. Kin g Duryodhana was a master of untold 
wealth, but with all that he was a pauper in compar ison with Vidura and Sudama. 
Today the world adores Vidura and Sudama, whereas, Duryodhana’s name is 
remembered only as a byword for the evil qualities o ne should shun. 
…In the struggle between capital and labour, it may  be generally said that more often 
than not the capitalists are in the wrong box. But when labour comes fully to realize its 
strength, I know it can become more tyrannical than  capital. The mill-owners will have 
to work on the terms dedicated by labour if the lat ter could command intelligence of 
the former. It is clear, however, that labour will n ever attain to that intelligence. If it 
does, labour will cease to be labour and become its elf the master. The capitalists do 
not fight on the strength of money alone. They poss ess intelligence and tact. 
The question before us is this: When the labourers,  remaining what they are, develop a 
certain consciousness, what should be there course?  It would be suicidal if the 
labourers rely upon their numbers or brute-force, i .e. violence. By so doing they will 
do harm to industries in the country. If on the oth er hand they take their stand on pure 
justice and suffer in their person to secure it, no t only will they always succeed but 
they will reform their masters, develop industries and both master and men will be as India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  members of one and the same family. A satisfactory solution of the condition of labour 
must include the following: 
(1) The hours of labour must leave the workmen some hours of leisure; 
(2) They must get facilities for their own educatio n; 
(3) Provision should be made for an adequate supply of milk, clothing and necessary 
education for their children; 
(4) There should be sanitary dwelling for the workm en; 
(5) They should be in a position to save enough to m aintain themselves during their old 
age. 
None of these conditions is satisfied today. For th is both the parties are responsible. 
The masters care only for the service they get. What  becomes of the labourer does not 
concern them. All their endeavours are generally con fined to obtaining maximum 
service with minimum payment. The labourer on the ot her hand tries to hit upon all 
tricks whereby he can get maximum pay with minimum work. The result is that 
although the labourers get an increment there is no  improvement in the work turned 
out. The relations between the two parties are not purified and the labourers do not 
make proper use of the increment they get. 
A third party has sprung up between these two parti es. It has become the labourers’ 
friend. There is need for such a party. Only to the  extent to which this party has 
disinterested friendship for the labourers can it b efriend them. 
A time has come now when attempts will be made to u se labour as a pawn in more 
ways than one. The occasion demands consideration a t the hands of those that would 
take part in politics. What will they choose? Their  own interest or the service of labour 
and the nation? Labour stands in sore need of frien ds. It cannot proceed without a 
lead. What sort of men give this lead will decide th e condition of labour. 
Strikes, cessation of work and hartal are wonderful  things no doubt, but it is not 
difficult to abuse them. Workmen ought to organize themselves into strong labour 
unions, and on no account shall they strike work wi thout the consent of these unions. 
Strike should not be risked without negotiation wit h the mill-owners. If the mill-owners 
resort to arbitration, the principle of Panchayat s hould be accepted. And once the 
Pancha are appointed, their decision must be accept ed by both the parties alike, 
whether they like it or not. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  Young India, 11-2-‘20  
 
It is my universal experience that as a rule labour discharges its obligations more 
effectively and more conscientiously than the maste r who has corresponding 
obligations towards the labourers. It, therefore be comes necessary for labour to find 
out how far labour can impose its will on the maste rs. If we find that we are not 
adequately paid or housed, how are we to receive eno ugh wages, and good 
accommodation? Who is to determine the standard of comfort required by the 
labourers? The best way, no doubt, is that you labo urers understand your own rights, 
understand the method of enforcing your rights and enforce them. But for that you 
require a little previous training-education. 
In my humble opinion labour can always vindicate its elf if labour is sufficiently united 
and self-sacrificing. No matter how oppressive the c apitalists may be, I am convinced 
that those who are connected with labour and guide the labour movement have 
themselves no idea of the resources that labour can command and which capital can 
never command. If labour would only understand and r ecognize that capital is 
perfectly helpless without labour, labour will imme diately come to its own. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 1046  
 
We have unfortunately come under the hypnotic sugges tion and the hypnotic influence 
of capital, so that we have come to believe that capi tal is all in all on this earth. But a 
moment’s thought would show that labour has at its disposal capital which the 
capitalists will never possess….There is an English a very potent word, and you have it 
in French also, all the languages of the world have it-it is “No” and the secret that we 
have hit upon is that when capital wants labour to s ay “Yes” labour roars out “No” if it 
means “No”. And immediately labour comes to recogni ze that it has got the choice 
before it of saying “Yes”, when it wants to say “Ye s” and “No”, when it wants to say 
“No”, labour is free of capital and capital has to woo labour. And it would not matter 
in the slightest degree that capital has guns and e ven poison gas at its disposal. Capital 
would still be perfectly helpless if labour would a ssert its dignity by making good its 
“No”. Then labour does not need to retaliate but la bour stands defiant receiving the 
bullets and poison gas and still insists upon its “ No”. The whole reason why labour so India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  often fails is that instead of sterilizing capital as I have suggested, labour, (I am 
speaking as a labourer myself) wants to seize that capital and become capitalist, 
therefore, who is properly entrenched and organized , finding among the labourers also 
candidates for the same office, makes use of a port ion of these to suppress labour. If 
we really were not under this hypnotic spell, everyo ne of us, men and women, would 
recognize this rock-bottom truth without the slight est difficulty. 
Young India, 14-1-‘32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41   
Chapter 11 
RIGHTS OR DUTIES? 
I want to deal with one great evil that is afflictin g society today. The capitalist and the 
zamindar talk of their rights, the labourer on the other hand of his, the prince of his 
divine right to rule, the ryot of his to resist it. If all simply insist on rights and no 
duties, there will be utter confusion and chaos. 
If instead of insisting on rights everyone does his  duty, there will immediately be the 
rule of order established among mankind. There is n o such thing as the divine right of 
kings to rule and the humble duty of the ryots to p ay respectful obedience to their 
masters. Whilst it is true that these hereditary in equalities must go as being injurious 
to the well-being of the society, the unabashed ass ertion of rights of the hitherto 
downtrodden millions is equally injurious, if not m ore so to the same well-being. The 
latter behaviour is probably calculated to injure th e millions rather than the few 
claimants of divine rights. They could but die a br ave or cowardly death but those few 
would not bring in the orderly life blissful conten tment. It is, therefore, necessary to 
understand the correlation of the rights and duties . I venture to suggest that rights 
that do not flow directly from duty well performed are not worth having. They will be 
usurpations, sooner discarded the better. A wretche d parent who claims obedience 
from his children without first doing his duty by t hem excites nothing but contempt. It 
is distortion of religious precepts for a dissolute  husband to expect compliance in every 
respect from his dutiful wife. But the children who  flout their parent who is ever ready 
to do his duty towards them would be considered ung rateful and would harm 
themselves more than their parent. The same can be s aid about husband and wife. If 
you apply this simple and universal rule to employe rs and labourers, landlords and 
tenants, the princes and their subjects or the Hind us and the Muslims, you will find 
that the happiest relations can be established in a ll walks of life without creating 
disturbances in and dislocation of life and busines s which you see in India as in other 
parts of the world. What I call the law of Satyagra ha is to be deduced from an 
appreciation of duties and rights flowing there fro m. 
What is the duty of the Hindu towards his Muslim ne ighbor? His duty is to befriend him 
as man, to share his joys and sorrows and help him in distress. He will then have the 
right to expect similar treatment from his Muslim n eighbor and will probably get the India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  expected response. Supposing the Hindus are in a ma jority in a village with a sprinkling 
of Muslim in their midst, the duty of the majority towards the few Muslims neighbours 
is increased manifold, so much so that the few will  not feel that their religion makes 
any difference in the behaviour of the Hindus toward s them. The Hindus will then earn 
the right, not before, that the Muslims will be nat ural friends with them and in times 
of danger both the communities will act as one man.  But suppose that the few Muslims 
do not reciprocate the correct behaviour of the many  Hindus and show fight in every 
action, it will be a sign of unmanliness. What is t hen the duty of the many Hindus? 
Certainly not to over-power them by the brute stren gth of the many; that will be 
usurpation of an unearned right. Their duty will be  to check their unmanly behaviour 
as they would that of their blood brothers. It is n ecessary for me to dilate further upon 
the illustration. I will close it by saying that th e application will be exactly the same if 
the position is reversed. From what I have said it is  easy enough to extend the 
application with profit to the whole of the present  state which has become baffling 
because people do not apply in practice the doctrin e of deriving every right from a 
prior duty well performed. 
The same rule applies to the princes and the ryots.  The former’s duty is to act as true 
servants of the people. They will rule not by right granted by some outside authority, 
never by the right of the sword. They will rule by r ight of service, of greater wisdom. 
They will then have the right to collect taxes volun tarily paid and expect certain 
services equally voluntarily rendered, not for themse lves but for the sake of the people 
under their care. If they fail to perform this simp le and primary duty, the ryots not 
only owe no return duty but the duty but the duty d evolves on them of resisting the 
princely usurpation. It may be otherwise said that the ryots earn the right of resisting 
the usurpation or misrule. But the resistance will become a crime against man in terms 
of duty if it takes the form of murder, rapine and plunder. Force that performance of 
duty naturally generates is the non-violence and in vincible force that Satyagraha brings 
into being. 
Harijan, 6-7-‘47 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43   
Chapter 12 
THE PROBLEM OF UMEMPLOYMENT 
We should be ashamed of resting or having a square meal so long as there is one able-
bodies man or woman without work or food. 
Young India, 6-10-‘21  
 
Imagine a nation working only five hours per day on an average, and this not by choice 
but by force of circumstances, and you have a reali stic picture of India. If the reader 
would visualize the picture, he must dismiss from hi s mind the busy fuss of the city life 
or the grinding fatigue of the factory life or the slavery of the plantation. These are 
but drops in the ocean of Indian humanity. If he wo uld visualize the picture of the 
Indian skeleton, he must think of the eighty per ce nt of the population which is 
working its own fields, and which has practically n o occupation for at least four months 
in the year, and which therefore lives on the borde rland of starvation. This is the 
normal condition. The ever recurring famines make a large addition to this enforced 
idleness. 
Young India, 3-11-‘21  
 
The reason why our average life-rate is deplorably low, the reason why we are getting 
more and more impoverished is that we have neglecte d our 7,00,000 villages. We have 
in-deed thought of them, but only to the extent of exploiting them. We read thrilling 
accounts of the ‘glory that was Ind’, and of the la nd that was flowing with milk and 
honey; but today it is a land of starving millions. We are sitting in this fine pandal 
under a blaze of electric lights, but we do not kno w that we are burning these lights at 
the expense of the poor. We have no right to use the se lights if we forget that we owe 
these to them. 
There is a difference between the civilization of th e East- the civilization of India-and 
that of the West. It is not generally realized wher ein the difference lies. Our 
geography is different, our history is different, o ur ways of living are different. Our 
continent, though vast, is a speck of the globe, bu t it is the most thickly populated, 
barring China. Well, now, the economics and civiliz ation of a country where the India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  pressure of population on land is greatest are and must be different from those of a 
country where the pressure least. Sparsely populate d, America may have need of 
machinery. India may not need it at all. Where ther e are millions and millions of units 
of idle labour, it is no use thinking of labour-savi ng devices. If someone devised a 
machine which saved us the trouble of using our hand s to eat, eating would cease to 
be a pleasure, it would become a torture. The reaso n of our poverty is the extinction 
of our industries and our consequent unemployment. Some years ago India’s 
agricultural population was said to be 70 pet cent.  Today it is said to be 90 per cent. It 
does not mean that 90 per cent are agriculturists, but that, instead of 70 per cent who 
depended on land, 90 per cent are now driven to dep end on land. In other words, 
whereas there were industries and crafts enough to feed the 20 per cent, some time 
ago, these are no longer there and the people have thus been thrown on land. They 
thus steal their living, not because they want to, but because there Is no more land. 
Not that there is not enough land to feed our 35 cr ores. It is absurd to say that India is 
overpopulated and that the surplus population must d ie. I am sure that if all the land 
that is available was properly utilized and made to yield up to its capacity, it would 
surely maintain the whole population. Only we have g ot to be industries and to make 
two blades of grass grow where one grows today. 
The remedy is to identity ourselves with the poor vil lager and to help him make the 
land yield its plenty, help him produce what we nee d, and confine ourselves to use 
what he produces, live as he lives, and persuade hi m to take to more rational ways of 
diet and living. 
We eat mill-ground flour, and even the poor villager  walks with a head-load of half a 
maund grain to have in spite of the plenty of foodst uffs we produce we import wheat 
from outside and we eat the ‘superfine’ flour from Australia? We will not use our hand-
ground flour, and the poor villager also foolishly c opies us. We thus turn our wealth 
into waste, nectar into poison. For whole meal is t he proper meal. Mill-ground flour is 
vitamin less flour; mill-ground flour kept for days is not only vitamin less, but poison. 
But we will not exert ourselves to produce flour wh ich we must eat fresh every day, 
and will pay for less nutritious things and purchas e ill-health in bargain. This is not any 
abstruse economic truth, it is a fact which is dail y happening before our eyes. The 
same is the case with rice and gur and oil. We will  eat rice, polished of its substance, 
and eat less nutritious sugar and pay more for it t han more nutritious gut. We have India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  suffered the village oilman to be driven to extincti on and we eat adulterated oils. We 
idolize the cow, but kill by slow degrees. We eat h oney and kill the honey-bee, with 
the result that honey is such a rare commodity toda y that it is only available to a 
‘Mahatma’ like me or to those who must have it from  the physician as a vehicle for the 
drugs he prescribes. If we took the trouble of lear ning scientific and harmless bee-
keeping, we should get it cheaper and our children would get out of it all the 
carbohydrates they need. In all our dietetics we mi stake the shadow for the substance, 
preferring bone-white sugar to rich brown gur and p ale white bread to rich brown 
bran-bread. 
We are said to be a nation of daily bathers. That w e are, to be sure, but we are none 
the better for it. For we bathe with unclean water,  we foul our tanks and rivers with 
filth and use that water for drinking and bath. We lawyers and degree-holders and 
doctors will not learn the elementary principles of  sanitation and hygiene. We have not 
yet devised the most economical method of disposal of our evacuations and we turn 
our open healthy spaces into breeding grounds of di sease. 
I implore you t throw off your inertia, to bestir y ourselves to study these elementary 
facts and live more rational lives and learn how to turn waste into wealth. I have told 
you simple truths which we would soon realize and a ct up to if we threw off the inertia 
of ages. But we have shunned body-labour to the det riment of our brains, and thus rest 
content with the irrational ways of diet and living.  Let us pull ourselves together and 
resolve to make our bodies and brains more active. 
(From a summary of Gandhiji’s address at a public g athering at Indore.)  
Harijan, 11-5-‘35  
 
In one sense the problem of unemployment in our cou ntry is not so difficult as in other 
countries. The mode of life is a great factor. The Western unemployed worker must 
have warm clothing, boots or shoes and socks like th e rest of the people, he must have 
a warm house and many other things incidental to th e cold climate. We do not want all 
these things. I have indeed wept to see the stark po verty and unemployment in our 
country, but I must confess our own negligence and ignorance are responsible for it. 
We do not know the dignity of labour as such. Thus a shoe-maker will not do anything 
beyond his shoes, he will think all other labour is  below his dignity. That wrong notion India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  must go. There is enough employment in India for al l who will work with their hands 
and feet honestly. God has given everyone the capacit y to work and earn more than his 
daily bread and whoever is ready to use that capaci ty is sure to find work. No labour is 
too mean for one who wants to earn an honest penny.  The only thing is the readiness 
to use the hands and feet that God has given us. 
Harijan, 19-12-‘36  
 
I hold that a working knowledge of a variety of occ upations is to the working class what 
metal is to the capitalist. A labourer’s skill is h is capital. Just as the capitalist cannot 
make his capital fructify without the co-operation of labour, even so the working man 
cannot make his labour fructify without the co-oper ation of capital. And, if both labour 
and capital have the gift of intelligence equally de veloped in them and have 
confidence in their capacity to secure a fair deal,  each at the hands of the other, they 
would get to respect and appreciate each other as e qual partners in a common 
enterprise. They need not regard each other as inhe rently irreconcilable antagonists. 
But the difficulty is that whilst today capital is organized and seems to be securely 
entrenched, labour is not. The intelligence of the working man is cramped by his 
soulless, mechanical occupation which leaves him lit tle scope or chance to develop his 
mind. It has prevented him from realizing the power and the full dignity of his status. 
He has been taught to believe that his wages have to  be dictated by capitalists instead 
of his demanding his own terms. Let him only be org anized along right lines and have 
his intelligence quickened, let him learn a variety  of occupations, and he will be able 
to go about with his head erect and never be afraid of being without means of 
sustenance. 
Harijan, 3-7-‘37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47   
Chapter 13 
DARIDRANARAYAN 
Daridranarayan is one of the millions of names by w hich humanity knows God who is 
unnamable and unfathomable by human understanding a nd it means God of the poor, 
God appearing in the hearts of the poor. 
Young India, 4-4-‘29  
 
For the poor the economic is the spiritual. You can not make any other appeal to those 
starving millions. It will fall flat on them. But yo u take food to them and they will 
regard you as their God. They are incapable of any other thought. 
Young India, 5-5-‘27  
 
With this very hand I have collected soiled pies from  them tried tightly in their rags. 
Talk to them of modern progress. Insult them by tak ing the name of God before them 
in vain. They will call you and me fiends if we talk  about God to them. They know, if 
they know God at all, a God of terror, vengeance, a  pitiless tyrant. 
Young India, 15-9-‘27  
 
I am able to restrain myself from committing suicid e by starvation because I have faith 
in India’s awakening and her ability to put herself  on the way to freedom from this 
desolating pauperism. Without faith in such a possi bility I should cease to take interest 
in living. 
Young India, 3-4-‘31  
 
I dare not take before them the message of God. I m ay as well place before the dog 
over there the message of God as before those hungry  millions who have no luster in 
their eyes and whose only God is their bread. I can  take before them a message of God 
only by taking the message of sacred work before th em. It is good enough to talk of 
God whilst we are sitting here after a nice breakfa st and looking forward to nicer 
luncheon, but how I am to talk of God to the millio ns who have to go without two India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  meals a day? To them God can only appear as bread f rom their soil. I offered them the 
spinning wheel in order that they may get butter an d if I appear today….in my loin-
cloth it is because I come as the sole representati ve of those half-starved, half-naked 
dumb millions. 
Young India, 15-10-‘31  
 
I recognize no God expect the God that is to be fou nd in the hearts of the dumb 
millions. They do not recognize His presence; I do.  And I worship the God that is Truth 
or Truth which is God, through service of these mill ions. 
Harijan, 11-3-‘39  
 
We are either ignorant or negligent of the divine la w by virtue of which man has been 
given only his daily bread and no more, with the res ult that there arise inequalities 
with all the misery attendant upon them. The rich h ave a superfluous store of things 
which they do not need and which are, therefore, ne glected and wasted; while millions 
starve and are frozen to death for want of them. If each retained possession only of 
what the needed, no one would be in want and all wo uld live in contentment. As it is, 
the rich are discontented no less than the poor. Th e poor man would become a 
millionaire and the millionaire a multi-millionaire . The poor are often not satisfied 
when they get just enough to fill their stomachs; b ut they are clearly entitled to it and 
society should make it a point to see that they get  it. The rich must take an initiative 
in the matter with a view to a universal diffusion o f the spirit of contentment. If only 
they keep their own property within moderate limits  the poor will be easily fed, and 
will learn the lesson of contentment along with the  rich.                             From 
Yeravda Mandir, Chap.VI  
 
Civilization in the real sense of the term consists not in the multiplication but in the 
deliberate and voluntary reduction of wants, which p romotes real happiness and 
contentment and increase the capacity for service. O ne can reduce one’s wants by 
perseverance, and the reduction of wants makes for h appiness-a healthy body and a 
peaceful mind. 
From Yeravda Mandir, Chap. VI  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49   
The golden rule….is resolutely to refuse to have wha t millions cannot. This ability to 
refuse will not descend upon us all of a sudden. Th e first thing is to cultivate the 
mental attitude that will not have possessions or fa cilities denied to millions, and the 
next immediate things is to re-arrange our lives as fast as possible in accordance with 
that mentality. 
Young India, 24-6-‘26  
 
Jesus, Muhammed, Buddha, Nank, Kabir, Chaitanya, Sh ankara, Dayanand, Ramkrishna 
were men who exercised an immense influence over an d moulded the character of 
thousands of men. The world is the richer for their  having lived in it. And they were all 
men who deliberately embraced poverty as their lot. 
Speeches and Writing of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 353 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50   
Chapter 14 
THE GOSPEL OF BREAD LABOUR 
The great Nature has intended us to earn our bread in the sweat of our brow. 
Everyone, therefore, who idles away a single minute becomes to that extent a burden 
upon his neighbours, and to do so is to commit a br each of the very first lesson of 
Ahimsa….Ahimsa is nothing if not a well-balanced ex quisite consideration for one’s 
neighbor, and an idle man is wanting in that elemen tary consideration. 
Young India, 11-4-‘29  
 
The divine law, that man must earn his bread by lab oring with his own hands, was first 
stressed by a Russian writer named T. M. Bondaref. Tolstoy advertised it and gave it 
wide publicity. In my view the same principle has be en set forth in the third chapter of 
the Gita, where we are told, that he who eats witho ut offering sacrifice eats stolen 
food. Sacrifice here can only mean bread labour. 
Reason too leads to an identical conclusion. How ca n a man, who does not do body 
labour, have the right to eat? ‘In the sweat of thy  brow shalt thou eat thy bread’, says 
the Bible. A millionaire cannot carry on for long, and will soon get tired of his life, if 
he rolls in his bed all day long, and is even helped  to his food. He, therefore, induces 
hunger by exercise and helps himself to the food he  eats. If everyone, whether rich or 
poor, has thus to take exercise in some shape or fo rm, why should it not assume the 
form of productive, i.e. bread labour? No one asks the cultivator to take breathing 
exercise or to work his muscles. And more than nine -tenths of humanity lives by tilling 
the soil. How much happier, healthier and more peac eful would the world become, if 
the remaining tenth followed the example of the ove rwhelming majority, at least to 
the extent of laboring enough for their food! 
There is a world-wide conflict between capital and labour, and the poor envy the rich. 
If all worked for their bread, distinctions of rank  would be obliterated; the rich would 
still be there, but they would deem themselves only trustees of their property, and 
would use it mainly in the public interest. 
Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one who woul d observe non-violence, worship 
Truth and make the observance of Brahmacharya a natu ral act. This labour can truly India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  be related to agriculture alone. But at present at any rate, everybody is not in a 
position to take to it. A person can therefore spin  or weave, or take up carpentry or 
smithery, instead of tilling the soil, always regar ding agriculture, however, to be the 
ideal. Every one must be his own scavenger. Evacuatio n is as necessary as eating; and 
the best thing would be for every one to dispose of  his own waste. If this is impossible, 
each family should see to its own scavenging. 
I have felt for years, that there must be something radically wrong, where scavenging 
has been made the concern of a separate class in so ciety. We have no historical record 
of the man who first assigned the lowest status to this essential sanitary service. 
Whoever he was, he by no means did us a good. We sho uld, from our very childhood, 
have the idea impressed upon our minds that we are a ll scavengers, and the easiest 
way of doing so is, for every one who has realized t his, to commence bread-labour as a 
scavenger.  Scavenging, thus intelligently taken up, will help to a true appreciation of 
the equality of man. 
From Yeravda Mandir, Chap. IX  
 
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discha rge our duties, right will not be far to 
seek. if leaving duties unperformed we run after rig hts, they escape us like a will-o’-
the-wisp. The more we pursue them, the rather they fly. The same teaching has been 
embodied by Krishna in the immortal words: ‘Action alone is thine. Leave thou the 
fruit severely alone.’ Action is duty: fruit is the  right. 
Young India, 8-1-‘25  
 
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of l ife even as birds and beasts have. 
And since every right carries with it a correspondi ng duty and the corresponding 
remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is mere ly a matter of finding out the 
corresponding duties and remedies to vindicate the e lementary fundamental equality. 
The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs a nd the corresponding remedy is to 
non-co-operate with him who deprives me of the frui t of my labour. 
Young India, 26-3-‘31  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  If all labored for their bread and no more, then th ere would be enough food and 
enough leisure for all. Then there would be no cry of over-population, no disease and 
no such misery as we see around. Such labour will b e the highest form of sacrifice. Men 
will no doubt do many other things either through t heir bodies or through their minds, 
but all this will be labour of love for the common g ood. There will them be no rich and 
no poor, none high and none low, no touchable and n o untouchable. 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not,  therefore, cease to strive for it. 
Even if, without fulfilling the whole law of sacrifi ce, that is, the law of our being, we 
performed physical labour enough for our daily brea d, we should go a long way towards 
the ideal. 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our foo d would be simple. We should then 
eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyone who doubts the accuracy of this proposition try 
to sweat for his bread, he will derive the greatest relish from the productions of his 
labour, improve his health, and discover that many t hings he took were superfluities. 
Harijan, 29-6-‘35  
 
Intelligent bread labour is any day the highest fro m of social service. 
The adjective ‘intelligent’ has been prefixed to la bour in order to show that labour to 
be social service must have that definite purpose be hind it. Otherwise every labourer 
can be said to render social service. He does in a w ay, but what is meant here is 
something much more than that. A person who labours  for the general good of all 
serves society and is worthy of his hire. Therefore,  such bread labour is not different 
from social service. 
Harijan, 1-6-‘35  
 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the body must 
be supplied by the body. “Render unto Ceaser that w hich is Ceaser’s” perhaps applies 
here well. Mere mental, that is, intellectual labou r is for the soul and is its own 
satisfaction. It should never demand payment. In the  ideal state, doctors, lawyers and 
the like will work solely for the benefit of societ y, not for self. Obedience to the law of 
bread labour will bring about a silent revolution in  the structure of society. Man’s India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  triumph will consist in substituting the struggle f or existence by the struggle for mutual 
service. The law of the brute will be replaced by th e law of man. 
Return to the villages means a definite, voluntary re cognition of the duty of bread 
labour and all it connotes. But says the critic, “M illions of India’s children are today 
living in the villages and yet they are living a lif e off semi-starvation.” This, alas, is but 
too true. Fortunately we know that theirs is not vol untary obedience. They would 
perhaps shirk body labour if they could, and even ru sh to the nearest city if they could 
be accommodated in it. Compulsory obedience to a ma ster is a state of slavery, willing 
obedience to one’s father is the glory of son ship.  Similarly compulsory obedience to 
the law of bread labour breeds poverty, disease and discontent. It is a state of slavery. 
Willing obedience to it must bring contentment and health. And it is health which is 
real wealth, not pieces of silver and gold. The Vill age Industries Association is an 
experiment in willing bread labour. 
Harijan, 29-6-‘35  
 
Beggary  
My Ahimsa would not tolerate the idea of giving a f ree meal to a healthy person who 
has not worked for it in some honest way, and if I had the power, I would stop every 
sadavrata where free meals are given. It has degraded  the nation and it has 
encouraged laziness, idleness, hypocrisy and even cr ime. Such misplaced charity adds 
nothing to the wealth of the country, whether mater ial or spiritual, and gives a false 
sense of meritoriousness to the donor. How nice and  wise it would be if the donor were 
to open institutions where they would give meals un der healthy, clean surroundings to 
men and woman who would work for them. I personally  think that the spinning wheel 
or any of the processes that cotton has to go throu gh will be an ideal occupation. But if 
they will not have that, they may choose any other work; only the rule should be “No 
labour, no meal”. Every city has its own difficult problem of beggars, a problem for 
which the moneyed men are responsible. I know that it is easier to fling free meals in 
the faces of idlers, but much more difficult to org anize an institution where honest 
work has to be done before meals are served. From a  pecuniary standpoint, in the 
initial stages at any rate, the cost of feeding peo ple after taking work from them will 
be more than the cost of the present free kitchens.  But I am convinced that it will be India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  cheaper free in the long run, if we do not want to increase in geometrical progression 
the race of loafers which is fast over-running this  land. 
Young India, 13-8-25  
 
I do feel that whilst it is bad to encourage beggin g, I will not send away a beggar 
without offering him work and food. If he does not work, I shall let him go without 
food. Those who are physically disabled like the ha lt and the maimed have got to be 
supported by the State. There is, however, a lot of fraud going on under cover of 
pretended blindness or even genuine blindness. So ma ny blind have become rich 
because of ill-gotten gains. It would be a good thi ng if they were taken to an asylum, 
rather than be exposed to this temptation. 
Harijan, 11-5-‘35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55   
Chapter 15 
SARVODAYA 
To observe morality is to attain mastery over our mi nd and our passions. We notice 
that the mind is a restless bird; the more it gets the more it wants, and still remains 
unsatisfied. The more we indulge our ancestors, the refore, set a limit to our 
indulgences. They saw that happiness was largely a mental condition. A man is not 
necessarily happy because he is rich, or unhappy be cause he is poor. The rich are often 
seen to be unhappy, the poor to be happy. Millions will always remain poor. Observing 
all this, our ancestors dissuaded us from luxuries and pleasures. We have managed with 
the same kind of plough as existed thousands of yea rs ago. We have retained the same 
kind of cottages that we had in former time and our  indigenous education remains the 
same as before. We have had no system of life-corrod ing competition. Each followed 
his own occupation or trade and charged a regulatio n wage. It was not that we did not 
know how to invent machinery, but our forefathers k new that, if we set our hearts 
after such things, we would become slaves and lose our moral fibre. They, therefore, 
after due deliberation, decided that we should only  do what we could with our hands 
and feet. They saw that our real happiness and heal th consisted in a proper use of our 
hands and feet. They further reasoned that large ci ties were snare and a useless 
encumbrance and that people would not be happy in t hem, that there would be gangs 
of thieves and robbers, prostitution and vice flouri shing in them and that poor men 
would be robbed by rich men. They were, therefore, satisfied with small villages. They 
saw that kings and their swords were inferior to th e sword of ethics, and they 
therefore, held the sovereigns of the earth to be in ferior to the Rishis and the Fakirs. A 
nation with a constitution like this is fitter to r each others than to learn from others. 
This nation had courts, lawyers and doctors, but th ey were all within bounds. 
Everybody know that these professions were not parti cularly superior; moreover, these 
Vakils and Vaids did not rob people; they were cons idered people’s dependents not 
their masters. Justice was tolerably fair. The ordi nary rule was to avoid courts. There 
were no touts to lure people into them. This evil, t oo, was noticeable only in and 
around capitals. The common people lived independen tly and followed their 
agricultural occupation. They enjoyed true Home Rul e. 
Hind Swaraj, Chap. XIII  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56   
A life of service must be one of humility. He who wo uld sacrifice his life for others, has 
hardly time to reserve for himself a place in the su n. Inertia must not be mistaken for 
humility, as it has been in Hinduism. True humility  means most strenuous and constant 
endeavour entirely directed to the service of humanit y. God is continuously in action 
without resisting for a single moment. If we would serve Him or become one with Him, 
our activity must be as unwearied as His. 
From Yeravda Mandir, Chap. XII  
 
No work that is done in His name and dedicated to H im is small. All work when so done 
assumes equal merit. A scavenger who works in His se rvice shares equal distinction 
with a king who uses his gifts in His name and as a  mere trustee. 
Young India, 25-11-‘26  
 
A votary of Ahimsa cannot subscribe to the utilitari an formula (of the greatest good of 
the greatest number). He will strive for the greate st good of all and die in the attempt 
to realize the idea. He will, therefore, be willing  to die, so that the others may live. 
He will serve himself with the rest, by himself dyin g. The greatest good of all 
inevitably includes the good of the greatest number , and therefore, he and the 
utilitarian will converge in many points in their c areer, but there does come a time 
when they must part company, and even work in opposi te directions. The utilitarian to 
be logical will never sacrifice himself. The absolut ist will even sacrifice himself. 
Young India, 9-12-‘26  
 
Service is not possible unless it is rooted in love o r Ahimsa. True love is boundless like 
the ocean and rising and swelling within one spread s itself out and crossing all 
boundaries and frontiers envelops the whole world. T his service is again impossible 
without bread labour, otherwise described in the Gi ta as Yajna. It is only when a man 
or woman has done bodily labour for the sake of ser vice that he or she has the right to 
live. 
Young India, 20-9-‘29  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57   
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness c an we conquer the evil in us. God 
demands nothing less than complete self-surrender a s the price for the only real 
freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus lo ses himself, he immediately 
finds himself in the service of all that lives. It b ecomes his delight and his recreation. 
He is a new man never weary of spending himself in t he service of God’s creation. 
Young India, 20-12-‘28  
 
All our activities should be centred in Truth. Trut h should be the very breath of our 
life. When once this stage in the pilgrim’s progres s is reached, all other rules of 
correct living will come without effort, and obedie nce to them will be instinctive. But 
without Truth it is impossible to observe any princ iples or rules in life. 
A seeker after Truth, a follower of the Law of Love,  cannot hold anything against 
tomorrow. God never provides for the morrow. He never creates more than what is 
strictly needed from day to day. If, therefore, we repose faith in His Providence, we 
should rest assured that He will give us every day o ur daily bread, supplying enough 
that we require. 
Young India, 4-9-‘30  
 
Ends and Means  
They say, ‘means are after all means.’ I would say,  ‘means are after all everything.’ As 
the means so the end. There is no wall of separatio n between the means and the end. 
Indeed the Creator has given us control (and that to o very limited) over means, none 
over the end. Realization of the goal is in exact pr oportion of no exception. 
Young India, 17-7-‘24  
 
Violent means will give violent Swaraj. That would b e a menace to the world and India 
herself. 
Young India, 17-7-‘24  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  Impure means result in an impure end. Hence the pri nce and the peasant will not be 
equalized by cutting off the prince’s head, nor can  the process of cutting off equalize 
the employer and the employed. One cannot reach tru th by untruthfulness. Truthful 
conduct alone can reach truth. Are not non-violence and truth twins? The answer is an 
emphatic ‘no’. Non-violence is embedded in truth an d vice versa. Hence has it been 
said that they are faces of the same coin. Either i s inseparable from the other. Read 
the coin either way. The spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. 
This blessed state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbour impurity of mind or 
body and you have untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore, only untruth, non-violent and pure-hearte d socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the wo rld. 
Harijan, 13-7-‘47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59   
Chapter 16 
THEORY OF TRUSTEESHIP 
Suppose I have come by a fair amount of wealth eithe r by way of legacy, or by means 
of trade and industry, I must know that all that we alth does not belong to me, what 
belongs to me is the right to an honorable liveliho od, no better than that enjoyed by 
millions of others .The rest of my wealth belongs t o the community enunciated this 
theory when the socialist theory was placed before the country in respect to the 
possessions held by zamindars and ruling chiefs. Th ey would do away with these 
privileged classes. I want them to out grow their br ead by labour. The labourer has to 
realize that the wealthy man is less owner of his w ealth than labourer is owner of his 
own, viz. the power to work. 
The question how many can be real trustees accordin g to this definition is beside the 
point. If the theory is true, it is immaterial whet her many live up to it or only one man 
lives up to it. The question is of conviction. If yo u accept the principle of ahimsa, you 
have to strive to live up to it .The question is of conviction. If you accept the principle 
of ahimsa, you have to strive to live up to it, no ma tter whether you succeed or fail. 
There is nothing in this theory which can be said t o be beyond the grasp of intellect, 
though you may say it is difficult of practice. 
Harijan, 3-6–’39  
 
You may say that trusteeship is a legal fiction. Bu t if people meditate over it 
constantly and try to act up to it, then life on ea rth would be governed far more by 
love than it is at present. Absolute trusteeship is an abstraction like Euclid’s definition 
of a point, and is equally unattainable. But if we strive for it, we shall be able to go 
further in realizing a state of equality on earth t han by other method …. It is my firm 
conviction that if the state suppressed capitalism by violence, it will be caught in the 
coils of violence itself, and fails to develop non-vio lence at any time. The state is a 
soulless machine; it can never be weaned from weane d from violence to which it owes 
its very existence. Hence I prefer the doctrine of t rusteeship. The fear is always there 
that the state may use too much violence against tho se who differ from it. I would be 
very happy indeed if the people concerned behaved as trustees ; but if they fail, I 
believe we shall have deprive them of their possessi ons through the state with the India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  minimum exercise of violence …(that is why I said a t the round table conference that 
vested interest must be subjected to scrutiny , and confiscation ordered necessary … 
with or without compensation as the case demanded) What I would prefer would be 
not a centralization of power in the hands of state  , but an extension of the sense of 
trusteeship; as in my opinion the violence of privat e ownership is less injurious than 
the violence of the state . However, if it is unavoid able, I would support a minimum 
state-ownership.                              The modern review 1933, p.412  
 
It has become the fashion these days to say that so ciety cannot be organized or run on 
non-violent lines .I join issue on that point. In a  family, when the father slaps his 
delinquent child, the latter does not think of reta liating. He obeys his father not 
because of the deterrent effect of the slap but bec ause of the offended love which he 
senses behind it. That in my opinion is an epitome of the way in which society is or 
should be governed. What is true of the family must be true of society which is but a 
larger family.                                                                 Harijan, 3-12-’38  
 
I hold that non – violence is not merely a personal virtue. I t is also social virtue to be 
cultivated like the other virtue to be cultivated li ke the other virtues. Surely society is 
largely regulated by the expression of non-violence  in its mutual dealings. What I ask 
for it an extension of it on a larger, national and  international scale. 
Harijan, 7-1-39  
 
My theory of ‘trusteeship’ is no make-shift, certai nly no camouflage. I am confident 
that it will survive all other theories. It has the sanction of philosophy and religion 
behind it. That possessors of wealth have not acted up to the theory does not prove its 
falsity; it proves the weakness of the wealthy, No o ther theory is compatible with non-
violence. In the non-violent method the wrong does co mpasses his own end, if he does 
not undo the wrong. For, either through non-violent non-cooperation he is made to see 
the error he finds himself completely isolated. 
Harijan, 16- 12- ’39  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  I have no hesitation in endorsing the opinion that g enerally rich men and for that 
matter most men are not particular as to the way th e make money. In the application 
of the method of non-violence, one must believe in th e possibility of every person, 
however, depraved, being reformed under humane and s killed treatment. We must 
appeal to the good human beings and expect response . It is not conducive to well being 
of society that every member uses all his talents, only not for personal aggrandizement 
but for the good of all? We do not want to produce a dead equality of using where 
every person becomes or is rendered incapable of usi ng his ability to the utmost 
possible extent. Such a society must ultimately per ish. I therefore suggest that my 
advice that moneyed men may earn their crores (hones tly only, of course) but so as to 
dedicate them to the service of all is perfectly sou nd.  “……………….” is a mantra based 
on uncommon knowledge. It is the surest method to e volve a new order of life of 
universal benefits in the place of the present one where each one lives for himself 
without regard to what happens to his neighbor. 
Harjian, 22-2-‘42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62   
Chapter 17 
NON-VIOLENT ECONOMY 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take a nything that do not need for my own 
immediate use and keep it, I thieve it from somebod y else. It is the fundamental law of 
nature , without exception, , that nature produces enough for our wants from day to 
day; and if only everybody took enough for himself and nothing more , there would be 
no pauperism in this world, there would be no man d ying  of starvation. I am no 
socialist, and I do not want to dispossess those wh o have got possessions; but I do say 
that personally those of us who want to see light o ut of darkness have to follow this 
rule. I do not want to dispossess anybody; I should  be departing from the rule of non-
violence. If somebody else possesses more than I do,  let him. But so far as my own life 
has to be regulated I dare not possess anything whi ch I do not want. In India we have 
got many millions of people who have to be satisfied  with one meal a day, and that 
meal consisting of chapatti containing no fat in it  and a pinch of salt. You and I, who 
ought to know better, must adjust our wants, and eve n undergo voluntary privation in 
order that they may be nursed, fed and clothed. 
Speeches and writings of Mahatma Gandhi p.384  
 
I must confess that I do not draw a sharp or any di stinction between economies and 
ethics. Economics that hurt the moral well- being o f an individual or a nation are 
immoral and, therefore sinful to buy and use articl es made by sweated labour. 
Young India 13-10-’21  
 
According to me the economic constitution of India and for the matter of that of the 
world, should be such that no one under it should s uffer from want of food and 
clothing. I n other words, everybody should be able to get sufficient work to enable 
him to make the two ends meet. And this ideal can b e universally utilized only if the 
means of production of the elementary necessaries o f life remain in the control of the 
masses.These should be freely available to all as go d’s air and vehicle of traffic for the 
exploitation of others. Their monopolization by any  country, nation or group of persons 
would be unjust .The neglect of this simple princip les is the cause of the destitution India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  that we witness today not only in this is unhappy l and but in other parts of the world 
too. 
Young India 15-11,-’28  
 
True economics never militates against the highest e thical standard, just as all true 
ethics to be worth its name must at the same time h im also good economics. An 
economics that inculcates mammon   worship, and ena bles the strong to amass wealth 
at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal s cience .It spells death. True 
economics on the other hand, stand for justice, it promotes the good of all equally 
including the weakest, and is indispensable for dec ent life. 
Harijan, 9-10-’37  
 
I want to bring about an equalization of status. Th e working classes have all these 
centuries been isolated and relegated to a lower st atus. I want to allow no 
differentiation between the son of a weaver, of an agriculturist and of a schoolmaster. 
Harijan, 15-1-’38  
 
Economic equality is the master key to non-violent i ndependence .Working for 
economic equality means abolishing the eternal conf lict between capital and labour. It 
means  the leveling down of the few rich in whose ha nds is concentrated the bulk of 
the nation’s wealth on the other hand , and a level ing up of the semi starved naked 
millions on the other hand naked millions on the ot her .  A non – violent system of 
government is clearly impossibility so long s the wi de gulf between the rich and the 
hungry millions persists. The contrast between the palaces of New Delhi and the 
miserable hovels of the poor, laboring class cannot last one day in a free India in which 
the poor will enjoy the same power as the richest i n the land. A violent and bloody 
revolution is a certainty one day unless there is a voluntary abdication of riches and 
the power which riches give and sharing them for the  common good. I adhere to my 
doctrine of trusteeship in spite of the ridicule th at has been poured upon it. It is true 
that it is a difficult to attain. But we made up ou r minds in 1920 to negotiate that 
steep ascent. 
Constructive Progamme, PP.20-21  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64   
I suggest that, if India is to evolve along non-violen t lines, it will have to decentralize 
many things, Centralization cannot be sustained and  defended without adequate force. 
Simple homes from which there is nothing to take aw ay require no policing; the 
palaces of the rich must have strong guards to prote ct them against dacoit. So must 
huge factories .Rurally organized India will run le ss risk of foreign invasion that 
urbanized India, Well equipped with military, naval and air forces 
Harijan, 30-12-’39  
 
Today there is a gross economic inequality. The bas is of socialism is economic equality. 
There can be no Ramarajya in the present state of i niquitous in equalities in which a 
few roll in riches and the masses do not get even en ough to eat. 
Harijan 1-6-’47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65   
Chapter 18 
THE WAY TO EQUAL DISTRIBUTION. 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the wherewithal 
to supply all his natural needs and no more. For ex ample, if one man has a weak 
digestion and requires only a quarter of a pound of  flour for his bread and another 
needs a pound, both should be in a position to sati sfy their wants. To bring this ideal 
into being the entire social order has got to be re constructed. A society based on non-
violence cannot nurture any other ideal. We may not perhaps be able to realize the 
goal, but we must bear it in mind and work unceasin gly to near it. To the same extent 
as we progress towards our goal we shall find conte ntment and happiness, and to that 
extent too shall we have contributed towards the bri nging into being of a non-violent 
society. 
It is perfectly possible for an individual to adopt this way of life without having to wait 
for others to do so. And if an individual can observe  a certain rule of conduct, it 
follows that a group of individuals can do likewise . It is necessary for me to emphasize 
the fact that no one need wait for anyone else in o rder to adopt a right course. Men 
generally hesitate to make a beginning of they feel  that the objective cannot ne had in 
its entirety. Such an attitude of mind is in realit y a bar to progress. 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be b rought about through non-violence. 
The first step towards it is for him who has made t his ideal part of his being to bring 
about the necessary changes in his personal life. H e would reduce his wants to a 
minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His e arnings would be free of 
dishonesty .The desire for speculation would be ren ounced. His habitation would be 
self- restraint exercised in every sphere of life. When he has done all that is possible in 
his own life, then only will he be in a position to  preach this ideal among his associates 
and neighbours. 
Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distri bution must lie that of the trusteeship 
of wealthy for the superfluous wealth possessed by them .For according to the doctrine 
they may not possess a rupee more than their neighb ours. How is this to be brought 
about? Non–violently? Or should the wealthy be disp ossessed of their possessions? To do 
this we would naturally have to resort to violence. T his violent action cannot benefit 
society. Society will be the poorer, for it will lo se the gifts of a man who knows how to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  accumulate wealth. Therefore the non-violent way is evidently superior. The rich man 
will be left in possession of his wealth, of which he will use what he reasonably 
requires for his personal needs and will act as a t rustee for the remainder to be used 
for the society. In this argument honesty on the pa rt of the trustee is assumed. 
As soon as a man looks upon himself as a servant of society, earns for its sake, spends 
for its benefit, then purity enters into his earnin gs and there is ahimsa is venture. 
Moreover, if men’s minds turn towards this way of l ife, there will come about a 
peaceful revolution in society, and that without any  bitterness. 
It may be asked whether history at any time records  such a change in human nature. 
Such change has certainly taken place in individuals . One may not perhaps be able to 
point to them in a whole society. But this only mea ns that up till now there has never 
been an experiment on a large scale in non-violence.  Somehow or other the wrong 
belief has taken possession of that ahimsa is pre-e minently a weapon for individuals 
and its use should, therefore be limited to that sp here. In fact this is not the case. 
Ahimsa is definitely an attribute of society. To co nvince people of this truth is at once 
my effort and my experiment. In this age of wonders  no one will say that a thing or 
idea is worthless because it is new. To say it is i mpossible because it is difficult is again 
not in consonance with the spirit of the age. Thing s undreamt of are daily being seen, 
the impossible is ever becoming possible. We are co nstantly being astonished these 
days at the amazing discoveries will be made in the field of non-violence .But I 
maintain that far more undreamt of are daily being seen, the impossible is ever 
becoming possible. We are constantly being astonish ed these days at the amazing 
discoveries in the field of non-violence. The histo ry of religion is full of such examples. 
To try to root out religion itself from society is a wild goose chase.  And were such an 
attempt to succeed, it would mean the destruction o f society. Superstition, evil 
customs and other imperfections creep in from age t o age and mar religion itself 
remains because the existence of the world in a bro ad sense depends on religion. The 
ultimate definition of religion may be said to be o bedience to the law of god. God and 
his law are synonymous terms. Therefore God signifi es an unchanging and living law. 
No one has really found him. But avatars and prophet s have by means of their tapasya, 
given to mankind a faint glimpse of eternal law. 
If, however, in spite of the utmost effort, the ric h do not become guardians of the 
poor in true sense of the term and the latter are m ore and more crushed and die of India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  hunger, what is to be done? In trying to find the s olution to this riddle I have lighted on 
Non-violent Non-co-operation and civil disobedience  as the right and infallible means. 
The rich cannot accumulate wealth without the co-op eration of the poor people in 
society. Man has been conversant with violence from the beginning, for he has 
inherited this strength from the animal in his natu re. It was only when he rose from the 
state of a quadruped (animal) to that of a biped (m an) that the knowledge of the 
strength of ahimsa entered into his soul. This know ledge has grown within him slowly 
but surely. If this knowledge would become strong a nd would learn how to free 
themselves by means of non-violence from the crushing  inequalities which have 
brought them to the verge of starvation 
Harijan, 25-8’40  
 
What India needs is not the concentration of capita l in a few hands , but its 
distribution so as to be within easy reach of the 7  lakhs of villages that make this 
continent 1900 miles long and 1500 miles broad 
Young India, 23- 3- ’21  
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68   
Chapter 19 
INDIA’S RECORD OF NON-VIOLENCE 
I have ventured to place before India the ancient la w of self- sacrifice. For Satyagraha 
and its offshoots, Non-co-operation and civil resis tance are nothing but new names for 
the la of suffering. The Rishis, who discovered the law of non-violence in the midst of 
violence, were greater warriors than wellington havi ng themselves known the use of 
arms they realized their uselessness, and taught a weary world that its salvation lay 
not through violence but through non-violence. Non-vi olence in its dynamic condition 
means pitting of one’s whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law 
of our being, it is possible for a single individual  to defy the whole might of an unjust 
empire to save individual to defy the whole might o f an unjust empire to save his 
honour, his religion, his soul, and lay the foundat ion for that empire’s fall or its 
regeneration. And so I am not pleading for India to  practice non-violence because it is 
weak. I want her to practice Non- Violence being co nscious of her strength and power. 
No training  in arms is required for realization of  her strength .We  seem to need it, 
because we seem to think that we are but a lump of flesh. I  want India to recognize 
that she has a soul that cannot perish and that can  rise  triumphant above every 
physical  weakness and defy the physical combinatio n of a whole world.   
Young India, 11-8-’20  
 
That Indians are not a nation of coward is proved by  the personal bravery and daring of 
her marital races, whether Hindu, Mussalman, Sikh o r Gurkha. My point is that the 
spirit of fighting is foreign to India’s soil and t hat probably she has a higher part to play 
in the evolution of the world. Time alone can show what is to be her destiny.                                                                                 
Young India, 22-6-‘21  
 
India’s past training for ages, I mean the training  of the masses, has been against 
violence. Human nature in India has advanced so far t hat the doctrine of non – violence 
is more natural for the people at large than that o f violence. 
Young India 26-1-’22  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  India has never waged was against any nation. She ha s put up sometimes ill-organized 
or half-organized resistance in self defense pure a nd simple. She has, therefore not got 
to develop the will for peace. She has that in abun dance whether she knows it or not. 
The way she can promote peace is to offer successfu l resistance to her exploitation by 
peaceful means. That is to say she has to achieve h er independence… by peaceful 
means. If she can do it will be the largest contrib ution that any single nation will have 
made towards world peace. 
Young India 4-7-’29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70   
 
Chapter 20 
THE SARVODYA STATE 
Many have shaken their heads as they have said, ‘Bu t you can’t teach non-violence to 
the masses. It is only possible for individuals and  that too in rare cases.’ That is, in my 
opinion, a gross self-deception. If man-kind was no t habitually non-violent, it would 
have been self-destroyed ages ago. But in the duel b etween forces of violence and 
non-violence the latter have always come out victorio us in the end. The truth is that 
we have not had patience enough to wait and apply ou r–selves whole-heartedly to the 
spread of non-violence among the people as means for  political ends. 
Young India, 2-1-‘30  
 
To me political power is not an end but one of the means of enabling people to better 
their condition in every department of life. Politi cal power means capacity to regulate 
national life through national representatives. If national life becomes so perfect as to 
become self-regulated, no representation becomes ne cessary, there is then a state of 
enlightened anarchy. In such a State everyone is his  own ruler. He rules himself in such 
a manner that is never a hindrance to his neighbour.  In the ideal State, therefore, 
there is no political power because there is no Sta te.  But the ideal is never fully 
realized in life. Hence the classical statement of Thoreau that government is best 
which governs the least. 
Young India, 2-7-‘31  
 
I look upon an increase in the power of the State w ith greatest fear, because although 
wile apparently doing good by minimizing exploitati on, it does the greatest harm to 
mankind by destroying individuality which lies at t he root of all progress. 
The State represents violence in a concentrated and  organized form. The individual has 
a soul, but as the State is a soulless machine, it can never be weaned from violence to 
which it owes its vey existence. 
What I disapprove of is an organization based on for ce which a State is. Voluntary 
organization there must be.                                 The Modern Review, 1935, P.412  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71   
(As to whether in an ideal society, there should be  any or no government.) I do not 
think, we need worry work ourselves about at the mom ent. If we continue to work for 
such a society, it will slowly come into being to a n extent, such that the people can 
benefit by it. Euclid’s line is one without breadth  but no one has so far been able to 
draw it and never will. All the same it is only by k eeping the ideal line in mind that we 
have made progress in geometry. What is true here is  true of every ideal. 
It must be remembered that nowhere in the world, do es a State without government 
exist. If at all it could ever come into being, it w ould be in India; for, ours is the only 
country where the attempt has, at any rate, been ma de. We have not yet been able to 
show that bravery to the degree which is necessary a nd for the attainment of which 
there is only one way. Those who have faith in the latter, have to demonstrate it. In 
order to do so, the fear of death has to be complet ely shed, just as we have shed the 
fear of prisons.                                                                          Harijan, 16-9-’46  
 
Police Force  
Even in a non-violent State a police force may be nec essary. This, I admit, is a sign of 
my imperfect Ahimsa. I have not the courage to decla re that we can carry on without a 
police force as I have in respect of an army. Of co urse, I can and do envisage a State 
where the police will not be necessary; but whether  we shall succeed in realizing it, 
the future alone will show. 
The police of my conception will, however, be of a wholly different pattern from the 
present-day force. Its ranks will be composed of be lievers in non-violence. They will be 
servants, not masters, of the people. The People wil l instinctively render them every 
help, and through mutual co-operation they will eas ily deal with the ever-decreasing 
disturbances. The police force will have some kind o f arms, but they will be rarely 
used, if at all. In fact the policeman will be refo rmers. Their police work will bed 
confined primarily to robbers and dacoits. Quarrels  between labour and capitals and 
strikes will be few and far between in a non-violent  State, because the influence of the 
non-violent State, because the influence of the non -violent majority will be so great as 
to command the respect of the principal elements in  society. Similarly there will be no 
room for communal disturbances.                                                    Harijan, 1-9-‘40 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72   
Chapter 21 
SATYAGRAHA AND DURAGRAHA 
I hold the opinion firmly that civil disobedience i s the purest type of constitutional 
agitation. Of course, it becomes degrading and desp icable, if its civil, i.e. non-violent 
character is a mere camouflage. 
Young India, 15-12-‘21  
 
Disobedience to be civil must be sincere, respectfu l, restrained, never defiant, must 
be based upon some well-understood principle, must not be capricious and above all, 
must have no ill-will or hatred behind it. 
Young India, 24-3-‘20  
 
Those only can take up civil disobedience, who beli eve in willing obedience even to 
irksome laws imposed by the State so long as they d o not hurt their conscience or 
religion, and are prepared equally willingly to suf fer the penalty of civil disobedience. 
Disobedience to be civil has to be absolutely non-v iolent, the underlying principle 
being the winning over of the opponent by suffering,  i.e. love. 
Young India, 3-11-‘21  
 
Civil disobedience is the inherent right of a citize n. He dare not give it up without 
ceasing to be a man. Civil disobedience can lead to it. Every State puts down criminal 
disobedience by force. It perishes, if it does not.  But to put down civil disobedience is 
to attempt to imprison conscience. 
Young India, 5-1-‘22  
 
Since Satyagraha is on e of the most powerful metho d of direct action, a Satyagrahi 
exhausts all other means before he resorts to Satya graha. He will, therefore, 
constantly and continually approach the constituted  authority, he will appeal to public 
opinion, educate public opinion, state his case cal mly and coolly before everybody who 
wants to listen to him, and only after he has exhau sted all these avenues will he resort India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  to Satyagraha. But when he has found the impelling call of the inner voice within him 
and launches out upon Satyagraha he has burnt his b oats and there is no receding. 
Young India, 20-10-‘27  
 
The word Satyagraha is often most loosely used and is made to cover veiled violence. 
But as the author of the word I may be allowed to s ay that it excludes every form of 
violence, veiled or unveiled, and whether in thought,  word or deed. It is a breach of 
Satyagraha to wish ill to an opponent or to say a h arsh word to him or of him with the 
intention of harming him…. Satyagraha is gentle, it  never wounds. It must not be the 
result of anger or malice. It is never fussy, never impatient, never vociferous. It is the 
direct opposite of compulsion. It was conceived as complete substitute for violence. 
Harijan, 15-4-‘33  
 
Duragraha  
(Following the report of Gandhiji’s arrest on his w ay to the Punjab early in April, 1919, 
outbreaks of violence took place in Bombay and other  places. When he was brought 
back to Bombay under police escort and released on the 11th April, he caused a 
message to be read at all meetings that evening, in  the course of which he remarked 
as follows : 
I have not been able to understand the cause so much  excitement and disturbance that 
followed my detention. It is not Satyagraha. It is worse than Duragraha. Those who join 
Satyagraha demonstrations were bound one and all to  refrain at all hazard from 
violence, not to throw stones or in any way whatever  to injure stones. We have 
obstructed tram-cars by putting obstacles in the wa y. This is not Satyagraha. We have 
demanded the release of 50 men who have been arreste d for deeds of violence. Our 
duty is chiefly to get ourselves to secure the relea se of those who have committed 
deed of violence. We are not, therefore, justified o n any grounds whatever in 
demanding the release of those who have been arrest ed. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p.474  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  I have said times without number that Satyagraha adm its of no violence, no pillage, no 
incendiarism; and still in the name of Satyagraha w e have burnt building, forcibly 
captures weapons, extorted money, stopped trains, c ut off telegraph wires, killed 
innocent people and plundered shops and private hous e. If deeds such as these could 
save me from the prison-house or the scaffold, I sho uld no like to be so saved. 
Speeches and writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p.476  
 
I can see nothing but catastrophe for India from me thods of violence. Workmen would 
be committing suicide and India would have to suffe r indescribable misery if 
workingmen were to vent their anger by criminal dis obedience of the law of the 
land….When I began to preach Satyagraha and civil d isobedience it was never meant to 
cover criminal disobedience. My experience teaches m e that truth can never he 
propagated by doing violence. Those who believe in the justice of their cause need to 
possess boundless patience, and those alone are fit  to offer civil disobedience who are 
above committing criminal disobedience or doing vio lence. A man cannot commit both 
civil and criminal disobedience at the same time even  as he cannot be both temperate 
and furious at the same time, and just as self-rest raint is acquired only after one has 
been able to master his passions, so is the capacit y for civil disobedience acquired 
after one has disciplined of the laws of the land. Again, just as he alone can be said 
exposed to them, has succeeded in resisting them, s o may we be said, has succeeded 
in resisting them,  so may we be said to have conqu ered anger when having sufficient 
cause for it we have succeeded in controlling oursel ves. 
Young India, 28-4-‘20  
 
Some students have revived the ancient form of barbar ity in the form of ‘sitting 
dhurna’. I call it ‘barbarity’ for it is a crude wa y of using coercion. It is also cowardly 
because one who sits dhurna knows that he is not go ing to be trampled over. It is 
difficult to call the practice violence, but it is c ertainly worse. If we fight our 
opponent, we at least enable him to return the blow . But when we challenge him to 
walk over us, we, knowing that he will not, place hi m in a most awkward and 
humiliating position. I know that the over-zealous students who sat dhurna never 
thought of the barbarity of the deed. But one, who is expected to follow the voice of India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  conscience and stand even single-handed in the face of odds, cannot afford to be 
thought-less…. There must be no impatience, no barb arity, no insolence, no under 
pressure. If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be 
intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in on e’s cause. 
Young India, 2-2-‘21  
 
Indiscriminate resistance to authority must lead to  lawlessness and unbridled licence 
and consequent self-destruction. 
Young India, 2-4-‘31  
 
The first indispensable condition precedent to any civil disobedience is that there 
should be surety against any outbreak of violence w hether on the part of those who are 
identified with civil resistance or on the part of the general public. It would be no 
answer in the case of an outbreak of violence that i t was instigated by the State or 
other agencies hostile to civil resisters. It should  be obvious that civil resistance cannot 
flourish in an atmosphere of violence. This does no t mean that the resources of a 
Satyagrahi have come to and end. Ways other than civ il disobedience should be found 
out. 
Harijan, 19-3-‘39  
 
Fasting in Satyagraha  
Fasting is a potent weapon in the Satyagraha armour y. It cannot be taken by every 
one. Mere physical capacity to take it is no qualif ication for it. It is of no use without a 
living faith in God. It should never be a mechanical effort or a mere imitation. It must 
come from the depth of one’s soul. It is, there-for e, rare. 
Harijan, 18-3-‘39  
 
There can be no room for selfishness, anger, lack o f faith, or impatience in a pure 
fast…. Infinite patience, firm resolve, single-mind edness of purpose, perfect calm, and 
no anger must of necessity be there. But since it i s impossible for a person to develop India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  all these qualities all at once, no one who has not  devoted himself to following the 
laws of Ahimsa should undertake a Satyagrahi fast. 
Harijan, 13-10-‘40  
 
One general principle, however, I would like to enun ciate. A Satyagrahi should fast 
only as a last resort when all other avenues of red ness have failed. There is no room 
for imitation in fasts. He who has no inner strengt h should not dream of it, and never 
with attachment to success…. Ridiculous fasts sprea d like plague and are harmful. 
Harijan, 21-4-‘46  
 
Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be  really coercive. Such are fast to 
attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wring  money from a person or for fulfilling 
some such personal end would amount to the exercise  of coercion or undue influence. I 
would unhesitatingly advocate resistance of such und ue influence. I have myself 
successfully resisted it in the fasts that have been  undertaken or threatened against 
me. And if it is argued that the dividing line betw een a selfish and unselfish end is 
often very thin, I would urge that a person who rega rds the end of a fast to be selfish 
or otherwise base should resolutely refuse to yield  to it, even though the refusal may 
result in the death of the fasting person. 
If people will cultivate the habit of disregarding fasts which in their opinion are taken 
for unworthy ends, such fast will be robbed of the taint of coercion and undue 
influence. Like all human institutions, fasting can  be both legitimately and 
illegitimately used. 
Harijan, 6-5-‘33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77   
Chapter 22 
THE TILLERS OF THE SOIL 
If Indian society is to make real progress along pe aceful lines, there must be a definite 
recognition on the part of the moneyed class that t he ryot possesses the same soul that 
they do and that their wealth gives them no superior ity over the poor. They must 
regard themselves even as the Japanese nobles did, a s trustees holding their wealth 
for the good of their wards, the ryots. Then they w ould take no more than a 
reasonable amount as commission for their labours. At present there is no proportion 
between the wholly unnecessary pomp and extravaganc e of the moneyed class and the 
squalid surroundings and the grinding pauperism of the ryots in whose midst the former 
are living. A model Zaminder would therefore at once  reduce much of the burden the 
ryot is now bearing, he would come in intimate touc h with the ryots and know their 
wants and inject hope into them in place of the des pair which is killing the very life 
out of them. He will not be satisfied with the ryot s’ ignorance of the laws of sanitation 
and hygiene. He will reduce himself to poverty in o rder that the ryot may have the 
necessaries of life. He will study the economic con dition of the ryots under his care, 
establish schools in which he will educate his own children side by side with those of 
ryots under his care, establish schools in which he  will educate his under own children 
side by side with those of ryots. He will purify th e village well and the village tank. He 
will teach the ryot to sweep his roads and clean hi s latrines by himself doing this 
necessary labour. He will throw open without reserv e his own gardens for the 
unrestricted use of the ryot. He will use as hospit al, school, or the like most of the 
unnecessary buildings which he keeps for his pleasu re. If only the capitalist class will 
read the signs of the times, revise their notions of  God-given right to all they possess, 
in an incredibly short space of time the seven hundr ed thousand dung-heaps which 
today pass muster as villages can be turned into abo des of peace, health and comfort. I 
am convinced that the capitalist, if he follows the Samurai of Japan, has nothing really 
to lose and everything to gain. There is no other ch oice than between voluntary 
surrender on the part of the capitalist of superflu ities and consequent acquisition of 
the real happiness of all on the one hand, and on t he other the impending chaos into 
which, if the capitalist does not wake up betimes, the awakened but ignorant and 
famishing millions will plunge the country and whic h not even the armed force that a India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  powerful Government can bring into play can avert. I  have hoped that India will 
successfully avert the disaster. 
Young India, 5-12-‘29  
 
The Kisan or the peasant, whether as a landless lab ourer or a labouring proprietor, 
comes first. He is the salt of the earth which righ tly belongs or should belong to him, 
not to the absentee landlord or Zamindar. But in th e non-violent way the labourer 
cannot forcibly eject the absentee landlord. He has  so to work as to make it impossible 
for the landlord to exploit him. Closest co-operati on amongst the peasants is 
absolutely necessary. To this end, special organizi ng bodies or committees should be 
formed where there are none and those already in ex istence should be reformed where 
necessary. The kisans are for the most part illiter ate. Both adults and young persons of 
school-going age should be educated. This applies t o men and women. Where they are 
landless labourers their wages should be brought to  level that would ensure a decent 
living which should mean balanced food, dwelling hou ses and clothing, which should 
mean balanced food, dwelling houses and clothing, w hich should satisfy health 
requirements.                                                          The Bombay Chronicle, 28-10-‘44  
 
I have no doubt that if we have democratic Swaraj as it must be if the freedom is won 
through non – violence, the Kisan must hold power in  all its phases including political 
power.                                                                     The Bombay Chronicle, 12–1–‘45  
 
If Swaraj is attained by the effort of the whole pe ople, as it must be under non-
violence, the Kisans must come into their own and ha ve the uppermost voice. But if it 
is not so and there is sort of a workable compromis e between the people and the 
Government on the basis of a limited franchise, the interests of the tiller of the soil 
will need close watching. If the legislature proves itself to be incapable of safeguarding 
Kisans’ interests they will, of course, always have the sovereign remedy of civil 
disobedience and non-co-operation. But … Ultimately  it is not paper legislation nor 
brave words or fiery speeches but the power of non-vi olent organization, discipline and 
sacrifice that constitutes the real bulwark of the people against injustice or 
oppression.                                                                The Bombay Chronicle, 12-1-‘45 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79   
Chapter 23 
BACK TO THE VILLAGE 
I have believed and repeated times without number th at India is to found not in its few 
cities but in its 7,00,000 villages.  But we town – dwellers have believed that India is to 
be found in its towns and the villages were created  to minister to our needs. We have 
hardly ever paused to inquire if those poor folk get  sufficient to eat and clothe 
themselves with and whether they have a roof to shel ter themselves from sun and rain. 
Harijan, 4–4–‘36  
 
I have found that the town–dweller has generally exp loited the villager, in fact he has 
lived on the poor villager’s subsistence. Many a Bri tish official has written about the 
conditions of the people of India. No one has, to m y knowledge, said that the Indian 
Villager has enough to keep body and soul together.  On the contrary they have 
admitted that the bulk of the population lives on t he verge of starvation and ten 
percent are semi–starved, and that millions have to rest content with a pinch of dirty 
salt and chillies and polished rice or parched grai n. 
You may be sure that if any of us were to be asked to live on that diet, we should not 
expect to survive it longer than a month or should b e afraid of losing our mental 
faculties. And yet our villagers go through that sta te from day to day. 
Harijan, 4–4–‘36  
 
Over 75 percent of the populations are agriculturist s. But there cannot be much spirit 
of self –government about us if we take away or all ow others to take away from them 
almost the whole of the result of their labour. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 323  
 
The cities are capable of taking care of themselves.  It is the village we have to turn to. 
We have to disabuse them of their prejudice, their s uperstitions, their narrow outlook 
and we can do so in no other manner than that of st aying amongst them and sharing 
their joys and sorrows and spreading education and intelligent information among 
them. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  Young India, 30–3–‘31  
 
We have got to be ideal villagers, not the villagers w ith their queer about sanitation 
and giving no thought to how they eat and what they  eat. Let us not, like most of 
them, cook anyhow, eat anyhow, live anyhow. Let us s how them the ideal diet. Let us 
not go by mere likes and dislikes, but get at the r oot of those likes and dislikes. 
Harijan, 1–3–‘35  
 
We must identify ourselves with the villagers who toi l under the hot sun beating on 
their bent backs and see how we would like to drink  water from the pool in which the 
villagers bathe, wash their clothes and pots, in whi ch their cattle drink and roll. Then 
and not till then shall we truly represent the mass es and they will, as surely as I am 
writing this, respond to every call. 
Young India, 11–9–‘24  
 
We have got to show them that they can grow their ve getables, their greens, without 
much expense, and keep good health. We have also to show that most of the vitamins 
are lost when they cook the leaves. 
Harijan, 1–3–‘35  
 
We have to teach them how to economize time, health and money. Lionel Curtis 
described our villages as dung-heaps. We have to turn  them into model villages. Our 
village –folk do not get fresh air though they are s urrounded by fresh air; they don’t 
get fresh food though they are surrounded by the fr eshest foods. I am talking like a 
missionary in this matter of food, because my missi on is to make villages a thing of 
beauty. 
Harijan, 1–3–‘35  
 
It is profitless to find out whether the villages of  India were always what they are 
today. If they were never better it is a reflection upon the ancient culture in which we 
take so much pride. But if they were never better, h ow is it that they have survived India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  centuries of decay which we see going on around us… . The task before every lover of 
the country is how to prevent this decay or, which i s the same thing, how to 
reconstruct the villages of India so that it may be as easy for any-one to live in them as 
it is supposed to be in the cities. Indeed, it is t he task before every patriot. It may be 
that the villagers are beyond redemption, that rural  civilization has had its day and 
that the seven hundred thousands villages have to give place to seven hundred well–
ordered cities supporting a population not of three  hundred millions but thirty. If such 
is to be India’s fate, even that won’t come in a day . It must take time to wipe out a 
number of villages and villagers and transform the re mainder into cities and citizens. 
Harijan, 7–3–‘36  
 
The village movement is as much an education of the city people as of the villagers. 
Workers drawn from cities have to develop village me ntality and learn the art of living 
after the manner of villagers. This does not mean t hat they have to starve like the 
villagers. But it does mean that there must be a rad ical change in the old style of life. 
Harijan, 11–4–‘36  
 
The only way is to sit down in their midst and work  away in steadfast faith, as their 
scavengers, their nurses, their servants, not as thei r patrons, and to forget all our 
prejudices and prepossessions. Let us for a moment forget even Swaraj, and certainly 
forget the ‘haves’ whose presence oppresses us at e very step. They are there. There 
are many who are dealing with these big problems. L et us tackle the humbler work of 
the village which is necessary now and would be eve n after we have reached our goal. 
Indeed, the village work when it becomes successful  will itself bring us nearer the 
goal. 
Harijan, 16–3–‘36  
 
The village communities should be revived. Indian vill ages produced and supplied to 
the Indian towns and cities all their wants. India became impoverished when our cities 
became foreign markets and began to grain the villag es dry by dumping cheap and 
shoddy goods from foreign lands. 
Harijan, 27–2–‘37  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82   
It is only when the cities realize the duty of maki ng an adequate return to the villages 
for the strength and sustenance which they derive f rom them, instead of selfishly 
exploiting them, that a healthy and moral relations hip between the two will spring up. 
And if the city children are to play their part in this great and noble work of social 
reconstruction, the vocations through which they ar e to receive their education ought 
to be directly related to the requirements of the vi llages. 
Harijan, 19 –10–‘37  
 
We have to tackle the triple malady which holds our villages fast in its grip: (i) want of 
corporate sanitation; (ii) deficient diet; (iii) in ertia…. They are not interested in their 
own welfare. They don’t appreciate modern sanitary methods. They don’t want to 
exert themselves beyond scratching their farms or do ing such labour as they are used 
to. These difficulties are real and serious. But th ey must not baffle us. We must have 
an unquenchable faith in our mission. We must be pa tient with the people. We are 
ourselves novices in village work. We have to deal wi th a chronic disease. Patience and 
perseverance, if we have them, overcome mountains of difficulties. We are like nurses 
who may not leave their patients because they are r eported to have an incurable 
disease. 
Harijan, 16-5–‘36  
 
The moment you talk to them [the Indian peasants] a nd they begin to speak; you will 
find wisdom drops from their lips. Behind the crude  exterior you will find a deep 
reservoir of spirituality, I call this culture you w ill not find such a thing in the West. 
You try to engage an European peasant in conversatio n and you will find that he is 
uninterested in things spiritual. 
Harijan, 28 – 1 –‘39  
 
In the case of the Indian villager, an age–old cultu re is hidden under an encrustment of 
crudeness. Take away the encrustation, remove his ch ronic poverty and his illiteracy 
and you have the finest specimen of what a cultured,  cultivated, free citizen should 
be.                                                                                               Harijan, 28–1–‘39 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83   
Chapter 24 
EVERY VILLAGE A REPUBLIC 
My Idea of village Swaraj is that it is a complete republic, independent of its 
neighbours for its own vital wants and yet interdepe ndent for many others in which 
dependence is necessary. Thus every village’s first c oncern will be to grow its own food 
crops, and cotton for its cloth. It should have res erve for its cattle, recreation and 
playground for adults and children. Then if there i s more land available, it will grow 
useful money crops, thus excluding ganja, tobacco, opium and the like. 
The village will maintain a village theatre, school a nd public hall. It will have its own 
waterworks ensuring clean water supply. This can be  done through controlled wells or 
tanks. Education will be compulsory up to the final  basic course. As far as possible 
every activity will be conducted on the co-operative  basis. There will be no castes such 
as we have today with their graded untouchability. 
Harijan, 26-7-‘42  
 
Non-violence with its technique of Satyagraha and n on-co-operation will be the 
sanction of the village community. There will be a c ompulsory service of village guards 
who will be selected by rotation from the register maintained by the village. The 
government of the village will be conducted by a Panc hayat of five persons annually 
elected by the adult villagers, male and female, pos sessing minimum prescribed 
qualifications. These will have all the authority an d jurisdiction required. Since there 
will be no system of punishments in the accepted se nse, this Panchayat will be the 
legislature, judiciary an executive combined to oper ate for its year of office, 
Any village can become such a republic today without  much interference, even from 
the present Government whose sole effectual connect ion with the village is the 
exaction of the village revenue. I have not examined here the question of the relations 
with the neighbouring villages and the Centre if any . My purpose is to present an 
outline of village government. Here is perfect democ racy based upon individual 
freedom. The individual is the architect of his own  Government. The individual is the 
architect of his own Government. He and his village a re able to defy the might of the 
world. For the law governing every villager is that he  will suffer death in the defence 
of his and his village’s honour. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  To model such a village may be the work of life-time . Any lover of democracy and 
village life can take up a village, treat it as his w orld and sole work, and he will find 
good results. He begins by being the village scavenge r, spinner, watchman, medicine-
man and school master all at once. If nobody comes near him he will be satisfied with 
scavenging and spinning. 
Harijan, 26-7-‘42  
 
The villagers should develop such a high degree of sk ill that articles prepared by them 
should command a ready market outside. When our vill ages are fully developed there 
will be no dearth in them of men with a high degree  of skill and artistic talent. There 
will be village poets, village artists, village arch itects, linguists and research workers. 
In short, there will be nothing in life worth having  which will not be had in the villages. 
Today, the villages are dung heaps. Tomorrow they wi ll be like tiny gardens of Eden 
where dwell highly intelligent folk whom no one can  deceive or exploit. 
The reconstruction of the villages along these line s should begin now. The 
reconstruction of the villages should not be organiz ed on a temporary but permanent 
basis. 
Craft, art, health and education should all be inte grated into one scheme. Nai Talim is 
a beautiful blend of all the four and covers the who le education of the individual from 
the time of conception to the moment of death. Ther efore, I would not divide village 
uplift work into water-tight compartments from the very beginning but undertake an 
activity which will combine different from education  I will regard the former as the 
medium for the latter. Nai Talim therefore ought to  be integrated into the scheme. 
Harijan, 10-11-‘46  
 
A village unit as conceived by me is as strong as the  strongest. My imaginary village 
consists of 1,000 souls. Such a unit can give a goo d account to itself, if it is well 
organized on a basis of self-sufficiency. 
Harijan, 4-8-‘46  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  An ideal Indian village will be so constructed as t o lend itself to perfect sanitation. It 
will have cottages with sufficient light and ventila tion, built of a material obtainable 
within a radius of five miles of it. The cottages wi ll have courtyards enabling the 
householders to plant vegetables for domestic use an d to house their cattle. The 
village lanes and streets will be free of all avoida ble dust. It will have wells according 
to its needs and accessible to all. It will have ho uses of worship for all, also a common 
meeting place, a village common for grazing its catt le, a co-operative dairy, primary 
and secondary schools in which industrial education  will be the central factor, and it 
will have village Panchayats for settling disputes. It will produce its own grains, 
vegetables and fruit, and its own Khadi. 
Mahatma, Vol. IV, p.144 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86   
Chapter 25 
PANCHAYAT RAJ 
Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every village will be a Republic or 
Panchayat having full powers. It follows, therefore,  that every village has to be self-
sustained and capable of managing its affairs even t o the extent of defending itself 
against the whole world. It will be trained and pre pared to perish in its attempt to 
defend itself against any onslaught from without. T hus, ultimately, it is the individual 
who is the unit. This does not exclude dependence o n and willing help from neighbors 
or from the world. It will be free and voluntary pla y of mutual forces. Such a society is 
necessarily highly cultured, in which every man and woman knows what he or she 
wants and, what is more, knows that no one should w ant anything that others cannot 
have with equal labor. 
This society must naturally be based on Truth and N on-Violence which, in my opinion, 
are not possible without a living belief in God, mea ning a self-existent, all-knowing 
living force which inheres every other force known to  the world but which depends on 
none and which will live when all other forces may c onceivably perish or cease to act. I 
am unable to account for my life without belief in this all-embracing living light. 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages t here will be ever widening, never 
ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid with the apex sustained by the bottom. 
But it will be the individual always ready to peris h for the village, the letter ready to 
perish for the village, sharing the majesty of the o ceanic circle of which they are 
integral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wie ld power to crush the inner circle 
but give strength to all within and derive its own from the centre. I may be taunted 
with the retort that this is all Utopian and theref ore not worth a single thought. If 
Euclid’s point, though incapable of being drawn by human agency, has an imperishable 
value, my picture has its own for mankind to live. Le t India Live for this true picture, 
though never realizable in its completeness. We mus t have a proper picture of what we 
want before we can have something approaching it. If  there ever is to be a republic of 
every village in India, then I claim verity for my pi cture in which the last is equal to 
the first, or in other words, none is to be the fir st and none the last. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  In this picture every religion has its full and equa l place. We are all leaves of a 
majestic tree whose trunk cannot be shaken off its roots which are deep down in the 
bowels of the earth. The mightiest of wind cannot m ove it. 
In this there is no room for machines that would di splace human labor and that would 
concentrate power in a few hands. Labor has its uni que in a cultural human family. 
Every machine that helps every individual has a place . But I must confess that I have 
never sat down to think out what that machine can be . I have thought of singer’s 
sewing machine. But even that is perfunctory. I do n ot need it to fill in my picture. 
Harijan, 28-7’46  
 
When panchayat raj is established, public opinion w ill do what violence can never do. 
The present power of the zamindars, the capitalist and the rajas can hold sway so long 
as the common people do not realize their own stren gth. If the people non – co – 
operate with the evil of zamindari or capitalism, i t must die of inanition. In panchayat 
Raj only the panchayat will be obeyed and the panch ayat can only work through the 
law of their making. 
Harijan 1-7-’47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88   
Chapter 26 
VILLAGE INDUSTRIES  
Extinction of village industries would complete the ruin of the 7, 00,000 villages of 
India. 
I have seen in the daily press criticism of the prop osals I have adumbrated. Advice has 
been given to me that I must look for salvation in t he direction of using the powers of 
nature that the inventive brain of man has brought u nder subjection .The critics say 
that water, oil and electricity should be fully uti lized as they are being under 
subjection.  The critics say that water, air, oil, and electricity should be fully utilized 
as they are being utilized in the go-ahead West. Th ey say that control over these 
hidden powers of nature enables every American to ha ve thirty-three slaves. They say 
that control over these hidden powers of nature ena bles every American to have thirty 
– three slaves. 
Repeat the process in India and I dare say that it will thirty- three times enslave every 
inhabitant of this land, instead of giving every on e thirty–three slaves. 
Mechanization is good when the hands are too few fo r the work intended to be 
accomplished. It is an evil when there are more hand s then required for the work, as is 
the case in India. I may not use a plough for diggi ng a square yard of a plot of land. 
The problem with us is not how to find leisure for the teeming millions inhabiting our 
villages. The problem is how to utilize their idle h ours, which are equal to the working 
days of six months in the year. Strange as it may a ppear, every mill generally is a 
menace to the villagers. I have not worked out the fi gures, but I am quite safe in 
saying that every mill-hand does the work of at leas t ten laborers doing the same work 
in their villages. In other words, he earns more th an he did in his village at the expense 
of ten fellow-villagers. Thus spinning and weaving mi lls have deprived the villagers of 
substantial means of livelihood. It is no answer in reply to say that they turn out 
cheaper, better cloth, if they do so at all. For, i f they have displaced thousands of 
workers, the cheapest mill cloth is dearer than the  dearest Khadi woven in the villages. 
Coal is not dear for the coal miner who can use it there and then, nor is Khadi dear for 
the villager who manufactures his own Khadi. But if  the cloth manufactured in mills 
displace thousand of poor women workers, but damage  the health of the whole 
population in the bargain. Where people have no obj ection to taking flesh diet and can India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  afford it, white flour and polished rice may do no harm, but in India, where millions 
can get no flesh diet even where they have no object ion to eating it if they can get it, 
it is sinful to deprive them of nutritious and vital elements contained in whole wheat 
meal and unpolished rice. It is time medical men an d others combined to instruct the 
people on the danger attendant upon the use of whit e lour and polished rice. 
I have drawn attention to some broad, glaring facts to shown that they way to take 
work to the villagers is not through mechanizations  but that it lies through revival of 
the industries they have hitherto followed. 
Harijan, 16-11-‘34  
 
The idea behind the village industries schemes its that we should look to the villages 
for the supply of our daily need and that, when we find that some need are not so 
supplied, we should see whether with a little troub le and organization they cannot be 
profitably supplied by the villagers. In estimating  the profit, we should think of the 
villager, not of ourselves. It may be that in the in itial stage we might have to pay a 
little more than the ordinary price and get an infe rior article in the bargain.  Things 
will improve, if we will interest ourselves in the s upplier of our needs and insist on his 
doing better and take the trouble of helping him to  do better. 
Haijan, 23-11-‘34  
 
I would say that if the village perishes India will perish too. India will be no more India. 
Her own mission in the world will get lost. The revi val of the village is possible only 
when it is no more exploited. Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily lead to 
passive or active exploitation and marketing come. Th erefore we have to concentrate 
on the village being self-contained, manufacturing m ainly for use. Provided this 
character of the village industry is maintained, the re would be no objection to 
villagers using even the modern machines and tools th at they can make and can afford 
to use. Only they should not be used as a means of exploitation of others. 
Harijan, 29-8-‘36  
 
We have to make a choice between India of the villag es that are as ancient as her and 
India of the cities which are a creation of foreign  domination. To day the cities India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  dominate and drain the villages so that they are cru mbling to ruin. My Khadi mentality 
tells me that cities must sub serve villages when tha t domination goes. Exploiting of 
villages is itself organized violence. If we want Swa raj to be built on non-violence, we 
will have to give the villages their proper place. 
Harijan, 20-1-‘40  
 
Khadi  
Khadi to me is the symbol of unity of Indian humani ty, of its economic freedom and 
equality and, therefore, ultimately, in the poetic expression of Jawaharlal Nehru, “the 
livery of India’s freedom”. 
Moreover, Khadi mentality means decentralization of  the production and distribution 
of the necessaries of life. There for, the formula so fare evolved is, every village to 
produce all its necessaries and a certain percentag e in addition for the requirements of 
the cities. 
Heavy industries will needs be centralized and natio nalized. But they will occupy the 
least part of the vast national activity which will m ainly be in the villages. 
Production of Khadi includes cotton growing, pickin g, ginning, cleaning, carding, 
slivering, spinning, sizing, dyeing, preparing the w arp and the woof, weaving, and 
washing. These, with the exception of dyeing, are e ssential processes. Every on of 
them can be effectively handled in the villages and is being so handle din many village 
throughout India which the A.I.S.A. is covering. 
Since the wanton destruction of this central village  industry and the allied handicraft, 
intelligence and brightness have fled from the villag es, leaving them inane, lusterless, 
and reduced almost to the state of their ill – kept  cattle. 
Constructive Program me, P.12  
 
Other village industries  
These stand on a different footing from Khadi. Ther e is not much scope for voluntary 
labor in them. Each industry will take the labor of  only a certain number of hands. 
These industries come in as a handmaid to Khadi. Th ey cannot exist without Khadi, and 
Khadi will be robbed of its dignity without them. V illage economy cannot be complete India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91  without the essential village industries such as han d-grinding, hand-pounding, soap-
making, paper making, match-making, tanning, oil-pr essing, etc. Congressmen can 
interest themselves in these and, if they are village rs or will settle down in villages, 
they will give these industries a new life and a new  dress. All should make it a point of 
honor to use only village articles whenever and where ver available. Given the demand 
there is no doubt that most our wants can be suppli ed from our villages. When we have 
become village-minded, we will not want imitations o f the West of machine-made 
products, but we will develop a true national taste in keeping with the vision of a new 
India in which pauperism, starvation and idleness wi ll be unknown. 
Constructive Programme, p. 15  
 
Compost Manure  
Given the willing co-operation of the masses of Indi a, this country can not only drive 
out shortage of food, but can provide India with mor e than enough. This organic 
manure ever enriches, never impoverishes the soil. T he daily waste, judiciously 
composted, returns to the soil in the form of golde n manure causing a saving of 
millions of rupees and increasing manifold, the tot al yield of grains and pulses. In 
addition, the judicious use of waste keeps the surr ounding clean. And clean-lines is not 
only next to godliness, it promotes health. 
Harijan, 28-12—‘47  
 
Village Tanning  
Village tanning is as ancient as India itself. No o ne can say when tanning became a 
degraded calling. It could not have been so in ancie nt times. But we know today that 
on e of the most useful and an indispensable indust ry has consigned probably a million 
people to hereditary untouchability. An evil day da wned upon this unhappy country 
when labor began to be despised and therefore negle cted. Millions of those who were 
the salt of the earth, on whose industry this count ry depended for its very existence, 
came to be regarded as low classes, and the microsc opic leisured few became the 
privileged classes, with the tragic result that Indi a suffered morally and materially. 
Which was the greater of the two losses it is diffi cult, if not impossible, to estimate. 
But the criminal neglect of the peasants and artisa ns has reduced us to pauperism, India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  dullness and habitual idleness. With her magnificen t climate, lofty mountains, mighty 
rivers and an extensive seaboard, India has limited resources, whose full exploitation 
in her villages should have prevented poverty and dis ease. But divorce of the intellect 
from body-labor has made of us perhaps the shortest -lived, most resource less and 
most exploited nation on earth. The state of village  tanning is, perhaps, the best proof 
of my indictment. 
It is estimated that rupees nine cores worth of raw  hide is annually exported from India 
and much of it is returned to her in the shape of m anufactured articles. This means not 
only a material, but also an intellectual, drain. W e miss the training we should receive 
in tanning and preparing the innumerable articles o f leather we need for daily use. 
Here is work for the cent percent Swedish lover and scope for the harnessing of 
technical skill to the solution of a great problem.  It serves the Harijans. It serves the 
villagers, and it means honorable employment for the  middle class intelligentsia who 
are in search of employment. Add to this the fact t hat the intelligentsia has a proper 
opportunity of coming in direct touch with the villa gers. 
 
How to Begin  
Correspondents have been writing, and friends have b een seeing me, to ask me how to 
begin the village industries work and what to do fi rst. 
The obvious answer is, “Begin with yourself and do first that which sis easiest for you 
to do.” 
This answer, however, does not satisfy the enquirers . Let me, therefore, be more 
explicit. 
Each person can examine all the article of food, cl othing and other things, that he used 
from day to day and replace foreign makes or city m akes, by those produced by the 
villagers in their homes or fields with the simple i nexpensive tools they can easily 
handle or mend. This replacement will be itself an education of great value and a solid 
beginning. The next step will be opened out to him of itself. For instance, say, the 
beginner has been hitherto using a tooth-brush made  in a Bombay factory. He wants to 
replace it with a village brush. He is advised to us e a babul twig. If he has weak teeth 
or is toothless, he has to crush one end of it, wit h a rounded stone or hammer, on a 
hard surface. The other end he slits with a knife a nd uses the halves as tongue-India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  scrapers. He will find these brushes to cheaper and  much cleaner than the very 
unhygienic factory made tooth-brush. The city-made tooth-powder he naturally 
replaces with equal parts of clean, finely-ground w ood-charcoal and clean salt. He will 
replace mill-cloth with village-spun Khadi, and mill  husked rice with hand-husked, 
unpolished rice, and white sugar with village-made guru. These I have taken merely as 
samples already mentioned in these columns. I have m entioned them again to deal 
with the difficulties the question with me. 
Harijan, 25-1-‘35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94   
Chapter 27  
WHAT THE GOVERNMENT CAN DO 
It is legitimate to ask what Congress Ministers wil l do for khaddar and other village 
industries now that they are in office. Whether a M inister is separately appointed or 
not, a department for the work is surely necessary.  
In these times of scarcity times of food and clothi ng, this department can render the 
greatest help. The Ministers have experts at their disposal through the A.I.S.A. and the 
A.I.V.I.A. It is possible today the whole of India in Khadi on the smallest outlay and in 
the shortest time possible. Each provincial Governme nt has to tell the villagers that 
they must manufacture their own Khaddar for their o wn use. This brings in automatic 
local production and distribution. And there will u ndoubtedly be a surplus for the cities 
at least to a certain extent which, in its turn, wi ll reduce the pressure on the   local 
mills. The latter will then be able to take part in  supplying the want of cloth in other 
parts of the world. 
How can this result be broth about? 
The Government should notify the villagers that the y will be expected to manufacture 
Khaddar for the needs of their villages within a fix ed date after which no cloth will be 
supplied to them. The Government in their turn will supply the villagers with cotton 
seed or cotton whenever required, at the cost price  and the tools of manufacture also 
at cost, to be recovered in easy installments payab le in, say, five years or more. They 
will supply them with instructors wherever necessary  and undertake to by surplus stock 
of Khaddar, provided that the villagers in question have their cloth requirement 
supplied from their own manufacture. This should do  away with cloth shortage without 
fuss and with very little overhead charges. 
The villages will be surveyed and a list prepared of things that can be manufactured 
locally with little or no help and which may be req uired for village use or for sale 
outside, such for instance, as ghani-pressed oil an d cakes, burning oil prepared through 
ghanis, hand pounded rice, tadgud, honey, toys mats , hand-made paper, village soap, 
etc. If enough care is thus taken the villages, mos t of them as good as dead or dying, 
will hum with life and exhibit the immense possibil ities they have of supplying most of 
their wants themselves and of the cities and towns of India. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  Then there is the limitless cattle wealth of India suffering from criminal neglect. 
Goseva Sangh, as yet not properly experienced, can s till supply valuable aid. 
Without the basic training the villagers are being s tarved for education. This 
desideratum can be supplied by the Hindustani Talim i Sangh. 
Harijan, 28-4-‘46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96   
Chapter 28 
VILLAGE EXHIBITIONS 
If we want and believe that the village should not o nly survive but also become strong 
and flourishing, then the village perspective is the  only correct view-point. If this is 
true then in our exhibitions there can be no place for the glamour and pomp for the 
cities. There should be no necessity for games and other entertainments that belong to 
the cities. There should be no necessity for games and other entertainments that 
belong to the cities. An exhibition should not beco me a “Tamasha”, nor a source of 
income; it should never become the advertising medium  for traders. No sales should be 
allowed there. Even Khadi and village industry produ cts should not be sold. An 
exhibition should be a medium of education, should be attractive and it should be such 
as to infuse in the villager the impulse to take to  some industry or the other. It should 
bring out the glaring defects and drawbacks in the present day village life, and show 
methods to be adopted to set them right. It should also be able to indicate the extent 
of achievement in that direction ever since the idea  of village uplift was sponsored. It 
should also teach how to make village life artistic.  
Now let us see what an exhibition will be life if i t is to conform to the above 
conditions. 
1. There should be two models of villages-one as is existing today and the other an 
improved one. The improved village will be clean all throughout. Its houses, its roads, 
its surroundings and its fields will be all clean. The condition of the cattle should also 
improve. Books, charts and pictures should be used to show what industries give 
increased income and how. 
2. It must show how to conduct the various village in dustries, wherefrom to obtain the 
needed implements, how to make them. The actual wor king of each industry should be 
demonstrated. Along with these the following should  also find place: 
(a) Ideal village diet. 
(b) Comparison between village industry and machine industry 
(c) Model lessons on rearing animals. 
(d) Art section. 
(e) Model of village latrine. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  (f) Farm-yard manure v. chemical manure. 
(g) Utilization of hides, bones, etc. of animals. 
(h) Village music, musical instruments, village dram as. 
(i) Village games, village akhadas and forms of exer cise. 
(j) Nai Talim. 
(k) Village medicine. 
(l)  Village maternity home. 
Subject to the policy enunciated in the beginning, this list may be further expanded. 
What I have indicated is by way of example only; it should not be taken to be 
exhaustive. I have not made any mention of the Chark ha and other village industries as 
they are taken for granted. Without them the exhibi tion will be absolutely useless. 
Gram Udyog Patrika, July 1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98   
Chapter 29 
THE MUSIC OF THE SPINNING WHEEL 
I think of the poor of India every time I draw a thr ead on the wheel. The poor of India 
today have lost faith in God, more so than the middl e classes or the rich. For a person 
suffering from the pangs of hunger, and desiring no thing but to fill his belly, his belly is 
his God. To him anyone who gives him his bread is hi s Master. Through him he may 
even see God. To give alms to such persons, who are s ound in all their limbs, is to 
debase oneself and them. What they need is some kin d of occupation, and the 
occupation that will give employment to millions can  only be hand-spinning… I have 
described my spinning as a penance or sacrament. An d, since I believe that where 
there is pure and active love for the poor there is  God also, I see God in every thread 
that I draw on the spinning wheel. 
Young India, 20-5-‘26  
 
I feel convinced that the revival of hand-spinning an d hand–weaving will make the 
largest contribution to the economic and the moral regeneration of India. The millions 
must have a simple industry to supplement agricultur e. Spinning was the cottage 
industry years ago, and if the millions are to be s ave from starvation, they must be 
enabled to reintroduce spinning in their homes, and  every village must repossess its 
won weaver. 
Young India, 21-7-‘20  
 
I can only think of spinning as the fittest and mos t acceptable sacrificial body labour. I 
cannot imagine anything nobler or more national tha n that for, say one hour in the 
day, we should all do the labour that the poor must  do, and thus identify ourselves 
with them and through them with all mankind. I cann ot imagine better worship of God 
then that in His name I should labour for the poor even as they do. The spinning wheel 
spells a more equitable distribution of the riches of the earth. 
Young India, 20-10-‘21  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  I… claim for the Charkha the honour of being able t o solve the problem of economic 
distress in a most natural, simple, inexpensive and  businesslike manner. The Charkha, 
therefore, is not only not useless... but it is a u seful and indispensable article for every 
home. It is the symbol of the nation’s prosperity a nd, therefore, freedom. It is a 
symbol not of commercial war but of commercial peac e. It bears not a message of ill-
will towards the nations of the earth but of good-w ill and self-help. It will not need the 
protection of a navy threatening a world’s peace and  exploiting its resources, but it 
needs the religious determination of millions to sp in their yarn in their own homes as 
today they cook their food in their own homes. I ma y deserve, the curse of posterity 
for many mistakes of omission and commission, but I  am confident of earning its 
blessings for suggesting a revival of the Charkha, I  stake my all on it. For every 
revolution of the wheel spins peace, good will and l ove.  And with all that, in as much 
as the loss of it brought about India’s slavery, its  voluntary revival with all its 
implications must mean India’s freedom. 
Young India, 8,12-‘21  
 
What is claimed for spinning is that 
1. It supplies the readiest occupation to those who  have leisure and are in want of a 
few coppers; 
2. it is known to the thousands; 
3. it is easily learnt; 
4. it requires practically no outlay of capital; 
5. The wheel can be easily and cheaply made. Most o f us do not yet know that spinning 
can be done even with a piece of tile and splinter; 
6. the people have no repugnance to it; 
7. it affords immediate relief in times of famine a nd scarcity; 
8. it alone can stop the drain of wealth which goes  outside India in the purchase of 
foreign cloth; 
9. it automatically distributes the millions thus s aved among the deserving poor; 
10. even the smallest success means so much immediat e gain to the people; 
11. it is the most potent instrument of securing co -operation among the people. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  Young India, 21-8-‘24  
 
‘‘If hand–spinning is all you say, how is it that i t has not already been universally 
adopted? asks the critic. The question is quite fai r. The answer is simple. The message 
of the wheel has to be carried to a people who have  no hope, no initiative left in 
them, and who would, if left to themselves, starve an d die rather than work and live. 
Such was not the case before, but long neglect has made laziness a habit with them 
.That laziness can only be removed by the living con tact and example of men of 
character and industry, plying the wheel before the m and by gently showing them the 
way. The second great difficulty is the absence of a ready-market for khaddar. I 
confess hat it cannot for the time being compete wi th mill cloth. I will not engage in 
any such killing competition. The capitalist may, f or capturing the market, sell his 
calico for nothing. The manufacturer whose only cap ital is labour cannot afford to do 
so. Can there be any competition between the dead a rtificial rose, however 
symmetrical it may be, and the living rose whose tw o petals will not be a like, or can 
there be any competition between a wax statue of Cr omwell and the living one? 
Khaddar is a living thing. But India has lost her e ye for the real art and is, therefore, 
satisfied with the glossy exterior. Revive the healt hy national taste for Khaddar and 
you will find every village a busy hive. As it is, the  resources of khaddar organizations 
are taxed to the utmost, in order to create a marke t for the article… The marvel is 
that, in spite of heavy odds against it, the movement  is making headway. 
I have the summarized the case for the spinning whee l as a supplementary industry as 
against the hand-loom. Let there be no confusion of  thought. I am not against the 
handloom. It is great and thriving industry. It will  progress automatically if the spinning 
wheel succeeds. It is bound to die if the wheel fai ls. 
Young India, 11-11-‘26  
 
The spinning wheel represents to me the hope of the  masses. The masses lost their 
freedom, such as it was with the loss of the Charkh a. The Charkha supplemented the 
agriculture of the villagers and gave it dignity. It was the friend and solace of the 
widow. It kept the villager from idleness. For the Charkha included all the anterior and 
posterior industries – ginning, carding, warping, s izing, dyeing and weaving. These in India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  their turn kept the village carpenter and the black smith busy. The Charkha enabled the 
seven hundred thousand villages to become self-contai ned. With the exit of the 
Charkha went the other village industries, such as t he oil press. Nothing took the place 
of these industries. Therefore the villages were dra ined of their varied occupations and 
their creative talent and what little wealth these b rought them. 
Hence, if the villagers are to come into their own, the most natural thing that suggests 
itself is the revival of the Charkha and all it mean s. 
This revival cannot take place without an army of se lfless Indians of intelligence and 
patriotism working with a single mind in the village s to spread the message of the 
Charkha and bring a ray of hope and light into thei r lusterless eyes. This is a mighty 
effort at co-operation and adult education of the c orrect type. It brings about a silent 
and sure revolution like the silent but sure and lif e-giving revolution of the Charkha. 
Harijan, 13-4-‘40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102   
Chapter 30 
THE MILL INDUSTRY 
Our mills cannot today spin enough for our wants, a nd if they did, they would not keep 
down prices unless they were compelled. They are fr ankly money-makers and will not, 
therefore, regulate prices according to the needs o f the nation. Hand-spinning is 
therefore, designed to put millions of rupees in th e hands of poor villagers. Every 
agricultural country requires a supplementary indus try to enable the peasants to utilize 
spare hours. Such industry for India has always bee n spinning. Is it a visionary ideal – an 
attempt to revive an ancient occupation whose destru ction has brought on slavery, 
pauperism and disappearance of the inimitable artis tic talent which was once all 
expressed in the wonderful fabric of India and whic h was the envy of the world? 
Young India, 16-2-‘21  
 
The great mill industry may be claimed to be an Ind ian industry. But in spite of its 
ability to computer with Japan and Lancashire, it i s an industry that exploits the 
masses and deepens their poverty in exact proportion  to its success over Khadi. In the 
modern craze for industrialization, my presentation  has been questioned, if not 
brushed aside. It has been contended that the growi ng poverty of the masses, due to 
the progress of industrialization, is inevitable, an d should, therefore, be suffered. The 
A.I.S.A. has successfully demonstrated the possibil ity of the villages manufacturing the 
whole of the cloth requirements of India, simply by  employing the leisure hours of the 
nation in spinning and the anterior processes. The difficulty lies in weaning the nation 
from the use of mill cloth. 
Harijan, 23-10-‘37  
 
Mill-owners are not philanthropists to go on providi ng yarn to the handloom weaver 
when he enters into effective competition with them.  
Harijan, 25-8-‘46  
 
As soon as the mill-owners can do so profitably, th ey will certainly stop selling mill 
yarn and will weave it themselves. They are not phila nthropists. They have set mills to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  make money. They will stop selling their yarn to ha ndloom weavers, if they find 
weaving it more profitable. 
Harijan, 31-3-‘46  
 
The use of mill-yarn is the principal stranglehold on the handloom industry. In hand-
spun yarn lies its only salvation. If the spinning w heel goes, the handloom is bound to 
follow suit. 
Harijan, 25-8-‘46  
 
I am personally opposed to great trusts and concent ration of industries by means of 
elaborate machinery. If India takes to khaddar and all it means, I do not lose the hope 
of India taking only as much of the modern machiner y as may be considered necessary 
for the amenities of life and labour-saving devices. 
Young India, 24-7-‘24  
 
Organization of machinery for the purpose of concen trating wealth and power in the 
hands of a few and for the exploitation of many I h old to be altogether wrong. Much of 
the organization of machinery of the present age is  of that type. The movement of the 
spinning wheel is an organized attempt to displace machinery from that state of 
exclusiveness and exploitation and to place it in it s proper state. Under my scheme, 
therefore, men in charge of machinery will think no t of themselves or even of the 
nation to which they belong but of the whole human race. Thus Lancashire men will 
cease to use their machinery for exploiting India a nd other countries but on the 
contrary they will devise means of enabling India t o convert in her own villages her 
cotton into cloth. Nor will Americans under my sche me seek to enrich themselves by 
exploiting the other races of the earth through the ir inventive skill. 
Young India, 17-9-‘25 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104   
Chapter 31 
THE GOSPEL OF SWADESHI 
Swadeshi is that spirit in us which restricts us to  the use and service of our immediate 
surroundings to the exclusion of the more remote. T hus, as for religion, in order to 
satisfy the requirements of the definition, I must restrict myself to my ancestral 
religion. That is, the use of my immediate religiou s surrounding. If I find it defective, I 
should serve it by purging it of its defects. In th e domain of politics I should make use 
of the indigenous institutions and serve them by cur ing them of their proved defects. 
In that of economics I should use only things that are produced by my immediate 
neighbours and serve those industries by making them  efficient and complete where 
they might be found wanting. It is suggested that s uch Swadeshi, if reduced to 
practice, will lead to the millennium…. 
Let us briefly examine the three branches of Swades hi as sketched above. Hinduism has 
become a conservative religion and, therefore, a mi ghty force because of the Swadeshi 
spirit underlying it. It is the most tolerant becau se it is non-proselytizing, and it is as 
capable of expansion today as it has been found to be in the past. It has succeeded no 
in driving out, as I think it has been erroneously h eld, but in absorbing Buddhism. By 
reason of the Swadeshi spirit, a Hindu refuses to c hange his religion, not necessarily 
because he considers it to be the best, but because  he knows that he can complement 
it by introducing reforms. And what I have said abou t Hinduism is, I suppose, true of 
the other great faiths of the world, only it is hel d it is specially so in the case of 
Hinduism. But here comes the point I am laboring to  reach. If there is any substance in 
what I have said, will not the great missionary bod ies of India, to whom she owes a 
deep debt of gratitude for what they have done and are doing, do still better and serve 
the spirit of Christianity better by dropping the g oal of proselytizing while continuing 
their philanthropic work? 
Following out the Swadeshi spirit, I observe the in digenous institutions, and the village 
Panchayats holds me. India is really a republican c ountry, and it is because it is that, 
that it has survived every shock hitherto delivered. P rinces and potentates, whether 
they were Indian born or foreigners, have hardly tou ched the vast masses except for 
collecting revenue. The latter in their turn seem t o have rendered unto Caesar what 
was Caesar’s and for the rest have done much as they  have liked. The vast organization India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  of caste answered not only to the religious wants o f the community but it answered to 
its political needs. The villagers managed their int ernal affairs through the caste 
system and through it they dealt with any oppressio n from the ruling power or powers. 
It is not possible to deny the organizing ability o f nation that was capable of producing 
from the caste system its wonderful power of organi zation. One has but to attend the 
great Kumbha Mela at Hardwar… to know how skilful t hat organization must have been 
which, without any seeming million pilgrims. Yet it  is the fashion to say that we lack 
organizing ability. This is true, I fear, to a cert ain extent, of those who have been 
nurtured in the new traditions. 
We have labored under a terrible handicap owing to a n almost fatal departure from the 
Swadeshi spirit. We, the educated classes, have rece ived our education classes, have 
received our education through a foreign tongue. We have, therefore, not reacted 
upon the masses. We want to represent the masses, b ut we fail. They recognize us not 
much more than they recognize the English officers.  Their hearts are an open book to 
neither. Their aspirations are not ours. Hence ther e is a break. And you witness not in 
reality failure to organize but want of corresponde nce between the representatives 
and the represented. If during the last fifty years  we had been educated through the 
vernaculars, our elders and our servants and our nei ghbours would have partaken of 
our knowledge; the discoveries of a Bose or a Ray wo uld have been household treasures 
as are the Ramayan and the Mahabharat. As it is, so  far as the masses are the 
concerned, those great discoveries might as well ha ve been made by foreigners. Had 
instruction in all the branches of learning been gi ven through the vernaculars, I make 
bold to say that they would have been enriched wonde rfully. The question of village 
sanitation etc. would have been solved long ago. The village Panchayats would be now 
a living force in a special way, and India would al most be enjoying self-government 
suited to her requirements, and would have been spar ed the humiliating spectacle of 
organized assassination on her sacred soil. It is n ot too late to mend. 
And now for the last division of Swadeshi.  Much of the deep poverty of the masses is 
due to the ruinous departure from Swadeshi in the e conomic and industrial life. If not 
one article of commerce had been brought from outsi de India, she would be today a 
land flowing with milk and honey. But that was not to be. We were greedy and so was 
England. The connection between England and India w as based clearly upon and error. 
But she does not remain in India in error. It is he r declared policy that India is to be India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  held in trust for her people. If this be true, Lanc ashire must stand aside. And If the 
Swadeshi doctrine is a sound doctrine, Lancashire c an stand aside without hurt, though 
of Swadeshi not as a boycott movement undertaken by way of revenge. I conceive it as 
a religious principle to be followed by all. I am n o economist, but I have read some 
treatises which show that England could easily beco me a self-sustained country, 
growing all the produce she needs. This may be utte rly ridiculous proposition, and 
perhaps the best proof that it cannot be true, is t hat England is one of the largest 
importers in the world. But India cannot live for La ncashire or any other country before 
she is able to live for herself. And she can live fo r herself only if she produces and is 
helped to produce everything for her requirements w ithin her own borders. She need 
not be, she ought not be, drawn into the vortex of m ad and ruinous competition which 
breeds fratricide, jealousy and many other evils. Bu t who is to stop her great 
millionaires from entering into the public opinion and proper education, however, can 
do a great deal in the desired direction. The handl oom industry is in a dying condition. 
I took special care during my wanderings… to see as  many weavers as possible, and my 
heart ached to find how they had lost, how families  had retired from this once 
flourishing and honourable occupation. 
If we follow the Swadeshi doctrine, it would be you r duty and mine to find out 
neighbours who can supply our wants and to teach th em to supply them where they do 
not know how to proceed, assuming that there are ne ighbours who are in want of 
healthy occupation. Then every village of India will almost be a self-supporting and 
self-contained unit, exchanging only such necessary  commodities with other villages as 
are not locally producible. This may all sound nons ensical. Well, India is a country of 
nonsense. It is nonsensical to parch one’s throat w ith thirst when a kindly 
Muhammedan is ready to offer pure water to drink. A nd yet thousands of Hindus would 
rather die of thirst than drink water form a Muhamm edan household. These nonsensical 
men can also, once they are convinced that their re ligion demands that they should 
wear garments manufactured in India only and eat fo od only grown in India, decline to 
wear any other clothing or eat any other food. 
There is a verse in the Bhagavadgita which, freely r endered, means masses follow the 
classes. It is easy to undo the evil if the thinkin g portion of the community were to 
take the Swadeshi vow, even though it may for a time cause considerable 
inconvenience. I hate best it is the lesser evil. But  I would tolerate, welcome goods. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  Natal, a British colony, protected its sugar by tax ing the sugar that came from another 
British colony, Mauritius; England has sinned again st India by forcing free trade upon 
her. It may have been food for her, but it has been  poison for this country. 
It has often been urged that India cannot adopt Swa deshi in the economic life at any 
rate. Those who advance this objection do not look u pon Swadeshi as rule of life. With 
them it is a mere patriotic effort-not to be mad if  it involved any self-denial. 
Swadeshi, as defined here, is a religious disciplin e to be undergone in utter disregard 
of the physical discomfort it may cause to individua ls. Under it spell the deprivation of 
a pin or a needle, because these are not manufactur ed in India, need cause no terror. 
A Swadeshi will learn to do without hundreds of thi ngs which today he considers 
necessary. Moreover, those who dismiss Swadeshi from  their minds by arguing the 
impossible, forget that Swadeshi, after all, is a g oal to be reached by steady effort. 
And we would be making for the goal even if we confi ned Swadeshi to a given set of 
articles allowing ourselves as  a temporary measure to use such things as might not 
procurable in the country. 
There now remains for me to consider one more objec tion that has been raised against 
Swadeshi. The objectors consider it to be a most se lfish doctrine without any warrant 
in the civilized code of morality. With them to prac tice Swadeshi is to revert to 
barbarism. I cannot enter into a detailed analysis of the proposition. But I would urge 
that Swadeshi is the only doctrine consistent with the law of humility and love. It is 
arrogance to think of launching out to serve the wh ole of family. It was better to 
concentrate my effort upon the family and consider that though them I was serving the 
whole nation and, if you will, the whole of humanit y. This is humility and it is love. 
The motive will determine the quality of the act. I may serve my family regardless of 
the sufferings I may cause to others. As, for insta nce, I may accept an employment 
which enables me to extort money from people. I enr ich myself thereby and then 
satisfy many unlawful demands of the family. Here I  am neither serving the family nor 
the State. Or I may recognize that God has given me hands and feet only to work with 
for my sustenance and for that of those who may be dependent upon me. I would then 
at once simplify my life and that of those whom I c an directly reach. In this instance I 
would have served the family without causing injury to anyone else. Supposing that 
every one followed this mode of life, we should have at once and ideal state. All will 
not reach that state at the same time. But those of  us, who, realizing its truth, enforce India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  it in practice, will clearly anticipate and acceler ate the coming of that happy day. 
Under this plan of life, in seeming to serve India to the exclusion of every other 
country, I do not harm any other country. My patrio tism is both exclusive and inclusive. 
It is exclusive in the sense that in all humanity I confine my attention to the land of my 
birth, but is inclusive in the sense that my service is not of a competitive or 
antagonistic nature. Sic utere tuo ut alinum non la edas is not merely a legal maxim, 
but it is a grand doctrine of life. It is the key t  proper practice of Ahimsa or love. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 336-44  
 
Even Swadeshi like any other good thing can be ridde n to death if it is made a fetish. 
That is a danger that must be guarded against. To r eject foreign manufactures, merely 
because they are foreign and to go on wasting natio nal time and money in the 
promotion in one’s country of manufactures for whic h it is not suited, would be 
criminal folly and a negation of the Swadeshi spiri t. A true votary of Swadeshi will not 
harbor ill-will towards a foreigner and not be actu ated by antagonism towards anybody 
on the earth. Swadeshi is not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless service that 
has its roots in the purest Ahimsa, i.e., love. 
From Yervada Mandir, Chap.XVI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109   
Chapter 32 
COW PROTECTION 
The central fact of Hinduism is cow protection. Cow  protection to me is one of the 
most wonderful phenomena in human evolution. It take s the human being beyond his 
species. The cow to me means the entire sub-human w orld. Man through the cow is 
enjoined to realize his identity with all that lives . Why the cow was selected for 
apotheosis is obvious to me. The cow was in India th e best companion. She was the 
giver of plenty. Not only did she give milk, but she  also made agriculture in the gentle 
animal. She is mother to millions of Indian mankind . Protection of the cow means 
protection of the whole dumb creation of God. The a ncient seer, whoever he was, 
began with the cow. The appeal of the lower order o f creation is all the more forcible 
because it is speechless. Cow protection is the gif t of Hinduism to the world. And 
Hinduism will live so long as there are Hindus to pr otect the cow… 
Hindus will be judged not by their tilaks, not by t he correct chanting of mantras, not 
by their pilgrimages, not by their most punctilious  observances of caste rule but by 
their ability to protect the cow. 
Young India, 6-10-‘21  
 
Mother cow is in many ways better than the mother w ho gave us birth. Our mother 
gives us milk for a couple of years and then expects  us to serve her when we grow up. 
Mother cow expects from us nothing but grass and gr ain. Our mother often falls ill and 
expects service from us. Mother cow rarely falls ill . Hers is an unbroken record of 
service which does not end with her death. Our mothe r when she dies means expenses 
of burial or cremation. Mother cow is as useful dea d as when she is alive. We can make 
use of every part of her body her flesh, her bones, her intestine, her horns, and her 
skin. Well, I say this not to disparage the mother who gives us birth, but in order to 
show you the substantial reason for my worshipping the cow. 
Harijan, 15-9-‘40  
 
Criminal negligence is the only cause of the misera ble condition of our cattle. Our 
pinjrapoles, though they are an answer to our insti nct for mercy, are a clumsy India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110  demonstration of its execution. Instead of being mo del dairy-farms and great 
profitable national institutions, they are merely d epots for receiving decrepit cattle. 
Whilst professing the religion of cow protection, w e have enslaved the cow and her 
progeny, and have become slaves ourselves. 
Young India, 6-10’21  
 
But let me reiterate… the legislative prohibition is  the smallest part of any 
programmed of cow protection… People seem to think that when a law is passed 
against any evil, it will die without any further e ffort. There never was any grosser 
self-deception. Legislation is intended and is effe ctive against an ignorant or a small 
evil-minded minority; but no legislation which is op posed by an intelligent and 
organized public opinion, or under cover of religio n by a fanatical minority, can ever 
succeed. The more I study the question of cow prote ction, the stronger the conviction 
grows upon me, the protection of the cow and her pr ogeny can be attained, only if 
there is continuous and sustained constructive effor t along the lines suggested by me. 
Young India, 7-7-‘27  
 
Then how can the cow be saved without having to kill her off when she ceases to give 
the economic quantity of milk or when she becomes o therwise an uneconomic burden? 
The answer to the question can be summed up as foll ows: 
1. By the Hindus performing their duty towards the cow and her progeny. If they did 
so, our cattle would be the pride of India and the world. The contrary is the case 
today. 
2. By learning the science of cattle-breeding. Toda y there is perfect anarchy in this 
work. 
3. By replacing the present cruel method of castrat ion by the humane method 
practiced in the West. 
4. By thorough reform of the pinjarapoles of India which are today, as a rule, managed 
ignorantly and without any plan by men who do not k now their work. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  5. When these primary things are done, it will be f ound that the Muslims will, of their 
own accord, recognize the necessity, if only for th e sake of their Hindu brethren, of 
not slaughtering cattle for beef or otherwise. 
The reader will observe that behind the foregoing r equirement lies one thing and that 
is Ahimsa. If that supreme thing is realized, everyt hing else becomes easy. Where 
there is Ahimsa, there is infinite patience, inner calm, discrimination, self-sacrifice 
and true knowledge. Cow protection is not an easy t hing. Much money is wasted in its 
name. Nevertheless, in the absence of Ahimsa the Hi ndus have become destroyers 
instead of saviours of the cow. It is even more diff icult than the removal of foreign rule 
from India. 
(Note: The average quantity of milk that the cow in India yields is said to be roughly 
2lbs. per day, that of New Zealand 14lbs., of Engla nd 15lbs., of Holland 20lbs. The 
Index figure for health goes up in proportion to th e increase in the yield of milk.) 
Harijan, 31-8-‘47  
 
I am amazed at our partiality for buffalo milk and ghee. Our economics is short-
sighted. We look at the immediate gain, but we do n ot realize that in the last analysis 
the cow is the more valuable animal. Cow’s butter ( and ghee) has a naturally yellowish 
colour which indicates its superiority to buffalo b utter (and ghee) in carotene. It has a 
flavour all its own. Foreign visitor’s cow’s milk the y get there. Buffalo milk and butter 
are almost unknown in Europe. It is only in India t hat one finds a prejudice in favour of 
buffalo milk and ghee. This has spelt all but extin ction of the cow, and that is why I 
say that, unless we put an exclusive emphasis on the  cow, she can onto be saved. 
Harijan, 8-2-‘42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112   
Chapter 33 
CO-OPERATIVE CATTLE-FARMING 
It is quite impossible for an individual farmer to l ook after the welfare of his cattle in 
his own home in a proper and scientific manner. Amo ngst other causes lack of 
collective effort has been a principal cause of the deterioration of the cow and hence 
of cattle in general. 
The world today is moving towards the ideal of colle ctive or co-operative effort in 
every department of life. Much in this line has been  and is being accomplished. It has 
come into our country also, but in such a distorted  form that our poor have not been 
able to reap its benefits. Pari passu with the incr ease in our population land holdings of 
the average farmers are daily decreasing. Moreover, what the individual possesses in 
often fragmentary. For such farmers to keep cattle in their homes is a suicidal policy; 
and yet this is their condition today. Those who gi ve the first place to economics and 
pay scant attention to religious, ethical or humani tarian considerations proclaim from 
the house-tops that the farmer is being devoured by  his cattle due to the cost of their 
feed which is out of all proportion to what they yi eld. They say it is folly not to 
slaughter wholesale all useless animals. 
What then should be done by humanitarians is the qu estion. The answer obviously is to 
find a way whereby we may not only save the lives of  our cattle but also see that they 
do not become a burden. I am sure that co-operative effort can help us in a large 
measure. 
The following comparison may he helpful: 
1. Under the collective system no farmer can keep cattl e in his house as he does 
today. They foul the air, and dirty the surrounding s. There is neither intelligence 
nor humanitarianism in living with animals. Man was  not meant to do so. The space 
taken up by the cattle today would be spared to the  farmer and his family, if the 
collective system were adopted 
2. As the number of cattle increases, life becomes imp ossible to the farmer in his 
home. Hence he is obliged to sell the calves and kil l the male buffaloes or else turn 
them out to starve and die. This inhumanity would be  averted if the care of the 
cattle were under taken on a co-operative basis. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  3. Collective cattle-farming would ensure the supply o f veterinary treatment to 
animals when they are ill. No ordinary farmer can a fford this on his own. 
4. Similarly one selected bull can be easily kept for the need of several cows under 
the collective system. This is impossible otherwise except for charity. 
5. Common grazing ground or land for exercising the an imals will be easily available 
under the co-operative system, whereas today genera lly there is nothing of the kind 
for individual farmers. 
6. The expenses on fodder will be comparatively far les s under the collective system. 
7. The sale of milk at good prices will be greatly fac ilitated and there will be no need 
or temptation for the farmer to adulterate it as he  does as an individual. 
8. It is impossible to carry out tests of the fitness of every head of cattle individually, 
but this could easily be done for the cattle of a w hole village and would thus make 
it easier to improve the breed. 
9. The foregoing advantages should be sufficient argume nt in favour of co-operative 
cattle-farming. The strongest argument in its favour  is that the individualistic 
system has been the means of making our own conditi on as well as that of our 
cattle pitiable. We can only save ourselves and them by making this essential 
change. 
I firmly believe too that we shall not derive the fu ll benefits of agriculture until we 
take to co-operative farming. Does it not stand to r eason that it is far better for a 
hundred families in a village to cultivate their land s collectively and divide the income 
therefrom than to divide the land anyhow into a hund red portions? And what applies to 
land applies equally to cattle. 
It is quite another matter that it may be difficult  to convert people to adopt this way 
of life straightaway. The straight and narrow road is always hard to traverse. Every 
step in the programme of cow service is strewn with thorny problems. But only by 
surmounting difficulties can we hope to make the pa th easier. My purpose for the time 
being is to show the great superiority of collective  cattle-farming over the individual 
effort. I hold further that the latter is wrong and  the former only is right.  In reality 
even the individual can only safeguard his independen ce through co-operation. In 
cattle-farming the individual effort has led to self ishness and inhumanity, whereas the 
collective effort can abate both the evils, if it do es not remove them altogether. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  Harijan, 15-2-‘42  
 
The excreta of animals and human beings mixed with refuse can be turned into golden 
manure, itself a valuable commodity. It increases th e productivity of the soil which 
receives it. Preparation of this manure is itself a village industry. But this, like all 
village industries cannot give tangible results unles s the crores of India co-operated in 
reviving them and thus making India prosperous. 
Delhi Diary, pp. 270-71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115   
Chapter 34 
VILLAGE SANITATION 
Divorce between intelligence and labour has resulted  in criminal negligence of the 
villages. And so, instead of having graceful hamlets dotting the land, we have dung-
heaps. The approach to many villages is not a refres hing experience. Often on would 
like to shut one’s eyes and stuff one’s nose; such is the surrounding dirt and offending 
smell. If the majority of Congressmen were derived from our villages, as they should 
be, they should be able to make our villages models of cleanliness in every sense of the 
word. But they have never considered it their daily l ives. A sense of national or social 
sanitation is not a virtue among us. We may take a kind of a bath, but we do not mind 
dirtying the well or the tank or the river by whose side or in which we perform 
ablutions. I regard this defect as a great vice whi ch is responsible for the disgraceful 
state of our village and the sacred banks of the sac red rivers and for the diseases the 
spring from insanitation. 
The things to attend to in the villages are cleaning  tanks and wells and keeping them 
clean, getting rid of dung-heaps. If the workers wi ll begin the work themselves, 
working  like paid bhangis from day to day and alwa ys letting the villagers know that 
they are expected to join them so as ultimately to do the whole work themselves, they 
may be sure that they will find that the villagers w ill sooner or later co-operative. 
Lanes and streets have to be cleansed of all the ru bbish, which should be classified. 
There are portions which can be turned into manure,  portions which have simply to be 
buried and portions which can be directly turned in to wealth. Every bone picked up is 
valuable raw material from which useful articles can  be made or which can be crushed 
into rich manure. Rags and waste-paper can be turne d into paper, and excreta picked 
up are golden manure for the village fields. The way  to treat the excreta is to mix 
them, liquid as well as solid, with superficial ear th in soil dug no deeper than one foot 
at the most. In his book on rural hygiene, Dr. Poor e says that excreta should be buried 
in earth no deeper than nine to twelve inches (I am  quoting from memory). The author 
contends that superficial earth is charged with min ute life, which, together with light 
and air which easily penetrate it, turn the excreta  into good soft sweet-smelling soil 
within week. Any villager can test this for himself.  The way to do it is either to have 
fixed latrines, with earthen or iron buckets, and e mpty the contents in properly India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  prepared places from day to day, or to perform the function directly on to the ground 
dug up in squares. The excreta can either be buried  in a village common or in 
individual fields. This can only be done by the co-o peration of the villagers. At the 
worst and enterprising villager can collect the excr eta and turn them into wealth for 
himself. At present, this rich manure, valued at la khs of rupees, runs to waste every 
day, fouls the air and brings disease into the barg ain. 
Village tanks are promiscuously used for bathing, w ashing clothes, and drinking and 
cooking purposes. Many village tanks are also used b y cattle. Buffaloes are often to be 
seen wallowing in them. The wonder is that, in spit e of this sinful misuse of village 
tanks, villages have not been destroyed by epidemics.  It is the universal medical 
evidence that this neglect to ensure purity of the w ater supply of villagers is 
responsible for many of the diseases suffered by th e villagers. 
This, it will be admitted, is a gloriously interest ing and instructive service, fraught 
with incalculable benefit to the suffering humanity  of India. I hope it is clear from my 
description of the way in which the problem should be tackled, that, given willing 
workers who will wield the broom and the shovel with  the same ease and pride as the 
pen and the pencil, the question of expense is almo st wholly eliminated. All the outlay 
that will be required is confined to a broom, a bas ket, a shovel and a pick-axe, and 
possibly some disinfectant. Dry ashes are, perhaps,  as effective a disinfectant as any 
that a chemist can supply. 
Harijan, 8-2-‘35  
 
An ideal Indian village will be so constructed as t o lend itself to perfect sanitation. It 
will have cottages with sufficient light and ventila tion built of a material obtainable 
within a radius of five miles of it. The cottages wi ll have courtyards enabling 
householders to plant vegetables for domestic use an d to house their cattle. The 
village lanes and streets will be free of all avoida ble dust it will have wells according 
to its needs and accessible to all. It will have ho uses of worship for all, also a common 
meeting place, a village common for grazing its catt le, a co-operative dairy, primary 
and secondary schools in which industrial education  will be the central fact, and it will 
have Panchayats for settling disputes. I will produc e its own grains, vegetables and 
fruits, and it’s won Khadi. This is roughly my idea  of a model village. In the present India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  circumstances its cottages will remain what they ar e with slight improvements. Given a 
good zamindar, where there is one, or co-operation among the people, almost the 
whole of the programme other than model cottages ca n be worked out at expenditure 
within the means of the villagers including the zami ndar and zamindars, without 
Government assistance. With that assistance there is  no limit to the possibility of 
village reconstruction. But my task just now is to d iscover what the villagers can do the 
help themselves if they have mutual co-operation and  contribute voluntary labour for 
the common good. I am convinced that they can, unde r intelligent guidance, double 
the village income as distinguished from individual income. There are in our village’s 
inexhaustible resources not for commercial purposes  in every case but certainly for 
local purposes in almost every case. The greatest tr agedy is the hopeless unwillingness 
of the villagers to better their lot. 
The very first problem the village workers will solve  is its sanitation. It is the most 
neglected of all the problems that baffle workers a nd that undermine physical well-
being and breed disease. If the worker became a volu ntary bhangi, he would begin by 
collecting night-soil and turning it into manure an d sweeping village streets. He will 
tell people how and where they should perform daily  functions and speak to them on 
the value of sanitation and the great injury caused  by its neglect. The worker will 
continue to do the work whether the villagers liste n to him or no. 
Harijan, 9-1-‘37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118   
Chapter 35 
VILLAGE HEALTH 
I hold that where the rules of personal, domestic a nd public sanitation are strictly 
observed and due care is taken in the matter of diet  and exercise, there should be no 
occasion for illness or disease. Where there is abs olute purity, inner and outer, illness 
becomes impossible. If the village people could but understand this, they would not 
need doctors, hakims or vaidyas. 
Harijan, 26-5-‘46  
 
Nature cure implies and ideal mode of life and that  in its turn presupposes ideal living 
conditions in towns and villages. The name of God is , of course, the hub round which 
the nature cure system revolves. 
Nature cure implies that the treatment should be th e cheapest and the simplest 
possible. The ideal is that such treatment should b e carried out in the villages. The 
villagers should be able to provide the necessary mea ns and equipments. What cannot 
be held in the villages should be procured. Nature c ure does mean a change for the 
better in one’s outlook on life itself. It means re gulation of one’s life in accordance 
with the laws of health. It is not a matter of taki ng the free medicine from the 
hospitals or for fees. A man who takes free treatme nt from the hospital accepts 
charity. The man who accepts nature cure never begs.  Self-help enhances self-respect. 
He takes steps to cure himself by eliminating poiso ns from the system and takes 
precautions against falling ill in the future. 
Right diet and balanced diet are necessary. Today o ur villages are as bankrupt as we 
are ourselves. To produce enough vegetables, fruits and milk in the villages, is an 
essential part of the nature cure scheme. Time spen t on this should not be considered 
a waste. It is bound to benefit all the villages and  ultimately the whole of India. 
Harijan, 2-6-‘46  
 
The essence of nature cure is that we learn the pri nciples of hygiene and sanitation 
and abide by those laws as well as the laws relatin g to proper nutrition. Thus does 
every one become his own doctor. The man who eats to  live, who is friends with the India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  five powers, earth, water, ether, sun and air and wh o is a servant of God, the Creator 
of all these, ought not to fall ill. If he does, he  will remain calm relying on God and die 
in peace, if need be. If there are any medicinal he rbs in the fields of this village he 
may make use of them. Crores live and die like this without a murmur. They have not 
so much as heard of a doctor, much less seen one fa ce to face. Let us become really 
village-minded. Village children and adults come to us. Let us teach them how to live 
truly. Doctors aver that 99% of disease springs fro m insanitation, from eating the wrong 
food and from under-nourishment. If we can teach th is 99% the art of living, we can 
afford to forget the 1%.... They may find a philant hropic doctor…to look after them. 
We need not worry about them. Today pure water, goo d earth, fresh air are unknown 
to us. We do not know the inestimable value of ethe r and the sun. If we make use of 
these five powers and if we eat the proper and balan ced diet, we shall have doe the 
work of ages. For acknowledging this knowledge, we need neither degrees nor crores 
of money. What we need are a living faith in God, a zeal for service, an acquaintance 
with the five powers of nature and knowledge of die tetics. All this can be acquired 
without wasting time in schools and colleges. 
Harijan, 1-9-’46  
 
Disease springs from a willful or ignorant breach o f the laws of nature. It follows, 
therefore, that timely return to those laws should mean restoration. A person, who has 
tried nature beyond endurance, must either suffer t he punishment inflicted by nature 
or in order to avoid it, seek the assistance of the  physician or the surgeon as the case 
may be. Every submission to merited punishment stre ngthen the mind of men, every 
avoidance saps it. 
Harijan, 15-9-‘46  
 
I would like to know what the medical men and scien tist are doing for the country. One 
finds them readily going to foreign lands to learn new modes of treating special 
diseases. I suggest that they should turn their att ention towards the seven lakhs of the 
villages of India. They would immediately discover th at all the qualified men and 
women are required for village service, not after the  manner of the East. They will 
then adapt themselves to many indigenous systems. In dia does not need imported India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120  drugs from the West when she has an inexhaustible s tock of a variety of drugs grown in 
the villagers themselves. Bt more than drugs they h ave to teach the people the right 
mode of living. 
Harijan, 15-6-‘47  
 
My nature cure is designed solely for villagers and  villages. Therefore, there is no place 
in it for the microscope, X-rays and similar things . Nor is there room in nature cure for 
medicines, such as quinine, emetin and penicillin, Personal hygiene and healthy living 
are of primary importance. And these should suffice . If everyone could achieve 
perfection in this art, there could be no disease. And, while obeying all the laws of 
Nature in order to cure illness, if it does come, t he sovereign remedy ever lies in 
Ramanama. But this cure through Ramanama cannot bec ome universal in the twinkling 
of an eye. To carry conviction to the patient, the p hysician has to be a living 
embodiment of the power of Ramanama. 
Harijan, 11-8-‘46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121   
Chapter 36 
Polished v. unpolished Rice  
If rice can be pounded in the villages after the old  fashion the wages will fill the 
pockets of the rice pounding sisters and the rice e ating millions will get some 
sustenance from the unpolished rice instead of pure  starch which the polished rice 
provides. Human greed, which takes no count of the h ealth or the wealth of the people 
who come under its heels, is responsible for the hi deous rice-mills one sees in all the 
rice-mills an impossibility by simply insisting on unpolished rice and appealing to the 
owners of rice-mills to stop a traffic that undermi nes the health of a whole nation and 
robs the poor people of an honest mean of livelihood . 
Harijans, 26-10-‘44  
 
Whole-wheat  
That branless (wheat) flour is as bad as polished r ice is the universal testimony of 
medical men. Whole-wheat flour ground in one’s won chakki is any day superior to, 
and cheaper then, the fine flour to be had in the b azaars. It is cheaper because the 
cost of grinding is saved. Again, in the whole-wheat  flour there is no loss of weight. In 
fine flour there is loss of weight. The richest par t of wheat is contained in its bran. 
There is a terrible loss of nutrition when the bran  of wheat is removed. The villagers 
and other who eat whole wheat flour ground in their  own chakkis save their money 
and, what is more important, their health. A large part of the millions that flour-mills 
make will remain in and circulate among the deservi ng poor when village grinding is 
revived. 
Harijan, 1-2-‘35  
 
Gur  
According to the medical testimony…gur is any day s uperior to refined sugar in food 
value, and if the villagers cease to make gur as the y are beginning to do they will be 
deprived of and important food adjunct for their chi ldren. They may do without gur 
themselves, but their children cannot without underm ining their stamina…. Retention India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  of gur and its use by the people in general means s everal crores of rupees retained by 
the villagers. 
Harijan,1-2-‘35  
 
Green Leaves  
Take up any modern text-books on food or vitamins, and you would find in it a strong 
recommendation to take a few edible green leaves un cooked at every meal. Of course, 
these should always be well washed half a dozen tim es to remove all dirt. These leaves 
are to be had in every village for the trouble of pi cking. And yet greens are supposed 
to be only a delicacy of cities. 
Villagers in many parts of India live on dal and ric e or roti, and plenty of chillies, which 
harm the system. Since the economic re-organization  of villages has been commenced 
with food reform, it is necessary to find out the s implest and cheapest foods that 
would enable villagers to regain lost health. The a ddition of green leaves to their 
meals will enables villagers to avoid many diseases from which they are now suffering. 
The villagers’ food is deficient in vitamins; many of  them can be supplied by fresh 
green leaves. I had introduced to me the leaves of sa rsav, suva, turnip-tops, carrot-
tops, radish-tops and pea-nut leaves. Besides these,  it is hardly necessary to state that 
the radish, turnip and carrot tubers are also known  to be edible in their raw state. It is 
waste of money and ‘good’ taste to cook these leave s or tubers. The vitamins 
contained in these vegetables are wholly or partial ly lost in cooking. I have called 
cooking these wastes of ‘good’ taste, because the u ncooked vegetables have a natural 
good taste of their own which is destroyed by cooki ng. 
Harijan, 15-2-‘35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123   
Chapter 37 
THE VILLAGE WORKER 
The village work frightens us. We who are town-bred find it trying to take to the 
village life. Our bodies in many cases do not respon d to the hard life. But it is a 
difficulty which we have to face boldly, even heroic ally, if our desire is to establish 
Swaraj for the people, not substitute one class rul e by another, which may be even 
worse. Hitherto the villagers have died in their tho usands so that we might live. Now 
we might have to die so that they may live. The diff erence will be to die so that they 
may live. Now we might have to die so that they may live. The difference will be 
fundamental. The former have died unknowingly and i nvoluntary. Their enforced 
sacrifice has degraded us. If now we die knowingly and willingly, our sacrifice will 
ennoble us and the whole nation. Let us not flinch from the necessary sacrifice, if we 
will live as an independent self-respecting nation. 
Yong India, 17-4’24  
 
There is no school equal to a decent home and no te achers equal to honest, virtuous 
parents. Modern (high school) education is a dead-w eight on the villagers. Their 
children will never be able to get it, and thank God , they will never miss it if they have 
the training of a decent home. If the village worker  is not a decent home, he or she 
had better not aspire after the high privilege and honour of becoming a village 
worker… What they need is not a knowledge of the th ree R’s but a knowledge of their 
economic life and how they can better it. They are today working as automations, 
without any responsibility whatsoever to their surro unding and without feeling the joy 
of work. 
Villages have suffered long from neglect by those wh o have had the benefit of 
education. They have chosen the city life. The villag e movement is an attempt to 
establish healthy contact with the spirit of service  to settle in them and find self-
expression in the service of villagers… Those who h ave settled in villages in the spirit 
of service are not dismayed by the difficulties faci ng them. They knew before they 
went that they would have to contend against many di fficulties including even 
sullenness on the part of villagers. Only those, the refore, who have faith in themselves 
and in their mission will serve the villagers and in fluence their lives. A true life live India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124  amongst the people is in itself an object-lesson th at must produce its own effect upon 
immediate surroundings.  The difficulty with the yo ung man is, perhaps, that he has 
gone to the village merely to earn a living without t he spirit of service behind it. I 
admit that village life does not offer attractions t o those who go there in search of 
money. Without the incentives of service village life  would jar after the novelty has 
worn out. No young man having gone to village may aba ndon the pursuit on the 
slightest contact with difficulty. Patient effort c ity-dweller and that they will respond 
to kindliness and attention. It is no doubt true th at one does not have in the villagers 
the opportunity of contact with the great ones of t he land. With the growth of village 
mentality the leaders will find it necessary to tou r in the villages and establish a living 
touch with them. Moreover the companionship of the g reat and the good is available to 
all through the works of saints like Chaitanya, Ram akrishna, Tulsidas, Kabir, Nanak, 
Dadu, Tukaram, Tiruvallavar, and others too numerous  to mention though equally 
known and pious. The difficulty is to get the mind turned to the reception of 
permanent values. If it is modern thought-political,  social, economical, scientific-that 
is meant, it is possible to procure literature that  will satisfy curiosity. I admit, to 
procure literature that will satisfy curiosity. I a dmit, however, that one does not find 
such as easily as one finds religious literature. S aints wrote and spoke for the masses. 
The vogue fro translating modern thought to the mass es in an acceptable manner has 
not yet quite set in. But it must come in time. I w ould, therefore advise young men… 
not to give in but persist in their effort and by th eir presence make the villages more 
livable and lovable. That they will do by serving the  villages in a manner acceptable to 
the villagers. Every-one their own labour and removin g illiteracy to the extent of their 
ability. And if their lives are clean, methodical a nd industrious, there is no doubt that 
the infection will spread in the villages in which they may be working. 
Harijan , 20-2-37 
 
Essential items of Village work  
If rural reconstruction were not to include rural s anitation, our villages would remain 
the muck-heaps that they are today. Village sanitat ion is a vital part of village life and 
is as difficult as it is important. It needs a hero ic effort to eradicate age-long 
insanitation. The village worker who is ignorant of the science of village sanitation, 
who is not a successful scavenger, cannot fit himsel f for village service. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125  It seems to be generally admitted that without the new the new or basic education the 
education of millions of children in India is well- nigh impossible. The village worker 
has, therefore, to master it, and become a basic ed ucation teacher himself. 
Adult education will follow in the wake of basic ed ucation as a matter of course. 
Where this new education has taken root, the childr en themselves become their 
parent’s teachers. Be that as it may, the village w orker has to undertaken adult 
education also. 
Woman is described as man’s better half. As long as  she has not the same rights in law 
as man, as long as the birth of a girl does not rec eive the same welcome as his mother, 
sister or daughter as the case may be, and look upo n her with respect. Only such a 
worker will command the confidence of the village pe ople. 
It is impossible for an unhealthy people to win Swa raj. Therefore we should no longer 
be guilty of the neglect of the health of our peopl e. Every village worker must have a 
knowledge of the general principles of health. 
Without a common language no nation can come into b eing. Instead of worrying 
himself with the controversy about Hindi-Hindustani and Urdu, the village worker will 
acquire a knowledge of the rashtrabhasha which shou ld be such as can be understood 
by both Hindus and Muslims. 
Our infatuation for English has made us unfaithful to provincial languages. If only as 
penance for this unfaithfulness the village worker should cultivate in the villagers a 
love of their won speech.  
He will have equal regard for tall the other languag es of India, and will learn the 
languages of the part where he may be working, and thus be able to inspire the 
villagers there with a regard for their own speech.  
The whole of this programme will however, be a struc ture on sand if it is not built on 
the solid foundation on sand if it is not built on the solid foundation of economic 
equality. Economic equality must never be supposed t o mean possession of an equal 
amount of worldly goods by everyone. It does not mea n, however, of worldly goods by 
everyone. It does mean, however, that everyone will h ave a proper house to live in, 
sufficient and balanced food to eat, and sufficient  Khadi with which to cover himself. 
It also means that the cruel inequality that obtain s today will be removed by purely 
non-violent means. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126  Harijan, 18-8-40  
 
Requisite Qualifications  
(The following are some qualifications prescribed b y Gandhiji for Satyagrahis. But as a 
village worker was according to him also t be a true  Satyagrahi, these qualifications 
may be regarded as applying also to a village worker .) 
1. He must have a living faith in God, for He is only R ock. 
2. He must believe in truth and non-violence as his cre ed and therefore have faith in 
the inherent goodness of human nature which he inhe rent goodness of human 
nature which he expects to evoke by his truth and lo ve expressed through his 
suffering. 
3. He must be leading a chaste life and be ready and w illing for the sake of his cause 
to give up his life and his possessions. 
4. He must be habitual Khadi-weaver and spinner. This is essential for India. 
5. He must be a teethtaller and be free from the use o f other intoxicants in order that 
his reason may be always unclouded and his mind con stant. 
6. He must carry out with a willing heart all the rule s of disciplines as may be laid 
down from time to time. The qualifications are not to be regarded as exhaustive. 
They are illustrative only. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127   
Chapter 38 
ALL-ROUND VILLAGE SERVICE 
A Samagra Gramsevak must know everybody living in the village and render them such 
service as he can. That does not mean that the worke r will be able to do everything 
single-handed. He will show them the way of helping  themselves and procure for them 
such help and materials as they require. He will tr ain up his own helpers. He will so 
win over the villagers that they will seek and follo w his advise. Supposing I go and 
settle down in a village with a ghani, I won’t be an  ordinary ghanchi earning 15-2- 
rupees a month. I will be a Mahatma ghanchi. I have used the word ‘Mahatma’ in fun 
but what I mean to say is that as a ghanchi. I will  become a model for the villagers to 
follow. I will be a ghanchi who knows the Gita and the Quran. I will be learned enough 
to teach their children. I may not be able to do so  for lack of time. The villagers will 
come to me and ask me: “Please make arrangements fo r our children’s education.” I 
will tell them: “I can find you a teacher but you w ill have to bear the expenses.” And 
they will be prepared to do so most willingly. I wi ll teach them spinning and when they 
come and ask me for the services of a weaver, I will find them a weaver on the same 
terms as I found the teacher. And the weaver will t each them how to weave their own 
cloth. I will inculcate in them the importance of h ygiene and sanitation and when they 
come and ask me for a sweeper, I will tell them: “I  will be your sweeper and I will 
train you all in the job.” This is my conception of  Samagra Gramseva. You may tell me 
that I will never find a ghanchi of this descriptio n in this age. Then I will say that we 
cannot hope to improve our villages in this age. Ta ke the example of a ghanchi in 
Russia. After all the man who runs oil mill is a gh anchi. He has money but this strength 
does not lie in his money.  Real strength lies in k nowledge. True knowledge gives a 
moral standing and moral strength. Everyone seeks t he advice of such a man. 
Harijan, 17-3-46  
 
Village Factions  
Alas for India that parties and factions are to be found in the villages as they are to be 
found in our cities. And when power politics enter our villages with less thought of the 
welfare to the welfare of the villages and more of using them for increasing the parties 
own power, this becomes a hindrance to the progress  of the villages rather than a India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128  help. I would say that whatever be the consequence,  we must make use as much as 
possible of local help and if we are free from the taint of power politics, we are not 
likely to go wrong. Let us remember that the Englis h-educated men and women from 
the cities have criminally neglected the villages of  India which are the backbone of the 
country. The process of remembering our neglect wil l induce patience. I have 
remembering our neglect will induce patience. I have  never gone to a single village 
which is devoid of an honest worker. We fail to find  him when we are not humble 
enough to recognize any merit in our village. Of cou rse, we are to steer clear of local 
politics and this we shall learn to do when we acce pt help from all parties and no 
parties, wherever it is really good. 
Harijan, 2-3-‘47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129   
Chapter 39 
A CALL TO YOUTH 
My hope lies in the youth the country. Such of them  as are prey to vice are not vicious 
by nature. They are helplessly and thoughtlessly dr awn to it. They must realize the 
harm that it has done them and society. They must u nderstand too that nothing but a 
rigorously disciplined life will save them and the c ountry form utter ruin. 
Young India, 9-7-‘25  
 
Above all, unless they visualize God and seek His aid  in keeping them from temptation, 
no amount of dry discipline will do them much good.  Seeing God face to face is to feel 
that He is enthroned in our hearts even as a child f eels a mother’s affection without 
needing any demonstration. 
Young India, 9-7-‘25  
 
Young men… claiming…to be the fathers for tomorrow,  should be the salt of the 
nation. If the slat loses its flavour wherewith shal l it be salted? 
Young India, 22-12-‘27  
 
Youth will be emotional all the world over. Hence t he utter necessity of preconceived 
and deliberate brahmacharya during the study period , i.e. at least 25 years. 
Harijan, 6-5-‘33  
 
Innocent youth is priceless possession not to be sq uandered away for the sale of 
momentary excitement miscalled pleasure. 
Harijan, 21-9-‘35  
 
Put all your knowledge, learning and scholarship in  one scale and truth and purity in 
the other and the latter will be far outweigh to ot her. The miasma of moral impurity 
has today spread among our school-going children an d like a hidden epidemic is 
working have among them. I therefore appeal to you, boys and girls, to keep your mind India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  and bodies pure. All your scholarship, all your stu dy of the scriptures will be in vain if 
you fail to translate their teachings into your dai ly life. I know that some of the 
teachers too do not lead pure and clean lives. To th em I say that even if they impart 
all the knowledge in the world to their students bu t inculcate not truth and purity 
among them, they will have betrayed them and instead  of raising them set them on the 
downward road to perdition. Knowledge with-out char acter is a power for evil only, as 
seen in the instances of so many ‘talented thieves’  and ‘gentlemen rascals’ in the 
world. 
Young India, 21-2-‘29  
 
I ask you (young men) to go to the villages and bur y yourselves there, not as their 
masters or benefactors, but as their humble servants . Let them know what to do and 
how to change their modes of living from our daily c onduct and way of living. Only 
feeling will be of no use just like stream which by  itself is of no account unless it is 
kept under proper control –when it becomes a mighty  force. I ask you to go forth as it 
becomes a mighty force. I ask you to go forth as me ssengers of God carrying balm for 
the wounded soul of India. 
Young India, 29-12-‘27  
 
As father of, you might say, many boys and girls, y ou might almost say of thousands of 
boys and girls, I want to tell you, boys, that afte r all you hold your destiny in your own 
hands. I do not care what you learn or what you do not learn in your school, if you will 
observe two conditions. One condition is that you mu st be fearlessly truthful against 
the heaviest odds under every circumstance imaginabl e. A truthful boy, a brave boy 
will never think of hurting even a fly. He will defe nd all the weak boys in his school 
and help, whether inside school or outside, all tho se who need his help. A boy who 
does no observe personal purity of mind and body and  action is a boy would always 
keep his mind pure, his eyes straight and his hands  unpolluted. You do not need to go 
to any school to learn these fundamental maxims of life, and if you will have this triple 
character with you, you will build on a solid found ation. 
With Gandhiji in Ceylon, p.109  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131  We are inheritors of a rural civilization. The vastn ess of our country, the vastness of 
the population, the situation and the climate of th e country have, in my opinion, 
destined it for a rural civilization. Its defects ar e well known, but not one of them is 
irremediable. To uproot it and substitute, unless w e are prepared by some drastic 
means to reduce the population from three hundred m illion to three or say even thirty. 
I can therefore suggest remedies on the assumption that we must perpetuate the 
present rural civilization and endeavour to rid it of  its acknowledged defects. This can 
only be done if the youth of the country will settl e down the village life. And if they 
will do this, they must reconstruct their life and pass every day of their vacation in the 
villages surrounding their college of high schools, and those who have finished their 
education or are not receiving any should think of s ettling down in villages. 
Young India, 7-11-‘29  
 
If the sense of shame that wrongly attaches to phys ical labour could be got rid of, 
there is enough work and to spare for young men and  women of average intelligence. 
Harijan, 1-3-‘35  
 
No labour is too mean for one who wants to earn an honest penny. The only thing is the 
readiness to use the hands and feet that God has gi ven us. 
Harijan 19-12-‘36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132   
Chapter 40 
THE NATIONS HEALTH, HYGIENE AND DIET 
It is established beyond doubt that ignorance and n eglect of the laws of health and 
hygiene are responsible for the majority of disease  to which mankind is heir. The very 
high death rate among us is no doubt due largely to  our gnawing poverty, but it could 
be mitigated if the people were properly educated a bout their health and hygiene. 
Mens sana in corpore sano is perhaps the first law for humanity. A healthy mi nd in a 
healthy body is a self-evident truth. There is an in evitable connection between mind 
and body. If we were in possession of healthy minds , we would shed all violence and, 
naturally obeying the laws of health, we would have  healthy bodies without an effort. 
The fundamental laws of health and hygiene are simp le and easily learnt. The 
difficulty is about their observance. Here are some:  
Think the purest thoughts and banish all idle and i mpure thoughts.  
Breathe the freshest air day and night. 
Establish a balance between bodily labour and menta l work. 
Stand erect, sit erect, and be neat and clean in ev ery one of your acts, and let these 
be an expression of your inner condition. 
Eat to live for service of fellow-men. Do not live fo r indulging yourselves. Hence your 
food must be just enough to keep your mind and body  in good order. Man becomes 
what he eats. 
Your water, food and air must be clean, and you wil l not be satisfied with mere 
personal cleanliness, but you will infect your surr oundings with the same three-fold 
cleanliness that you will desire for yourselves. 
Constructive Programme, pp.18-9  
 
Minimum Diet  
Use one grain at a time. Chapati, rice and pulses, milk, ghee, gur and oil are used in 
ordinary households besides vegetable and fruit. I r egard this, an unhealthy 
combination. Those who get animal protein in the sh ape of milk, cheese, eggs or meat 
need not use pulses at all, the poor people get onl y vegetable protein. If the well-to-India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  do give up pulses and oils, they set free these two essentials for the poor who get 
neither animal protein nor animal fat. Then the gra in eaten should not be sloppy. Half 
the quantity suffices when it is eaten dry and not dripped in gravy. It is well to eat 
with raw salads such as onion, carrot, radish, sala d leaves, tomatoes. An ounce or two 
of salads serve the purpose of eight ounces of cooke d vegetables. Chapatis or bread 
should not be eaten with milk. To begin with, one m eal may be raw vegetables and 
chapati or bread, and the other cooked vegetables wi th milk or curds. 
Sweet dishes should be eliminated altogether. Inste ad gur or sugar in small quantities 
may be taken with milk or bread or by itself. 
Fresh fruit is good to eat, but only a little is ne cessary to give tone to the system. It is 
an expensive article, and an over-indulgence by the well-to-do has deprived the poor 
and the ailing of an article which they need much m ore than the well-to-do. 
Any medical man who has studied the science of diet etics will certify that what I have 
suggested can do no harm to the body; on the contra ry it must conduce to better 
health. 
Harijan, 25-1-‘42  
 
The unlimited capacity of the plant world be sustai n man at his highest is a region yet 
unexplored by modern medical science which through force of habit pins its faith on 
the shambles or at least milk and it’s by products.  It is duty which awaits discharge by 
Indian medical men whose tradition is vegetarian. Th e fast developing researches 
about vitamins and the possibility of getting the mo st important of them directly from 
the sun bids fair to revolutionize many of the acce pted theories and beliefs 
propounded by medical science about food. 
Young India, 18-7’29  
 
It almost seems to me that it is reserved for lay en thusiasts to cut their way through a 
mountain of difficulties even at the risk of their l ives to find the truth. I should be 
satisfied if scientists would lend their assistance  to such humble seekers. 
Young India, 15-8-‘29  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134  I believe that man has little need to drug himself.  999 cases out of a thousand can be 
brought round by means of a well-regulated diet, wa ter and earth treatment and 
similar household remedies. 
Autobiography, p.270  
 
Instead of using the body as a temple of God we use  it as a vehicle for indulgences, 
and are not ashamed to run to medical men for help in our effort to increase them and 
abuse the earthly tabernacle. 
Young India, 8-8-‘29  
 
There is a great deal of truth in the saying that m an becomes what he eats. The 
grosser the food the grosser the body. 
Harijan, 5-8-‘33  
 
I do feel the spiritual progress does demand at som e stage that we should cease to kill 
our fellow creatures for the satisfaction of our bo dily wants. The beautiful lines of 
Goldsmith occur to me as I tell you of my vegetarian  fad: 
No flocks that range the valley free 
To slaughter I condemn, 
Taught by the Power that pities me 
I learn to pity them. 
India’s Case for Swaraj, p.402  
 
I do not regard flesh-food as necessary for us at a ny stage and under any clime in which 
it is possible for human beings ordinarily to live. I hold flesh-food to be unsuited to our 
species. We err in copying the lower animal world i f we are superior to it. Experience 
teaches that animal food in the formation of charac ter or in subjugating the flesh. Diet 
is a powerful factor not to be neglected. But to su m up all religion in terms of diet, as 
is often done in India, is as wrong as it is to dis regard all restraint in regard to diet and 
to give full reins to one’s appetite. Vegetarianism is one of the priceless gifts of 
Hinduism. It may not be lightly given up. It is nece ssary, therefore, to correct the error India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135  the vegetarianism has made us weak in mind or body or passive or inert in action. The 
greatest Hindu reformers have been the activist in th eir generation and they have 
invariably been vegetarians. Who could show greater activity than say Shankara or 
Dayananda in their times? 
Young India, 7-10-‘26  
 
When to Fast  
Out of the fullness of my own experience and that o f fellow cranks, I say without 
hesitation, fast (1) if you are constipated, (2) If  you are anaemic, (3) if you are 
feverish,(4) If you are rheumatic,(5) if you have a h eadache, (6) if you are rheumatic, 
(7) if you are gouty, (8) if you are fretting and f uming, (9) if you are depressed, (10) if 
you are overjoyed, and you will avoid medical prescri ption and patent medicines. 
Young India, 17-12-‘25  
 
National Food  
I believe that we should be able to accommodate our selves to the food eaten in the 
provinces other than our won. I know that this is no t so simple a question as it appears, 
I know southerners who have made a herculean effort to take to Gujarati food and 
failed. Gujaratis will not take to the southern mod e of cooking. Bengal produces 
dainties which the other provinces will not easily relish. If we would be national 
instead of provincial, we would have to have an inter change of habits as to food, 
simplify our tastes and produce healthy dishes all can take with impunity. This means a 
careful study of the food, taken by different provin ces, but there are different styles n 
the same province, among the different communities.  It is necessary, therefore, for 
national workers to study the foods and the methods  of preparing them in the various 
provinces and discover common, simple and cheap dishe s which all can take without 
upsetting the digestive apparatus. In any case, it must be a shame for workers not to 
know the manners and customs of different provinces  and communities….What can and 
should be aimed at are common dishes for common peo ple. This I know is easily if we 
should  be aimed at are easily possible, volunteers will have to learn the art of cooking 
and for this purpose they will have also to study t he values of different foods and 
evolve common dishes easily and cheaply prepared. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136  Harijan, 5-1-‘34  
 
Leprosy  
Leper is a word of bad odour. India is perhaps a ho me of lepers next only to Central 
Africa. Yet they are as much a part of society as t he tallest among us. But the tall 
absorb our attention though they are least in need of it. The Lot of the lepers who are 
much in need of attention is studied neglect. I am tempted to call it heartless, which it 
certainly is, in terms on non-violence. It is largel y the missionary who, be it said to his 
credit, bestows care on him. The only institution r un by a bestows care on him. The 
only institution run by an Indian, as a pure labour  of love, is by Shri Manohar Diwan 
near Wardha. It is working under the inspiration an d guidance of Shri Vinoba Bhave. If 
India is pulsating with new life, there would not b e a leper or beggar in India uncared 
for. What The leper is in India, that we are, if we  will but look about us, for the 
modern civilized world. Examine the condition of ou r brethren across the ocean and 
the truth of my remark will be borne home to us. 
Delhi Diary, p.108  
 
There are many other contagious diseases like scabi es, cholera, plague, even common 
cold. Leprosy is far less infectious perhaps than t hese. Why should there be a stigma 
about leprosy any more than about other infectious diseases? Real leprosy is attached 
to an unclean mind. To look down upon fellow human beings, to condemn any 
community or class of men, is a sign of a diseased mind, far worse than physical 
leprosy. Such men are real lepers of society. He hi mself did not attach much 
importance to names. A rose would not lose its frag rance if it was called by any other 
name. 
Delhi Diary, p.111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137   
Chapter 41 
DRINK AND DRUGS 
Liquor, as we say, is an invention of the devil. In  Islam it is said that when Satan began 
to beguile men and women he dangled before them the  “red water”. I have seen in so 
many cases that liquor has not only robbed men of t heir money but of their reason, 
they have for the time being forgotten the distincti on between wife and mother, 
lawful and unlawful. I have seen drunken barristers wallowing in gutters carried home 
by the police. I have found on two occasions captai ns of steamers so dead drunk as to 
be incapable of keeping charge of their boats till they came to their senses. For both 
flesh-meats and liquor the sovereign rule is “We mus t not live in order to eat and drink 
and be merry, but eat and drink in order to make ou r bodies temples of God and use 
them for service of man.” Liquor may be a medical ne cessity on occasions; and when 
life seems to be extinct it may be possible to prol ong it with a dose of liquor, but that 
is about all that can be said for it. 
India’s Case for Swaraj, P. 403  
 
You will not be deceived by the specious arguments that India must not be made sober 
by compulsion, and that those who wish to drink mus t have facilities provided for 
them. The state does not cater for the vices of its  people. We do not regulate or 
license houses of ill-frame. We do not provide faci lities for thieves to indulge their 
propensity for thieving. I hold drink to be more dam nable than thieving and perhaps 
even prostitution. Is it not often the parent of bot h? 
Young India, 8-6-‘21  
 
Drink is more a disease than a vice. I know scores of men who would gladly leave off 
drink if they could. I know some who have asked tha t the temptation might be put 
away from them. In spite of the temptation having be en put away at their instance, I 
have known them to steal drink. I do not, therefore,  think that it was wrong to have 
removed the temptation. Diseased persons have got to be helped against themselves. 
Young India, 12-1-‘28  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138  Having identified myself with labour, I know what ru in drink has bought to the homes 
of labourers given to drink. I know that they will n ot touch liquor if it was not within 
easy reach. We have contemporaneous evidence that dr inkers themselves are in many 
cases asking for prohibition. 
Harijan, 3-6-‘39  
 
The drink habit destroys the soul of man and tends to turn him into a beast, incapable 
of distinguishing between wife, mother and sister. I have seen men who forget this 
distinction under the influence of liquor. 
Harijan, 9-3-‘34  
 
The drink and the drug evil is in many respects infi nitely worse then the evil caused by 
malaria and the like; for, whilst the latter only i njure the body, the former saps both 
body and soul. 
Young India, 3-3-‘27  
 
I would rather have India reduced to a state of paup erism than have thousands of 
drunkards in our midst. I would rather have India wi thout education if that is the price 
to be paid for making it dry. 
Young India, 15-9-‘27  
 
Nothing but ruin stares a nation in the face that i s prey to the drink habit. History 
records that empires have been destroyed through tha t habit. We have it in India that 
the great community to which Shri Krishna belonged was ruined by that habit. This 
monstrous evil was undoubtedly one of the contribut ory factors in the fall of Rome. 
Young India, 4-4-29  
 
If I was appointed dictator for one hour for all In dia, the first thing I would do would be 
to close without compensation all the liquor shops,  and compel factory owners to 
produce humane conditions rooms where these workmen  would get innocent drinks and 
equally innocent amusements. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139  Young India, 25-6-‘31  
 
Toddy  
There is a school who favour limited and regulated c onsumption of alcohol and believe 
it to be useful. I have not found any weight in the ir argument. Even if we accept their 
view for a moment, we have still to face the fact th at innumerable human beings 
cannot be kept under discipline. Therefore, it beco mes our duty to prohibit alcoholic 
drinks even if it were only for the sake of this vast  majority. 
Parsis have strongly supported the use of toddy. Th ey say that although toddy is an 
intoxicant it is also a food and even helps to dige st other foodstuffs. I have carefully 
examined their argument and have read a fair amount of literature pertaining to this 
subject. But I have been a witness of the terrible s traits to which toddy reduces the 
poor and therefore I have come to the conclusion tha t it can have no place in man’s 
food. 
The advantages, attributed to toddy, are all availab le from other foodstuffs. Toddy is 
made out of Khajuri juice. 
Fresh Khajuri juice is not an intoxicant. It is kno wn as nira in Hindustani and many 
people have been cured of their constipation as a re sult of drinking nira. I have taken 
it myself. Though It did not act as a laxative with me, I found that it had the same food 
value as sugarcane juice. If one drinks a glass of n ira in the morning instead of tea 
etc., he should not need anything else the breakfas t. 
As in the case of sugarcane juice, palm juice can b e boiled to make palm jiggery. 
Khajuri is a variety of palm tree. Several varieties o f palm grow spontaneously in our 
country. All of them yield drinkable juice. As nira  gets fermented very quickly, it has 
to be used up immediately and therefore on the spot . Since this condition is difficult to 
fulfill except to a limited extent, condition is di fficult to fulfill except to a limited 
extent, in practice, the best use of nira is to con vert it into palm jiggery. Palm jiggery 
can well replace cane-juice jiggery. In fact some p eople prefer it to the latter. One 
advantage of palm jaggery over sugarcane jaggery is t hat it is less sweet and therefore 
one can eat more of it…. If the palms that are used  for making toddy are used for 
making jaggery, India will never lack sugar and the poor will be able to get good 
jaggery for very little money. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140  Palm jaggery can be converted into molasses and refi ned sugar. But the jaggery is 
much more useful than refined sugar. The salts pres ent in the jaggery are lost in the 
process of refining. Just as refined wheat flour an d polished rice lose some of their 
nutritive value because of the loss of the pericarp, refined sugar also loses some of the 
nutritive value of the jaggery. One may generalizes t hat all foodstuffs are richer if 
taken in their natural state as far as possible. 
Key to Health, pp.32-4  
 
Smoking  
I have a horror of smoking as of wines. Smoking I co nsider to be a vice. It deadens 
one’s conscience and is often worse than drink, in that it acts imperceptibly. It is a 
habit which is difficult to get rid of when once it  seizes hold of a person. It is an 
expensive vice. It fouls the breath, discolours teet h and sometimes even causes 
cancer. It is an unclean habit. 
Young India, 12-1-‘21  
 
Smoking is in a way a greater curse than drink, ina smuch as the victim does not realize 
its evil in time. It is not regarded as a sign of ba rbarism, it is even acclaimed by the 
civilized people. I can only say, let those who can,  give it up and set the example. 
Young India, 4-2-‘26  
 
Tobacco has simply worked havoc among mankind. Once  caught in its tangle, it is rare 
to find anyone get out again…. Tolstoy has called i t the worst of all intoxicants. 
In India people use tobacco for smoking, snuffing a nd also for chewing….Lovers of (or 
seekers after) health, if they are slaves to any evil  habits, will resolutely get out of the 
slavery. Several people are addicted to one, two or all the three of these habits. They 
do not appear loathsome to them. But if we think ov er it calmly, there is nothing 
becoming about blowing of smoke or keeping the mout h stuffed with tobacco and pan 
practically the whole day long or keep on opening t he snuffbox and take snuff every 
now and then. All the three are most dirty habits. 
Key to Health, pp. 39-42  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141   
Chapter 42 
URBAN SANITATION 
The one thing which we can and must learn from the West is the science of municipal 
sanitation. The peoples of the West have evolved a s cience of corporate sanitation and 
hygiene from which we have much to learn. We must m odify western methods of 
sanitation to suit our requirements. 
Young India, 26-12-‘24  
 
‘Cleanliness is next to godliness.’ We can no more gain God’s blessing with an unclean 
body than with an unclean mind. A clean body cannot  reside in an unclean city. 
Young India, 19-11-‘25  
 
No municipality can cope with insanitation and cong estion by the simple process of 
taxation and paid services. This vital reform is pos sible only by whole-sale and 
voluntary co-operation of the people both rich and p oor. 
Young India, 26-11-‘25  
 
It is not enough that we clear the villages which a re occupied by our Parish brethren. 
They are amenable to reason and persuasion. Shall w e have to say that the so called 
higher classes are not equally amenable to reason a nd persuasion and to hygienic laws 
which are indispensible in order to live a city-life ? In a village we may do many things 
with impunity but immediately we transfer ourselves  to crowded streets where we 
have hardly air to breathe, the life become changed,  and we have to obey another set 
of laws which immediately come into being. Do we do  that? It is no use saddling the 
municipality with the responsibilities for the cond ition in which we find…the central 
parts of every city in able to over-ride the habits of a class of people handed suggest 
that it is a question of sanitary reform in these b ig cities, which will be a hopeless task 
if we expect our municipalities to do this unaided by this voluntary work. Far be it 
from me to absolve the municipalities from their re sponsibilities. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 375-76  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  I consider myself a lover of municipal life. I thin k that it is a rare privilege for a person 
to find himself in the position of a municipal coun cilor but let me not down for you as 
a man with some experience in public life that one indispensable condition of that 
privilege is that the municipal councilors dare not approach their office from 
interested or selfish motives. They must approach t heir sacred task in a spirit of 
service. They should pride themselves upon calling th emselves scavengers. There is a 
significant expression for municipal corporation in  my mother tongue – Kachrapatti, 
which means literally scavenging department, and a m unicipality is nothing if it is not 
a premier scavenging department embracing all sphere s of public and social life of a 
city and if it is not saturated with the spirit sca venging, scavenging not merely by way 
looking after the physical sanitation of a city, bu t also the internal sanitation of its 
citizens. 
Young India, 28-3-‘29  
 
If I were a taxpayer within the jurisdiction of a l ocal board or a municipality, I would 
refuse to pay a single pie by way of additional tax ation and advise others to do likewise 
unless the money we pay is returned four-fold. Thos e who enter local boards and 
municipalities as representatives go there not to s eek honour or to indulge in mutual 
rivalries, but to render a service of love and that do es not depend upon money. Ours is 
pauper country. If our municipal councilors are imb ued with a real spirit of service, 
they will convert themselves into unpaid sweepers, bh angis and road-makers, and take 
pride a in doing so. They will invite their fellow-c ouncilor, who may not have come on 
the Congress ticket, to join them and if they have f aith in themselves and their 
mission, their example will not fail to evoke respon se. This means that a municipal 
councilor has to be a whole timer. He should have no  axe of his own to grind. The next 
step would be asked to make their contribution to m unicipal activities. A regular 
register should be maintained. Those who are too po or to make any money 
contribution but are able-bodied and physically fit  can be asked to give their free 
labour. 
Harijan, 18-2-‘39  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143  If night-soil was properly utilized, we would get m anure worth lakhs of rupees and also 
secure immunity from a number of diseases. By our b ad habits we spoil our sacred river 
banks and furnish excellent breeding grounds for fl ies, with the result that the very 
flies which through our criminal negligence settle upon uncovered night-soil defile our 
bodies after we have bathed. A small spade is the m eans of salvation from a great 
nuisance. Leaving night-soil, cleaning the nose, or spitting on the road is a sin against 
God as well as humanity, and betrays a sad want of consideration for others. The Man 
who does not cover his waste deserves a heavy penalty  even if he lives in a forest. 
Satyagraha in South Africa, p.240 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144   
Chapter 43 
EVIL WROUGHT BY THE FOREIGN MEDIUM 
To give millions knowledge of English is to enslave t hem. The foundation that Macaulay 
laid of education has enslaved us. I do not suggest that he had any such intention, but 
that has been the result…. Is it not a painful thin g that, if I want to go to a court of 
justice, I must employ the English language as a me dium; that, when I became a 
Barrister, I may not speak my mother tongue, and th at someone else should have to 
translate to me from my own language? Is not this a bsolutely absurd? Is it not a sign of 
slavery? Am I to blame the English for it or myself?  It is we, the English knowing men 
that have enslaved India. The curse of the nation wi ll rest not upon the English but 
upon us. 
Hind Swaraj, 1908  
 
The strain of receiving instruction through a forei gn medium is intolerable. Our 
children alone can bear it, but they have to pay fo r it. They become unfit to bear any 
other strain. For this reason our graduates are mos tly without stamina, weak, devoid of 
energy, diseased and mere imitators. Originally, re search, adventure, ceaseless effort, 
courage, dauntlessness and such other qualities have  become atrophied. We are thus 
incapacitated for undertaking new enterprises, and we are unable to carry them 
through if we undertaken any. Some who can give proo f of such qualities die an 
untimely death…. We the English-educated classes ar e unfit to ascertain the true 
measure of the harm done by the unnatural system. W e should get some idea of it if 
we realized how little we have reacted upon the mass es. 
The correspondence that should exist between the sc hool training and the character 
imbibed with the mother’s milk and the training rec eived through her sweet speech is 
absent when the school training is given through a foreign tongue. However pure may 
be his motives, he who thus snaps the cord that shou ld bind the school-life and the 
home-life is an enemy of the nation. We are traitor s to our mothers by remaining 
under such a system. The harm done goes much furthe r. A gulf has been created 
between the educated classes and the uneducated mas ses. The latter do not know us. 
We do not know the former. They consider us to be ‘ Saheblog’. They are afraid of us. 
They do not trust us…. Fortunately the educated cla ss seems to be walking up from its India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145  trance. They experience the difficulty of contact w ith the masses. How can they infect 
the masses with their own enthusiasm for the nation al cause? They cannot do so 
through English… Owing to the barrier thus created the flow of national life suffers 
impediment. 
The fact is that when English Occupies its proper p lace and the vernaculars receive 
their due, our minds which are today imprisoned wil l be set free and our brains though 
cultivated and trained, and yet being fresh, will n ot feel the weight of having to learn 
English as a language. And is my belief that Englis h thus learnt will be better than our 
English of today. 
When we receive our education through the mother ton gue, we should observe a 
different atmosphere in our homes. At present we ar e unable to make our wives co-
partners with us. They know little of our activity. Our parents do not know what we 
learn. If we receive instruction through the mother  tongue we should easily make our 
washermen, our barbers, and our family circle, not because the members of the family 
or the barbers are ignorant people. Their intellect  is as well trained as that of the 
English barber. We are able to discuss intelligentl y with them the events of 
Mahabharat, Ramayana and of our holy places. For th e national training flows in that 
direction. But we are unable to take home what we r eceive in our schools. We cannot 
reproduce before the family circle what we have lear nt through the English language. 
At the present moment the proceedings of our Legisl ative Councils are conducted in 
English. In many other institutions the same state of things prevails. We are, therefore, 
in the position of the miser who buries underground  all his riches… It is bought up as a 
charge against us that flows from the mountains-top s during the rainy season to go to 
waste, and similarly treat valuable manure worth la khs of rupees and get disease 
bargain. In the same manner, being crushed under th e weight of having to learn English 
and though want of far-sightedness, we are unable t o give the nation what it should 
receive at our hands. There is no exaggeration in th is statement. It is an expression of 
the feelings that are raging within me. We shall ha ve to pay dearly for our continuous 
disregard of the mother tongue. The nation has suff ered much by reason of it. It is the 
first duty of the learned class now to deliver the nation from the agony – From the 
presidential address to the Second Gujarat Educatio nal Conference held at Broach on 
October 20, 1917. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146  The greatest service we can render society is to fr ee ourselves and it from the 
superstitious regard we have learnt to pay to the l earning of the English language. It is 
the medium of instruction in our schools and colleg es. It is becoming the lingua franca 
of the country. Our best thought are expressed in i t…This belief in the necessity of 
English training has enslaved us. It has unfitted us  for true national service. Were it not 
for force of habit, we could not fail to see that b y reason of English being the medium 
of instruction, our intellect has been segregated; we have been engaged these past 
sixty years in memorizing strange words and their p ronunciation instead of assimilating 
facts. In the place of building upon the foundation , training received from our parents, 
we have almost unlearnt it. There is no parallel to this in history. It is a national 
tragedy. The first and greatest Social Service we ca n render is to revert our 
vernaculars, to restore Hindi to its natural place a s the National Language and begin 
carrying on all our provincial proceedings in our re spective vernaculars and national 
proceedings in Hindi. We ought not to rest till our  schools and colleges give us 
instruction when our legislature will debate nation al affairs in the vernaculars or Hindi 
as the case may be. Hitherto the masses have been s trangers to their proceedings. The 
vernacular papers have tried to undo the mischief a little. But the task was beyond 
them. The Patrika reserves its being sarcasm, the Be ngalee its learning, for ears 
thinkers the presence in our midst of a Tagore or a  Bose or a Ray ought not to excite 
wonder. Yet the painful fact is that there are so f ew of them. – From the presidential 
address to the First All India Social Service Confe rence held at Calcutta on 27th 
December, 1917. 
It is my considered opinion that English education in the manner it has been given has 
emasculated the English-educated Indian, it has put  a sever strain upon imitators. The 
process of displacing the vernacular has been one of  the saddest chapters in the British 
connection. Rammohan Rai would have been a great ref ormer, and Lokmanya Tilak 
would have been a greater scholar, if they had not t o start with the handicap of having 
to think in English and transmit their thoughts chi efly in English. Their effect on their 
own people, marvelous as it was, would have been gr eater if they had been brought up 
under a less unnatural system. No doubt they both g ained from their knowledge of the 
rich treasures of English literature. But these sho uld have been accessible to them 
through their own vernaculars. No country can becom e a nation by producing a race of 
imitators. Think of what would have happened to the  English if they had not an India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147  authorized version of the Bible. I do believe that Ch aitanya, Kabir, Nanak, Guru 
Govindsing, Shivaji, Tilak. I know that comparisons a re odious. All are equally great in 
their own way. But judged by the results, the effec t of Rammohan and Tilak. I know 
that comparisons are odious. All are equally great in their own way. But judged by the 
results, the effect of Rammohan and Tilak on the ma sses is not so permanent or far-
reaching as that of the others more fortunately bor n. Judged by the obstacles they had 
to surmount, they were giants, and both would have b een greater by achieving results, 
if they had not been handicapped by the system unde r which they received their 
training. I refuse to believe that the Raja and the  Lokmanya could not have thought 
the thoughts they did without a knowledge of the En glish language is necessary for 
imbibing ideas of liberty, and developing accuracy o f thought. It should be 
remembered that there has been only one system of e ducation before the country for 
the past fifty years, and only one medium of expres sion forced on the country. We 
have, therefore, no data before us as to what we wou ld have been but for the 
education in the existing schools and colleges. Thi s, however, we do know that India 
today is poorer than fifty years ago, less able to defend herself, and her children have 
less stamina. I need to be told that this is due to  the defect in the system of 
Government. The system of education is its most defe ctive part. 
It was conceived and born in error, for the English  rulers honestly believed the 
indigenous system to be worse then useless. It has been nurtured in sin, for the 
tendency has been to dwarf the Indian body, mind an d soul. 
Young India, 27-4-‘21  
 
Reply to Tagore  
… English is today studied because of its commercia l and so-called political value. Our 
boys think, and rightly in the present circumstance s that without English they cannot 
get Government service. Girls are taught English as  a passport to marriage. I know 
several instances of women wanting to learn English so that they may be able to talk to 
Englishmen in English. I know husbands who are sorr y that their wives cannot talk to 
them and their friends in English. I know families in which English is being made the 
mother tongue. Hundreds of youth believe that withou t a knowledge of English, 
freedom for India is practically impossible. The ca nker has so eaten into the society India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  that in many cases, the only meaning of Education i s a knowledge of English. All these 
are for me signs of our slavery and degradation. It is unbearable to me that the 
vernaculars should be crushed and starved as they have  been. I cannot tolerate the 
idea of parents writing to their children, or husba nds writhing to their wives, not in 
their vernacular but in great Poet. I do not want my  house to be stuffed. I want the 
cultures of all the lands to be blown about my hous e as freely as possible. But I refuse 
to be blown off my feet by any. I refuse to live in other people’s houses as an 
interloper, a beggar or a slave. I refuse to put the  necessary strain of learning English 
upon my sisters for the sake of false pride or ques tionable social advantage. I would 
have our young men and young women world languages a s thy like, and the expect 
them to give the benefits of their learning to India  and to the world, like a Bose, a Roy 
or the Poet himself. But I would not have a single Indian to forget, neglect or be 
ashamed of his mother tongue, or to feel that he or  she cannot think or express the 
best thoughts in his or her own vernacular. Mine is not a religion of the prison-house. It 
has room for the least among God’s creation. But it  is against insolence, pride of race, 
religion or colour. 
Young India, 1-6-‘21  
 
The foreign medium has cause brain fag, put an undu e strain upon the nerves of our 
children, made them crammers and imitators, unfitte d them for original work and 
thought, and disabled them for filtrating their lea rning to the family o the masses. The 
Foreign medium has made our children practically fo reigners in their own land. It is the 
greatest tragedy of the existing system. The foreig n medium has prevented the growth 
of our vernaculars. If I had the powers of a depot, I would today stop the tuition of our 
boys and girls through a foreign medium, and requir e all the teachers and professors on 
pain dismissal to introduce the change forthwith. I  would not wait for the preparation 
of textbooks. They will follow the change. It is an  evil that needs a summary remedy. 
Young India, 1-9-‘21  
 
But for the fact that the only higher education, th e only education worth the name has 
been received by us through the English medium, the re would be no need to prove 
such a self-evident preposition that the youth of a  nation t remain a nation must India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149  receive instruction including the highest in its own  vernacular or vernaculars. Surely, it 
is a self-demonstrated proposition that the youth o f a nation cannot keep or establish a 
living contact with the masses unless their knowledg e is received and assimilated 
through a medium understood by the people. Who can calculate the immeasurable loss 
sustained by the nation owing to thousands of its y oung men having been obliged to 
waste years in mastering a foreign language and its  idiom of which in their daily life 
they have the least use and in learning which they h ad to neglect their own mother 
tongue and their won literature? There never was a greater superstition than that a 
particular language can be incapable of expansion o f expressing abstruse or scientific 
ideas. A language is an exact reflection of the cha racter and growth of its speakers. 
Among the many evils of foreign rule, this blightin g imposition of a foreign medium 
upon the youth of the country will be counted by hi story as one of the greatest, It has 
sapped the energy of the nation, it has shortened t he lives of the pupils it .It ahs 
estranged them form the masses, it has made educati on unnecessarily expensive, If 
this process is still persisted in, it bids fair to  rob the nation of its soul. The sooner, 
therefore, educated India shakes itself free from t he hypnotic spell of the foreign 
medium, the better it would be for them and the peo ple. 
Young India, 5-7-‘28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150   
Chapter 44 
MY OWN EXPERIENCE 
Let me give a chapter form my own experience Up to t he age of 12 all the knowledge I 
gained was through Gujarati, my mother tongue. I kn ew then something of Arithmetic, 
History and Geography. Then I entered a High School , For the Fist three years the 
mother tongue was still the medium. But the school master’s business was to drive 
English into the pupil’s head. Therefore, more than  half of our time was given to 
learning English, and mastering its arbitrary spell ing and pronunciation. It was a painful 
discovery to have written. It was a strange experien ce to have to learn the spelling by 
heart. But that is by the way, and irrelevant to my argument. However, for the first 
three years it was comparatively plain sailing. 
The pillory began with the fourth year. Every thing had to be learnt through English – 
Geometry, Algebra, Chemistry, Astronomy, History, G eography. The tyranny of English 
was so great that even Sanskrit or Persian had to b e learnt through English, not through 
the mother tongue. If any boy spoke in the class in  Gujarati which he understood, he 
was punished. It did not matter to the teacher if a  boy spoke bad English which he 
could neither pronounce correctly nor understand fu lly. Why should the teacher worry? 
His own English was by no means without blemish. It  could not be otherwise. English 
was as much a foreign language to him as to his pup ils. The result was chaos. We the 
boy had to learn many things by heart, though we co uld not understand them fully and 
often not at all. My head used to reel as the teach er was struggling to make his 
exposition on Geometry understood by us. I could ma ke neither head nor tail of 
Geometry till we reached the 13th Theorem of the fi rst book of Euclid. And let me 
confess to the reader that in spite of all my love f or the mother tongue, I do not to this 
day know the Gujarati equivalents of the technical terms of Geometry, Algebra and the 
like. I know now that what I took four years to lea rn of Arithmetic, Geometry, Algebra, 
Chemistry and Astronomy, I should have learnt easily  in one year, if I had not to learn 
through English but Gujarati. My grasp of the subje cts would have been easier and 
clearer. My Gujarati vocabulary would have been ric her. I would have made use of such 
knowledge in my own home. This English medium creat ed an impassable barrier 
between me and the members of my family, who had no t gone through English schools. 
My father knew nothing of what I was doing. I could  not, even If I had wished it, India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  interest my father in what I was learning. For thou gh he had ample intelligence, he 
knew not a word of English. I was fast becoming a s uperior person. Even my dress 
began to undergo imperceptible changes. What happen ed to me was not an uncommon 
experience. It was common to the majority. 
The first three years in the High School made littl e addition to my stock of general 
knowledge. They were a preparation for fitting the boys for teaching them every thin 
thing through English. High Schools were schools fo r cultural conquest by the English. 
The knowledge gained by the three hundred boys of m y High School became a 
circumscribed possession. It was not for transmissi on to the masses. 
A word about literature. We had to learn several bo oks of English prose and English 
poetry. No doubt all this was nice. But the Knowled ge has been of no use to me in 
serving or bringing me in touch with the masses. I a m unable to say that if I had not 
learnt what I did of English prose and poetry, I sh ould have misses. I am unable to say 
that if I had not learnt what I did of English pros e and poetry, I should have missed a 
rare treasure. If I had, instead, passed those prec ious seven years in mastering Gujarati 
and have learnt Mathematics, Sciences, and Sanskrit and other subjects through 
Gujarati, I could easily have shared the knowledge s o gained with my habit of 
application and my inordinate love for the country and the mother tongue, made a 
richer and greater contribution to the service of th e masses? 
I must not be understood to decry English or its no ble literature. The columns of the 
Harijan are sufficient evidence of my love of Englis h. But the nobility of tits literature 
cannot avail the Indian nation any more than the tem perate climate or the scenery of 
England can avail her. India has to flourish in her won climate, and scenery, and her 
own literature, even though all the three may be in ferior to the English climate, 
scenery and literature. We and our children must bu ild on our own heritage. If we 
borrow another we impoverish our own. We can never gr ow on foreign victuals. I want 
the nation to have the treasures contained in that l anguage, and for that matter the 
other languages of the world, through its own vernac ulars. I do not need to learn 
Bengali in order to know the beauties of Rabindrana th’s matchless productions. I get 
them through good translation. Gujarati boys and gi rls do not need to learn Russian to 
appreciate Tolstoy’s short stories. They learn them  through good translations. It is the 
boast of Englishmen that the best of the world’s li teracy output is in the hands of that India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  nation in simple English inside of a week of its pu blication. Why need I learn English to 
get at the best of what Shakespeare and Milton thou ght and wrote? 
It would be good economy to set apart a class of st udents whose business would be to 
learn the best of what is to be learnt in the diffe rent languages of the world and give 
the translation in the vernaculars. Our masters chos e the wrong way for us, and habit 
has made the wrong appear as right. 
I find daily proof of the Increasing and continuing  wrong being done to the millions by 
our false de-Indian-izing education. These graduate s who are my valued associates 
themselves flounder when they have to give expressions  to their innermost thoughts. 
They are strangers in their own homes. Their vocabul ary in the mother tongue is so 
limited that they cannot always finish their speech  without having recourse to English 
words and even sentences. Nor can they exist withou t English books. They often write 
to one another in English. I cite the case of my co mpanions to show how deep the evil 
has gone. For we have made a conscious effort to men d ourselves. 
It has been argued that the wastage that occurs in our colleges need not worry us if, 
out of the collegians, one Jagdish Bose can be prod uced by them. I should freely 
subscribe to the argument, if the wastage was unavoi dable. I hope I have shown that it 
was and is even now avoidable. Moreover, the creation  of a Bose does not help the 
argument. For Bose was not a product of the present  education. He rose in spite of the 
terrible handicaps under which he had to labour. An d his knowledge became almost 
intransmissible to the masses. We seem to have come to think that no one can hope to 
be like a Bose unless he knows English. I cannot co nceive a grosser superstition than 
this. No Japanese feels so helpless as we seem to d o. 
The medium of instruction should be altered at once  and at any cost, the provincial 
language being given their rightful place. I would p refer temporary chaos in higher 
education to the criminal waste that is daily accum ulating. 
In order to enhance the status and market-value of ht provincial languages, I would 
have the language of the law courts to be language o f the province where the court is 
situated. The proceedings of the provincial legislat ure must be in the language, or 
even the languages of the province where a province ha s more than one language 
within its borders. I suggest to the legislators th at they could, by enough application, 
inside of a month, understand the languages of thei r provinces. There is nothing to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  prevent a Tamilian from easily learning the simple g rammar and a few hundred words 
of Telugu, Malayalam, and Kanarese all allied to a Tamil. At the centre Hindustani 
must rule supreme. 
In my opinion this is not question to be decided by  academicians. They cannot decide 
through what language the boys and girls of a place  are to be educated. That question 
is already decided for them in every free country. Nor can they decide the subjects to 
be taught. That depends upon the wants of the count ry to which they belong. Theirs is 
a privilege of enforcing the nation’s will in the b est manner possible. When this 
country becomes really free, the question of medium  will be settled only one way. The 
academicians will frame the products of the educati on of a free India will answer the 
requirement of the country as today they answer tho se of the foreign ruler. So long as 
we the educated classes play with this question, I very much fear we shall not produce 
the free and healthy India of our dream. We have to grow by strenuous effort out of 
our bondage, whether it is educational, economical,  social or political. The effort itself 
is three-fourths of the battle. 
Harijan, 9-7-‘38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154   
Chapter 45 
INDIA’S CUTLTURAL HERITAGE 
Nothing can be further from my thought than that we  should become exclusive or erect 
barriers. But I do respectfully contend that an app reciation of other cultures can fitly 
follow, never precede, an appreciation and assimila tion of our own. It is my firm 
opinion that no culture has treasures so rich as ou rs has. We have not known it, we 
have been made even to deprecate its study and depre ciate its value. We have almost 
ceased to live it. An academic grasp without practi ce behind it is like an embalmed 
corpse, perhaps lovely to look at but nothing to ins pire or ennoble. My religion forbids 
me to belittle or disregard other cultures, as it i nsists under pain of civil suicide upon 
imbibing and living my own. 
Young India, 1-9-‘21  
 
It stands for synthesis of the different cultures t hat have come to stay in India, that 
have influenced Indian life, and that, in their turn , have themselves been influence by 
the spirit of the soil. This synthesis will natural ly be of the spirit of the soil. This 
synthesis will naturally be of the Swadeshi type, w here each culture is assured its 
legitimate place, and not of the American pattern, where one dominant culture 
absorbs the rest, and where one dominant culture ab sorbs the rest, and where the aim 
is not towards harmony, but towards an artificial a nd forced unity. 
Young India, 17-11-’20  
 
The Indian culture of our times is in the making. M any of us are striving to produce a 
blend of all the cultures which seem today to be in  clash with one another. No culture 
can live, if it attempts to be exclusive. There is n o such thing as pure Aryan culture in 
existence today in India. Whether the Aryans were i ndigenous to India. Whether the 
Aryans were indigenous to India or were unwelcome i ntruders, does not interest me 
much. What does interest me is the fact that my rem ote ancestors blended with one 
another with the result of that blend. Whether we a re doing any good to the country of 
our birth and the tiny globe which sustains us or w hether we are a burden, the future 
alone will show.                                                                                  Harijan, 9-5-36 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155   
Chapter 46 
THE NEW EDUCATION 
Whatever may be true of other countries, in India a t any rate where more than eighty 
percent of the population is agricultural and anoth er ten percent industrial, it is crime 
to make education merely literacy, and to unfit boy s and girls for manual work in 
after-life. Indeed I hold that as the larger part o f our time is devoted to labour for 
earning our bread, our children must from their inf ancy be taught the dignity of such 
labour. Our children should not be so taught as to despise having gone to school should 
become useless, as he does become, as an agricultur al labourer. It is a sad thing that 
our schoolboys look upon manual labour with disfavou r, if not contempt. 
Young India, 1-9-‘21  
 
In my opinion, intelligent labour is for the time b eing the only primary and adult 
education in this land of starving millions…. Litera cy education should follow the 
education of the hand-the one gift that visibly dis tinguishes man from beast. It is a 
superstition to think that the fullest development of man is impossible without a 
knowledge of the art of reading and writing. That k nowledge undoubtedly adds grace 
to life, but it is in no way indispensable for man’ s moral, physical, or material growth. 
Harijan, 8-3-‘35  
 
I hold that true education of the intellect can onl y come through a proper exercise and 
training of the bodily organs, e.g. hands, feet, ey es, ears, nose, etc. In other words, an 
intelligent use of the bodily organs in a child pro vides the best and quickest way of 
developing his intellect. But unless the development of the mind and body goes hand in 
had with a corresponding awakening of the soul, the  former alone would prove to be a 
poor lop-sided affair. By spiritual training I mean  education of the heart. A proper and 
all-round development f the mind, therefore, can tak e place only when it proceeds 
pari passu with the education of the physical and s piritual faculties of the child. They 
constitute and indivisible whole. According to this  theory, therefore, it would be a 
gross fallacy to suppose that they can be developed  piecemeal or independently of one 
another.                                                                                            Harijan, 8-5-‘37  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156   
The baneful effects of absence of proper coordinati on and harmony among the various 
faculties of body, mind and soul respectively are ob vious. They are all around us; only 
we have lost perception of them owing to our present  perverse associations. 
Harijan, 8-5-‘37  
 
Man is neither mere intellect, nor the gross animal  body, nor the heart or soul alone. A 
proper and harmonious combination of all the three is required for the making of the 
whole man and constitutes the true economics of edu cation. 
Harijan, 8-5-‘37  
 
By education I mean an all-round drawing out of the  best in child and man-body, mind 
and spirit, Literacy is not the end of education or  even the beginning. It is only of the 
means where by man and woman can be educated. Liter acy in itself is no education. I 
would therefore begin the child’s education by teac hing it a useful handicraft and 
enabling it to produce from the moment it begins it s training. I hold the highest 
development of the mind and the soul is possible und er such a system of education. 
Only every handicraft has to be taught not merely me chanically as is done today but 
scientifically, i.e. the child should know the why and the wherefore of every process. 
Harijan, 31-7-‘37  
 
In my scheme of things the hand will handle tools b efore it draws or traces the 
writings. The eyes will read the pictures of letter s and words as they will know other 
things in life, the ears will catch the names and m eanings of things and sentences. The 
whole training will be natural, responsive and, ther efore, the quickest and the 
cheapest in the world. 
Harijan, 28-8-‘37  
 
Manual work will have to be the very centre of the whole thing….The manual training 
will not consist in producing articles for a school  museum, or toys which have no value. 
It should produce marketable articles. The children  will not do this as children used to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  do under the whip in the early days of the factorie s. They will do it because it 
entertains them and stimulates their intellect. 
Harijan, 11-9-‘37  
 
I am a firm believer in the principle of free and c ompulsory Primary Education for 
India. I also hold that we shall realize this only by teaching the children a useful 
vocation and utilizing it as a means for cultivating their mental, physical and spiritual 
faculties. It will check the progressive decay of ou r villages and lay the foundation of a 
juster social order in which there is no unnatural division between the ‘haves’ and the 
‘havenots’ and everybody is assured of a living wage  and the rights to freedom. 
Harijan, 9-10-‘37  
 
My plan to impart Primary Education through the med ium of village handicrafts like 
spinning and carding etc. is thus conceived as the s pearhead of a silent social 
revolution fraught with the most far-reaching conseq uences. It will provide a healthy 
and moral basis of relationship between the city an d the village and thus go a long way 
to eradicating some of the worst evils of the prese nt social insecurity and poisoned 
relationship between the classes. 
Harijan, 9-10-‘37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158   
Chapter 47 
BASIC EDUCATION 
This education is meant to transform village childr en into model villagers. It is 
principally designed for them. The inspiration for it has come from the villages… Basic 
education links the children, whether of the cities  or the villages, to all that is best 
and lasting in India. It develops both the body and the mind, and keeps the child 
rooted to the soil with a glorious vision of the fut ure in the realization of which he or 
she begins to take his or her share form the very co mmencement of his or her career in 
school. 
Constructive Programme, pp. 15-16  
 
The object of Basic Education is the physical, inte llectual and moral development of 
the children through the medium of a handicraft. Bu t I hold that nay scheme which is 
sound from the educative point of view and is efficie ntly managed is bound to be sound 
economically. For instance, we can teach our childr en to make clay toys that are to be 
destroyed afterwards. That too will develop their i ntellect. But it will neglect a very 
important moral principle, viz. that human labour an d material should never be used in 
a wasteful or unproductive way. The emphasis laid o n the principle of spending every 
minute of one’s life usefully is the best education  for citizenship and incidentally 
makes Basic Education self-sufficient. 
Harijan, 6-4-‘40  
 
Let us now glance at the fundamentals of Basic Educ ation: 
1. All education to be true must be self-supporting, t hat is to say, in the end it will 
pay its expenses excepting the capital which will r emain intact. 
2. In it the cunning of the hand will be utilized even up to the final stage, that is to 
say, hands of the pupils will be skillfully working  at some industry for some period 
during the day. 
3. All education must be imparted through the medium o f the provincial language. 
4. In this there is no room for giving sectional religi ous training. Fundamental 
universal ethics will have full scope. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159  5. This education, whether it is confined to children or adults, male or female, will 
find its way to the homes of the pupils. 
6. Since millions of students receiving this education  will consider themselves as of 
the whole of India, they must learn an inter-provin cial language. This common 
inter-provincial speech can only be Hindustani writt en in Nagari or Urdu script. 
Therefore, pupils have to master both the scripts. 
Harijan, 2-11-‘47  
 
The Introduction of manual training will serve a dou ble purpose in a poor country like 
ours. It will pay for the educations of our childre n and teach them an occupation on 
which they can fall back in after-life, if they cho ose, for earning a living. Such a 
system must make our children self-reliant. Nothing  will demoralize the nation so much 
as that we should learn to despise labour. 
Young India, 1-9-‘21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160   
Chapter 48 
HIGHER EDUCATION 
I would revolutionize college education and relate i t to national necessities. There 
would be degrees for mechanical and other engineers . They would be attached to the 
different industries which should pay for the train ing of the graduates they need. Thus 
the Tatas would be expected to run a college for tr aining engineers under the 
supervisions of the State, the mill associations wou ld run among them a college for 
training graduates whom they need. 
Similarly for the other industries that may be name d. Commerce will have its college. 
There remain arts, medicine and agriculture. Several  private arts college are today 
self-supporting. The State would, therefore, cease to run its own. Medical colleges 
would be attached to certified hospitals. As they a re popular among moneyed men 
they may be expected by voluntary contributions to s upport medical colleges. And 
agricultural colleges to be worthy of the name must  be self-supporting. I have a painful 
experience of some agricultural graduates. Their kn owledge is superficial. They lack 
practical experience. But if they had their apprent iceship on farms which are self-
sustained and answer the requirement of the country , they would not have to gain 
experience after getting their degrees and at the e xpense of their employers. 
Harijan, 31-7-‘37  
 
The State Universities should be purely examining bo dies, self-supporting through the 
fees charged for examinations. 
Universities will look after the whole of the field of education and will prepare and 
approve courses of studies in the various department s of education. No private school 
should be run without the previous sanction of the r espective Universities. University 
charters should be given liberally to any body of p ersons of proved worth and integrity, 
it being always understood that the Universities wil l not cost the State anything except 
that it will bear the cost of running a Central Edu cation Department. 
Harijan, 2-10-‘37  
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161  New Universities  
There seems to be a mania for establishing new univ ersities in the provinces. Gujarat 
wants one for Gujarati, Maharashtra for Marathi, Ca rnatic for Kannad, Orissa for Oriya, 
Assam for Assami and what not. I do believe that the re should be such universities if 
these rich provincial languages and the people who speak them are to attain their full 
height. 
At the same time I fear that we betray ourselves int o undue haste in accomplishing the 
object. The first step should be linguistic politic al redistribution of provinces. Their 
separate administration will naturally lead to the establishment of universities where 
there are none. 
There should be a proper background for new universi ties. They should have feeders in 
the shape of schools and colleges which will impart  instruction through the medium of 
their respective provincial languages. Then only can there be a proper milieu. 
University is at the top. A majestic top can only be  sustained if there is a sound 
foundation. 
Though we are politically free, we are hardly free from the subtle domination of the 
West. I have nothing to say to that school of polit icians who believe that knowledge 
can only come from the West. Nor do I subscribe to the belief that nothing good can 
come out of the West. I do fear, however, hat we ar e unable as yet to come to a 
correct decision in the matter. It is to be hoped t hat no one contends that because we 
seem to be politically free from foreign domination , the mere fact gives us freedom 
from the more subtle influence of the foreign langu age and foreign thought. Is it not 
wisdom, does not duty to the country dictate, that before we embark on new 
universities we should stop and fill our own lungs first with the ozone of our newly got 
buildings and treasures of gold and silver. What it does need most of all is the 
intelligent backing of public opinion. It should ha ve a large reservoir of teaching to 
draw upon. Its founders should be far-seeing. 
In my opinion it is not for a democratic State to f ind money for founding universities. If 
the people want them they will supply the funds. Un iversities so founded will adorn 
the country which they represent. Where administrat ion is in foreign hands, whatever 
comes to the people comes from top and thus they be come more and more dependent. 
Where it is broad-based on popular will, everything goes from bottom upward and India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  hence it last. It is good-looking and strengthens t he people. In such a democratic 
scheme money invested in the promotion of learning g ives a tenfold return to the 
people even as a seed sown in good soil returns a lu xuriant crop. Universities founded 
under foreign domination have run in the reverse dir ection. Any other result was 
perhaps impossible. Therefore, there is every reason  for being cautious about founding 
new universities till India has digested the newly- acquired freedom. 
Harijan, 2-11-‘47  
 
Adult Education  
If I had charge of adult education, I should begin with opening the minds of the adult 
pupils to the greatness and vastness of their countr y. The villager’s India is contained 
in his village. If he goes to another village, he ta lks of his own village as his home. 
Hindustan is for him a geographical term. We have no  notion of the ignorance 
prevailing in the villages. The villagers know nothing  of foreign rule and its evils….They 
do not know how to get rid of it. They do not know that the foreigner’s presence is due 
to their own weaknesses and their ignorance of the power they possess to rid 
themselves of the foreign rule.  My adult education means, therefore, first, true 
political education of the adult by word of mouth….  Side by side with the education by 
the mouth will be the literacy education. This is i tself a specialty. Many methods are 
being tried in order to shorten the period of educa tion. 
Constructive Programme, pp.16-17  
 
Mass illiteracy is India’s sin and shame and must b e liquidated. Of course, the literacy 
campaign must not begin and end with a knowledge of  the alphabet. It must go hand in 
hand with the spread of useful knowledge. The dry k nowledge to of the three R’s is not 
even now, it can never be, a permanent part of the vi llager’s life. They must have 
knowledge given to them which they must use daily. I t must not be thrust upon them. 
They should have the appetite for it. What they hav e today is something they neither 
want nor appreciate. Give the villagers arithmetic, village geography, village history, 
and the literary knowledge that they must use daily , i.e. Reading and writing letters, 
etc. They will treasure such knowledge and pass on to the other stages. They have no 
use for books which give them nothing of daily use.                         Harijan, 22-6-‘40  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163   
Religious Education  
… there is no doubt that the vast majority of studen ts who pass through the 
Government educational institutions are devoid of any  religious instruction….I know 
also that there is a school of thought which believe s in only secular instruction being 
given in public schools. I know also that in a count ry like India, where there are most 
religions of the world represented and where there are so many denominations in the 
same religion; there must be difficulty about makin g provision for religious instruction. 
But if India is not to declare spiritual bankruptcy , religious instruction of its youth must 
be held to be at least as necessary as secular inst ruction. It is true, that knowledge of 
religious books is no equivalent of that of religio n. But if we cannot have religion we 
must be satisfied with providing our boys and girls with what is next best. And whether 
there is such instruction given in the self-help abo ut matters religious as about other. 
They may start their own class just as they have the ir debating and now spinners’ 
clubs. 
Young India, 25-8-‘27  
 
I do not believe that the State can concern itself o r cope with religious education. I 
believe that religion education must be the sole co ncern of religious associations. Do 
not mix up religion and ethics. I believe that fund amental ethics is common to all 
religions. Teaching of fundamental ethics is undoub tedly a function of the state. By 
religion I have not in mind fundamental ethics but what goes by the name of 
denominationalism. We have suffered enough from Sta te-aided religion and a State 
Church. A society or a group, which depends partly or wholly on State aid for the 
existence of its religion, does not deserve, or, bet ter still, does not have any religion 
worth the name. 
Harijan, 23-3-‘47  
 
A curriculum of religious instruction should includ e a study of the tenets of faiths other 
than one’s own. For this purpose the students shoul d be trained to cultivate the habit 
of understanding and appreciating the doctrines of various great religions of the world 
in a spirit of reverence and broad-minded tolerance.  This if properly done would help India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164  to give them a spiritual assurance and a better appr eciation of their own 
religion….There is one rule, however, which should always be kept in mind while 
studying all great religions and that is, that one should study them only through the 
writings of known votaries of the respective religion s. 
Young India, 6-12-‘28  
 
Text-books  
There seems to me to be no doubt that in the public  schools the books used, especially 
for children, are for the most part useless when th ey are not harmful. That many of 
them are cleverly written cannot be denied. They mi ght even be the best for the 
people and the environment for which they are writte n. But they are not written for 
Indian boys and girls, not for the Indian environme nt. When they are so written, they 
are generally undigested limitations hardly answeri ng the wants of the scholar. 
I have, therefore, come to the conclusion that books  are required more for the 
teachers than for the taught. And every teacher, if he is to do full justice to his pupils 
will have to prepare the daily lesson from the mater ial available to him. This, too, he 
will have to suit to the special requirement of his class. Real education has to draw out 
the best from the boys and girls to be educated. Th is can never be done by packing ill-
assorted and unwanted information into the heads of  the pupils. It becomes a dead 
weight crushing all originality in them and turning  them into mere automata. 
Harijan, 1-12-‘33  
 
Teachers  
I believe in the ancient idea of teachers teaching for the love of it and receiving the 
barest maintenance. The Roman Catholics have retaine d that idea and they are 
responsible for some of the best educational instit utions in the world. The Rishis of old 
did even better. The made their pupils members of t heir families, but in those days 
that class of teaching which they imparted was not intended for the masses. They 
simply brought was not intended for the masses. The y simply brought up a race of real 
teachers of mankind in India. The masses got their training in their homes and in their 
hereditary occupations. It was good enough ideal fo r those times. Circumstances have 
now changed. There is a general insistent demand fo r literacy training. The masses India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  claim the same attention as the classes. How far it  is possible and beneficial to 
mankind generally cannot be discussed here. There i s nothing inherently wrong in the 
desire for learning. If it is directed in a healthy  channel it can only do good. Without, 
therefore, stopping to devise means for avoiding the  inevitable, we must make the 
best possible use of it. Thousand of teachers canno t be had for the asking, nor will 
they live by begging. They must have a salary guaran teed and we shall require quite an 
army of teachers; their remuneration cannot b in pr oportion to the intrinsic worth of 
their calling, but it will have to be in proportion  to the capacity of the nation for 
payment. We may expect a steady rise as we realize the relative merits of the 
different callings. The rise must be painfully slow . There must therefore a rise class of 
men and women in India who will from patriotic moti ves choose teach in as a 
profession, irrespective of the material gain that it may bring them. Then the nation 
will not underrate the calling of the teacher. On t he contrary, it will give the fist place 
in its affection to these self-sacrificing men and women. And so we come to this that 
as our Swaraj is possible largely by our own effort s, so is the teachers rise possible 
mainly by their own effort. They must bravely and p atiently cut their way through to 
success. 
Young India, 6-8-‘25  
 
Self-supporting Education  
The suggestion has often been made…that in order to  make education compulsory, or 
even available to every boy and girl wishing to  recei ve education, our schools and 
colleges should become almost, if not wholly, self- supporting, not through donations or 
State aid or fees exacted from students, but throug h remunerative work done by the 
students themselves. This can only be done by making  industrial training compulsory. 
Apart from the necessity which is daily being more and more recognized of students 
having and industrial training side by side with lit eracy training, there is in this country 
the additional necessity of pursuing industrial tra ining in order to make education 
directly self-supporting. This can only be done whe n our students begin to recognize 
the dignity of labour an when the convention is est ablished of regarding ignorance of 
manual occupation a mark of disgrace. In America, w hich is the richest country in the 
world and where, therefore, perhaps there is the le ast need for making education self-
supporting, it is the most usual thing for students  to pay their way wholly or partially… India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  If America has to model her school and colleges so as to enable students to earn their 
scholastic expenses, how much more necessary it mus t be for our schools and colleges? 
Is it not far better that we find work for poor stu dents than that we pauperize them by 
providing free studentships? It is impossible them b y providing free studentships? It is 
impossible to exaggerate the harm we do to Indian Y outh by filling their minds with the 
false notion that it is ungentlemanly to labour wit h one’s hands and feet for one’s 
livelihood or schooling. The harm done is moral and material, indeed much more moral 
than material. A freeship lies and should lie like a load upon a conscientious lad’s mind 
throughout his whole life. No one likes to be remin ded in after life that he had to 
depend upon charity for his education. Contrarily w here is the person who will not 
recall with pride those days if the had the good fo rtune to have had them when he 
worked in a carpentry-shop or the like for the sake  of educating himself-mind, body 
and soul? 
Young India, 2-8-‘28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167   
Chapter 49 
ASHRAM IDEAL OF EDUCATION 
[The following translation by Shri V. G. Desai of s ome of the notes on the Ashram 
ideal of education written by Mahatma Gandhi in Guj arati appeared in the issues of 
Harijan of 15th July and 5th August, 1950.]  
I have my own perhaps peculiar views on education whi ch have not been accepted by 
my colleagues in full, and here they are: 
1. Young boys and girls should have co-education till t hey are eight years of age. 
2. Their education should mainly consist in manual tra ining under the supervision of an 
educationist. 
3. The special aptitudes of each child should be recog nized in determining the kind of 
work he (or she) should do. 
4. The reasons for every process should be explained w hen the process is being carried 
on. 
5. General knowledge should be imparted to each to chi ld as he begins to understand 
things. Learning to read or write should come later . 
6. The child should first be taught to draw simple geo metrical figures, and when he 
has learnt to draw these with ease, he should be ta ught to write the alphabet. If 
this is done, he will write a good hand from the ver y first. 
7. Reading should come before writing. The letters sho uld be treated as pictures to be 
recognized and later on to be copied. 
8. A child taught on these lines will have acquired co nsiderable knowledge according 
to his capacity by the time he is eight. 
9. Nothing should be taught to a child by force. 
10. He should be interested in everything taught to him . 
11. Education should appear to the child like play, Pla y is an essential part of 
education. 
12. All education should be imparted through the mother  tongue. 
13. The child should be taught Hindi-Urdu as the nation al language, before he learns 
letters. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168  14. Religious education is indispensable and the child should get it by watching the 
teacher’s conduct and by hearing him talk about it.  
15. Nine to sixteen constitutes the second stage in the  child’s education. 
16. It is desirable that boys and girls should have co-e ducation during the second stage 
also as far as possible. 
17. Hindu children should now be taught Sanskrit and Mu slim Children Arabic. 
18. Manual training should be continued during the seco nd stage. Literacy education 
should be allotted more time as is necessary. 
19. The boys during this stage should be taught their p arent’s avocation in such a way 
that they will by their own choice obtain their liv elihood by practicing the 
hereditary craft. This does not apply to the girls.  
20. During this stage the child should acquire a genera l knowledge of world history and 
geography, botany, astronomy, arithmetic, geometry,  and algebra. 
21. Each child should now be taught to sew and to cook.  
22. Sixteen to twenty-five is the third stage, during wh ich every young person should 
have and education according to his or her wishes an d circumstances. 
23. During the second stage (9-16) education should be self-supporting; that is, the 
child all the time that he is learning, is working upon some industry, the proceeds 
of which will meet the expenditure of the school. 
24. Production starts from the very beginning, but durin g the first stage it does not still 
catch up with the expenditure. 
25. Teachers should be paid not very high salaries but o nly a living wage. They should 
be inspired by a spirit of service. It is a despicab le thing to take any Tom, Dick or 
Harry as a teacher in the primary stage. All teache rs should be men of character. 
26. Big and expensive buildings are not necessary for ed ucational institutions. 
27. English should be taught only as one of several lang uages. As Hindi is the national 
languages, English is to be used in dealing with ot her nations and international 
commerce. 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  Women’s Education  
As for women’s education I am not sure whether it s hould be different from men’s and 
when it should begin. But I am strongly of opinion that women should have the same 
facilities as men and even special facilities where necessary. 
There should be night schools for illiterate adults . But I do not think that they must be 
taught the three R’s; they must be helped to acquir e general knowledge through 
lectures etc.; and if they wish, we should arrange to teach them the three R’s also. 
Experiments in the Ashram have convinced us of one t hing, viz. that industry in general 
and spinning in particular should have pride of plac e in education, which must be 
largely self-supporting as well as related and tend ing to the betterment of rural life. 
Real education begins after a child has left school . One who has appreciated the value 
of studies is a student all his life. His knowledge  must increase from day to day while 
he is discharging his duty in a conscientious manne r. 
The superstition that no education is possible with out a teacher is an obstacle in the 
path of educational progress. A man’s real teacher is himself. And now-a-days there is 
ample apparatus available for self-education. A dil igent person can easily acquire 
knowledge about many things by himself and obtain t he assistance of teacher when 
one is needed. Experience is the biggest of all sch ools. Quite a number of crafts cannot 
be learnt at school but only in the workshop. Knowl edge of these acquired at school is 
often only parrot-like. Knowledge of the other subj ects can be acquired with the help 
of books. Therefore, what adults need is not so muc h a school as a thirst for 
knowledge, diligence and self-confidence. 
The education of children is primarily a duty to be  discharged by the parents. 
Therefore, the creation of a vital educational atmos phere is more important than the 
foundation of innumerable schools. When once this a tmosphere has been established 
on a firm footing, the schools will come in due cou rse. 
This is the Ashram ideal of education which has bee n achieved to some extent, as every 
department for Ashram activity is a veritable school.  
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170  Chapter 50 
NATIONAL LANGUAGE AND SCRIPT 
If we are to make good our claim as one nation, we must have several things in 
common. We have a common culture running through a va riety of creeds and sub-
creeds. We have common disabilities. I am endeavorin g to show that a common 
material for our dress is not only desirable but ne cessary. We need also a common 
language not in supersession of the vernaculars, but  in addition to them. It is generally 
agreed that that medium should be Hindustani-a resu ltant of Hindi and Urdu, neither 
highly Sanskritized, nor highly Persianized or Arab ianized. The greatest obstacles in the 
way are the numerous scripts we have for the vernacu lars. If it is possible to adopt a 
common script, we should remove a great hindrance i n the way of realizing the dream, 
which at present it is, of having a common language . 
A variety of scripts is an obstacle in more ways tha n one. It constitutes an effectual 
barrier against the acquisition of knowledge. The A ryan languages have so much in 
common that, if a great deal of time had not to be wasted in mastering the different 
scripts, we should all know several languages withou t much difficulty; for instance, 
most people who have a little knowledge of Sanskrit  would have no difficulty in 
understanding the matchless creation of Rabindranat h Tagore, if it was all printed in 
Devanagari Script. But the Bengali script is a notic e to the non-Bengalis-“hands off”. 
Conversely if the Bengalis knew the Devanagari script , they would at once be able to 
enjoy the marvelous beauty and spiritually of Tulsid as and a host other Hindustani 
writers… A common script for all India is a distant  ideal. A common script for all those 
who speak the Indo-Sanskrit languages, including th e Southern stock, is a practical 
ideal, if we but shed our provincialisms, There is little virtue, for instance, in a 
Gujarati clinging to the Gujarati script. Provincia l Patriotism is good where it feeds the 
larger stream of all-India patriotism, as the latte r is good to the extent that it serves 
the still larger end of the universe. But a provinci al patriotism that says “India is 
nothing, Gujarat is all”, is wickedness….That the D evanagari should be the common 
script, I suppose, does not need any demonstration- the deciding factor being that it is 
the script known to the largest part of India… A sp irit that is so exclusive and narrow as 
to want every form of speech to be perpetuated and d eveloped, is anti-national and 
anti-universal. All undeveloped and unwritten dialec ts should, in my humble opinion, 
be sacrificed and merged in the great Hindustani st ream. It would be a sacrifice only to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171  be nobler, not a suicide. If we are to have a common  language for cultured India, we 
must arrest the growth of any process of disintegra tion or multiplication of languages 
and script. We must promote a common language….If I  could have my way, I would 
make the learning of Devanagari script and Urdu scri pt, in addition to the established 
provincial script, compulsory in all the provinces an d I would print in Devanagari chief 
books in the different vernacular with a literal tra nslation in Hindustani. 
Young India, 27-8-‘25  
 
Let us now consider the question of a national lang uage. If English is to become our 
national language then it must be made a compulsory  subject in our schools. Let us 
first consider whether English can become our natio nal language. 
Some of our learned men, who are also good patriots , contend that even to raise the 
question betrays ignorance. In their opinion it alr eady occupies that place. 
On a superficial consideration, this view appears co rrect. Looking at the educated 
section of our society, one is likely to gain the i mpression that in the absence of 
English, all our work would come to a stop. But dee per reflection will show that English 
cannot and ought not to become our national languag e. 
1. Let us see what should be the requirements of a nat ional language: 
2. It should be easy to learn for Government officials.  
3. It should be capable of serving as a medium of relig ious, economic and political 
intercourse throughout India. 
4. It should be the speech of the majority of the inha bitants of India. 
5. It should be easy to learn for the whole of the cou ntry. 
6. In choosing this language considerations of tempora ry or passing interest should 
not count. 
English does not fulfill any of these requirements.  
The First ought to have been placed last, but I hav e purposely given it the first place, 
because it seems as though English fulfilled it. Cl oser examination will, however, show 
that even at the present moment it is not for the of ficials an easy language to learn or 
to handle. The constitution under which we are bein g ruled envisages that the number 
of English officials which progressively decrease un til finally only the Viceroy and a few India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  more will be left here. The majority of the people in Government services are even 
today Indians and their number will increase as tim e goes on. I think no one will deny 
that. For them English is more difficult than any o ther language. 
As regards the second requirement: Religious interc ourse through English is 
impossibility unless our people throughout the land  begin to speak English. Spread of 
English among the masses to this extent is clearly impossible. 
English simply cannot satisfy the third requirement , because the majorities in India do 
not speak it.The fourth also cannot be met by Engli sh it is not an easy language to 
learn for the whole of India. 
Considering the fifth we see that the status which English enjoys today is temporary. 
The fact is that in India the need for English in n ational affairs will be, if at all, very 
little. It will certainly be required for imperial affairs. It will remain the language of 
diplomacy between different matter. English will re main the imperial language we will 
compel our Malaviyajis, our Shastris and our Banerj ees to learn it and expect them to 
enhance the glory of our country wherever they go. B ut English cannot become the 
national language of India. To give it that place w ill be like introducing Esperanto into 
the country. To think that English can become our n ational language is a sign or 
weakness and betrays ignorance. 
Then which is the language which fulfils all the fi ve requirements? We shall have to 
admit that it is Hindi. 
No other language can compete with Hindi in satisfy ing these five requirements. Next 
to Hindi comes Bengali. But the Bengalis themselves make use of Hindi outside Bengal. 
The Hindi-speaking man speaks Hindi wherever he goe s and no one feels surprised at 
this. The Hindi-speaking Hindu preachers and the Ur du-speaking Maulvis make their 
religious speeches throughout India in Hindi and Ur du, and even the illiterate masses 
understand them. Even an unlettered Gujarati, when he goes to the North attempts to 
speak a few Hindi words. But Northern Bhaiya who wo rks as gate-keeper to the Bombay 
Seth declines to speak in Gujarati and it is the Se th, his employer, who is obliged to 
speak to him in broken Hindi. I have heard Hindi sp oken even in far off Southern 
provinces. It is not correct to say that in Madras o ne cannot do without English. I have 
successfully used Hindi there for all my work. In t he trains I have heard Madrasi 
passengers speaking to other passengers in Hindi. B esides, the Muslims of Madras know India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173  enough Hindi to use it sufficiently well. It has to  be noted that Muslims thought out 
India speak Urdu and they are found in large number s in every province. 
Thus Hindi has already established itself as the na tional language of India. We have 
been using it as such for a long time. The birth of  Urdu itself is due to this fact. 
Muslim kings could not make Persian or Arabic the n ational language. They accepted 
the Hindi grammar; only they used more Persian word s in their speech and employed 
the Urdu script for writing. But they could not car ry on intercourse with the masses 
through a foreign tongue. Similar is the case with the English rulers. Those who have 
any knowledge of how they deal with the sipahees in  the army know that for this 
purpose they have coined Hindi or Urdu terms. 
Thus we see that Hindi alone can become the nationa l language. No doubt it presents 
some difficulty to the educated classes of Madras. But for Maharashtra’s, Gujaratis, 
Sindhis and Bengalis it should be very easy. In a fe w months they can acquire enough 
command of Hindi to be able to use it for national purposes. It is not so easy for 
Tamilians. 
Tamil and the other languages of the South belong t o the Dravidian group. Their 
structure and grammar are different from those of S anskrit. The only thing common 
between these two groups is their Sanskrit vocabula ry. 
But the difficulty is confined to the present educa ted classes only. We have a right to 
appeal to their patriotic spirit and expect them to  put forth special effort to learn 
Hindi. 
If Hindi attains to its due status, then it will be  introduced in every schools in Madras 
will thus be in a position to cultivate acquaintanc e with other provinces. English has 
failed to reach the masses. But Hindi will do so in  no time. The Telugu people have 
already started moving in this direction.                                           (From Gujarati) 
From Gandhiji’s presidential address at the Second Gujarat Educational Conference 
held at Branch on 20th October, 1917.  
 
Our love of the masses must be skin-deep, if we will  not take the trouble of spending 
over learning Hindustani as many months as the years  we spend over learning English. 
Constructive Programme, p. 20 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174   
Chapter 51 
PROVINCIAL LANGUAGES 
Our love of the English language in preference to ou t own mother tongue has caused a 
deep chasm between the educated and politically-min ded classes and the masses. The 
languages of India have suffered impoverishment. We flounder when we make the vain 
attempt to express abstruse thought in the mother t ongue. There are no equivalents 
for scientific terms. The result has been disastrou s. The masses remain cut off from 
the modern mind. We are too near our own times corr ectly to measure the disservice 
caused to India by this neglect of its great langua ges. It is easy enough to understand 
that, unless we undo the mischief, the masses canno t do this fully unless they 
understand every step with all its implications. Thi s is impossible unless every step is 
explained in their own languages. 
Constructive Programme, pp. 19-20  
 
I must cling to my mother tongue as to my mother’s breast, in spite of its short 
comings. It alone can give me the life-giving milk. I love the English tongue in its own 
place, but I am its inveterate opponent, if it usur ps a place which does not belong to 
it. English is today admittedly the world language.  I would therefore accord it a place 
as a second, optional language, not in the school b ut in the university course. That can 
only be for the select few-not for the millions. To day when we have not the means to 
introduce even free compulsory primary education, ho w can we make provision for 
teaching English? It is our mental slavery that mak es us feel that we cannot do without 
English. I can never subscribe to that defeatist cre ed. 
Harijan, 25-8-‘46  
 
Unless the Government and their Secretariats take c are, the English language is likely 
to usurp the place of Hindustani. This must do infi nite harm to the millions of India 
who would never be able to understand English. Surel y it must be quite easy for the 
Provincial Governments to have a staff which would ca rry on all transactions in the 
provincial languages and the inter-provincial langua ge, which, in my opinion, can only 
be Hindustani written in Nagari or Urdu script. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175  Every day lost in making this necessary change is so  much cultural loss to the nation. 
The first and foremost thing is to revive the rich p rovincial languages with which India 
is blessed. It is nothing short of mental sluggishn ess to plead that in our courts, in our 
schools and even in the Secretariats, sometime, pro bably a few years, must lapse 
before the change is made. No doubt a little diffic ulty will be felt in multi-lingual 
provinces, as in Bombay and Madras, until redistribu tion of provinces takes place on 
the linguistic basis. Provincial Governments can devis e a method in order to enable the 
people in those Provinces to feel that they have com e into their own. Nor need the 
Provinces wait for the Union for solving the questio n, whether for provincial speech it 
shall be Hindustani written in either Nagari or Urd u script or mere Hindi written in 
Nagari. This should not detain them in making the d esired reform. It is wholly 
unnecessary controversy likely to be the door throug h which English may enter to the 
eternal disgrace of India. If the first step, that is, revival of provincial speech in all 
public departments takes place immediately, that of  inter-provincial speech will follow 
in quick succession. The provinces will have to dea l with the Centre. They dare not do 
so in English, if the Centre is wise enough quickly  to realize that they must not tax the 
nation culturally for the sake of a handful of Indi ans who are too lazy to pick up the 
speech which can be easily common to the whole of I ndia without offending any party 
or section. My plea is for banishing English as a c ultural rule of the English usurper. The 
rich English language will ever retain its natural place as the international speech of 
commerce and diplomacy. 
Harijan, 21-9-47  
 
Place of Sanskrit  
I am of opinion that Sanskrit cannot be dispensed w ith in matters religious. The 
translation, no matter however accurate, cannot repl ace the original mantras which 
have an import of their own. Besides it would be det racting from the solemnity of the 
mantras which have been repeated in Sanskrit for ce nturies, to repeat them today in 
the vernaculars. But I am clear that each mantra an d every rite should be accurately 
interpreted and explained to the person repeating t he mantra or participating in the 
rite. A Hindu’s education must be regarded as inade quate without a knowledge of the 
rudiments of Sanskrit. Hinduism would be extinct wi thout Sanskrit learning and Sanskrit 
scholarship being cultivated on an adequate scale. W e have made the language India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176  difficult by the present system of education, it is  not really so. But even if it is 
difficult, practice of religion is still more so. H e, therefore, who would practice 
religion must regard as comparatively easy all the steps to it, however difficult they 
may appear to be. 
Young India, 13-5-‘26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177   
Chapter 52 
HINDI IN THE SOUTH* 
I have the greatest faith in the Dravidians some day  taking up Hindi study seriously. If 
an eighth of the industry that they put in masterin g English were to be devoted to 
learning Hindi, instead of the rest of India remain ing a sealed book to them, they will 
be one with us as never before. I know that some wo uld say the argument cuts both 
ways. The Dravidians being in a minority, national economy suggests that they should 
learn the common language of the rest of India than  that the rest should learn Tamil, 
Telugu, Kanarese and Malayalam in order to be able converse with Dravidian India. It is 
for that reason that Hindi –propaganda work of an i ntense type has been going on in 
the Madras Presidency. 
*LITERACY IN ENGLISH  
The following figures, based on 1951 census, are ta ken from the Report of the 
official Language Commission, p. 468: 
(In thousands) 
States Population Literates Literates in 
English 
(S.L.G. or 
equivalent) Percentage 
of col. 4 to 
col. 3 Percentage 
of col. 4 to 
col. 2 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Bombay 35,956 8,829 458 5.19 1.27 
Punjab 12,641 2,039 325 15.93 2.56 
West Bengal 24,810 6,088 597 9.81 2.41 
Ajmer 693 139 18 13.11 2.63 
South India (i.e. 
Madras, Mysore, 
Travancore-
Cochin and Coorg) 75,600 17,234 876 5.08 1.15 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  Madras (after 
separation of 
Andhra) 35,735 7,800 400 5.13 1.12 
Andhra 20,508 3,108 165 5.32 0.81 
Mysore (including 
Bellary Talukas) 9,849 1,956 136 6.94 1.38 
  
Let no Dravidian think that learning Hindi is at al l difficult. A little time taken from the 
recreation hour daily in a systematic manner will e nable an average man to learn Hindi 
in one year. I would venture to suggest too that lar ge municipalities might now 
introduce Hindi as an optional language to be learn t in the municipal schools. I can say 
from experience that Dravidian children take to Hind i in a remarkably easy manner. 
Little does anyone know that almost all the Tamils and the Telugus living in South 
Africa can carry on an intelligent conversation in H indi. I venture to hope therefore 
that the young men of Madras will show their apprec iation of Marwadi generosity by 
availing themselves of the facility afforded to them  of learning Hindi without payment. 
Young India, 16-6-‘20  
 
*LITERACY IN HINDI  
The following figures pertaining to the spread of l iteracy in Hindi are form the 
report of the Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha, Madras, for the period 1918 – 
1955: 
(In lakhs) 
States Population Literates Literates in Hindi 
Andhra 203.2 30.4 8.02 
Tamil Nadu 277.7 51.8 8.98 
Kerala 140.1 72.8 14.22 
Karnatak 228.4 48.7 9.87 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179  Telangana 80.0 13.3 1.36 
Madras City 14.2 4.3 1.75 
 
Bengal and Madras are the two Provinces that are cu t off from the rest of India for 
want of a knowledge of Hindustani on their part. Be ngal, because of its prejudice 
against learning any other language of India, and M adras, because of the difficulty of 
the Dravidians about picking up Hindustani. An aver age Bengali can really learn 
Hindustani. An average Bengali can really learn Hind ustani in two months if he gave it 
three hours per day and a Dravidian can hope to achi eve the same result with English 
in the same time. A knowledge of English opens up i ntercourse only with the 
comparatively few English-knowing Indians, whereas a  possible knowledge of 
Hindustani enables us to hold intercourse with the largest number of our countrymen… 
I appreciate the difficulty with the Dravidians, bu t nothing is difficult before their 
industrious love for the motherland. 
Young India, 2-2-‘21  
 
English is the language of international commerce, is the language of diplomacy, and it 
contains many a rich literary treasure, it gives us an introduction to Western thought 
and culture. For a few of us, therefore, a knowledg e of English is necessary. They can 
carry on the departments of national commerce and i nternational diplomacy, and for 
giving to the nation the best of Western literature,  thought, and science. That would 
be the legitimate use of English, whereas today Eng lish has usurped the dearest place 
in our hearts and dethroned our mother tongues. It is an unnatural place due to our 
unequal relations with Englishmen. The highest devel opment of the Indian mind must 
be possible without a knowledge of English. It is d oing violence to the manhood and 
specially the womanhood of India to encourage our b oys and girls to think that an entry 
into the best society is impossible without a knowl edge of English. It is too humiliating 
a thought to be bearable. To get rid of the infatua tion for English is one of the 
essentials of Swaraj. 
Young India, 2-2-‘21  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  If we were not living in artificial conditions, the people living in the South will not 
consider the learning of Hindi as a strain on them,  much less a superfluity. It is surely 
more necessary for them to learn Hindi than for the  Hindi-speaking and understanding 
Hindi against one speaking population to learn the Southern languages. There are two 
speaking and understanding Hindi against one speaki ng the Southern languages in all 
India. There must be for all India a common languag e of inter- provincial contact in 
additional to, not in the place of, the provincial l anguage or languages. It can be Hindi- 
Hindustani. 
Some who altogether dismiss the masses from their m inds would regard English not 
merely as an alternative but the only possible mediu m. This proposition would be 
unthinkable but for the hypnotic influence of forei gn domination. For the masses of the 
South who take an ever- growing part in national af fairs, what can be easier- learning 
Hindi which has many words in common with their lan guages and which at once gives 
them access practically to the whole of the North o r to learn English, a wholly foreign 
tongue spoken only by a select few? 
The choice really depends upon one’s conception of Swaraj. If it is to be of and for 
only the English Knowing Indians, English is undoub tedly the common medium. If it is 
to be for and of the starving millions, of the illit erate millions, of the illiterate women, 
of the suppressed ‘untouchables’, Hindi is the only  possible common language. 
Young India, 18-6-31  
 
Though I consider these Southern languages to be da ughter of Sanskrit they are 
different from Hindi, Ooira, Bengali, Assamese, Pun jabi, Sindhi, Marathi and Gujarati. 
There grammar is totally different from Hindi. In d escribing them as the daughter of 
Sanskrit, I only mean that they have a large number  of Sanskrit words in there 
vocabulary and when they are in difficulty, they go to Sanskrit as to a mother- they 
seek her help and receive from her in the firm of ne w words their requisite 
nourishment.  They might have been independent in th e olden days, but now they are 
enriching themselves with words taken from Sanskrit . There are many other reasons 
also why they should be regarded as the daughter of  Sanskrit. But we may not go into 
them here. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181  I have always held that in no case whatsoever do we w ant to injure, much less suppress 
or destroy the provincial languages. We want only th at all should learn Hindi as a 
common medium for inter-provincial intercourse. Thi s does not mean that we have any 
undue partiality for Hindi. We regarded Hindi as ou r national language. It is fit to be 
adopted as such. That language alone can become the  national language which is easy 
to learn. To our knowledge there has notice of. 
If Hindi takes the place of English, I for one woul d be pleased. But we know well the 
importance of the English language. Knowledge of En glish is necessary to us for the 
acquisition of modern knowledge of the study of mod ern literature, for knowledge of 
the world, for intercourse with the present rulers and such other purposes. As things 
are, we have to learn English even if we do not wis h to. English is an international 
language. 
But English can never become our national language.  True, it seems to dominate the 
scene today. In spite of all efforts to resist its hold on us, it continues to occupy a 
large place in the conduct of our national affairs.  But this should not lead us to 
entertain the illusion that it is going to become o ur national language. 
We can easily find proof for this from our experien ce in any province. Take for instance 
Bengal or South Indian where we find the influence of English to be the largest. Should 
we want anything done in these parts by the people,  we cannot have it done through 
English, though at the moment we may also not be ab le to do it through Hindi. With 
the help of a few words of Hindi, however, we may su cceed in expressing our meaning 
at latest to some extent; but through English not e ven this much. 
Of course, if may be accepted that hitherto no lang uage has been able to establish 
itself as the national language. English is the off icial language. That as natural under 
the prevailing circumstance. But I consider it quite  impossible for it to go beyond this. 
If we want to make Indian one nation, whether one b elieves it or not, Hindi alone can 
be the national language for the simple reasons tha t no other language can hope to 
have the advantages enjoyed by Hindi. With some slig ht variations Hindi- Hindustani is 
the language spoken by about twenty-two crores of p eople, both Hindus and Muslims. 
Therefore the most proper and under the circumstanc e the only possible thing would 
be to use the language of the province in the provi nce, to use Hindi for all- Indian 
purposes and to use English for inter-national purp oses. While the Hindi-speaking India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  people may be counted in crores, the number of thos e who speak English can never be 
increased to more than a few lakhs. Even the attempt  the attempt to do so would be 
unjust to the people. 
(From Hindi) 
From Gandhiji’s presidential address at the 24th se ssion of the Hindi Sahitya 
Sammelan held at Indore in 1935  
 
There is nothing wrong in making a knowledge of Hin dustani compulsory, if we are 
sincere in our declarations tjat Hindustan is or to  be the Rashtrabhasha or the common 
medium of expression. Latin was and probably still is compulsory in English schools. 
The study did not interfere with the study of Engli sh. On the contrary English was 
enriched by a Knowledge of the noble language. The cry of “mother tongue in danger” 
is either ignorant or hypocritical. And where it is  sincere it speaks little for the 
patriotism of those who will grudge our children an  hour per day for Hindustani. We 
must break through the provincial crust if we are to  reach the core of all- Indian 
nationalism. Is India one country and one national or countries and many nations? 
Harijan, 10-9-‘38  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183   
Chapter 53 
A CODE FOR STUDENTS 
(1) Student must not take part in party politics. T hey are student, searchers, not 
politicians. 
(2) They may not resort to political strikes. They must have their heroes but their 
devotion to them is to be shown by copying the best in their heroes, not by going on 
strikes if their heroes are imprisoned or die or ar e even sent to the gallows. If their 
grief is unbearable and if all the student feel equ ally, school or colleges may be closed 
on such occasions with the consent of their princip als. If the principals will not listen, 
it is open to the student to leave their institution  in a becoming manner till the 
managers repent and recall them. On no account may they use coercion against 
dissentients or against the authorities. They must have the confident that is they are 
united and dignified in their con duct they are sur e to win. 
(3) They must all do sacrificial spinning in a scie ntific manner. Their tools shall be 
always neat, clean and in good order and condition.  If possible, they will learn to make 
themselves. Their yarn will study the literature abo ut spinning with all its economic, 
social, moral and political implications. 
(4) They will be Khadi uses all through and use vill age products to the exclusion of all 
analogous things, foreign or machine made. 
(5) They may not impose ‘Bande Mataram’ or the Nati onal Flag on others. They may 
wear National Flag buttons on their own persons but  not force others to do the same. 
(6) They can enforce the massage of the Tricolor Fl ag in their own persons and harbor 
neither communalism nor untouchability in their hea rts. They will cultivate real 
friendship with student of other faiths and with Ha rijans as If they were their own kith 
and kin. 
(7) They will make it a point to give first aid to their injured neighbours and do 
scavenging and cleaning in the neighbouring villages and instruct village children and 
adults. 
(8) They will all learn the national language, Hind ustani, in its present double dress-
two forms of speech and two scripts–so that they ma y feel at home whether Hindi or 
Urdu is spoken and Nagari or Urdu script is written . India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  (9) They will translate into their own mother tongu e everything new they may learn 
and transmit it in their weekly round to the surrou nding villages. 
(10)They will do nothing in secret. They will be ab ove-board in all their dealings; they 
will lead a pure life of self-restraint, shed all f ear and be always ready to protect their 
weak fellow-student and be ready to quell riots by non-violent conduct at the risk of 
their lives. And when the final heat of the struggle  comes they will leave their 
institution and, if need be, sacrifice themselves fo r the freedom of their country. 
(11) They will be scrupulously correct and chivalrou s in their behaviour towards their 
girl’s fellow-students. 
For working out the programme I have sketched for th em, the students must find time. 
I know that they waste a grate deal of time in idle ness. By strict economy they can 
save hours. But I do not want to put an undue strain  upon any student. I would, 
therefore, advise patriotic student to lose one year , not at a stretch, but spread it over 
their whole study. They will find that one year so given will not be a waste of time. 
The efforts will add to their equipment, mental, mo ral and physical, and they will have 
made even during their studies a substantial contrib ution to the freedom movement. 
The Bombay Chronicle, 9-1-‘46  
 
The base imitation of the West, the ability to spea k and wire polished English, will not 
add one brick to the temple of freedom. The student  world which is receiving an 
education far too expensive for starving India, an ed ucation which only a microscopic 
minority can ever hope to receive, is expected to qu alify itself for it by giving its life-
blood to the nation. Students must become pioneers in conservative reform, conserving 
all that is good in the nation and fearlessly riddi ng society of the innumerable abases 
that have crept into it. 
Student have to react upon the dumb millions, they h ave to learn to think not in terms 
of a province, or a town, or a class, or a caste, b ut in term of a continent and of the 
millions who include untouchables, drunkards, hooli gans and even prostitutes, for 
whose existence in our midst  every one of us is res ponsible. Students in olden times 
were called Brahmacharis,  that is those who walked  with and in the fear of God. They 
were honored by king and elder. They were a voluntar y change on the nation, and in 
return they gave to the nation hundredfold strong so uls, strong brains, strong arms. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185  Students in the modern world, where they are to be found among fallen nations, are 
considered to be their hope, and have become the se lf- sacrificing leaders of reforms 
in every department. Not that we have no such exampl es in India; but they are far too 
few. What I plead for is that students’ conferences  should stand for this kind of work 
befitting the status of brahmacharis. 
Young India, 9-6-‘27  
 
The student should devote the whole of their vacation  to village service. To this end, 
instead of talking their walks along beaten paths, they should walk to the villages 
within easy reach of their institutions and study t he condition of the village folk and 
befriend them. This habit will bring them in contac t with the villagers who, when the 
students actually go to stay in there midst, will b y reasons of the previous occasional 
contact, receive them as friend rather than as stran gers to be looked upon with 
suspicion. During the ling vacations the students wi ll stay in the village and offer to 
conduct classes for adult and to teach the result o f sanitation to the villages and to 
introduce the spinning- wheel amongst them and teac h them the use of every spare 
minute. In order that this may be done students and  teachers will have to revise their 
ideas of the use of vacation. Often do thoughtless t eachers prescribed lessons to be 
done during the vacation. This, in my options, is in  any case a vicious habit. Vacation is 
just the period when students’ minds should be free  from the routine work and be left 
free for self-help and original development. The vil lage work I have mentioned is easily 
the best form of recreation and light instruction. It is obviously the best preparation 
for dedication to exclusive village service after fini shing the studies. 
Young India, 26- 12-‘29  
 
Put yours talents in the services of the country ins tead of converting them to £.s.d. If 
you are a medical man, there is disease enough in I ndia to need all your medical skill. 
If you are a lawyer, there are differences and quar rels enough in India. Instead of 
fermenting more trouble, patch up those quarrels an d litigation. If you are an 
engineer, build model house suited to the mean and needs of your people and yet full 
of health and fresh air. There is nothing that you have learnt which cannot be turned 
to account.                                                                          Young India, 5-11-’31  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186   
Student and Politics  
Student should have the greatest freedom of expressi on and of opinion. They may 
openly sympathize with any political party they lik e. But in my opinion they may not 
have freedom of action whilst they are studying. A s tudent cannot be an action 
politician and pursue his studies at the same time.  
Harijan, 2-10-‘37  
 
Student cannot afford to have party politics. They hear all parties, as they read all sots 
of books, but their business is to assimilate the t ruth of all and reject the balance. 
Power politics should be unknown to the student wor ld. Immediately they dabble in 
that class of works, they cease to be students and will, therefore, fail to serve the 
country in its crisis. 
To The Students, p. 283 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187   
Chapter 54 
REGENERATION OF INDIAN WOMEN 
Woman has been suppressed under custom and law for which man was responsible and 
in the shaping of which she had no hand. In a plan of life based on non- violence, 
women have as much right to shape her own destiny a s man has to shape his. But as 
every rights in a non-violent society proceed from t he precious performance of a duty, 
it follows that rules of the social conduct must be  framed by mutual co- operation and 
consultation. They can never be imposed from outside . Men have not realized this 
truth in its fullness in their behaviour towards wo men. They have considered 
themselves to be lords women. They have considered th emselves to be lords and 
masters of women instead of considering them as the ir friends and co-workers. Women 
are in the position somewhat of the slave of old who  did not know that he could or 
ever had to be free. And when have been taught to reg ard themselves they enable of 
men. It is up to Congressmen to see that they enabl e them to realize their full status 
and play their part as equals of men. 
This revolution is easy, if the mind up. Let congres smen begin with their own homes. 
Wives should not be dolls and object of indulgence, but should be treated as honored 
comrades in common service. To this end those who ha ve not received a liberal 
education should receive such instruction as is poss ible for their husbands. The same 
observation applies, with the necessary changes, to mothers and daughters. 
It is hardly necessary to point out that I have gives  a one-sided picture of the helpless 
state of India’s women. I am quite conscious of the  fact that in the villages generally 
they hold their own with their men folk and in some  respects even rule them. But to 
the impartial outsider the legal and customary stat us of women is bad enough 
throughout and demands radical alteration. 
Constructive Programme, pp.17-18  
 
Legislation has been mostly the handiwork of men; a nd man has not always been fair 
and discriminating in performing that self-appointe d task. The largest parts of our 
efforts, in promoting the regeneration of women, sh ould be directed towards removing 
those blemishes which are represented in our Shastr as as the necessary and ingrained 
characteristic of women. Who will attempt this and how? In my humble opinion, in India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  order to make the attempt we will have to produce wo men, pure, firm and self-
controlled as Sita, Damayanti and Draupadi. If we d o produce them, such modern 
sisters will have the same authority as the Shastras . We will feel ashamed of the stray 
reflections on them in our Smritis, and will soon f orget them. Such revaluations have 
occurred in Hinduism in the past, and will still ta ke place in the future, lending to the 
stability of our faith. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 424  
 
Woman is the companion of man gifted with equal men tal capacities.  She has the right 
to participate in every minute detail in the activit ies of man and she has an equal right 
of freedom and liberty with him. She is entitled to  a supreme place in her own sphere 
of activity as man is in his. This ought to be the natural condition of things and not as a 
result only of leaning to read and write. By sheer force of a vicious custom, even the 
most ignorant and worthless men have been enjoying a superiority and worthless men 
have been enjoying a superiority over women which the y do not deserve and ought not 
to have. Many of our movements stop half way because  of the conditions of our 
women. Much of our works done dose not yield approp riate results; our lot is like that 
of the penny-wise and pound-foolish trader who does  not employ enough capital in his 
business. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 425 
 
Equality of Sexes  
I am uncompromising in the matter of women’s rights . In my opinion she should labour 
under no legal disability not suffered by men. I sh ould treat the daughters and sons on 
a footing of perfect equality. 
Young India, 17-10-‘29  
 
Equity of sexes does not mean equity of occupations . There may be no legal bar 
against woman hunting or wielding a lance. But she instinctively recoils form a function 
that belongs to man. Nature has created sexes as co mplements of each other. Their 
functions are defined as are their forms.                                        Harijan, 2-12-‘39  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189   
Marriage  
A large part of the miseries of today can be avoided , if we look at the relations 
between the sexes in a healthy and pure light, and regard ourselves as trustees for the 
moral welfare of the future generations. 
Young India, 27-9-‘28  
 
Marriage is a natural thing in life, and to conside r it derogatory in any sense is wrong…. 
The ideal is to look upon marriage as a sacrament, and therefore, to lead a life of self- 
restraint in the married state. 
Harijan, 22-3-‘42  
 
The Purdah  
Chastity is not a hot-house growth. It cannot be pr otected by the surrounding wall of 
the Purdha. It must growth from within, and to be w orth anything is must be capable 
of withstanding every unsought temptation. 
Young India, 3-2-‘27  
 
And why is there all this morbid anxiety about fema le purity? Have women any say in 
the matter of male purity? We hear nothing of women ’s anxiety about men’s chastity. 
Why should men arrogate to themselves the right to regulate female purity? It cannot 
be superimposed form without. It is a matter of evol ution from within and therefore of 
individual self effort. 
Young India 25-11-26  
 
The Dowry System  
The system has to go. Marriage must cease to be a m atter of arrangement made by the 
parents for money. The system is intimately connect ed with caste. So long as the 
choice is restricted to a few hundred young men or young women of a particular caste, 
the system will persist no matter what is said agai nst it. The girls or boys or their 
parents will have to break the bonds of caste if th e evil is to be eradicated. All this India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190  means education of a character that will revolution ize the mentality of the youth of 
the nation. 
Harijan, 23-5-26  
 
Any Young Man Who makes dowry a conditions of marri age discredits his education and 
his country and dishonors womanhood.  There are man y youth movement in the 
country. I wish that these movements would deal with  question of this character. Such 
associations often become self-adulation societies,  instead of becoming, as they should 
be, bodies representing solid reform from within…. A strong public opinion should be 
created in condemnation of the degrading practice o f dowry and young men who soil 
their fingers with such ill-gotten gold should be e xcommunicated from society. Parents 
of girls should not cease to be dazzled by English degrees and provinces to secure true, 
gallant young men for their daughters. 
Young India, 21-6’28  
 
Widow Re-marriage  
Voluntary widowhood consciously adopted by a woman who has felt the affection of a 
partner adds grace and dignity to life, sanctifies the home and uplifts religious itself. 
Widowhood imposed by religion or custom is an unbea rable yoke and defiles the home 
by secret vice and degrades religion. 
If we would be pure, if we would save Hinduism, we m ust rid ourselves of this poison of 
enforced widowhood. The reform must begin by those who have girl widows taking 
courage in both their hands and seeing that the chi ld widows in their charges are duly 
and well married- not remarried. They were never rea lly married. 
Young India, 5-8-,26  
 
Divorce  
Marriage confirms the right of union between two pa rtners to the exclusion of all the 
others when in their joint opinion they consider su ch union to be desirable, but it 
confers no right upon one partner to demand obedien ce of the other to one’s wish for 
union. What should be done when one partner on mora l or other grounds cannot India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191  conform to the wishes of the other is a separate qu estion. Personally, if divorce was 
the only alternative, I should not hesitate to acce pt it, rather than interrupt my moral 
progress assuming that I want to restrain myself on  purely moral grounds. 
For me, the married state is as much a state of dis cipline as any other. Life is duty, a 
probation. Married life is intended to promote mutu al good, both here and hereafter. 
It is meant also to serve humanity. When one partner  breaks the law of discipline, the 
right accrues to the other of breaking the bond. Th e breach here is moral and not 
physical. It precludes divorce. The wife or the husb and separates but to serve the end 
for which they have united. Hinduism regards each a s absolute equal of the other. No 
doubt a different practice has grown up, no one kno ws since when. But so have many 
other evils crept into it. This, however, I do know t hat Hinduism leaves the individual 
absolutely free to do what he or she likes for the sake of self-realization, for which and 
which alone he or she is born. 
Young India, 21-10-26  
 
Woman’s Honour  
I have always held that it is physically impossible to violence a women against her will. 
The outrage takes place only when she gives way to f ear or does not realize her moral 
strength. If she cannot meet the assailant’s physic al might, her purity will gives the 
strength to die before he succeeds in violating her.  Take the case of Sita. Physically 
she was a weakling before Ravana, but her purity wa s more than a match even for his 
giant might. He tried to win her with all kind of a llurements but could not carnally 
tough her without her consent on the other hand, if  a women depends on her own 
physical strength or upon a weapon she possesses, s he is sure to be discomfited 
whenever her strength is exhausted. 
Harijan, 14-1-‘40  
 
When a woman is assaulted she may not stop to think  in terms of himsa of ahimsa. Her 
primary duty is self-protection. She is at liberty to employ every method or mean that 
come to her mind in order to define her honour. God  has given her nails and teeth, She 
must use them with all her strength and, if need be , die in the effort. The man or 
women who has shed all fear of death will be able n ot only to protect himself all fear India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  of death will be able not only to protect himself o r herself but others also through 
laying down his life. 
Harijan, 1-3-‘42  
 
Prostitution  
Prostitution in as old as the world, but I wonder i f it was ever a regular feature of town 
life as it is today. In any case the time must come  when humanity will rise against the 
cure and make prostitution a thing of the past, as it has got rid of many evil customs, 
however time-honoured they might have been. 
Young India, 28-5-‘25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193   
Chapter 55 
WOMEN’S EDUCATION 
I have pointed out form time to time that there is n o justification for men to deprive 
women or to deny them equal rights on the ground of  their illiteracy; but education is 
essential for enabling women to uphold these natura l rights, to improve them and to 
spread them; again the true knowledge of self and t o spread them; again, the true 
knowledge of self is unattainable by the millions w e are without such education. 
Man and women are of equal rank but they are not id entical. They are a peerless pair 
being supplementary to one another, each helpless t he other, so that without the one 
the existence of the other can not be conceived, and  therefore it follows as a 
necessary corollary from these facts that anything that will impair the status of either 
of them will involve the equal ruin of them both. In framing any scheme of women’s 
education this cardinal truth must be constantly ke pt in mind. Man is supreme in the 
outwards activities of a married pair and, therefore . It is in the fitness of things that 
he should have life is entirely the sphere of women and, therefore, in domestic affairs, 
in the upbringing and education of children, women ought to have mere knowledge. 
Not that knowledge should be divided in to watertigh t compartments, to that some 
branches of knowledge should close any one; but unl ess courses of instruction are 
based on a discriminating appreciation of these bas ic principles, the fullest life of man 
and women cannot be developed. 
I have come to the conclusion that in the ordinary c ourse of our lives neither our men 
nor our women need necessarily have any knowledge o f English. True, English is 
necessary for making a living and for active associa tion in our political movements. I do 
not believe in women working for a living or underta king commercial enterprises. The 
few women who may require or desire to have English  education can very easily have 
their way by joining the schools for men. To introd uce English education in schools 
meant for women could only lead to prolongation of our helplessness. I have often read 
and heard people saying that the rich treasures of English literature should be opened 
alike to mean and women. I submit in all humility t hat there is some misapprehension 
in assuming such an attitude. No one intends to clo se these treasures against women 
while keeping them open for men. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194  There is non earth to prevent you from studying the literature of the world if you have 
literary tastes. But when course of education have been framed with the needs of a 
particular society in view, you cannot supply the re quirement of the few who have 
cultivated a literary taste. In asking our men and women to spend less time in the 
study of English than they are doing now, my object  is not to deprive them of the 
pleasure which they are likely to derive from it, b ut I hold that the same please can be 
obtained at less cost and  trouble if we follow a m ore natural method. The world is full 
of many a gem of priceless beauty, but then these g ems are not all of English setting. 
Other languages can well boast of production of sim ilar excellence; all these should be 
made available for our common people and that can on ly be done if our learned men 
will undertake to translate them for us in our own language. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi. pp. 426-8  
 
I believe in the proper education of women. But I d o believe that women will not make 
her contribution to the world by mimicking or runni ng a race with man. She can run 
the race, but she will not rise to the great height s she is capable of by mimicking man. 
She has to be complement of man. 
Harijan, 27-2-‘37  
 
Co-education  
I cannot definitely state as yet whether it will be  successful or not. It does not seem to 
have succeeded in the West. I tried it myself years ago when I even made boys and 
girls sleep in the same verandah with no partition b etween them, Mrs. Gandhi and 
myself sharing the verandah with them. I must say i t brought undesirable results. 
…Co-education is still in its experiment stage and we cannot definitely say one way or 
the other as to its results. I think we should begi n with the family first. There boy and 
girls should grow together freely and naturally. Th e co-education will come of itself. 
Amrita Bazar patrika, 12-1-‘35  
 
If you keep co-education in your school, but not in  your training- schools, the children 
will think there is something wrong some where. I s hould allow my children to run the India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195  risk. We shall have to rid ourselves one day of this  sex mentality. We should not seek 
for examples from the West. Even in training- School , if the teachers are intelligent, 
pure and filled with the spirit of Nai Talim, There  is no danger. Supposing if some 
accidents do take place, we should not be frightene d by them. They would take place 
anywhere. Although I speak boldly, I am not unaware  of the attendant risk. 
Harijan, 9-11-‘47  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196   
Chapter 56 
BIRTH- CONTROL 
There can be two opinions about the necessity of bi rth-control. But the only method 
handed down from ages past is self-control or Brahm acharya. It is an infallible 
sovereign remedy doing good to those who practice it . And medical men will earn the 
gratitude of mankind, if instead of devising artifi cial means of birth-control they will 
find out the means of self-control. 
Artificial methods are like putting a premium upon vice. They make man and women 
reckless. And respectability that is being given to  the methods must hasten the 
dissolution of the restraints that public opinion p uts upon one. Adoption of artificial 
methods must result in imbecility and nervous prost ration. The remedy will be found to 
be worse than the disease. 
It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the conse quence of one’s acts. It is good for 
a person who overeats to have an ache and a fast. It  is bad for him to indulge his 
appetite and then escape the consequence by taking tonics or other medicine. It is still 
worse for a person to indulge in his acts. Nature i s relentless and will have full revenge 
for any such violation of her laws. Moral result ca n only be produced by moral 
restraints. All other restraints defeat the very pur pose for which they are intended. 
Young India, 12-3-‘25  
 
The practice of preventing progeny, by mean of artif icial method is not a new thing. In 
the past such method were practiced secretly and th ey were crude. Modern Society has 
given them a respectable place and made improvements.  They have been given a 
philanthropic parb. The advocates of contraceptives s ay that sexual desire is a natural 
instinct- some call it a blessing. They therefore s ay that it is were possible. Birth-
control by means of self –restraint is, in their op inion, difficult to practice. If a 
substitute for self-restraint is not prescribed, th e health of innumerable women is 
bound to suffer through frequent pregnancies. They add that if births are not 
regulated, over–population will ensure; individual f amilies will be pauperized and their 
children will be ill-fed, ill-clothed and ill-educa ted. Therefore, they argue, it is the 
duty of scientists to devise harmless and effective m ethod of birth-control. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197  This argument has failed to convince me. The use of  contraceptives is likely to produce 
evils if which we have no conception. But the worst danger is that the use of 
contraceptives bids fair to kill the desire for sel f-restraint. In my opinion it is too heavy 
a price to pay for any possible immediate gain…. Se lf- deception is the greatest 
stumbling block. Instead of controlling mind, the f ountain of all animal desire, men 
and women involve themselves in the vain endeavour to avoid the physical act. If there 
is a determination to control the through and the a ction, victory is sure to follow. Man 
must understand that a woman is his companion and h elpmate in life and not a means 
of satisfying his carnal desire. There must be a cl ear perception that the purpose 
satisfaction of animal wants. 
Key to health, pp. 52-54  
 
I know what havoc secret vice has played among schoo l boys girls. The Introduction of 
contraceptives under the name of science and the im primeture of known leaders of 
society have intensified the complication and made t he risk of reforms who work for 
purity of social life, well-night impossible age st udying in school and colleges who 
study birth-control literature and magazines with a vidity and even possess 
contraceptives. It is impossible to confine their u se to married women. Marriage loses 
its sanctity when its purpose and highest use is co ntemplating the natural result of 
such satisfaction. 
I have no doubt that those learned men and women who  are carrying on propaganda 
men and with missionary zeal in favour of the use o f contraceptives, are doing 
irreparable harm to the use of contraceptives, are d oing irreparable harm to the youth 
if the country under the false belief that they wil l be saving there by, the poor women 
who may be obliged to bear children against their w ill. Those who need to limit their 
children will not be easily reached by them. Our po or women have not the knowledge 
or the training that the women of the west have. Sur ely the propaganda is not being 
carried on on behalf of the middle class women, for  they do not need the knowledge, 
at any rate so much as the poor classes do. 
The greatest harm, however, done by that propaganda lies in its rejection of the old 
ideas and substitution on its place of one which, i f carried out, must spell the moral 
and physical extinction of the race. The horror wit h which ancient literature has India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198  regarded the fruitless use of the vital fluid was no t a superstition born of ignorance. 
What shall we of a husbandman who will sow the fine st seed in his possession on stony 
ground or of the owner of a field who will received , in his field rich with fine soil, good 
seed under conditions that will make it seed that h as the highest potency and women 
with a field richer with seed that has the highest earth to be found any where on his 
global. Surely it is criminal folly for man to allo w his most precious possession to run to 
waste. He upon the richest pearls in his possession . And so is a woman guilty of 
criminal golly who will receive the seed in her life -producing field with the deliberate 
intention of letting it run to waste. Both he and s he will be judged guilty of the misuse 
of the talented gives to them and they will be dispo sed of what they have been given. 
Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothin g is ne ashamed of it is a sin against 
god and humanity. Contraceptive of a kind there wer e before and there will be 
hereafter; but the use of them was formerly regarde d as sinful. It was reserved for our 
generation to glorify vice by calling it virtue. The  greatest disserve protagonists of 
contraceptive are rendering to the youth of India i s to fill their minds with what 
appears to me to be wrong ideology. Let the young m en and women of India who hold 
guard the treasure with which god has blessed them and use it, if they wish, for the 
only purpose for which it is intended. 
Harijan, 28-3-‘36  
 
I do not believe that woman is prey to sexual desire  to the same extent as man. It is 
easier for her than for man to exercise self- restr aint. I hold that right education in his 
country is to teach woman the art of saying no even to her husband, to teach her that 
it is no part of her duty to become a mere tool or a doll in her husband’s hands. She 
has rights as well as duties.  
… The first thing is to free her from mental slavery , to teach her sacredness of her 
body, and to teach her dignity of national service a nd the service of humanity, it is not 
fair to assume that Indian’s woman are beyond redem ption, and that they have 
therefore to be simply taught the use of contracept ives for the sake of preventing 
births and preserving such health as they may be in possession of. 
Let not sisters who are rightly indignant over the m iseries of women who are called 
upon to bear children, whether they will or no, be impatient. Not even the propaganda India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199  in favor of contraceptives is going to promote the d esired end overnight. Every method 
is a matter of education. My plea is for the type. 
Harijan, 2-5-‘36  
 
Sterilization  
I consider it inhuman to impose sterilization law o n the people. But in case of 
individual with chronic diseases, it is desirable to  have them sterilized if they are 
agreeable to it. Sterilization is a sort of contrac eptive and though I am against the use 
of contraceptive in case of women, I do not mind vol untary sterilization in case of man 
since he is the aggressor. 
Amrita Bazar Patrika, 12-1-‘35  
 
Bogey of Over-Population  
If it is contended that birth-control is necessary for the nation because of over 
population, I dispute the proposition. It has never been proved. In my opinion, by a 
proper land-system, agricultural and a supplementar y industry, this country is capable 
of supporting twice as many people as there are tod ay. 
Young India, 2-4-‘25  
 
This little globe of ours is not a toy of yesterday . It has not suffered from the weight of 
over-population through its age of countless million s. How can it be that the truth has 
suddenly dawned upon some people that it is in dang er of perishing of shortage of food 
unless birth rate is checked through the use of con traceptives? 
Harijan, 14-9-35  
 
The bogey of increasing birth rate is not a new thi ng. It has been often trotted out. 
Increase in population in not and ought not to be r egarded as a calamity to be avoided. 
Its regulation or restriction by artificial method is a calamity of the first grade the 
race, if it becomes universal, which, thank god, it is never likely to be. Pestilence, 
wars and famines are cursed antidotes against curse d lust which is responsible for 
unwanted children. If we could avoid this threefold  curse we would avoid too the curse India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  of unwanted children by the sovereign remedy if self -control…. Let me say propagation 
of the race rabbit wise must undoubtedly be stopped ; but not so as to bring greater 
evils in its train. It should be stopped by methods,  it is all a matter of proper education 
which would embrace every department of life; and de aling with one curse will take in 
its orbit all the others. A way is not to be avoide d because it is upward and therefore 
uphill. Man’s upward progress necessarily necessari ly means ever increasing difficulty, 
which is to be welcomed. 
Harijan, 31-3-‘46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201   
Chapter 57 
SEX EDUCATION 
What place has… instruction in sexual science in ou r educational system, or has it ant 
place there at all? Sexual science is of two kinds- that which is used that which is used 
for controlling or overcoming the sexual passion, an d that which is used to stimulate 
and feed it. Instruction in the former is as necess ary a part of a child’s education as 
the latter is harmful and dangerous and fit there f ore only to be shunned. And grate 
religious have rightly regarded kama as the arch-ene my of man, anger or hatred 
coming only in the second place. According to the G ita, the latter is an offspring of the 
former. The Gita, of course, use the word kama in i ts wider sense of desire. But the 
same holds good of the narrow sense in which it is used here. 
This, however, skill leaves unanswered the question,  i.e. whether it is desirable to 
impart to young pupils a knowledge about the use an d function of generative organs. It 
seems to me that it is necessary to impart such kno wledge to a certain extent. At 
present they are often left to pick up such knowled ge anyhow with the result that they 
are misled into abusive practices. We cannot proper ly control or conquer the sexual 
passion by turning a blind eye to it. I am, therefo re, strongly in favour of teaching 
young boys and girls, the significance and right us e of their generative organs. And in 
my own way I have tried to impart this knowledge to young children of both sexes for 
whose training I was responsible. 
But the sex education that I stand for, must have fo r its object the conquest and 
sublimation serve to bring home to children, the es sential distinction between man and 
brute, to make them realized that it is man’s speci al privilege and pride to be gifted 
with the faculties of head and heart both; that he is a thinking no less than a feeling 
animal, as the very derivation of the word (Hindi) s hows, and to renounce the 
sovereignty of reason over the blind instincts is, th erefore, to renounce a man’s 
estate. In man, reasons quicken and guides the hear t is to awaken the dormant soul, to 
awaken reasons, and to inculcate discrimination bet ween good and evil. 
Who should teach this true science of sex? Clearly,  he who has attained mastery over 
his passions. To teach astronomy and kindred scienc es we have teachers who have 
gone through course of training in them and ate mas ters of their art. Even so much we 
have as teachers of sexual science, i.e. the science  of sex-control, those who have India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202  studied it and have acquired mastery over self. Even a lofty utterance, that has not the 
backing of sincerity and experience, will be inert and lifeless, and will utterly fail to 
penetrate and quicken the hearts of men, while the to penetrate and quicken the 
hearts of men, while the speech that springs from s elf-realization and genuine 
experience is always fruitful. 
Today our entire environment - our reading. Our thi nking, our social behavior – is 
generally calculated to sub-serve and cater for the sex- urge. To brake through its coils 
is no easy task. But it is a task worthy of our hig hest endeavour. Even if there are a 
handful of teachers endowed with practical experien ce, who accept the ideal of 
attaining self- control as the highest duty of man,  and are fired by a genuine and 
undying faith in their mission, and are sleeplessly  vigilant and active, their labour will 
light the path of the children…, save the unwary fro m falling in to the mire of 
sexuality, and rescue those who might be already en gulfed in it.  
Harijan, 21-11’36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203   
Chapter 58 
CHILDREN 
Children inherit the qualities of the parents, no l ess than their physical features. 
Environment does play an important part, but the ori ginal capital on which a child 
starts life is inherited from its ancestors. I have always seen children successfully 
surmounting the effects of evil inheritance. That is  due to purity being an inherent 
attribute of the soul. 
Autobiography, p. 312  
 
The real property that a parent can transmit to all  equally is his or her character and 
educational facilities…. Parents should seek to mak e their sons and daughters self-
reliant, well able to earn an hones livelihood by t he sweat of the brow. 
Young India, 29-10-‘31  
 
I believe implicitly that the child is not born mis chievous in the bad sense of the term. 
If parents would behave themselves whilst the child i s growing, before it is born and 
after, it is a well-known fact that the child would  instinctively obey the law of Truth 
and the law of Love….And believe me, from my experie nce of hundreds- I was going to 
say thousands-of children, I know that they have per haps a finer sense of honour than 
you or I have. The greatest lessons of life, if we would but stoop and humble ourselves, 
we would learn not from grown-up learned men, but f rom the so-called ignorant 
children. Jesus never uttered a loftier or a grande r truth than when he said that 
wisdom cometh out of the mouth of babes. I believe it. I have noticed it in my own 
experience that if we would approach babes in humil ity and innocence, we would 
learned this one lesson-that what is impossible wit h man is child’s play with God and if 
we have faith in that divinity which presides on the destiny of the meanest of the 
meanest of His creation, I have no doubt that all t hings are possible and in that final 
hope, I believe and pass my time and endeavour to ob ey His will. If we are to reach 
real peace in this world and if we are it carry on a real war, we shall have to begin 
with children; and of they will grow up in their na tural innocence, we won’t have to 
struggle, we won’t have to pass fruitless, idle the resolutions, but we shall go from India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204  love to love and peace to peace, until at last all th e corners of the world are converted 
with that peace and love for which, consciously or u nconsciously, the while world is 
hungering. 
Young India, 19- 11- 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205   
Chapter 59 
COMMUNAL UNITY 
Everybody is agreed about the necessity of this (com munal) unity. But everybody does 
not know that unity does not mean political unity w hich may be imposed. It means an 
unbreakable heart unity. The first things essential  for achieving such unity is for every 
in his won person Hindu, Muslim, Christian, Zoroast rain, Jew, etc. shortly, every one of 
the millions of the inhabitants of Hindustan. In or der to realize this, every congressman 
will cultivate personal friendship with person repr esenting faiths other than his own. 
He should have the same regard for the other faiths as he has for his own. 
Constructive Programme, p.8  
 
Hindus and Musalmans, Christians, Shikhs and Parsis  must not settle their difference by 
resort to violence….Hindus and Musalmans prate abou t no compulsion in religion. What 
is it but compulsion, if Hindus will kill a Musalma n for saving a cow? It is like wanting to 
convert a Musalman to Hinduism by force. And simila rly what is it but compulsion, if 
Musalmans seek to prevent by force Hindus from playi ng music before mosques? Virtue 
lies in being absorbed in one’s prayers in the pres ence of din and noise. We shall both 
be voted irreligious savages by posterity if we conti nue to make a futile attempt to 
compel one another to respect our religious wishes.  
If Hindu-Muslim unity is endangered because an Arya  Samaj preacher or a Musalman 
preacher preaches his faith in obedience to a call from within, that unity is only skin-
deep. Why should we be ruffled by such movements? On ly they must be genuine. If the 
Malkanas wanted to return to the Hindu fold they ha d a perfect right to do so 
whenever they liked. But no propaganda can be allow ed which reviles other religions. 
For, that would be negation of toleration. The best  way of dealing with such 
propaganda is publicly to condemn it. Every movement attempts to put on the cloak of 
respectability. As soon as the public tear the cloa k of respectability. As soon as the 
public tear the cloak down, it dies for want of res pectability. 
It is now time to examine the treatment of two cons tant causes of friction. 
The first is cow slaughter. Though I regard cow pro tection as the central fact of 
Hinduism, central because it is common to classes a s well as masses, I have never been India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206  able to understand the antipathy towards the Muslam ans on that score. We say nothing 
about the Musalmans that daily takes place on behal f of Englishmen. Our anger 
becomes red-hot when a Muslalman slaughters a cow. All the riots that have taken 
place in the name of the cow have been an insane was te of effort. They have not saved 
a single cow, but they have on the contrary stiffene d the backs of the Musalmans and 
resulted in more slaughter…Cow protection should co mmence with ourselves. In no 
parts of the world perhaps are cattle worse treated  than in India. I have wept to see 
Hindu drivers goading their jaded oxen with the iron  points of their cruel stick. The 
half starved condition of the majority of our cattle  is a disgrace to. The cows find their 
necks under the butcher’s knife because Hindus sell  them. The only effective and 
honourable way is to befriend the Musalmans and lea ve it to their Honour to save the 
cow. Cow protection societies most turn their atten tion to the feeding of cattle, 
prevention of cruelty, preservation of the fast disap pearing pasture land, improving 
the breed of cattle, buying from poor shepherds and  turning pinjrapols in to middle 
self-supporting dairies. Hindus do sin against god and man when they omit to do any of 
the things I have described above. They commit no si n, if they cannot prevent cow 
slaughter at the hands of Muslmans, and they do sin  grievously when in other to save 
the cow, they quarrel with the Muslmans. 
The question of music before mosques, and now even a rati in Hindu temples, has 
occupied my prayerful attention. This is a sore poi nt with the Musalmans as cow 
slaughter is with the Hindus. And just as Hindus ca nnot compel Musalmans to refrain 
from killing cows, so can Musalmans not compel Hind us to stop music or arati at the 
point of sword. They must trust the god sense of th e Hindus. As a Hindu, I would 
certainly advise the Hindus, without any bargaining spirit, to consult the sentiment of 
their Musalman neighbours and wherever they can, ac commodate them. I have heart 
that in some places, Hindus purposely and with the deliberate intention of irritating 
Musalmans, commence. This is an insensate and unfri endly act. Friendship presupposes 
the utmost attention to the feelings of a friend. I t never required consideration. But 
Musalmans should never expect to stop Hindu music b y force. To yield to the threat or 
actual use of violence is a surrender of one’s self- respect and religious conviction. But 
a person, who never will yield to threat, would alwa ys minimize and, if possible, even 
avoid occasions for causing irritation.  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207  I am convinced that the masses do not want to fight,  if the leaders do not. If, 
therefore the leaders a free that mutual rows shoul d be, as in all advanced countries, 
erased out of our public life as being barbarous an d irreligious, I have no doubt that 
the masses will quickly follow them.  
Were Hindus and Musalmans and Sikhs always at war w ith one another when there was 
mo British rule, when there was no English face see n here? WE have chapter and verse 
given to us by Hindu historians and by Musalman hist orians to say that we were living in 
comparative peace even then. And Hindus and Musalman s in the villages are not even 
today quarrel at all…. This quarrel is not old…. I dare say, it is coeval with the British 
advent, and immediately this relationship, the unfor tunate, artificial unnatural 
relationship between Great Britain and India is tra nsformed into a natural relationship, 
when it becomes, if it does become a voluntary partn ership to be given up, to be 
dissolved at the will of either partly, when it beco mes that, you will find that Hindus, 
Musalmans, Sikhs, Europeans, Anglo-Indians, Christi ans, untouchables, will all live 
together as one man. 
Young India, 24-12-31  
 
I have not a shadow of doubt that the iceberg of com munal differences will melt under 
the warmth of the sun of freedom. 
Young India, 29-10-31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208   
Chapter 60 
VARNASHRAMA DHARMA  
I believe that every man is born in the world with certain natural tendencies. Every 
person is born with certain natural tendencies. Ever y person is born with certain 
definite limitations which he cannot overcome. From  a careful observation of those 
limitations the law of Varna was deduced. It establ ishes certain spheres of action for 
certain people with certain tendencies. This avoided  all unworthy competition. Whilst 
recognizing limitations the law of Varna admitted o f no distinctions of high and low; on 
the one hand it guaranteed to each the fruits of hi s labours, and on the other it 
prevented him from pressing upon his neighbours repu ted. But my conviction is that an 
ideal social order will only be evolved when the impl ication of this law are fully 
understood and given effect to. 
The Modern review, Oct’35, p.413  
 
Varnashrama Dharma defines man’s mission on this ea rth. He is not born day after day 
to explore avenues for amassing riches and to explor e different means of livelihood; on 
the contrary man is born in order that he may utili ze every atom of his energy for his 
purpose of knowing his Maker. It restricts him, the refore, for the purpose of holding 
body and soul together, to the occupation of his fo refathers. That and nothing more or 
nothing less is Varnashrama Dharma. 
Young India, 27-10-‘27  
 
I consider the four divisions alone to be fundament al, natural, and essential. The 
innumerable sub castes are sometimes a convenience, often a hindrance. The sooner 
there is fusion the batter. 
Young India, 8-12-20  
 
Today Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudra s are mere labels. There is utter 
confusion of varna as I understand it and I wish th at all the Hindus will voluntarily call 
themselves Shudras. That is the only way to demonstr ate the truth of Brahmanism and 
to revive Varnadhrma in its true state.                                               Harijan, 25-3-33  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209   
Caste  
I have frequently said that I do not believe in caste  in the modern sense. It is an 
excrescence and a handicap on progress. Nor, do I b elieve in inequalities between 
human being. We are all absolutely equal. But equal ity is of souls and not bodies. 
Hence, it is a mental state. We need to think of, a nd to assert, equality because we 
see great inequalities in the physical world. We ha ve to realize equalities in the midst 
of this apparent external to realize equality in th e midst of this apparent external 
inequality. Assumption of superiority by any person  over any other is a sin against god 
and man. Thus caste, in so far as it connotes disti nctions in status, is an evil. I do, 
however, believe in Varna which is based on hereditar y occupations, Varnas are four to 
mark four universal occupations,-imparting knowledge , defending the defence less, 
carrying on agriculture and commerce, and performin g service through physical labour. 
These occupations ate common to all mankind, but Hi nduism, having recognized them 
as the law of our being, has made use of it in regu lating social relations and conduct. 
Gravitation affects us all, whether one knows its ex istence or not. But scientist who 
knew the law have made it yield results that have st artled the world. Even so, has 
Hinduism started the world by its discovery and appl ication of the law of Varna. When 
Hindus were seized with inertia, abuse of Varna res ulted in innumerable castes, with 
unnecessary and harmful restrictions to inter-dinin g. The law of Varna has nothing to 
do with these restrictions. People of different Var nas may be necessary in the interest 
of chastity and hygiene. But a Brahmana who marries  a Shudra girl, or vice versa, 
commits no offence against the law of Varna. 
Young India, 4-6-31  
 
It is as wrong to destroy caste of the out caste, a s it would be to destroy a body 
because of an ugly growth in it or if a crop becaus e of the weeds. The out casteness, in 
the sense we understand it, has there fore to be de stroyed altogether. It is an excess 
to be removed, if the whole system is not to perish . Untouchability is the product, 
there fore, not of the caste system, but of the dis tinction of high and low that has 
crept into Hinduism and is corroding it. The attack  on untouchability is thus an attack 
upon this ‘high-and-low’-ness. the moment untouchab ility goes, the caste system itself India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  will be purified, that is to say, according to my d ream, it will resolve itself into the 
true Varnadharma, the four divisions of society, eac h complementary of the other and 
none inferior or superior to any other, each as nec essary for the whole body of 
Hinduism as any other. 
Harijan, 11-2-33  
 
From the economic point if view, its value was once v ery grate. It ensured hereditary 
skill; it limited competition. It was the best reme dy against pauperism. And it had all 
the advantages of trade guilds. Although it did not foster adventure or invention there, 
it is not known to have come in the way either.  
Historically speaking, caste may be regarded as man ’s experiment or social adjustment 
in the laboratory of Indian society. If we can prove  it to be a success, it can be offered 
to the world as a leaven and as the nest remedy aga inst heartless competition and 
social disintegration born of avarice and greed. 
Young India, 5-1-21  
 
Inter-marriage and Inter-dining  
Through there is in Varashrama no prohibition again st inter-marriage and inter-dinning, 
there can be no compulsion. It must be left to the unfettered choice of the individual 
as to where he or she will marry or dine. 
Harijan, 16-11-35   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211   
Chapter 61 
THE CURSE OF UNTOUCHABILITY 
There is an ineffaceable blot that Hinduism today c arries with it. I have declined to 
believe that it has been handed down to us from imm emorial times. I think that this 
miserable, wretched, enslaving spirit of ‘untouchab leness’ must have come to us when 
we were at our lowest ebb. This evil has stuck to us  and still remains with us, and as 
long as that curse remains with us, so long, I thin k sacred land is a proper punishment 
for the indelible crime that we are committing. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 387  
 
Untouchability as it is practiced in Hinduism today  is, in my opinion, a sin against God 
and man and is, there-fore, like a poison slowly ea ting into the very vitals of Hinduism. 
In my opinion, it has no sanction whatsoever in the  Hindu Shastras taken as a whole. 
Untouchability of a healthy kind is universal in all  religious. It is a rule of sanitation. 
That will exist to the end of time; but untouchabil ity as we are observing today in India 
is a hideous think and wears various forms in various  provinces, even in districts, it has 
degraded both the untouchables and the touchables. It has stunted the growth of 
nearly 40 million human beings. They are denied even  the ordinary amenities of life. 
The sooner, therefore, it is ended, the better for Hinduism, the better for India, and 
perhaps better for mankind in general. 
Harijan, 11-2-33  
 
Swaraj is a meaningless term, if we to keep a fifth  of India under perpetual subjection, 
and deliberately deny to them the fruits of subject ion, and deliberately deny to them 
the fruits of national culture. We are seeking the aid of God in this great purifying 
movement, but we deny to the most deserving among Hi s creatures the rights of 
humanity. Inhuman ourselves, we may not plead before  the Throne for deliverance 
from the inhumanity of others. 
Young India, 25-5-21  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212  That untouchability is an old institution, nobody h as ever denied. But if it is an evil, it 
cannot be defended on the ground of its antiquity. If the untouchables are the 
outcastes of the Aryan society, so much the worse f or that society. And if the Aryans at 
some stage in their progress regarded a certain cla ss of people as outcastes by way of 
punishment, there is no reason why that punishment should descend upon their 
progeny irrespective of the causes for which their a ncestors were punished. That there 
is untouchability even amongst untouchables merely demonstrates that the evil cannot 
be confined and that it’s deadening effect is all-p ervading. The existence of 
untouchability amongst untouchables is an additiona l reason for cultured Hindu society 
to rid itself of the curse with the quickest dispat ch. If the untouchables are so because 
they kill animals and because they have to do with flesh, blood, bones and night-soil, 
every nurse and every doctor should become an untouch able and so should Christians 
and Musalmans and all so-called high-class Hindus w ho kill animals for food or sacrifice. 
The argument that because slaughter-houses, toddy-s hop, and houses of ill-fame are or 
should be isolated, untouchables should likewise be  isolated betrays gross prejudice. 
Slaughter houses and toddy-shop are and should be i solated. But neither butchers nor 
publicans are isolated. 
Young India, 29-7-‘26  
 
Placed as we are in the midst of trials and temptat ions from within, and touched and 
polluted as we are by all the most untouchable and the vilest thought currents, let us 
not, in our arrogance, exaggerate the influence of contact with people whom we often 
ignorantly and more often ignorantly and more often  arrogantly consider to be our 
inferiors. Before the Throne of the Almighty we sha ll be judged, not by what we have 
been touched but by whom we have served we have been touched but by whom we 
have served and how. Inasmuch as we serve a single hu man being in distress, we shall 
find favour in the sight of God…. We dare not use ab stinence from certain food as a 
cover for fraud, hypocrisy and worse vices. We dare n ot refuse to serve a fallen or a 
dirty brother lest his contact should injure our sp iritual growth. 
Young India, 5-1-‘22  
 
Scavengers  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213  I have felt for year, that there must be something r adically wrong, where scavenging 
has been made the concern of a separate class in so ciety. We have no historical record 
of the man, who first assigned the lowest status to  this sanitary service. Whoever he 
was, he by no means did us a good. We should, from our minds that we are all 
scavengers, and the easiest way of doing so is, for every one who has realized this, to 
commence bread labour as a scavenger. Scavenging, thu s intelligently taken up, will 
help one to a true appreciation of the equality of man. 
From Yeravda Mandir, Chap. IX  
 
In its inception, untouchability was a rule of sani tation and still is in all parts of the 
world outside India. That is to say, an unclean per son or thing is untouchable but 
immediately his or its uncleanliness is shed, he or  it is no longer untouchable. 
Therefore, persons who are to attend to scavenging, whether a paid bhangi or an 
unpaid mother, they are unclean until they have wash ed themselves clean if their 
unclean work. If instead as a brother and was given an opportunity and even made to 
become clean after performing an unclean service for  society he should be as 
acceptable as any other member of that society. 
Harijan, 11-2-33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214   
Chapter 62 
RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE IN INDIA 
Hinduism  
I have found it to be that most tolerant of all reli gious known to me. Its freedom from 
dogma makes a forcible appeal to me inasmuch as it gives the votary the largest scope 
for self-expression. Not being an exclusive religion , it enables the followers of that 
faith not merely to respect all the other religions , but it also enables them to admire 
and assimilate whatever may be good in the other fa iths. Non-violence is common to 
all religious, but it has found the highest express ion and application in Hinduism (I do 
not regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate from Hin duism). Hinduism believes in the 
oneness not of merely all human life but in the one ness of all that lives. It is a 
practical application of the belief in the oneness and transmigration is a direct 
consequence of that belief in transmigration is a d irect consequence of that belief. 
Finally the discovery of the law of Varnashrama is a  magnificent result of the ceaseless 
search for truth. 
Young India, 20-10-‘27  
 
Buddhism  
It is fixed opinion that Buddhism or rather the tea ching of Buddha found its full fruition 
in India and it could not be otherwise, for Gautama  was himself a Hindu of Hindus. He 
was saturated with the best that was in Hindus, and  he gave life to some of the 
teachings that were buried in the Vedas and which w ere overgrown with weeds…. 
Buddha never rejected Hinduism, but broadened its ba se. He gave it a new life and a 
new interpretation. 
Young India, 24-11-27  
 
He undoubtedly rejected the notion that a being cal led God was actuated by malice, 
could repent of his action, and like the kings of t he earth could possibly have favorites. 
His whole soul rose in mighty indignation against t he belief that a being called God 
required for his satisfaction the living blood of an imals in order that he might be 
pleased- animals who were His own creation. He, the refore, reinstated God in the right India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  place and dethroned the usurper who for the time be ing seemed to occupy that While 
Throne. He emphasized and redeclared the eternal an d unalterable existence of the 
moral government of this universe. He unhesitatingl y said that the law was God 
himself. 
Young India, 24-11-27  
 
Christianity  
I cannot ascribe exclusive divinity to Jesus. He is a s divine as Krishna or Rama or 
Muhammad or Zoroaster. Similarly I do not regard ev ery world of the Bible as the 
inspired world of god even as I do not regard every w orld of the Vedas or the Koran as 
inspired. The sum total of each of these books is c ertainly inspired, but I miss that 
inspiration in many of the things taken individuall y. The Bible is as much a book of 
religion with me as the Gita and the Koran. 
Harijan, 6-3-37  
 
It is my firm opinion that Europe today represents not the spirit of god or Christianity 
but the spirit of Satan. And Satan’s successes are the greatest when he appears with 
the name of god on his lips. Europe is today only n ominally Christian. It is really 
worshipping Mammon. ‘It is easier for a camel to pa ss through the eye of a needle than 
for a rich man to enter the Kingdom.’ Thus really s poke Jesus Christ. His so called 
followers measure their moral progress by their mat erial possessions. 
Young India, 8-9-‘20  
 
Islam  
I do regard Islam to be a religion of peace in the same sense as Christianity, Buddhism 
and Hinduism are. No doubt there are differences in  degrees, but the object of these 
religions is peace. 
Young India, 20-1-‘27  
 
Islam’s distinctive contribution to India’s Nationa l culture is its unadulterated belief in 
the oneness of god and a practical application of t he truth of the brother hood of man India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216  for those who are nominally within its fold. I call  these two distinctive contributions. 
For in Hinduism the spirit of brotherhood has becom e too much philosophizes. Similarly 
through philosophical Hinduism has no other god but  God, it cannot be denied that 
practical Hinduism is not so emphatically uncomprom ising as Islam. 
Young India, 21-3-‘29  
 
I do not expect India of my dream to develop one rel igion, i.e., to be wholly Hindu, or 
wholly Christian, or wholly Musalman, but I want it  to be wholly tolerant, with its 
religious working side by side with one another. 
Young India, 22-12-‘27  
 
Idolatry  
We are all idolaters. We all want temples, churches , mosques and synagogues for our 
spiritual development, and to strengthen our faith in God. Some want images of stone 
or metal, others an altar or a book or even a pictu re, to inspire feelings of devotion 
towards God. 
Young India, 28-8-‘24  
 
Temple or mosques or churches… I make no distinctio n between these different abodes 
of God. They are what faith has made them. They are  an answer to man’s craving 
somehow to reach the unseen. 
Harijan, 18-3-‘33  
 
I am both an idolater and an iconoclast in what I c onceive to be the true sense of the 
terms. I value the spirit behind idol-worship. It pl ays almost important part in the 
uplift of the human race. And I would like to posse ss the ability to defend with my life 
the thousands of holy temples which sanctify this l and of ours………. I am iconoclast in 
the sense that I break down the subtle form of idol atry in the shape of worshipping the 
Deity save one’s own .This form of idolatry is more deadly for being more fine and 
evasive than the tangible and gross form of worship t hat identifies the deity with a 
little bit of a stone or a golden image. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217  Young India, 28-8-’24  
 
We worship an image when we visit a temple or A mosq ue with a feeling of sanctity or 
sanctity or reverence. Nor do I see any harm in all  this. On the contrary, endowed as 
man is with a finite, limited understanding, he can  hardly do otherwise. Eve so far so 
far from seeing anything inherently evil or harmful in tree-worship, I find in it a thing 
instinct with a deep pathos and poetic beauty. It s ymbolizes true reverence for the 
entire vegetable kingdom, which with its endless pa norama of beautiful shapes and 
forms, declares to us as it were with a million ton gues the greatness and glory of God. 
Without vegetation our planet would not be able to s upport life even for a moment. In 
such a country especially, therefore, in which ther e is a scarcity of trees, tree-worship 
assumes a profound economic significance. 
Young India, 26-9-‘29 
 
 
 
Chapter 63 
PROSELYTIZATION  
My Hindu instinct tells me that all religions are m ore or less true. All proceed from the 
same God but all are imperfect because they have com e down to us through imperfect 
human instrumentality. The real Shuddhi movement sho uld consist in each one trying 
to arrive at perfection in his or her own faith. In such a plan character would be the 
only test. What is the use of crossing from one com partment to another, if it does not 
mean a moral rise? What is the meaning of my trying  to convert to the service of god 
(for that must be the implication of Shuddhi or Tab ligh) when those who are in my fold 
are every day denying God by their action?”Physicia n, heal thyself” is more true in 
matters religious than mundane. 
Young India, 29-5-’24  
 
I am against the modern method of proselytizing. 
Years’ experience of proselytizing both in South Af rica and India has convinced me that 
it has not raised the general moral tone of the con verts who have imbibed the 
superficialities of European civilization, and have missed the teaching of Jesus. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218  I must be understood to refer to the general tenden cy and not to brilliant exceptions. 
The indirect contribution, on the other hand, of Ch ristian missionary effort is great. It 
has stimulated Hindu and Musalman religious researc h. It has forced us to put our own 
houses in order. The great educational and curative institutions of Christian missions I 
also count, among indirect result, because they hav e been established, not for their 
own sakes, but as an aid to proselytizing. 
Young India 17-12-‘25   
 
I hold that proselytizing under the cloak of humani tarian work is, to say the least, 
unhealthy. It is most certainly resented by the peo ple here. Religion after all is a 
deeply personal matter, it touches the heart. Why s hould I change my religion because 
a doctor who professes Christianity as his religion  has cured me of some disease or why 
should the doctor expect or suggest such a change w hilst I am under his influence? Is 
not medical relies its own reward and satisfaction?  Or why should I whilst I am in a 
missionary educational institution have Christian t eaching thrust upon me? In my 
opinion these are not uplifting and give rise to sus picion if not even secret hostility. 
The methods of conversion must be like Caesar’s wif e above suspicion. Faith is not 
imparted like secular subjects. It is given through the language of the heart. If a man 
has a living faith in him, it spreads its aroma like  the rose its scent. Because of its 
invisibility, the extent of its influence is far wid er than that of the visible beauty of the 
colour of the petals.  
I am, then, not against conversion. But I am agains t the modern methods of it. 
Conversion nowadays has become a matter of business,  like any other. I remember 
having read a missionary report saying how much it c ost per head to convert and then 
presenting and then presenting a budget for ‘the ne xt harvest.’  
Yes, I do maintain that India’s great faiths are al l sufficing for her. Apart from 
Christianity and Judaism,, Hinduism and its offshoo ts, Islam and Zoroastrianism are 
living faiths. No one faith is perfect. All faiths a re equally dear to their respective 
votaries. What is wanted, therefore, is a living frie ndly contact among the followers of 
the great religious of the world and not a clash am ong them in the fruitless attempt on 
the part of each community to show the superiority of its faith over the rest. Through India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  such friendly contact it will be possible for us al l to rid our respective faiths of 
shortcomings and excrescences.  
It follows from what have said above that India is in  no need of conversion of the    
kind I have in mind, Conversion in the sense of self -purification, self-realization is the 
crying need of the times. That however, is not what is ever meant by proselytizing. To 
those who would convert India, might it not be said , “Physician, heal thyself”? 
Young India, 23-4-‘31  
 
Why should a Christian want to covert a Hindu to Chr istianity and vice versa? Why 
should he not be satisfied if the Hindu is a good o r godly man? If the morals of a man 
are a matter of no concern, the fore of worship in a particular manner in a church, a 
mosque or a temple is an empty formula; it may even be a hindrance to individual or 
social growth, and insistence on a particular form or repetition of a credo may be a 
potent cause of violent quarrels leading to bloodshe d and ending in utter disbelief in 
religion, i.e. God Himself.  
Harijan, 30-1-37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220   
Chapter 64 
ROBLEMS OF ADMISTRATION  
I am afraid that for years to come India would be e ngaged in passing legislation in 
order to raise the down trodden, the fallen, from t he mire in to which they have been 
sunk by the capitalists, by the landlords, by the s o- called higher classes, and then, 
subsequently and scientifically, by the British rul ers.  
If we are to lift these people from the mire, then it would be the bounden duty of the 
National Government of India, in order to set its ho use in order, continually to give 
preference to these people and even free them from the burdens under which they are 
being crushed. And, if the landlords, Zamindars, mo neyed men and those who are 
today enjoying privileges—I do no care whether they were Europeans or Indians- if they 
find that they are discriminated against, I shall s ympathize with them, but I will not be 
able to help them, even if I could possibly do so, because I would seek their assistance 
in that process, and without their assistance it wo uld not be possible to raise these 
people out of the mire.  
It will, therefore, be a battle between the haves an d the have-nots; and if that is what 
is feared, I am afraid the National Government will  not be come in to being if all the 
classes hold the pistol at the head of the dumb mil lions and say: ’You shall not have a 
government of your own unless you guarantee our poss essions and our rights.’ 
The Nation’s Voice, p. 71  
 
Governors  
……...........Much as I would like to spare every pr ice of the public treasury, it would 
be bad economy to do away with provincial Governors and regard Chief Ministers as a 
perfect equivalent. Whilst I would resent much power  of interference to be given to 
Governors, I do not think that they should be mere f igure-heads. They should have 
enough power enabling them to influence ministerial  policy for the better. In their 
detached position they would be able to see things in their proper perspective and thus 
prevent mistakes by their Cabinets. Theirs must be a n all-pervasive moral influence in 
their provinces. 
Harijan, 21-12-’47.  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221   
Ministers  
If the Congress wants to continue as a people’s org anization, the ministers cannot live 
as sahib log nor use for private work facilities pro vided by Government for official 
duties.  
Harijan, 29-9’46.  
 
Nepotism  
This office-holding is a step towards either greate r prestige or its total loss. If it is not 
to be a total loss, the ministers and the legislato rs have to watchful of their own 
personal and public conduct. They have to be, like Caesar’s wife, above suspicion in 
everything. They have to be, like Caesar’s wife, abo ve suspicion in everything. They 
may not make private gains either for themselves or for their relatives or friends. If 
the relatives or friends get any appointment, it mu st be only because they are the best 
among the candidates, and their market value is alwa ys greater than what they get 
under the government. The ministers and the legislat ors of the Congress ticket have to 
be fearless in the performance of their duty. They must always be ready to risk the loss 
of their seats or offices. Offices and seats in the  legislatures have no merit outside 
their ability to raise the prestige and power of th e congress. And since both depend 
wholly upon the possession of morals, both public a nd private, any moral lapse means 
a blow to the Congress. 
Harijan, 23-4-‘38  
 
Taxes  
 A popular ministry is responsible to the legislatu res and cannot do anything without 
their consent. Every elected member in a popular le gislature is responsible to his 
voters. Therefore, the voter who represents the publi c should ponder well before 
embarking on any criticism of the government of his creation .Moreover, one bad habit 
of the people should be borne in mind, they do not like any tax whatsoever. Where 
there is good government, the tax –payer always res ent even paying such taxes. It is, of 
course, true that one cannot prove the benefit of al l taxes as easily as the one I have 
cited as an example. Bur as society grows, it is di fficult to explain to the individual India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222  tax-payer, and how he gets his return for any parti cular TAC. This much, however, is 
clear that taxes as a whole should stand for the ge neral benefit of society. If this were 
not so, the argument that the taxes were levied by popular will would not hold.  
Harijan, 8-9-’46  
 
Crime and Its Punishment  
In independent India of the non violent type, there will be crime but not criminals. 
They will not be punished. Crime is a disease like any other malady and is a product of 
the prevalent social system. Therefore, all crime in cluding murder will be treated as a 
disease. Whether such an India will ever come into b eing is another question. 
Harijan, 5-5-’46.  
 
What should our jails be like in free India? All cr iminals should be treated as patients 
and the jails should be hospitals admitting this cl ass of patients for treatment and 
cure. No one commits crime for the fun of it. It is  a sign of a diseased mind. The causes 
of a particular disease should investigate and remov ed. They need not have palatial 
buildings when their jails become hospitals. No cou ntry like India. But the outlook of 
the jail staff should be that of physicians and nur ses in a hospital. The prisoners should 
feel that the officials are their friends. They are  there to help them to regain their 
mental health and not to harass them in any way. Th e popular governments have to 
issue necessary orders, but meanwhile the jail staf f can do not a little to humanize 
their administration. What is the duty of the priso ners? ... They should behave as ideal 
prisoners. They should avoid breach of jail discipli ne. They should put their heart and 
soul into whatever work is entrusted to them. For i nstance, the prisoners’ food is 
cooked by themselves. They should clean the rice, da l or whatever cereal is used so 
that there are no stones and grit or weevils in the m. Whatever complaints the 
prisoners might have should be brought to the notice  of the authorities in a becoming 
manner. They should so behave in their little commun ity as to become better men 
when they leave the jail than when they entered it.  
Delhi Diary, pp. 113-14  
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223  Adult suffrage  
I am wedded to adult suffrage ….Adult suffrage is n ecessary for more reasons than one, 
and one of the decisive reasons to me is that it en able me to satisfy all the reasonable 
aspirations, not only of the Musalmans, but also of  the so-called untouchables, of 
Christians, of labourers and all kinds of classes. I cannot possibly bear the idea that a 
man who has got character but no wealth or literacy  should have no vote, or that a 
man who works honestly by the sweat of his brow day  in and out should not have the 
vote for the crime of being a poor man.  
Young India, 8-10-31  
 
Death Duties  
In this of all countries in the world possession of  inordinate wealth by individuals 
should be held as a crime against Indian humanity. Therefore the maximum limit of 
taxation of riches beyond a certain margin can never  be reached. In England, I 
understand, they have already gone as far as 70 per  cent of the earnings beyond a 
prescribed figure. There is no reason why India sho uld not go to a much higher figure. 
Why should there not be death duties? Those sons of  millionaires, who are of age and 
yet inherit their parents’ wealth, are losers for t he very inheritance. The nation thus 
becomes a double loser. For the inheritance should rightly belong to the nation. And 
the nation loses again in that the full faculties o f the heirs are not drawn out, being 
crushed under the load of riches. 
Harijan, 31-7-37  
 
Reform by Legislation  
People seem to think, that when a law is passed aga inst any evil, it will die without 
any further effort. There never was a greater self-d eception. Legislation is intended 
and is effective against an ignorant or a small evil -minded minority; but no legislation 
which is opposed by an intelligent and organized pu blic pinion, or under cover of 
religion by a fanatical majority, can ever succeed. 
Young India, 30-6-27  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224  The first thing is to avoid the slightest shadow of  compulsion or untruth. No reform 
worth the name has yet, in my humble opinion, been achieved by compulsion. For 
whilst compulsion may lead to apparent success, it gives rise to so many other evils 
which are worse than the original evil itself.  
Young India, 8-12-27  
 
Trials by Jury  
Trials by jury often result, all over the world, in defeating justice. But people 
everywhere submit to the drawback for the sake of th e more important result of the 
cultivation of an independent spirit among people a nd the justifiable sentiment of 
being judged by one’s own peers.  
Young India, 12-8-26  
 
I am unconvinced of the advantages of jury trials o ver those by judges…. We must not 
slavishly copy all that in English. In matters where  absolute impartiality, calmness and 
ability to sift evidence and understand human natur e are required, we may not replace 
trained judges by untrained men brought together by  chance. What we must aim at is 
an incorruptible, impartial and able judiciary righ t from the bottom.  
Young India, 27-8-31  
 
Law Courts  
If we were not under the spell of lawyers and law c ourts, and if there were no touts to 
tempt us into the quagmire of the courts and to app eal to our basest passions we 
would be leading a much happier life than we do. Le t those who frequent the law-
courts-the best of them-bear witness to the fact th at the atmosphere about them is 
foetid. Perjured witnesses are ranged on either sid e, ready to sell their very soul for 
money or for friendship’s sake. 
Young India 6-10-26  
 
The first thing which you must always bear in mind,  if you would spiritualize the 
practice of law, is not to make your profession sub servient to the interests of your India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225  purse, as is unfortunately but too often the case a t present, but to use your profession 
for the service of your country. There are instances  of eminent lawyers in all countries 
who lead a life of self-sacrifice, who devoted their  brilliant legal talents entirely to 
service of their country; although it meant almost p auperism to them….You can follow 
Ruskin’s precept given in his book Unto This Last. ‘Why should a lawyer charge fifteen 
pounds for his work’, he asks, ‘whilst a carpenter for instance hardly gets as many 
shillings for his work?’ the fees charged by lawyer s are unconscionable everywhere. In 
England, In South Africa, almost everywhere I have fo und that in the practice of their 
profession lawyers are consciously or unconsciously  led into untruth for the sake of 
their clients. An eminent lawyer has gone so far as  to say that it may even be the duty 
of a lawyer to defend a client whom he knows to be guilty. There I disagree. The duty 
of a lawyer is always to place before the judges, a nd to help them to arrive at, the 
truth, never to prove the guilty as innocent. 
Young India, 22-12-27  
 
Communal Representation  
Independent India cannot afford to have communal re presentation and yet it must 
placate all communities, if the rule of independenc e is not based on coercion of 
minorities. 
Young India, 19-1-30  
 
Military Expenditure  
Our statesman have for over two generations declaime d against the heavy expenditure 
on armaments under the British regime, but now that  freedom from political serfdom 
has come, our military expenditure has increased an d still threatens to increase and of 
this we are proud! There is not a voice raised again st it in our legislative chambers. In 
spite, however, of the madness and the vain imitatio n of the tinsel of the West, the 
hope lingers in me and many others that India shall  survive this death dance and 
occupy the moral height that should belong to her a fter the training, however 
imperfect, in non-violence for an unbroken period of  thirty-two years since1915. 
Harijan, 7-12-47  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226  Navy  
I do not know of the navy but I do know that the arm y of India of the future will not 
consist of hirelings to be utilized for keeping Ind ia under subjection and for depriving 
other nations of their liberty, but it would be lar gely cut down, will consist largely of 
volunteers and will be utilized for policing India. 
Young India, 9-3-22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227   
Chapter 65 
REORGANIZATION OF PROVINGES 
The congress has already adopted the principal (of redistribution of the provinces on a 
linguistic basis) and has declared its intention to  give effect to it constitutionally as 
soon as they come into power, as such redistributio n would be conducive to the 
cultural advancement of the country. But such redist ribution should not militate 
against the organic unity of India. Autonomy dose n ot and should not mean disruption 
or that hereafter provinces could go the way they c hose, independent of one another 
and of the Center. If each province began to look up on itself as a separate, sovereign 
unit, India’s independence would lose its meaning a nd with it would vanish the 
freedom of the various units as well.  
The character of India’s independence as conceived b y the Congress is based on village 
autonomy. But all the villages are to derive vitality  from the Center, as the latter in its 
turn derive all power and authority from the former . It would be fatal if it led to fatal 
provincialism, mutual bickering and rivalries…between  Tamil and Andhra for instance, 
Bombay and Karnatak and so on. The redistribution o f provinces on a linguistic basis is 
necessary if provincial languages are to grow to th eir full height. Hindustani is to be 
the lingua Franca-Rastra-Bhasha-of India, but it ca nnot take the place of the provincial 
tongues. It cannot be the medium of instruction in the provinces…much less English. Its 
function is to make them realize their organic rela tionship with India. The worlds 
outside dose not know them as Gujaratis, Maharashtr ians, Tamilians etc., but only as 
Indians. We must therefore, resolutely discourage a ll fissiparous tendencies and feel 
and behave as Indians. Subject to this paramount con sideration, a linguistic re-
distribution of provinces should give an impetus to  education and trade. 
(Gandhiji hoped that) they would not need a Boundar y Commission to delimit the 
frontiers on the new basis. That is the foreign way  which they have discarded. The best 
thing would be for themselves to determine the bound aries on the new basis by mutual 
agreement and consent and place the same before the ir Prime Minister for his final 
sanction. That would be true independence. To go to  a third party in the shape of 
Boundary Commission for a statement would be negati on of independence. They must 
evolve interdependence and mutual help. 
Delhi Diary, pp. 378-80  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228   
I entirely endorse the suggestion…that what is prop er to be done should not be delayed 
without just cause, and that what is improper shoul d not be conceded under any 
circumstances whatsoever. There can be no compromise  with evil and since linguistic 
redistribution is desirable from almost every point of view, all delay in carrying out the 
project should be avoided. 
But the reluctance to enforce linguistic redistribu tion is perhaps justifiable in the 
present depressing atmosphere. The exclusive spirit is ever uppermost. Everyone thinks 
of himself and his family. No one thinks of the who le of India. The centripetal force is 
undoubtedly there, but it is not vocal and never bois terous: whereas the centrifugal is 
on the surface and in its very nature makes the loud est noise, demanding the attention 
of all. It manifests itself most in matters communa l. This has given rise to fear in other 
fields. The history of the quarrel between Orissa a nd Andhra, Orissa and Bihar and 
Orissa and Bengal is fresh is our minds. The whole of it has not died out even 
now….Now, when we have freedom; we seem not to know what to do with it. It is 
almost mistaken for suicidal anarchy. Even zealous reformers would postpone 
controversial issues to a more hopeful time when, in  the interests of the county, the 
virtue of give and take would be freely recognized a nd all sectional interest would be 
subordinate to the one interest of the good of Indi a, which will include the good of all. 
Therefore, those who, like me, want constructive su ggestions to come into play at this 
very moment, have to work to bring about a healthy at mosphere promoting concord in 
the place of discord, peace in the place of strife,  progress in the place of retrogression 
and life in the place of death. That happy day will  be most manifest when the 
communal strife has died out.                                                      Harijan, 30-11-47  
 
It seems to me that if the provinces are all to make  equal progress in all directions, the 
services should be largely confined to the inhabitan ts of the province concerned for 
the sake of India as a whole. No province and no tri be or clan can be kept backward if 
India is to stand erect before the world. It will n ever do so through its arms of which 
the world is sick. It must shine through its innate  culture expressed in every citizen’s 
life and is the socialism I have recently described… .That means elimination of all force 
for the sake of popularizing one’s doctrines or sch emes. A thing which is truly popular 
rarely, if ever, requires force save that of public opinion to make itself acceptable to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229  all. Therefore, the ugly scenes of violence by indiv iduals witnessed in Bihar and Orissa 
and Assam should never have been. Popular government s are functioning to redress any 
irregularity or encroachment by persons from other provinces. The provincial 
governments are bound to give full protection to all the comers from outside their 
provinces. “Use what you consider as yours so as not  to injure others”, is a famous 
maxim of equity. It is also a grand moral code of c onduct. How apposite today? 
“Live in Rome as the Romans do”, is a sound commonse nse maxim so long as it dose 
not apply to Roman vices. The process of progressive  blending must be one of rejecting 
the bad and absorbing the good….The bane of our lif e is our exclusive provincialism, 
whereas my province must be co-extensive with the I ndian boundary so that ultimately 
it extends to the boundary of the earth. Else it pe rishes.                 Harijan, 21-9-47  
 
In his opinion an Indian was a citizen of India enj oying equal rights in every part of 
India. Therefore, a Bengali had every right in Bihar  as a Bihari. But he wished to 
emphasize that a Bengali must merge in the Bihari. He must never be guilty of 
exploiting Biharis or feeling a stranger or behaving  as a stranger in Bihar….All rights 
flowed from duties previously and duly performed. On e thing he must stress that in 
both the Dominions of India, the use of force for t he assertion of rights must be 
eschewed altogether if they were to make any progre ss. Thus neither the Bengalis nor 
the Biharis could assert themselves at the point of the sword, nor could the Boundary 
Commission Award similarly be changed. It was the f irst lessen to be learnt in a 
democratic independent India….Liberty never meant th e license to do anything at will. 
Independent meant voluntary restraint and discipline ; voluntary acceptance of the rule 
of law in the making of which the whole of India ha d its hand through is elected 
representatives. The only force at the disposal of democracy was that of public 
opinion. Satyagraha, civil disobedience and fasts h ad noting in common with the use of 
force, veiled or open. But even these had restricted  use in democracy. They could not 
even think of them whilst the Governments were settl ing down and the communal 
distemper was still stalking for one province to ano ther.  
(From post-prayer speech at Calcutta on 29-8-47)  
Harijan, 7-9-47  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230  Dravidistan ? 
Gandhiji then referred to the movement for Dravidista n-Southern India comprising the 
population speaking the four Dravidian languages-Te lugu, Tamil, Malayalam and 
Kanarese. Why should this portion of India speaking  the four languages be separated 
from the rest? Had not these languages, rich as the y were, drawn largely upon Sanskrit 
for their richness? He had traveled through the four  provinces and he found no 
difference between them and the rest of the province s. It was a myth to consider that 
those living in the south of the Vindhya Range were non-Aryans and in the north 
Aryans. Whatever they might have been at one time, th ey were so intermixed that 
they were one people from Kashmir to Cape Comorin, notwithstanding that India was 
cut into two. It would be folly to make further div isions. If they did not stop at that 
division, there would be no end to independent sovere ign States which would be 
useless for India and the world. Let it not be said  of them that they were fit for one 
political system only under bondage and as freemen,  savage-like they would split up 
into as many groups as they liked, each group going  its own way. Or would they be held 
in bondage by one despotic State possessing an army  large enough to bring them under 
subjection? He adjured them and especially the peop le of the South to give up the 
thralldom of the English language which was good as  a language of international 
commerce and diplomacy. It could never become the la nguage of the millions of India. 
The century or more of British rule had failed to m ake English spoken by more then a 
few millions in this ocean of Indian humanity. If t hey looked at the census they would 
discover that more millions spoke Hindustani, a mix ture of Hindi and Urdu, written in 
the Nagari or Urdu scripts. Sanskritized Hindi or P ersianized Urdu was confined to far 
fewer. He was asked whether they could learn it in their own provincial script. He had 
no objection. As a matter of fact the Hindustani Pr achar Sabha allowed the boys of the 
South to learn Hindustani in their provincial scrip t. They later on learnt the two 
scripts, so that they could become easily acquainte d with the literature in the North. 
Patriotism demanded that much from them. There was a grave danger of their 
becoming pettily provincial minded. If all become pe tty, where would be the India of 
their love? He freely admitted that if it was, as it  was, wrong for the Southerners no to 
learn Hindustani, it was equally wrong for the Nort herners not to learn one or more of 
the Southern languages which had very rich literatur e. He appealed to members from 
the south to resolve never to ask for English speech  in n Indian audience. They would India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  then soon pick up Hindustani. Let them remember tha t India free could cohere as one, 
only if it accepted moral government. Congress as a  fighting machine against bondage 
was held together by its moral force. Should it be different when it had almost 
attained political freedom? 
(From post-prayer speech at New Delhi on 16-7-47)  
Harijan, 27-7 47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232   
Chapter 66 
THE PROBLEM OF MINORITIES  
Hindus if they want unity among different races mus t have the courage to trust the 
minorities. Any other adjustment must leave a nasty  taste in the mouth. Surely the 
millions do not want to become legislators and muni cipal councilors. And if we have 
understood the proper use of Satyagraha, we should know that it can be and should be 
used against an unjust administrator whether he be a Hindu, Musalman or of any other 
race or denomination, whereas a just administrator or representative is always and 
equally good whether he be a Hindu or a Musalman. W e want to do away with the 
communal spirit. The majority must therefore make t he beginning and thus inspire the 
minorities with confidence in their bona fides. Adj ustment is possible only when the 
more powerful take the initiative without waiting fo r response from the weaker.  
So far as employment in the Government departments is concerned, I think it will be 
fatal to good government, if we introduce there the communal spirit. For 
administration to be efficient, it must always be i n the hands of the fittest. There 
should be certainly no favoritism. But if we want fi ve engineers we must not take one 
from each community but we must take the fittest fi ve even if they were all Musalman 
or all Parsis. The lowest posts must, if need be, b e filled by examination by an 
impartial board consisting of men belonging to diff erent communities. But distribution 
of posts should never be according to the proportio n of the numbers of each 
community. The educationally backward communities w ill have right to receive 
favoured treatment in the matter of education at the  hands of the national 
Government. This can be secured in an effective manne r. But those who aspire to 
occupy responsible posts in the Government of the co untry can only do so if they pass 
the required test.  
Young India, 29-5-24  
 
 Independent India cannot afford to have communal re presentation and yet it must 
placate all communities, if the rule of independenc e is not based on coercion of 
minorities.  
Young India, 19-1-30  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233   
Hindustan belong to all those who are born and bred  here and who have no other 
country to look to. Therefore, it belongs to Parsis , Beni Israels, to Indian Christians, 
Muslims and other non-Hindus as much as to Hindus. Free India will be no Hindu raj, it 
will be India raj based not on the majority of any religious sect or community but on 
the representatives of the whole people without dis tinction of religion. I can conceive 
of a mixed majority putting the Hindus in a minorit y. They would be elected for their 
record of service and merits. Religion is a persona l matter which should have no place 
in politics. It is the unnatural condition of forei gn domination that we have unnatural 
divisions according to religion. Foreign domination going, we shall laugh at our folly in 
having clung to false ideals and slogans.  
Harijan, 9-8-42  
 
I swear by my religion. I will die for it. But it i s my personal affair. The State has 
noting to do with it. The State would look after yo ur secular welfare, health, 
communications, foreign relations, currency and so on, but not your or my religion. 
That is everybody’s personal concern.  
Harijan, 22-9-46  
 
Anglo-Indians and Foreigners 
All foreigners will be welcome to stay here, only i f they look upon themselves as one 
with the people. India cannot tolerate foreigners w ho wish to remain here with 
safeguards for their rights. This would mean that t hey want to live here as superior 
persons and such a positive must lead to friction.  
Harijan, 29-9-46  
 
If this is true of the European, how much more true  must it be for those Anglo-Indians 
and others who have adopted European manners and cus toms in order to be classed as 
Europeans demanding preferential treatment? All suc h people will find themselves ill 
at ease if they expect continuation of the favoured treatment hitherto enjoyed by 
them. They should rather feel thankful that they wi ll be disburdened of referential India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234  treatment to which they had no right by any known c anon of reasoning and which was 
derogatory to their dignity.  
Harijan, 7-4-46  
 
His political right is in no danger. It is his soci al status which is non-existent. He frets 
over his Indian parentage and he is disowned by the European race. He is therefore 
between Scylla and Charybdis. I often  meet him .He  is washed out in  the process of 
living above his means and trying to live the Europea n life and look like European life 
and look like Europe and. I have pleaded with him to  make his choice and to throw in 
his lot with vast multitude. If these men and women will have the courage and the 
foresight to appreciate this very simple and natural  position, they will serve 
themselves. They will serve India and they will be sp ared the galling position in which 
they find themselves. The greatest problem before t he dumb Anglo-Indian is that of 
determining his social status. He is saved, the mome nt the recognizes himself as an 
Indian and lives like one.  
Young India. 29-8-’29  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235   
Chapter 67 
AN INDIAN GOVERNOR 
1. An Indian Governor should, in his own person, and  in his surroundings, be a 
teetotaler. Without this, prohibition of the fiery liquid is wellnigh inconceivable. 
2. He and his surroundings should represent hand sp inning as a visible token of 
identification with the dumb millions of India, a t oken of the necessity of ‘bread 
labour’ and organized non-violence as against organ ized violence on which the society 
of today seems to be based. 
3. He must dwell in a cottage accessible to all, th rough easily shielded from gaze, if he 
is to do efficient work. The British Governor natur ally represented the British might. 
For him and his was erected a fortified residence-a  palace to be occupied by him and 
his numerous vassals who sustained his empire. The I ndian prototype may keep 
somewhat pretentious buildings for receiving prince s and ambassadors of the world. 
For these, being guests of the Governor, should con stitute an education in what “Even 
unto This Last “equality of all –should mean in con crete terms. For him no expensive 
furniture, foreign or indigenous, plain living and h igh thinking must motto, not to adorn 
his entrance but to be exemplified in daily life. 
4. For him there can be no untouchability in any fr om whatever no caste or creed or 
colour distinction. He must represent the best of a ll religious and all things Eastern and 
Western. Being a citizen of the India, He must be a  citizen of the world. Thus simply, 
one reads, did the Khalif Omar, with millions of tr easure at his feet, live; thus lived 
Janaka of ancient times; thus lived, as I saw him, t he Master of Eton in his residence in 
the midst of, and surrounded by, the son of the Lor ds and Nabobs of the British Isles. 
Will the Governors of India of the famished millions  do less?  
5. He will speak the language of the province of wh ich he is the Governor and 
Hindustani, the lingua franca of India written in t he Nagari or Urdu script. This is 
neither Sanskritized Hindi nor Persianized Urdu. Hi ndustani is emphatically the 
language which is spoken by the millions north of t he Vindhya Range. 
This does not pretend to be an exhaustive list of th e virtues that an Indian Governor 
should represent. It is merely illustrative.  
Harijan, 24-8-47 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236   
Chapter 68 
THE PRESS 
The sole aim of journalism should be service. The n ewspaper press is a great power, 
but just as an unchained torrent of water submerges  whole country sides and 
devastates crops, even so an uncontrolled pen serves but to destroy. If the control is 
from without, it proves more poisonous than want of control. It can be profitable only 
when exercised from within. If this line of reasoni ng is correct, how many of the 
journals in the world would stop those that are use less? And who should be the judge? 
The useful and the useless must, like good and evil,  go on together, and man must 
make his choice. 
An Autobiography, p. 287  
 
The superficiality, the one-sidedness, the inaccura cy and often even dishonesty that 
have crept into modern journalism, continuously misl ead honest men who want to see 
nothing but justice done.  
Young India, 12-5-20  
 
I have before me extracts from journals containing s ome gruesome things. There is 
communal incitement, gross misrepresentation and in citement to political violence 
bordering on murder. It is of course easy enough fo r the Government to launch out 
prosecutions or to pass repressive ordinances. These  fail to serve the purpose intended 
expect very temporarily, and in no case do they conve rt the writers, who often take to 
secret propaganda, when the open forum of the press  is denied to them. 
The real remedy is healthy public opinion that will  refuse to patronize poisonous 
journals. We have our journalists’ Association. Why  should it not create a department 
whose business it would be to study the various jour nals and find objectionable articles 
and bring them to the notice of the respective edit ors? The function of the department 
will be confined to the establishment of contact wi th the offending journals and public 
criticism of offending articles where the contact f ails to bring about the desired 
reform. Freedom of the press is a precious privilege  that no country can forego. But if 
there is, as there should be, no legislative check s ave that of the mildest character, an India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237  internal, check such as I have suggested should not be impossible and ought not to be 
resented.  
Young India, 28-5-31  
 
I hold that it is wrong to conduct newspaper by the  aid of… immoral advertisements. I 
do believe that if advertisements should be taken at all there should be a rigid 
censorship instituted by newspaper proprietors and editors themselves and that only 
healthy advertisements should be taken…. The evil of  immoral advertisements is 
overtaking even what are known as the most respectab le newspapers and magazines. 
That evil has to be combated by refining the consci ence of the newspaper proprietors 
and editors. That refinement can come not through t he influence of an amateur editor 
like myself but it will come when their own conscie nce is roused to recognition of the 
growing evil or when it is super-imposed upon them b y a Government representing the 
people and caring for the people’s morals. 
Young India, 25-3-26  
 
My plea is for due regard for truth in advertising. It is a habit with people….to treat the 
printed word in a book or a newspaper as gospel tru th. There is need, therefore, 
extreme caution in drawing up advertisements. Untrut hs are most dangerous. 
Harijan, 24-8-35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238   
Chapter 69 
PEACE BRIGADES 
Some time ago I suggested the formation of a Peace Brigade whose members would risk 
their lives in dealing with riots, especially commun al. The idea was that this Brigade 
should substitute the police and even the military. This reads ambitious. The 
achievement may prove impossible. Yet, if the Congr ess is to succeed in its non-violent 
struggle, it must develop the power to deal peaceful ly with such situations. Let us 
therefore see what qualifications a member of the c ontemplated Peace Brigade should 
possess. 
(1) He or she must have a living faith in non-violenc e. This is impossible without a 
living faith in God. A non-violent man can do noting save by the power and grace of 
God. Without it he won’t have the courage to die wit hout anger, without fear and 
without retaliation. Such courage comes from the be lief that God sits in the hearts of 
all and that there should be no fear in the presenc e of God. The knowledge of the 
omnipresence of God also means respect for the lives  of even those who may be called 
opponents or goondas. This contemplated intervention  is a process of stilling the fury 
of man when the brute in him gets the mastery over h im. 
(2) This messenger of peace must have equal regard f or all the principal religions of 
the earth. Thus if he is a Hindu, he will respect t he other faiths current in India. He 
must therefore possess a knowledge of the general p rinciples of the different faiths 
professed in the country. 
(3) Generally speaking this work of peace can only be done local men in their own 
localities. 
(4) The work can be done singly or in groups. There fore no one need wait for 
companions. Nevertheless one would naturally seek c ompanions in one’s own locality 
and form a local Brigade. 
(5) This messenger of peace will cultivate through personal service contacts with the 
people in his locality or chosen circle, so that wh en he appears to deal with ugly 
situations, he dose not descend upon the members of  a riotous assembly as an utter 
stranger liable to be looked upon as a suspect or a n unwelcome visitor. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239  (6) Needless to say, a peace bringer must have a cha racter beyond reproach and must 
be known for his strict impartiality. 
(7) Generally there are previous warnings of coming  storms. If these are known, the 
Peace Brigade will not wait till the conflagration breaks out but will try to handle the 
situation in anticipation. 
(8) Whilst, if the movement spreads, it might be wil l if there are some whole-time 
workers, it is not absolutely necessary that there should be. The idea is to have as 
many good and true men and women as possible. These  can be had only if volunteers 
are drawn from those who are engaged in various wal ks of life but have leisure enough 
to cultivate friendly relations with the people livi ng in their circle and otherwise 
possess the qualifications required of a member of the Peace Brigade.  
(9) There should be a distinctive dress worn by the member of the contemplated 
Brigade so that in course of time they will be reco gnized without the slightest 
difficulty. 
These are but general suggestions. Each center can work out its own constitution on 
the basis here suggested.  
Harijan, 18-6-38  
 
Ordinarily, the efficient running of a large volunt eer corps based on force implies the 
possibility of the use of force in the event of bre ach of discipline. In such bodies little 
or no stress is laid on a man’s character. Physique  is the chief factor. The contrary 
must obtain in non-violent bodies in which characte r or soul force must mean 
everything and physique must take second place. It i s difficult to find many such 
persons. That is why non-violent corps must be small , if they are to be efficient. Such 
brigades may be scattered all over, there may be one  each for a village or a mohalla. 
The members must know one another well. Each corps will select its own head. All the 
members will have the same status, but where everyon e is doing the same work there 
must be one person under whose discipline all must come, or else the work will suffer. 
Where there are two or more brigades the leaders mu st consult among themselves and 
decide on a common line of action. In that way alon e lies success. If non-violent 
volunteer corps are formed on the above lines, they can easily stop trouble. These India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240  corps will not require all the physical training gi ven in akhadas, but a certain part of it 
will be necessary.  
One thing, however, should be common to members of a ll such organizations and that 
is implicit faith in God. He is the only companion and doer. Without faith in Him these 
Peace Brigades will be lifeless. By whatever name on e calls God, one must realize that 
one can only work through His strength. Such a man will never take another’s life. He 
will allow himself if need be, to be killed and the reby live through his victory over 
death. 
The mind of the man in whose life the realization o f this law has become a living 
reality will not be bewildered in crisis. He will i nstinctively know the right way to act. 
In spite, however, of what I have said above I would  like to give some rules culled from 
my own experience: 
1. A volunteer may not carry any weapons. 
2. The members of a corps must be easily recognizab le. 
3. Every volunteer must carry bandages, scissors, nee dle and tread, surgical knife etc., 
for rendering first aid. 
4. He should know how to carry and remove the wounde d. 
5. He should know how to put out fires, how to ente r a fire area without getting burnt, 
how to climb heights for rescue work and descend sa fely with or without his charge. 
6. He should be well acquainted with all the reside nts of his locality. This is a service 
in itself. 
7. He should recite Ramanama ceaselessly in his hea rt and persuade others who believe 
to do likewise. 
Man often repeats the name of God parrot-wise and e xpects fruit from so doing. The 
true seeker must have that living faith which will n ot only dispel the untruth of parrot-
wise repetition from within him but also from the h earts of others.  
Harijans, 5-5-46  
 
Goondas  
It is a mistake to blame the goondas. They never do mischief unless we create an 
atmosphere for them. I was eye-witness to what happ ened in Bombay on the Prince’s India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  day in 1921. We sowed the seed and the goondas reap ed the harvest. Our men were at 
their back….We must resolutely discountenance the p ractice of absolving the 
respectable class for blame….The Bania and the Brah mana must learn to defend 
himself even violently, if not non-violently, or surr ender his womenfolk and possessions 
to the goondas. They are a class apart, whether the y are labeled Musalman or Hindu. 
Young India, 29-5-24  
 
The remedy against cowardice is not physical cultur e but the braving of dangers. So 
long as the parents of the middle class Hindus, the mselves timid, continue to transmit 
their timidity by keeping their grown-up children i n cotton-wool so long will there be 
their desire to shun danger and run no risks. They will have to dare to leave their 
children alone, let them run risks and even at time s get killed in so doing. The puniest 
individual may have a shout heart. The most muscular  Zulus cower before English lads. 
Each village has to find out its stout hearts. 
Young India, 29-5-24  
 
The would-be member of a Peace Brigade should come into close touch and cultivate 
acquaintance with the so-called goondas element in his vicinity. He should know all 
and be known to all and win section should be regar ded as too contemptible or mean 
to mix with. Goondas do not drop from the sky, nor do they spring from the earth like 
evil spirits. They are the product of social disorga nization, and society is, therefore, 
responsible for their existence. In other words, th ey should be looked upon as a 
symptom of corruption in our body politic. To remov e the disease we must first 
discover the underlying cause. To find the remedy w ill then be a comparatively easy 
task. 
Harijan, 15-9-40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242   
Chapter 70 
INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 
Indian National Congress which is the oldest nation al political organization and which 
has after many battles fought her non-violent way t o freedom cannot be allowed to 
die. It can only die with the nation. A living organ ism ever grows or it dies. The 
Congress has won political freedom, but it has yet to win economic freedom, social and 
moral freedom. These freedom are harder then the po litical, if only because they are 
constructive, less exciting and not spectacular. All -embracing constructive work evokes 
the energy of all the units of the millions. 
The Congress has got the preliminary and necessary part of her freedom. The hardest 
has yet to come. In its difficult ascent to democra cy, it has inevitably created rotten 
boroughs leading to corruption and creation of inst itutions, popular and democratic 
only in name. How to get out of the weedy and unwie ldy growth? 
The Congress must do away with its special register  of members, at no time exceeding 
one crore, not even then easily identifiable. It ha d an unknown register of millions who 
could never be wanted. Its register should now be co -extensive with all the men and 
women on the voters’ rolls in the country. The Cong ress business should be to see that 
no faked name gets in and no legitimate name is lef t out. On its own register it will 
have a body of servants of the nation who would be w orked doing the work allotted to 
them from time to time. 
Unfortunately for the country they will be drawn ch iefly for the time being from the 
city dwellers, most of whom would be required to wo rk for and in the villages of India. 
The ranks must be filled in increasing numbers from  villagers. 
These servants will be expected to operate upon and serve the voters registered 
according to law in their own surroundings. Many pe rsons and parties will woo them. 
The very best will win. Thus and in no other way can  the Congress regain its fast 
ebbing unique position in the country? But yesterda y the Congress was unwittingly the 
servant of the nation; it was Khudai-Khidmatgar-God’ s servant. Let it now proclaim to 
itself and the world that it is only God’s servant- nothing more, nothing less. If it 
engages in the ungainly skirmish for power, it will  find one fine morning that it is no 
more. Thank God, it is now no longer on role posses sion of the field. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243  I have only opened to view the distant scene. If I ha ve the time and health, I hope to 
discuss in these columns what the servants of the na tion can do to raise themselves in 
the estimation of their masters, the whole of the a dult population, male and female. 
Harijan, 1-2-48  
 
His Last Will and Testament  
[The following draft of a new constitution for the Indian National Congress was 
prepared by Gandhiji on 29th January, 1948, a day b efore his death. Being his last 
piece of writing it may be taken as his “Last Will and Testament”.] 
Though split into two, India having attained politi cal Independence through means 
provided by the Indian National Congress, the Congre ss in its present shape and form, 
i.e., as a propaganda vehicle and parliamentary mach ine, has outlived its use. India 
has still to attain social, moral and economic inde pendence in terms of its seven 
hundred thousand villages as distinguished from its cities and towns. The struggle for 
the ascendancy of civil over military power is bound to take place in India’s progress 
towards its democratic goal. It must be kept out of  unhealthy competition with 
political parties and communal bodies. For these an d other similar reasons, the 
A.I.C.C. resolves to disband the existing Congress organization and flower into a Lok 
Sevak Sangh under the following rules with power to alter them as occasion may 
demand. 
Every Panchayat of five adult men or women being vil lagers or village-minded shall 
form a unit. 
Two such contiguous Panchayats shall form a working  party under a leader elected 
from among them. 
When there are one hundred such Panchayats, the fif ty first grade leaders shall elect 
from among themselves a second leader and so on, th e first grade leaders meanwhile 
working under hundred Panchayats shall continue to be formed till they cover the 
whole of India, each succeeding group of Panchayats  electing second grade leaders 
shall serve jointly for the whole of India and sever ally for their respective areas. The 
second grade leaders may elect, whenever they deem n ecessary, from among 
themselves a chief who will, during pleasure, regula te and command all the groups. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244   ( As the final formation of provinces or districts is still in a state of flux, no attempt 
has been made to divide this group of servants into Provincial or District Councils and 
jurisdiction over the whole of India has been vested in the group or groups that may 
have been formed at any given time. It should be note d that this body of servants 
derive their authority or power from service ungrud gingly or wisely done to their 
master, the whole of India.) 
1. Every worker shall be habitual wearer of Khadi made from self-spun yarn or 
certified by the A.I.S.A. and must be a teetotaler.  If a Hindu, he must have abjured 
untouchability in any shape or form in his own pers on or in his family and must be a 
believer in the ideal of inter-communal unity, equa l respect for all religions and 
equality of opportunity and status for all irrespec tive of race, creed or sex. 
2. He shall come in personal contact with every villager  within his jurisdiction. 
3. He shall enroll and train workers from amongst the villagers and shall keep a 
register of all these. 
4. He shall keep a record of his work from day to day.  
5. He shall organize the villages so as to make them se lf contained and self-supporting 
through their agriculture and handicrafts. 
6. He shall educate the village folk in sanitation and  hygiene and take all measures for 
prevention of ill health and disease among them. 
7. He shall organize the education of the village folk from birth to death along the 
lines of Nai Talim, in accordance with the policy l aid down by the Hindustani Talimi 
Sangh. 
8. He shall see that those whose names are missing on the statutory voters’ roll are 
duty entered therein. 
9. He shall encourage those who have not yet acquired the legal qualification, to 
acquire it for getting the right of franchise. 
10. For the above purposes and others to be added from t ime to time, he shall train 
and fit himself in accordance with the rule laid do wn by the Sangh for the due 
performance of duty. 
The Sangh shall affiliate the following autonomous bodies: 
1. A.I.S.A. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245  2. A.I.V.I.A. 
3. Hindustani Talim Sangh. 
4. Harijan Sevak Sangh. 
5. Goseva Sangh. 
 
Finance   
The Sangh shall raise finances for the fulfillment of its mission from among the 
villagers and others, special stress being laid on t he collection of poor man’s pice.  
The Last Phase, vol. II, pp. 819-20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246   
Chapter 71 
INDIA, PAKIATAN AND KASHMIR  
It is our misfortune that the country was divided in to two parts. The division was 
avowedly by reason of religious cleavage. Behind it m ight be economic and other 
causes. They could not have brought out the cleavage . The poison that fills the air 
arose also from the same communal cause. Irreligion  masquerades as religion. It sounds 
nice to say that it would have been better if there  had been no communal question. 
But how could the fact be undone? 
It has been repeatedly asked whether in the event of  a war between the two, the 
Muslims of the Union will fight against the Muslims  of Pakistan and the Hindus of one 
against those of the other. However unlikely it may  appear at present, there is nothing 
inherently impossible in the conception. There is a ny day more risk in distrusting the 
profession of loyalty than in trusting it and coura geously facing the danger of trusting. 
The question can be more convincingly put in this wa y: Will the Hindus ever fight the 
Hindus and the Muslims their co-religionists for th e sake of truth and justice? It can be 
answered by a counter question: Dose not history pr ovides such instances? 
In solving the puzzle the great stumbling block in t he way is that is at a discount. Let 
us hope that in this holocaust some there are who w ill stand firm in their faith in the 
victory of truth. 
Harijan, 26-10-47  
 
Partition was demanded on religio-communal grounds and it is therefore the duty of 
Pakistan, as its name implies, to remain clean in a ll its dealings. Both Hindus and 
Muslims had resorted to cruel acts and made grievous  blunders, but that dose not mean 
that this mad race should go on, culminating in war . A war would bring the Dominions 
under the sway of a third power and nothing can be worse. 
Delhi Diary, 307-08  
 
If there is a war (between India and Pakistan), the  Hindus in Pakistan cannot be fifth 
columnists there. No one would tolerate that. If th ere loyalty lies not with Pakistan, 
they should leave it. Similarly, the Muslims whose loyalty is with Pakistan should not India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247  stay in the Indian Union. To secure Justice for the  Hindus and Sikhs is the function of 
the Government. The people can make the Government do  their will…. The Muslims 
are reported to have said  hanske liya Pakistan, larke lenge Hindustan… Some dream of 
concerting the whole of India to Islam. That never w ill happen through war. Pakistan 
can destroy themselves and their faith. Similarly, if Islam is destroyed, it will be 
destroyed by the Muslims in Pakistan, not by the Hi ndus in Hindustan. 
Delhi Diary, pp. 40-41  
 
The universal way to have proper adjustment is for bo th the States to make a frank 
and full confession of guilt on either side and com e to terms, failing agreement to 
resort to arbitration in the usual manner. The othe r and rude way is that of war…. 
There is no escape from it if there is neither agre ement nor arbitration. 
Meanwhile…Muslims, who had not of their own free wi ll chosen to migrate to Pakistan, 
should be asked by their neighbours to return to th eir homes with a perfect feeling of 
safety. This cannot come about with the aid of the military. It can be done by return to 
sanity by the people concerned.  
Delhi Diary, p. 19  
 
To drive every Muslim from India and to drive every H indus and Sikh from Pakistan 
would mean war and eternal ruin for the country. If  such a suicidal policy is followed in 
both the States, it would spell the ruin of Islam a nd Hinduism in Pakistan and the 
Union. Good alone can beget good. Love breeds love. A s for revenge, it behaves man to 
leave the evil-doer in God’s hands. 
Delhi Diary, p. 26  
 
Death for me would be a glorious deliverance rather then that I should be a helpless 
witness of the destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikh ism and Islam. That destruction is 
certain if Pakistan ensures no equality of status a nd security of life and property for all 
professing the various faiths of the world and if In dia copies her. Only then Islam dies 
in the two Indians, not in the world. But Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside 
India.  
Delhi Diary, p. 332  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248   
Surely, it is cowardly on the part of the majority to kill or banish the minority for fear 
that they will all be traitors. Scrupulous regard f or the rights of minorities well 
becomes a majority. Disregard of them makes of a ma jority a laughing stock. Robust 
faith in oneself and brave trust of the opponent, so -called or real, is the best 
safeguard. 
Delhi Diary, pp. 31-32  
 
Those who have felt driven from Pakistan should know  that they are citizens of the 
whole of India, not merely of the Punjab or N.W.F.P . or Sind. The condition is that 
wherever they go, they should mix with the inhabitan ts there, as sugar with milk. They 
should be industrious and honest in their dealings.  They must realize that they were 
born to serve India and add to her glory, never to de grade her. They should refuse to 
waste their tine in gambling and drinking or quarre lling among themselves. It is human 
to err, but it is also given to human being to learn  from their mistakes and not to 
repeat them. If the refugees follow this advice, the y would be an asset wherever they 
go and the people in every province would welcome the m with open arms. 
Delhi Diary, p. 82  
 
If Pakistan would be a purely Muslim State and the Indian State a purely Hindu and Sikh 
State, with no rights for the minorities on either side, it would mean ruin for both the 
States.  
Delhi Diary, p. 91  
 
Had not the Quaid-i-Azam said that Pakistan was not  a theocratic State and that it was 
purely a secular State? That the claim cannot alway s be justified in action is, 
unfortunately, too true. Is the Union to be a theoc ratic State and are the tenets of 
Hinduism to be imposed on non-Hindus? ...The Indian  Union will then cease to be a 
land of hope and promise, a land to which all Asiat ic and African races look, indeed the 
whole world. The world expects not littleness and f anaticism from India whether as the 
Union or Pakistan. It expects greatness and goodnes s from which the whole world can 
derive a lesson and light in its prevailing darknes s. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249  Delhi Diary, p. 140  
 
Kashmir  
Neither the Maharaja saheb in neither Kashmir nor H is Exalted Highness the Nizam had 
any authority to accede to either Dominion, without  the known consent of their 
people. This was, so far as he knew, made clear in the case of Kashmir. If the Maharaja 
alone had wanted to accede, Gandhiji could not defe nd such accession. The accession 
was provisionally agreed to by the Union Government b ecause both the Maharaja and 
Sheikh Abdulla, speaking for the people of Kashmir and Jammu, wanted it. Sheikh 
Abdulla came on the scene because he claimed to rep resent the people of Kashmir and 
Jammu, not merely the Muslims but the whole of the people. 
He had heard whispers that Kashmir could be divided into two parts, Jammu going to 
the Hindus and Kashmir to the Muslims. He could not  think of such divided loyalties and 
splitting up of Indian States into so many parts. H e hoped, therefore, that wisdom 
would rule all India and an ugly situation would be  avoided without delay if only for 
the sake of the lakhs of Indians who felt compelled  to become helpless refugees. 
(From post-prayer speech at Delhi on 11-11-47)  
Delhi Diary, pp. 163-64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250   
Chapter 72 
FOREIGN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA     
Goa  
In free India, Goa cannot be allowed to exist as a separate entity in opposition to the 
laws of the Free State. Without a shot being fired,  the people of Goa will be able to 
claim and receive the rights of citizenship of the F ree State. 
Harijan, 30-6-46  
 
Surely there is not much to choose between French a nd Portuguese imperialism. The 
hands of imperialism are always dyed red. The soone r imperialistic powers shed their 
imperialism like Ashoka the Good, the better it wil l be for the groaning world….It is 
ridiculous for the Head of the Government Informati on Bureau to write of Portugal as 
the motherland of the Indians of Goa. Their mother country is as much India as mine. 
Goa is outside British India but it is within geogr aphical India as a whole. And there is 
very little, if anything, in common between the Port uguese and the Indians of Goa. 
Harijan, 8-9-46  
 
French  Settlements  
It is not possible for the inhabitants of these sma ll foreign settlements to remain under 
servility in the face of the millions of their count rymen who have become free from 
the British rule….I hope…the great French nation wo uld never identify itself with the 
suppression of people, whether black or brown, in I ndia or elsewhere. 
Harijan, 16-11-47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251   
Chapter 73 
INDIA AND WORLD PEACE  
The better mind of the world desires today not abso lutely independent State warring 
one against another, but a federation of friendly i nterdependent State. The 
consummation of that event may be far off. I want to  make no grand claim for our 
country. But I see nothing grand or impossible abou t our expressing our readiness for 
universal interdependence rather than independence.  
Young India, 26-12-24  
 
My ambition is much higher than independence. Throu gh the deliverance of India, I 
seek to deliver the so-called weaker races of the e arth from the crushing heels of 
Western exploitation. India’s coming to her own wil l mean every nation doing likewise. 
Young India, 12-1-28  
 
This I know that if India comes to her own demonstr ably through non-violent means, 
India will never want to carry a vast army, an equa lly grand navy and a grander air 
force. If her self-consciousness rises to the heigh t necessary to give her a non-violent 
victory in her fight for freedom, the world values wi ll have changed and most of the 
paraphernalia of war would be found to be useless. Such an India may be a mere 
dream, a childish folly. But such in my opinion is undoubtedly the implication of an 
India becoming free through non-violence. When that  freedom comes…it will have 
come through a gentlemanly understanding with Great  Britain. But then it will not be 
an imperialistic, haughty Britain maneuvering for w orld supremacy, but a Britain 
humbly trying to serve the common end of humanity. 
Young India, 9-5-29  
 
India will no longer then be helplessly driven into Britain’s wars of exploitation, but 
hers will be the voice of a powerful nation seeking to keep under restraint all the 
violent forces of the world. 
Young India, 9-5-29  
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252  I venture to suggest, in all humility, that if India  reaches her destiny through truth and 
non-violence, she will have made no small contributi on to the world peace for which 
all the nations of the earth are thirsting and she would also have, in that case, made 
some slight return for the help that those nations have been freely giving to her. 
Young India, 12-3-31  
 
When India becomes self-supporting, self-reliant, a nd proof against temptations and 
exploitation, she will cease to be the object of gr eedy attraction for any power in the 
West or the East and will then feel secure without having to carry the burden of 
expensive armaments. Her internal economy will be t he strongest bulwark against 
aggression. 
Young India, 2-7-31  
 
If I want freedom for my country, believe me, if I c an possibly help it, I do not want 
that freedom in order that I, belonging to a nation  which counts one-fifth of the human 
race, may exploit any other race upon earth, or any  single individual. If I want that 
freedom for my country, I would not be deserving of that freedom if I did not cherish 
and treasure the equal right of every other race, we ak or strong, to the same freedom. 
Young India, 1-10-31  
 
I feel in the inmost recesses of my heart…that the world is sick unto death of blood-
spilling. The world is seeking a way out, and I fla tter myself with the belief that 
perhaps it will be the privilege of the ancient land  of India to show that way out to the 
hungering world. 
India’s Case for Swaraj, p. 209  
 
What policy the National Government will adopt I can not say. I may not even survive it 
much as I would love to. If I do, I would advise the  adoption of non-violence to the 
utmost extent possible and that will be India’s gre at contribution to the peace of the 
world and the establishment of a new world order. I  expect that with the existence of 
so many martial races in India, all of whom will ha ve a voice in the government of the India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253  day, the national policy will incline towards milit arism of a modified character. I shall 
certainly hope that all the efforts to…show the eff icacy of non-violence as a political 
force will not have gone in vain and a strong party r epresenting true non-violence will 
exist in the country. 
Harijan, 21-6-42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254   
Chapter 74 
THE MESSAGE OF THE EAST 
If India fails, Asia dies. It has been aptly called  the nursery of many blended cultures 
and civilizations. Let India be and remain the hope of all the exploited races of the 
earth, whether in Asia, Africa or in any part of th e world. 
Delhi Diary, p. 31  
 
(In the course of his address to the concluding ses sion of the Inter-Asian Relations 
Conference held at Delhi on 2-4-1947 Mahatma Gandhi , stating that the wisdom had 
come to the West from the East, remarked as follows : ) 
The first of these wise men was Zoroaster. He belon ged to the East. He was followed 
by Buddha who belonged to the East-India. Who follo wed Buddha? Jesus, who came 
from the East. Before Jesus was Moses who belonged to Palestine though he was born 
in Egypt. After Jesus came Mohammad. I omit any ref erence to Krishna and Rama and 
other lights. I do not call them lesser lights, but  they are less known to the literary 
world. All the same I do not know a single person i n the world to match these men to 
Asia. And then what happened? Christianity become d isfigured when it want to the 
West. I am sorry to say that. I would not talk any further….What I want you to 
understand is the message of Asia. It is not to be learnt through the Western spectacles 
or by the West, it must be the message of love and t he message of truth….In this age 
of democracy, in this age of awakening of the poore st of the poor, you can redeliver 
this message with the greatest emphasis. You will c omplete the conquest of the West 
not through vengeance because you have been exploite d, but with real understanding. 
I am sanguine if all of you put your hearts togethe r…not merely heads…to understand 
the secret of the message these wise men of the Eas t have left to us, and if we really 
become worthy of that great message, the conquest o f the West will be completed. 
This conquest will be loved by the West itself. The West today is pining for wisdom. It 
is despairing of a multiplication of the atom bombs , because atom bombs mean utter 
destruction not merely of the West but of the whole  world, as if the prophecy of the 
Bible is going to be fulfilled and there is to be a  perfect deluge. It is up to you to tell 
the world of its wickedness and sin….That is the he ritage your teachers and my 
teachers have taught Asia.                                                                Harijan, 20-4-47 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255   
Chapter 75 
OBITER DICTA  
Adivasis  
The Adivasis are the original inhabitants whose mat erial position is perhaps no better 
than of Harijans and who have long been victims of neglect on the part of the so-called 
high classes. The Adivasis should have found a speci al place in the constructive 
programme. Non-mention was an oversight. They provid e a vast field of service for 
Congressmen. The Christian missionary has been more  or less in sole occupation of the 
field. Great as his labour has been, it has not pro spered as it might have, because of 
his ultimate aim being the Adivasis’ conversion to hi s fold and their becoming de-
Indianised. Any way no one who hopes to construct S waraj on the foundation of non-
violence can afford to neglect even the least of Indi a’s sons. Adivasis are too numerous 
to be counted among the least. 
Harijan, 18-1-42  
 
Discipline  
The highest from of freedom carries with it the gre atest measure of discipline and 
humility. Freedom that comes from discipline and hu mility cannot be denied, 
unbridled license is a sign of vulgarity alike to se lf and one’s neighbours. 
Young India, 3-6-26  
 
There will have to be rigid and iron discipline befo re we achieve anything great and 
enduring and that discipline will not come by mere academic argument and appeal to 
reason and logic. Discipline is learnt in the schoo l of adversity. And when zealous 
young men will train themselves to responsible work  without any shield, they will learn 
what responsibility and discipline are. 
Young India, 19-5-27  
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256  Doctors  
The fact remains that the doctors induce us to indu lge, and the result is that we have 
become deprived of self-control and have become effem inate. 
Hind Swaraj, p. 83  
 
My quarrel with the medical profession in general i s that it ignores the soul altogether 
and strains at nothing in seeking merely to repair such a fragile instrument as the 
body. Thus ignoring the soul, the profession puts m en at its mercy and contributes to 
the diminution of human dignity and self-control. 
Young India, 11-6-25  
 
Dress  
The national dress…is the most natural and the most  becoming for an Indian. I believe 
that our copying of the European dress is a sign of  our degradation, humiliation and our 
weakness, and that we are committing a national sin  in discarding a dress which is best 
suited to the Indian climate and which, for its sim plicity, art and cheapness, is not to 
be beaten on the face of the earth and which answer s hygienic requirements. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 393  
 
My narrow nationalism rebels against the hat; my se cret internationalism regards the 
sola hat as one of the few boons from Europe. But f or the tremendous national 
prejudice against the hat, I would undertake to bec ome president of a league for 
popularizing sola hats. 
Educated India has erred in taking to (in this clim ate) unnecessary, unhygienic, 
inelegant trousers and betraying general hesitation  to take up the sola hat. But I know 
that national likes and dislikes are not governed by  reason. 
Young India, 6-6-29  
 
Flag  
A flag is a necessity for all nations. Millions have  died for it. It is no doubt a kind of 
idolatry which it would be a sin to destroy. For a flag represents an ideal. The India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257  unfurling of the Union Jack evokes in the English b reast sentiments whose strength it is 
difficult to measure. The Stars and Stripes mean a world to the Americans. The Stars 
and the Crescent will call forth the best bravery in  Islam. It will be necessary for us 
Indians-Hindus, Mahomedans, Christians, Jews, Parsi s and all others to whom India is 
their home-to recognizes a common flag to live and t o die for.  
Young India, 13-4-21  
 
Lawyers  
The duty of a lawyer is always to place before the judges, and to help them to arrive 
at, the truth, never to prove the guilty as innocent.  
Young India, 11-6-25  
 
Leadership  
Those who claim to lead the masses must resolutely refuse to be led by them, if we 
want to avoid mob law and desire ordered progress fo r the country. I believe that mere 
protestation of one’s opinion and surrender to the mass opinion is not only not enough 
but in matters of vital importance, leaders must act  contrary to the mass opinion, if it 
does not commend itself to their reason. 
Young India, 14-7-20  
 
A leader is only first among equals. Some one must be put first, but he is and should be 
no stronger than the weakest link in the chain. Havi ng made our selection we must 
follow him or the chain is broken and is loose.  
Young India, 8-12-21  
 
Music  
Music, truly speaking, is an ancient and sacred art . The hymns of Samaveda are a mine 
of Music, and no ayat of the Koran can be recited u nmusically. David’s Psalms transport 
you to raptures and remind you of the hymns from Sa maveda. Let us revive this art and 
patronize the school of music. India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258  We see Hindu and Musalman Musicians sitting cheek b y jowl and partaking in musical 
concerts. When shall we see the same fraternal unio n in other affairs of our life? We 
shall then have the name of Rama and Rahman simulta neously on our lips. 
Young India, 15-4-26  
 
Parties   
If we have no charity, and no tolerance, we shall ne ver settle our difference amicably 
and must therefore always submit to the arbitrament  of a third party, i.e. to foreign 
domination. 
Young India, 17-4-24  
 
No school of thought can claim a monopoly of right judgment. We are all liable to err 
and are often obliged to revise our judgments. In a  vast country like this, there must 
be room for all school of honest though. And the le ast, therefore, that we owe to 
ourselves as to others is to try to understand the opponent’s viewpoint and, if we 
cannot accept it, respect it as fully as we would e xpect him to respect ours. It is one 
of the indispensable tests of a healthy public life  and, therefore, fitness for Swaraj. 
Young India, 17-4-24  
 
Politics  
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Tru th face to face one must be able to 
love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a man w ho aspires after that cannot 
afford to keep out of any field of life. That is wh y my devotion to Truth has drawn me 
into the field of politics; and I can say without t he slightest hesitation and yet in all 
humility, that those who say that religion has noth ing to do with politics do not know 
what religion means. 
An Autobiography, p. 504  
 
Priests  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259  It is a painful fact, but it is a historical truth,  that priests who should have been the 
real custodians of religion have been instrumental i n destroying the religion of which 
they have been custodians. 
Young India, 20-10-27  
 
Public Funds  
If we do not account for every single pie we receive and do not make judicious use of 
the funds, we shall deserve to be blotted out of pub lic life. 
Young India, 6-7-21  
 
Public money belongs to the poor public of India th an whom there is none poorer on 
earth. We have to be more wakeful, more cautious, an d more careful; and let us be 
ready to account for every pie that we receive from t he public. 
Young India, 16-4-31  
 
Public Institutions  
…After considerable experience with the many public  institutions which I have 
managed, it has become my firm conviction that it is  not good to run public institutions 
on permanent funds. A permanent fund carries in its elf the moral fall of the 
institution….Institutions maintained on permanent f unds are often found to ignore 
public opinion, and are frequently responsible for acts contrary to it. In our country we 
experience this at every step. Some of the so-calle d religious trusts have ceased to 
render any accounts. The trustees have become the o wners and are responsible to 
none. I have no doubt that the ideal is for public i nstitution to live, like nature, from 
day to day. The institution that fails to win publi c support has no rights to exist as 
such. 
An Autobiography, p. 198  
 
It is my settled conviction that no deserving instit ution ever dies for want of support. 
Institutions that have died have done so either beca use there was nothing in them to India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260  commend them to the public or because those in cont rol lost faith, or which is perhaps 
the same thing, lost stamina. 
Young India, 15-10-25  
 
It is not our financial position, but our moral pos ition that is precarious. No movement 
or activity that has the sure foundation of the pur ity of character of its workers is ever 
in danger to come to an end for want of funds….We h aving to tap humbler resources. 
Our middle classes and even poor classes support so many beggars, so many temples, 
why will they not support a few good workers? We mu st beg from door to door, beg 
grain, copper coins, do as they do in Bihar and Mah arashtra….But remember that 
everything will depend on the singleness of your pur pose, your devotion to the task and 
the purity of your character. People won’t give for such work unless they are sure of 
our selflessness. 
Harijan, 28-11-36  
 
Public Opinion  
Public opinion alone can keep a society pure and he althy. 
Young India, 18-12-20  
 
Legislation in advance of public opinion is often w orse than useless. 
Young India, 29-1-21  
 
Healthy public opinion has an influence of which we  have not realized the full 
significance. Public opinion becomes intolerable wh en it becomes violent and 
aggressive. 
Young India, 7-5-31  
 
Public Workers  
There is in modern public life a tendency to ignore  altogether the character of a public 
worker so long as he worker efficiently as a unit i n an administrative machinery. It is India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261  said that everybody’s character is his own private c oncern. Though I have known this 
view to have been often taken I have never been able to  appreciate, much less to 
adopt if. I have known the serious consequences over taking organizations that have 
counted private character as a matter of no consequ ence. 
Harijan, 7-11-36  
 
Punctuality  
It would be a distinct gain to the national cause i f the leaders and workers strictly keep 
their hours….No man is expected to do more than he really can. If at the end of the 
day there is surplus work left or he cannot get thr ough it without missing a meal or 
encroaching upon the hours of sleep or recreation, there is mismanagement 
somewhere. I have no doubt that if we cultivate the  habit of punctuality and acting 
according to programme, the index of national effic iency will go up, our advance 
towards our goal will be rapid, and the workers wil l be healthier and longer lived. 
Harijan, 24-9-38  
 
Races  
It is wholly unnecessary for the sake of the love of  horse flesh to have horse races and 
all their attendant excitement. They pander to the vices of humanity and mean a 
waste of good cultivable soil and good money. Who h as not witnessed as I have the ruin 
of fine men caused by the gamble on the race-course s? It is time to leave alone the 
vices of the West and to strive to adopt the best th at it has to give. 
Harijan, 18-1-48  
 
Refugees  
They should learn the art of humility which demands  a rigorous self-searching rather 
than a search of others and consequent criticism, o ften harsh, oftener undeserved and 
sometimes only deserved. Searching of self ennobles , searching of others debases. The 
sufferers should learn the art and virtue of corpora te life, in which the circumference 
of co-operation is ever widening till at last it enc ircles the whole human race. If they 
did this, no sufferer will live in isolation. All o f them, no matter to which province they India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262  belong, will hold together and would be considering  not the welfare of self but that of 
all. This does not mean that all of them will live o r insist on living at one place, an 
impossible feat at any time, more so today, when la khs and lakhs of people have been 
torn from their homes, not knowing where to lay the ir heads upon. But this humble 
spirit of co-operation does mean that wherever they are placed, they will feel one with 
all the sufferers, no matter from what strata of so ciety they are drawn or to which 
province they belong. Insistence on being accommodat ed in a particular place of one’s 
choice there will be none. The sufferers will never grumble. 
Moreover, every sufferer who is not a cripple will d o his or her full share of work 
against bread, clothing and shelter in a becoming m anner. Thus they will realize the 
dignity of labour and feel dependent upon no one. A ll will be equal to one another 
irrespective of sex. Some labour will be shared by a ll, e.g. sanitary work including 
latrine-cleaning and scavenging. No labour will be c onsidered too low or too high. In 
this society there will be no room for drones, idle rs or loafers. 
Hariajn, 14-12-47  
 
Rivers  
We have more Ganges and Jamunas than the two. They r emind us of the sacrifices we 
must make for the sake of the land we are living in.  They remind us of the process of 
purification that we must continuously go through a s the rivers themselves are going 
through from moment to moment. In the modern rush, the chief use we have for our 
rivers is to empty our gutters in them and navigate o ur cargo vessels, and in the 
process make them dirtier still. We have no time…to stroll down to these rivers, and in 
silent meditation listen to the message they murmur  to us. 
Young India, 23-12-‘26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263   
GLOSSARY 
Adivasis  Original inhabitants of the country 
Ahimsa  Non-violence; love 
Ashram, 
Ashrama  A place of spiritual retirement; hermitage; one of the four 
stages of life according to Hinduism 
Avatar  Incarnation of God 
Babul  A tree, a twig of which is used as a tooth brush 
Bania  Member of the trader caste of Hindus. 
Bhangi  Scavenger 
Bhogabhumi  Land of enjoyment 
Bigha  3,025 square yards of land 
Brahmachari  A celibate; one who leads a life of self-restraint 
Brahmacharya  Celibacy; life of self-restraint 
Brahmana  Member of the priestly caste among Hindus 
Chaitanya  Bengali religious reformer of the 15th century who preached 
devotion to God 
Chakki  Grinding wheel 
Chapati  Thin, flat, unleavened bread 
Charkha  Spinning wheel 
Dada  Hindu religious reformer of the 16th century A.D. w ho rejected 
the claim of both the Vedas and koran to be revealed  
scriptures. He had a large following in Northern In dia, his 
followers being known as Dadupanthis 
  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264  Damayanti  Princess of Vidarbha and wife of prince Nala of Nai shadha, the 
constancy of whose devetion to each other forms the theme of 
a well-known episode in the Pranas 
Daridranarayana  God in the form of the poor 
Dayananda  Swami Dayananda Sarasvati, founder of Arya Samaj 
Dharma  Religion; duty; law of one’s way 
Draupadi  Wife of Pandava brothers, heroes of the epic Mahabha rata 
Duragraha  Obstinately sticking to a wrong resolve; the opposi te of 
Satyagraha 
Duryodhan  Evil-minded Kaurava prince whose refusal to yield to  his 
cousins, the Pandavas, their just share in the kingd om led to 
the Mahabharata war 
Fakir  A Muslim ascetic 
Ganja  Flower of Indian hemp which has an intoxicating eff ect when 
smoked with tobacco 
Ghanchi  Oil-presser 
Ghani  Oil press of indigenous type 
Gopal  Cowherd; one of the names of Krishna 
Goonda Hooligan 
Goondasim  Hooliganism 
Goseva Sangh  Association for the welfare of cattle 
Gur  Jaggery; molasses derived from palm or sugar-cane ju ice 
Guru  Teacher; preceptor; religious leader  
Guru Govind 
Singh  The tenth Guru of the Sikhs 
  India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265  Harijan  lit. a ma n of God; a name which Gandhiji gave to the 
‘untouchable’ 
Harijan  English weekly journal conducted by Gandhiji 
Hartal  Temporary suspension of business by a large number of people 
as a mark of protest or mourning 
Himsa  Violence 
Ishopanishad  One of the major Upanishads which inculcates renunc iation of 
the desire for the fruits of one’s action 
Janaka  An ancient king of Videha who was a great philosoph er 
Jaggery  Molasses produced from palm or sugarcane juice 
Kabir  Poet-saint of northern India who lived in the 15th c entury A. D. 
and who preached the essential unity of the Godhead  and the 
harmony or religions. 
Kachrapatti  Municipal scavenging department 
Kama  Carnal love 
Karmabhumi  Land of duty 
Khaddar, Khadi  Hand-spun and hand-woven cloth 
Khuda-I 
Khidmatgar  lit. servant of God; one who works in the spirit of unselfish 
service of fellowmen; an Association of workers foun ded by 
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, the “Frontier Gandhi” 
Kisan  A peasant 
Koran  Book of Revelation of Islam 
Krishna  Central figure of the epic, Mahabharata, who is vene rated by 
Hindus as God incarnate 
Kshatriya  Member of warrior caste among Hindus India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266  Kumbha Mela  A Hindu fair held every twelfth year at the time of a certain 
planetary conjunction when the pious take a purific atory bath 
in some sacred rivers 
Lakh  1,00,000 
Mahabharata  Hindu epic of about 1,00,000 verses, the central the me of 
which is the great war between the Pandavas and thei r cousins 
the Kauravas, who were rival claimants to the throne  of 
Hastinapur (ancient Delhi) 
Mahatma  A high souled person 
Mantra  A sacred text or formula 
Nanak- Guru 
Nanak  Founder of Sikhism, who was born in 1469 and died i n 1538 or 
1539 A. D. 
Nai Talim  lit. new education i.e. Pre-Basic, Basic and Post-B asic 
Nira  Freshly drawn unfermented juice of the palm tree 
Panch  lit. five 
Panchayat  A village council of five or more elders 
Pariah  An ‘untouchable’ 
Pinjrapole  An institution for sheltering aged and crippled ani mals, 
including cows 
Poorna  Full 
Pratap  Mahatma Pratapsinha, ruler of Udaipur in Rajputana who 
valiantly fought against the Moghul Emperor Akbar in  defence of 
his kingdom 
Raj  Kingdom 
Rama  Hero of the epic, Ramayana, who is regarded as an i ncarnation 
of God by Hindus India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267  Ramakrishna  Bengali saint (1836-86 A. D.) who taught the onenes s of the 
Godhead and the basic harmony of all religions. The  
Ramakrishna Mission is named after him. 
Ramanama  lit. name of Rama, or God 
Ramarajya  lit. Kingdom of Rama; ideal social order 
Ramayana  Hindu epic which relates the story of the abduction  of Sita, wife 
of Ram, prince of Ayodhya, by Ravana, demon king of Lanka, 
and her rescue by rama after the destruction of the  demon 
Rashtrabhasha  National language 
Ravana  Demon-king of lanka who was destroyed by Rama, prin ce of 
Ayodhya, for abduction Sita, his wife 
Rishi  Seer 
Roti  Flat, unleavened bread 
Ryot  A peasant 
Sadavarta  Place where alms or food is distributed free to the  poor 
Sama Veda  One of the four Vedas 
Samurai  Feudal barons of Japan 
Sangh  Association 
Sarvodaya  Welfare of all 
Satyagraha  lit. clinging to truth; civil or non-violent resista nce 
Satyagrahi  Civil or non-violent resister 
Shankara  Hindu philosopher of the 8th century A. D. who was an 
exponent of Advaita or absolute Nondualsim 
Shanti dal  Peace brigade 
Shastra  Scripture India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268  Shuddhi  lit. purification; conversion, especially reconversi on, to Hindu 
religion 
Shudra  Member of the menial caste among Hindus  
Sipahee  A soldier of the lowest rank in the Indian army dur ing the British 
regime 
Sita  Wife of Rama, the hero of the epic, Ramayana  
Smritis  Ancient Hindu law books 
Sudama  An extremely poor class-mate of Krishna 
Swaraj  Self-government 
Swadeshi  lit. of indigenous make; principle of using only ar ticles of 
indigenous make 
Tabligh  Propaganda and conversion to Islam 
Tadgud  Jaggery prepared from palm juice 
Tadi  See toddy 
Tapasya  Penance; religious austerity 
Tilak  A mark of auspiciousness on the forehead with conse crate paste 
or powder 
Tiruwallwar  Author of Kural, one of the earliest Tamil classic which is 
generally assigned to the 2nd century A. D. 
Toddy  Juice of the palm tree which becomes intoxicating w hen it has 
fermented 
Tukaram  Poet saint of Maharashtra who lived in the 17th cent ury A. D. 
Tulsidas  Hindi poet-saint of northern India, who lived in the  16th century 
A. D. and whose work, Ramacharitamansa, is held in the highest 
veneration by all Hindus India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269  Upanishads  Ancient philosophical treatises which are believed by Hindus to 
contain revealed truth 
Vaid, Vaidya  A practitioner of indigenous medicine  
Vaishya  Member of the cultivator and mercantile caste among Hindus 
Varna  A class; a caste 
Varnashram  Ancient Hindu social order based on the four Ashram as or stages 
in life, (Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprashtha and  Sanyas) 
and the four occupational divisions (Brhmana, Kshat riya, 
Vaishya and Shudra) 
Vedas  Oldest scriptures of Hindus which are believed to e mbody 
revealed truth and which are divided into four books,  Rig Veda, 
Sama Veda, Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda 
Vidura  Righteous minded uncle of the Kaurava and Pandava pr inces of 
the epic, Mahabharata 
Yajna  Sacrifice 
Zamindar  Landlord 
Zamindari  Landlordism 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270   
SOURCES 
Amrita Bazar 
Patrika  Daily English newspaper published in Calcutta 
An Autobiography 
or The Story of My 
Experiments with 
Truth,  By M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabas -14, 
1956 
  
Constructive 
Programme  By M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad -14, 
1948 
Delhi Diary  By M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad -14, 
1948 
From Yeravada 
Mandir  By M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad -14, 
1945 
Gandhi in Indian 
Villages  By Mahadev Desai. S. Ganesan, Madras, 1927 
Gram Udyog 
Patrika  Monthly journal of All- India Village Industries As sociation, 
Wardha 
Harijan  English weekly journal edited by Gandhiji and other s and 
published at Ahmedabad; is discontinues since 1956 
Hind Swaraj or 
Indian Home Rule  By M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad -14, 
1958 
India’s Case for 
Swaraj  By Mahatma Gandhi. Yeshanand and co., Bombay, 1932 
Key to Health  By M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad -14, 
1956 
Mahatma: Life of 
Mohandas 
Karamchand 
Gandhi  By D. G. Tendulkar, in 8 Vols. Vitthalbhai Jhaveri a nd D. G. 
Tendulkar, Bombay, 1951, onwards 
Mahatma Gandhi, 
The Last Phase  By Pyarelal. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad-14 , Vol. I, 
1956; Vol. II, 1958 India of My Dreams 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271  Satyagraha in 
South Africa  By M.K. Gandhi. navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad - 14, 
1950 
Speeches and 
Writings of 
Mahatma Gandhi  G. A. Natesan, Madras, 1933 
The Bombay 
Chronicle  Daily newspaper published in Bombay 
The Modern 
review  Monthly journal published in Calcutta 
To the students  M. K. Gandhi. Navjivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad-14 , 1958 
With Gandhiji in 
Ceylon  By Mahadev Desai. S. Ganeshan, Madras, 1928 
Young India  Weekly journal edited by Gandhiji and published at 
Ahmedabad; is discontinued since 1932 
 
 
 
 
 
    
       
               
 
 
 
 