 
Is Gandhi out of date 
Dr. Vishwanath Tandon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by: 
Mumbai Sarvodaya Mandal – Gandhi Book Centre 
299 Nana Chowk – Tardeo Road, 
Mumbai 400 007 
 
 
Printed by : 
Mankari Mudranalaya 
2/A Vimal Udyog Bhavan 
Taikalwadi, Mahim, Mumbai 400 016(INDIA) 
 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2 PREFACE 
The first part of this pamphlet was written early as 1 969 for an All-India Essay 
Competition held in the observation of the Gandhiji' s Birth Centenary year. Though 
it was judged as best it has been lying with me and sinc e Mumbai Sarvodaya 
Mandal was prepared to publish I touched it only here  and there and left 
practically in it's original form, though it bears t he impress of the times. 
However, to make amends for it I have add a second p art to it wherein important 
world problems have been discussed in very brief light of Gandhiji's thinking. I 
hope they both together will be found useful by the readers. 
I am highly thankful to my friend Shri Daniel Mazga onkar for his initiative in the 
publication of this pamphlet and still more to Smt. S unandatai Kalushte, the 
chairperson of Mumbai Sarvodaya Mandal for undertak ing it. 
Vishwanath Tandon 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Mumbai Sarvodaya Mandal is grateful to Dr. Vishwanat h Tandon for giving us 
permission to publish his essay which had won the first p rize in the contest 
organised by Gandhi Smarak Nidhi in 1969. 
We take the opportunity to thank Smt. Anuradha Mohn i for getting the work of 
typing, proof reading done in time and for giving v aluable suggestions. 
We did not have the time to send the proof to Kanpur  to Dr. Tandon though he had 
expressed his willingness to have a look at the final pr ess copy of the booklet as 
we wanted to get this work done at the earliest. 
We are solely responsible for any kind of error that might have been overlooked 
inspite of our efforts and hope that the readers shal l condone us for the same. 
Smt. Sunanda Kaluste President, Mumbai Sarvodaya Mandal 
 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3 PART ONE 
IS GANDHI OUT OF DATE ? 
Pitirim A.Sorokin, (1889-1968) famous sociologist an d philosopher of history, has 
dedicated his book, 'The Reconstruction of Humanity' , to Mohandas K. Gandhiji, 
whom he considers as 'Deathless'. As opposed to it, to ma ny western minds the 
ideas of Gandhiji and his ways have been a matter of m uch perplexity. Another 
opinion heard was that "Gandhian philosophy was neith er with the age nor ahead 
of the age, but it was against the age". This somewhat echoed the view of many 
educated Indians, who, while revering Gandhiji as th e 'Father of the Nation', had 
been rejecting his ideas as outdated, a relic of a byg one outlook and mentality. 
Thus these two contradictory views have been held abo ut him and an attempt has 
been made here to examine his ideas mostly in the li ght of the thinking of some 
topmost thinkers of the century and in the context o f the problems before the 
world. 
 
A Superficial View 
The latter view is based on the fact that Gandhiji ha d rejected many of the 
contemporary pet notions and prevailing trends of the  time. In an age of 
scepticism he was a religious man with his ideas anchor ed to his faith in the 
existence of God. In conditions wherein wickedness seeme d to predominate in 
humans, he repeatedly affirmed the essential goodness o f humans. In a period of 
ethical relativism and nihilism, he pleaded for cert ain ethical norms as permanent 
and fundamental for human conduct. While Freud was pointing to the dangers of 
the suppression of the libido, he advocated Brahmachar ya and rejected birth 
control, permitting intercourse only for the purpose of procreation. In an age of 
materialism and craze for a higher and higher standar d of living he preached 
wantlessness, self imposed simplicity and austerity in l iving. While the modern 
world was taking to more and more gadgets and was adv ancing towards a Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4 computer civilization, he rejected modern industrial ism and advocated the cause 
of village industries. In a world where distances were being annihilated, he stood 
for economic self-sufficiency at the village or regio nal level. Amidst the increasing 
urbanization and the growth of metropolitan cities, he preached the values of a 
rural civilization and called upon the youths of Ind ia to go to the villages. While 
the world trend is towards political centralization and increase in state functions, 
he pleaded for decentralization of political power and held that, 'that government 
is best which governs the least.' In a world where th e ideas of class animosities 
and conflicts are gaining adherents, he laid emphasis on the harmony of interests 
by talking of Sarvodaya, the welfare of all. In an age of increasing armament and 
violence, he stood for disarmament and non-violence.  Though a staunch advocate 
of economic equality, he rejected nationalization a nd expropriation, advocating 
"trusteeship". And, lastly, to a world that has come to  look down upon physical 
labour as an evil to be avoided as much as possible, his idea of Basic Education 
seemed to be "a retreat from civilization". 
Thus looked at, Gandhiji stood for a culture which th e world is fast outgrowing. 
But it is not really so. A great quality of a seer or  a prophet is that he looks far 
ahead of others and is able to see beyond the outer ph enomena and to intuitively' 
see what is not generally apparent to others. That is why he is hardly honoured in 
his own country and times. The same is true of Gandhiji . The western world is now 
increasingly realizing the correctness of his insights, b ut we, who have yet to 
develop an independent individuality of our own, la g behind in that realization 
with consequences, already grave and dangerous to our  country. Independent 
India, while paying lip homage to the memory of tha t great soul, has conveniently 
forgotten his suggestions and ideas for which he stood t he whole of his life, and 
has adopted policies antithetical to them. Gunnar Myr dal, the Swedish politician 
and economist, writes, 'The social and economic revolu tion he (Gandhiji) had 
looked forward to had been, first, postponed and, lat er, shelved altogether - 
except for some continued rhetorical exuberance in public speaking. Instead of Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5 the economic equalization he had seen coming, inequa lities have been widening. 
The concentration of financial power has increased. The land and tenancy reforms 
have been little more than a sham. 
There has been no fundamental reform of education, w hich still serves to preserve 
and mark off the gulf between those who work with th eir hands and those who, 
having acquired the badge of education, do not have  to do so." 1 And he further 
says, "The development of Indian politics since the a ttainment of independence, 
which he himself barely survived, Gandhiji would in all certainty have censured 
severely." 2 Still more pathetic is the lament of Louis Fischer, w ho observes," India 
has impoverished itself by exporting its finest treasur es. It gave birth to Buddha. 
Now hundreds of millions follow him outside India and only a handful inside. India's 
earth and air nurtured Gandhiji. How many Indians ca n be counted in his native 
country? How much influence do these Gandhians exerci se? Is Gandhiji to become 
the lost Mahatma? Is the prophet to be without honou r in his homeland?"3 Such is 
the view of foreigners who cannot be accused of any bias against either the 
Government or the people of India. 
 
The Times 
However, for a rational examination of the relevanc y of Gandhiji's ideas, we must, 
first of all, look into the conditions of the age an d its needs and I do so here, with 
the solitary exception of Dr. Sarvapally Radhakrishna n, on the basis of some top 
western social thinkers themselves. 
There is no gainsaying the fact that we are living i n an age of unprecedented 
crisis. 
Dr. Radhakrishnan writes, "Whereas in the case of earl ier civilizations the 
challenges were of a material and external nature, t he problems of the latter ones 
are mainly inward and spiritual." 4 The root cause of it is that the resources of the 
spirit are on the decline while the achievements of t he mind have reached Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6 alarming proportions. There is a cultural lag between  the power human being has 
acquired over the forces of nature and the correspon ding self-control he needs, to 
use them for constructive purposes. Thus the present civilization is beset with a 
danger which is internal if humankind is taken as a  whole, but which is both 
external and internal as far as any particular countr y is concerned. This danger is 
of a nuclear holocaust. The fact that so far it has been avoided is no guarantee 
that it would not happen at all. The experience of history warns against the 
danger involved in the very piling up of armaments, for 'the guns go off their own 
volitions.' A nuclear war may even come about unint entionally. It may be initiated 
by a mechanical defect in the radar or the nervous b reakdown of some important 
officer working under a great strain of responsibilit y. 
War has an intimate connection with the ways of our i ndividual and social life, and 
is a consequence of violence we find therein. To eli minate it, we have to 
strengthen the forces making for life, and the three  factors on the side of life are 
love, the instinct of creativeness and the joy of lif e. But the present-day 
conditions have checked and enfeebled them. The conv entional conception of 
success and the present economic system with its overemph asis on the material 
aspects of life and on competition, run counter to a  life of love. It has engendered 
envy, hate, cupidity, egotism, and an inordinate am bition and lust for power. 
Crime and delinquency statistics, the divorce rate, th e rising tide of illegitimate 
births and higher incidence of broken homes, all poin t to a lack of a life of love. 
The modern system of production kills the instinct of creativeness by depriving the 
worker of opportunities for creative self-expression. A person is so constituted 
that if he lacks creative outlets, he takes pleasure in  negative creation or 
destruction. Lastly, the present-day worker feels no j oy in life, he has to work 
hard for his living, and the desire for an increasin gly higher standard of living 
makes his work harder and harder in spite of his abhor rence for his work. The 
high-speed machine production runs counter to his capa city. His physical heritage 
is better suited to simpler tasks, to a wider diversifica tion of functions and to a Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7 less monotonous toil than he has to perform. The resu lt is that a large number of 
workers hate their jobs, and this feeling is further i ncreased by the fact that their 
work and routine are controlled by others who pay t hem wages. No happy life can 
possibly be built on the basis of such hated work. There fore they do not feel any 
joy in life and consider it not worth living. No won der then, that some find relief 
in suicide while others run after thrills in life, go ing to extremes in their leisure 
activities. Elliot and Merill have pointed out that the hectic character of American 
life is a result of the morbid desire to escape from the unpleasant reality of the 
factory or the machine shop. The worker seeks oblivio n from his work rather than 
recreation of his vital forces. He can seldom find it at home, and hence he seeks 
escape in drinking bouts, delinquent and criminal co nduct, prostitution, etc. 5 Such 
an attitude of dissatisfaction with and of escape f rom life breeds war. 
Further, modern industrialism has led to exploitation,  imperialism and national 
rivalries, and these have been important causes of mode rn wars. The present-day 
centralization and concentration of power is itself a  consequence of this 
industrialization. Never before in history the life and death of so many depended 
upon so very few. The greatest autocrat of the past h ad only a fraction of the 
tremendous power held by the rulers of today. Hence o ne of the most important 
problems of the day is of taming and control of arbit rary power and unlimited 
ambitions. 
Another consequence of modern industrialism is the destr uction of traditional 
moral values. There has come about a loss of faith, an  intellectual and moral 
vacuum, and a loosening of the grasp of the meaning a nd purpose of life. There 
has been a virtual breakdown of civilization -an ero sion of values, a dissipation of 
human purposes, and a reversion to sub-human levels of conduct. Then there also 
has been a loss of the sense of community. The word 'soc iety' has lost its meaning 
because the old intimacy, feeling of kinship, neighb ourliness and interdependence 
have vanished. Relations between individuals have bec ome like those between Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8 living machines and they look upon each other as mea ns. Thus, as Erich Fromm has 
pointed out, modern society consists of 'atoms', littl e particles estranged from 
each other, but held together by selfish interests and by necessity to make use of 
each other. 6 All this explains the wayward conduct of the modern  youth who is not 
even aware that anything like society or community e xists, hippiism and student 
revolt are simply symptoms of a severely sick society. A  recent publication of an 
American university on hippiism says, "There is somethin g wrong, something 
deadly, something seriously fatal about the present world! Hippiness proves that 
fact. Those who become hippies see much of what is wron g with the world; they 
see the hypocrisy, the phoniness, the hollow shams, th e dishonesty, the dog-eat-
dog competition, the threat that humankind will wip e itself off the face of the 
earth; they see the threat to land, water and air po llution; they see all the 
horrendous problems of the world - but they retreat into their own selfish little 
drugged world.... They see clearly that something is wrong, but they don't know 
what to do about it." 7 The pamphlet also observes, "Many millions today are 
desperately seeking, searching, often they know not wh at. Modern education, the 
blurring of right and wrong, the double standards o f the world, the philosophy of 
permissiveness and experimental psychology, uncertainty  and general insecurity, 
the growth of affluence and leisure, the idea that m ight makes right and there are 
no absolute standards - all these factors contribute to  the widespread growth of 
disillusionment, immorality, rebellion against societ y and the growing escapism." 8 
The epidemic of Student Revolt like hippiism also re flects the malaise of society. 
It is a reaction of those who are activists by tempera ment, while the latter is of 
the gentle, the passive and the quiescent. Hippiism h as no relieving features, 
while the Student Revolt is not without some justific ation and it commands some 
sympathy. However, both are warning signals which soc iety should heed before it 
is too late! Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9 Under the present system the political, social and ec onomic problems are so 
complex that they are beyond the grasp of common pe rson. This produces in him a 
feeling of helplessness, a feeling which is increasing with further rapid changes in 
society to which he is unable to adjust himself with co rresponding rapidity. Its 
consequences are deep and far-reaching. It "creates am ong people apathy and 
passivity, hostility and sullen discontent and turns th em into easy victims of clever 
manipulations of popular emotions." 9 
Another curious phenomenon is that though the present- day world is itself a 
product of the life of the mind, it is getting out o f tune with it. Mechanization and 
industrialism is reducing humans to a robot. He is now  governed by the anonymous 
authority of conformity, has no convictions of its own , no individuality and almost 
no sense of self. The net result of all these developme nts is in the words of Lewis 
Mumford," We have reached a point in history where m an has become his most 
dangerous enemy.......Today it is man's higher funct ions that have become 
automatic and constricted and his lower ones that have  become spontaneous and 
irrepressible." 10 
Such is the crisis facing the modern civilization and  the way out of it lies in a basic 
change in the prevailing economic and political syste ms, and in the prevailing 
philosophy of life. The change in the economic system  must make the world 
simpler. It should make the 'man', and not the 'machi ne' and dominate the scene. 
It should emphasize co-operation and the sense of commu nity, and should 
decentralize economic power. The new system of produc tion should provide outlet 
to the creative instincts of men and women and induce  joy in life. In the words of 
Bertrand Russell," It is not only more material goods  that men need, but more 
freedom, more self-direction, more outlet for creati veness, more opportunity for 
the joy of life, more voluntary co-operation, and l ess involuntary subservience to 
purposes not their own." 11  The new political system must simplify problems and 
provide greater opportunities to the common man to b e the arbiter of his destiny Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10 by enabling him to take a more intelligent and a bi gger part in the political 
management of society. Lastly, the new philosophy of life must be that of love, 
for without a positive concentration on love in all its phases, we can hardly hope 
to rescue the world from the insensate forces of hate , violence and destruction 
which threaten it. The new philosophy must also conserv e what is good and lasting 
in the traditional moral values; it must inculcate in  people a favourable attitude 
towards work; and it must inspire them with a sense of t he unity of humankind 
and of neighbourliness. It should be a philosophy that  would promote a zest for 
life. 
This is wherein lies the relevancy of Gandhiji's ideas. They fundamentally meet 
the needs of the age. I deal below with important co ntroversial aspects of his 
thought. 
 
Philosophical Assumptions 
Gandhiji was a religious man, but not in any narrow  and sectarian sense. His 
religiousness consisted of 'an abiding faith in the absol ute values of truth, love and 
justice and a persistent endeavour to realize them on earth.' Some sort of religious 
spirit is ingrained in human nature, and even in anti -religious communist countries 
the throne of God is (was) not vacant. As A. N. White head once said, "Religion is a 
world loyalty", and Gandhiji was religious in the bes t sense. His conception of God 
is all-comprehensive and catholic. It includes all tho se elements and aspects in 
which he can be conceived. He writes, "That Law then  which governs all life is 
God. Law and Law-Giver are one." 12  At another place he says," To me God is Truth 
and Love; God is ethics and morality; God is fearless ness. God is the source of 
light and life and yet He is above all and beyond th ese. 13  However, he finally 
expressed his conception as 'God is Truth', and he incl uded sincere and truthful 
atheists in the category of believers. He said to Gora,  an avowed atheist, "You may Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11 call yourself atheist, but as long as you feel akin wi th humankind you accept God 
in practice." 14 
A belief in something higher like God is acknowledge d to be a practical necessity 
by even a sceptic like Bertrand Russell. He says," If l ife has to be fully human, it 
must serve some end which seems, in some sense, outside hum an life, some end 
which is impersonal and above mankind, such as God or truth or beauty. Those 
who best promote life do not have life for their pur pose." 15  Humanists' attempt to 
replace God with society suffers from serious drawbac ks. H.E.Hockings writes, 
"The death of God leaves society in the place of the  Absolute; and like many other 
potentates who fall short of omniscience as well as omn ipotence, we realize that 
his pretensions are tolerable only when he is humble an d recognizes a law above 
him. 16  As such Gandhiji's belief in God and his advocacy of it is no out- of-date 
attitude. What is really out of date is fanaticism an d Gandhiji is far from it. That 
is why he could say to Gora, "I can neither say my th eism is right nor your atheism 
wrong. We are seekers after truth. We change whenever  we find ourselves in the 
wrong. I have changed like this many times in my life . I see you as a worker. You 
are not a fanatic. You will change whenever you fin d yourself in the wrong. There 
is no harm as long as you are not fanatical." 17  His God did not scare Gora away ! 
The doctrine of the essential goodness of human natu re does not deny the 
existence of wicked tendencies in man. It only refuses to subscribe to the view 
that he is basically wicked. On the contrary, it rega rds human nature to be 
normally kind and loving. The very fact that a pers on always tries to justify or 
explain away one's own wrong actions, and that evil deeds usually hit headlines in 
the newspapers, testifies that they are abnormal to hu mans. Gandhiji was of the 
view that even a scoundrel has redeeming features. He  holds that there are chords 
in every human heart. If we only know how to strike  the right chord, we bring out 
the music" 18  Thus this doctrine only affirms faith in the ultimate  victory of the 
goodness in humans over their evil propensities. Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12 In spite of all criticism this faith is present in all of us. Who is there who ever loses 
all hopes of the reformation of one's own dear and n ear ones? Such faith forms the 
very basis of education which presumes human being's inh erent capacity for 
cultural development. Most of our evil actions emana te from frailty and not from 
perversity or depravity. And generally whatever perv ersity there is, it is due to 
wrong environment and upbringing. Erich Fromm, a ps ychoanalyst of repute, says, 
"Destructiveness is the outcome of an unlived life. Tho se individual and social 
conditions which make for the blocking of life furth ering energy produce energy 
produce destructiveness which in turn is the source from  which the various 
manifestations of evil spring." 19 
Such faith in humans is the need of the hour. It is t he only force that can reform 
the world. It is not a matter of ignoring evil or hu man wickedness. It is the only 
'realism' that we can afford. 
 
Sarvodaya 
These days when the destiny of individuals and nations a re becoming so closely 
linked up together, recognition of the concept of S arvodaya is another necessity. 
We were taught long ago that the 'world is a whole a nd we are members one of 
another', and now this truth is being reinforced by m odern science. A peaceful 
world requires besides change in its social, economic an d political structures a 
new philosophy of the identity of interests between i ndividuals and individuals, 
groups and groups, and nations and nations. In the conc ept of Sarvodaya all such 
antitheses of interests disappear, and this concept is n o figment of imagination. It 
is a reality to which recent researches in the field of psychology testify. Erich 
Fromm differentiates between self-love and selfishness, and observes, "It is true 
that selfish persons are incapable of loving others bu t they are not capable of 
loving themselves either." 20  Similarly, he is of the opinion that love for other s 
implies equally love for oneself. To cite him again,"  If an individual is able to love Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13 productively, he loves oneself too; if he can love on ly others, he cannot love at 
all." 21  All this signifies that there can be no possible antith esis between the 
genuine interest of various individuals and groups an d the uplift of all is no 
mirage. The belief in the antithesis of interests is a p roduct of capitalism with its 
emphasis on competition and struggle. Communism inherit ed it from capitalism 
and intensified it. 
 
Ethical Ideas 
Gandhiji's main emphasis was on morality. But he did  not always subscribe to 
conventional morality. According to him, "True mora lity consists, not in following 
the beaten track, but in finding out the true path for ourselves and in fearlessly 
following it." 22  With a man who .acted upon his inner voice and acco rding to the 
truth as it appeared to him at a particular time, it  could not but be so. His ethical 
vows, though reminiscent of the cardinal disciplines laid down by ancient Indian 
sages, gave a new and unorthodox interpretation to t he old terms in consonance 
with the needs of this age. While as a believer in the  existence of Absolute Truth, 
he acknowledged that the truths perceived by us are r elative and hence fanaticism 
and intolerance are unjustified. An individual can o nly attain Absolute Truth by 
acting upon one's relative truths. 
His second cardinal ethical principle is of nonviolenc e. While Truth is the highest 
law, nonviolence is the highest duty. The two are so intertwined that they cannot 
be separated. Nevertheless, as a means Ahimsa is of gre ater concern to us in our 
everyday life. Gandhiji held that if we take care o f the means, the end is sure to 
take care of itself. Hence all his emphasis on the puri ty of means. This is the most 
revolutionary contribution of Gandhiji from which f ollows the doctrine that the 
rules of morality of individual life have equal vali dity in inter- group and 
international relations. Gandhiji has been much criti cized for it on the ground of 
expediency. But that is short-sighted. The doctrine, " As the means, so the end', is Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14 scientific and there can be no escape from it. Ralph Borsodi observes," If history 
demonstrates anything, it demonstrates that mistaken m eans, mistaken 
procedures, mistaken tactics, inflict far more misery  upon mankind than mistaken 
goals. It is far better to use methods that are right methods that are humane in 
pursuit of a mistaken goal, than to use bad and mistake n methods in pursuit of a 
goal which is right." 23  We may well hope that as scientific attitude toward s life 
develops in us, the emphasis on the purity of means will  find easier acceptance. If 
we have to remove distrust between nations, and not to  do so would be courting a 
disaster, international dealings must follow the rules o f morality deemed valid for 
individual life. 
Gandhiji's wider definition of nonviolence which inc ludes ill-will', hatred and 
exploitation in the category of violence' is also ve ry appropriate today. 
The fact that he is no literalist in his conception of  nonviolence, exhibits his 
pragmatism, a distinguishing feature of the modern min d. 
However, the discipline of Brahmacharya (celibacy) d oes give an impression that 
he is outmoded. In an increasingly permissive society  of today where illegitimate 
births are losing their stigma and in a country like S weden about one-third girls are 
reported to be pregnant at the time of marriage, an d when contraceptives are 
advocated as a state policy to check the explosion of  population, Gandhiji's 
emphasis on Brahmacharya and his opposition to contrace ptives seem to 
contradict the trends of the time. But is Gandhiji wr ong? Are we not in an 
inordinate hurry to approve of things whose overall a nd long-term effects are yet 
to be explored? P. A. Sorokin writes, "Our survey show s that there has been and 
still continues to be a decline of creativity in mos t of the countries of the world. 
The decline is caused by many factors, not the least o f which is the growth of sex 
freedom." 24  He also says," Notably clear are the warning symptom s of the 
consequences of excessive sex freedom in the field of v itality and mental health. 
To prove their growing vigour, people boast of a lon ger lifespan and of greater Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15 health. They seem to forget that the greater part of  the increased life expectancy 
is bought at the cost of a decrease of the population of young people. This is 
specially so in those countries where the birth-rate i s intentionally brought down. 
And at the same time in boasting of the general healt h, people seem to forget the 
striking high percentage of young men rejected by th e armed forces in the 
advanced countries because of physical and mental diso rders. When the positive 
gains in the budget of vitality are weighed against t he liabilities, the former are 
seen to be much less than they like to proclaim. And i f in the future the birthrate 
should decline even these modest gains would be wiped  out by the increasing 
proportion of old people in the population." 25 As regards mental health, he 
observes that" psychoneuroses and functional psychoses ar e on the increase, and 
have already reached a dangerously high level. If d isorderly sex lives continue to 
be more the rule, there is little hope of stopping th e deterioration." 26  
Investigations and surveys done by others too confirm th e fact that the cultural 
condition of a society rises in exact proportion as it  imposes pre-nuptial restraints 
upon sexual opportunity. 
There are also psychoanalysts who do not see eye to eye  with Freud. Erich Fromm 
says, "The complete satisfaction of all the instinctu al needs is not only not a basis 
for happiness, it does not even guarantee sanity. Yet  Freud's idea could only have 
become so popular in the period after the First Worl d War because of the changes 
which have occurred in the spirit of capitalism, fro m the emphasis on saving to 
that of spending, from self-frustration as a means for e conomic success to 
consumption as the basis for an ever-widening market, and as the main 
satisfaction for the anxious atomised individual. Not t o postpone the satisfaction 
of any desire became the main tendency in the sphere of sex as well as in that of 
all material consumption." 27 
I have cited above the two well-known thinkers at co nsiderable lengths simply to 
show how correct was the attitude of Gandhiji. In ref using to being blown off by Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16 the prevailing wind, he maintained the quality of a  good leader, which is to lead 
and not to be led by. It does not mean, however, tha t most of those sex notions 
which prevail in India today are justified. What is rather needed is a rational 
attitude towards them and Gandhiji's ideas on Brahmac hrya are to be construed as 
an attempt in that direction. 
Gandhiji's advocacy of non-stealing lays stress on mor ality in the method of 
earning one's livelihood, while the discipline of non -possession sets limits to one's 
possessions. The present trend towards providing social se curity to citizens in all 
types of states does away with the need of accumulatio n to meet future 
requirements, and ipso facto for the right of privat e ownership. However, non- 
possession does not mean poverty. It stands for an afflue nt society wherein 
possession vests in society and there is proper distributi on. It, of course, does 
imply a simple life. This discipline is essential for th e peace and stability of 
society. Humankind may not long survive in this age un less people love each other 
and share their affluence with each other. But all this is possible only if the sense 
of private ownership is greatly weakened. 
Gandhiji's theory of trusteeship is an application of the principle of non-
possession. It was very much ridiculed during his lifetim e. But it was so either due 
to a misunderstanding of the theory or because of cert ain preconceived notions of 
the critics themselves. Trusteeship has two aspects - a per manent aspect and a 
temporary one. The former signifies that everything a  person has, including his 
talents, is a trust and should be fully devoted to the  service of society. In its latter 
aspect it is a technique of advancing towards the rel inquishment of private 
ownership. There can be no valid objection against th e former. It rather fulfils a 
crying need of the age. A.E.Morgan, a former Chairp erson of the T.V.A., observes, 
"Modern life with its rapidly growing complexities, g reatly increases the number of 
situations in which the only sound relation is that of  a trustee, and the growth of 
the sense of responsibility has not been sufficiently rap id to meet these changing Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17 conditions." 28  What else it is if not a sense of trusteeship which is e xpected of the 
bureaucracy in a welfare state and of the party memb ers in a communist state? 
As regards the economic principle of trusteeship, the l atest trend is to consider 
both state and private capitalism as unsatisfactory an d to devise a new form of 
ownership with the advantages of both. Some individua ls in the West have even 
acted upon the idea of trusteeship in their industrie s. They have surrendered their 
proprietary rights either to the community as a whole  or to their employees. They 
have formed a trust or some kind of partnership in wh ich they themselves have 
remained no longer. A notable example of it is of a firm of chemical 
manufacturers in England, Scott Bader & Co. In West Germany, attempts to 
neutralize entrepreneurial capital have taken the l egal form of the Foundation. 
Thereby the enterprise itself does not come within th e framework of the 
foundation, but its capital does. The Foundation whic h has a charitable purpose, 
disposes wholly or partly the returns from the capital  and uses them to endow 
social or cultural ventures. 29 
Another ethical principle advocated by Gandhiji is t hat of Swadeshi, "that spirit in 
us which restricts us to the use and service of our imme diate surroundings to the 
exclusion of the more remote". 30  It signifies no narrowmindedness for it denotes 
service of one's nighbours with the clear idea that th ey are part of the whole 
humanity to which the ultimate allegiance is due. Th at is why to Gandhiji, 
Swadeshi was 'an acme of universal service'. 31  It only recognizes that an individual's 
capacity for service is limited, and one who runs to se rve the whole world while 
neglecting one's neighbours, serves neither the world nor one's nighbours. It stands 
for no narrow-minded self-sufficiency. Gandhiji wrote , "To reject foreign 
manufactures merely because they are foreign, and to go on wasting national time 
and money in the promotion in one's own country of m anufactures for which it is 
not suited would be a criminal folly and a negation of Swadeshi spirit." 32 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18 There are also a few other ethical disciplines emphasiz ed by Gandhiji, but I need 
not dilate upon them here. All of them, including t hose which have been touched 
upon above, embody the principle of a happy individ ual and social life. It has been 
true of all ages, is true of the present one and would  be true of the future as well. 
Of course, every age has to interpret them in the li ght of its experience and the 
problems it has to face. 
 
Economic Ideas 
Gandhiji's most vehement criticism has been on the scor e of his economic ideas. 
The extreme views expressed by him in Hind Swaraj agai nst modern civilization 
and machinery have provided an easy handle for it. A t the same time, the baneful 
effects of modern industrialism are more visible now th an they were during his 
lifetime. More and more persons are realizing the t ruth of the saying, 'all that 
glitters is not gold.' Many western thinkers themselves are not happy over the 
growth of cities. A.E.Morgan finds fault with city-l ife because of its failure to keep 
alive mutual confidence and goodwill, so essential for  the existence of society, 
and because of the destruction of the emotional ties of affection and the sense of 
social responsibility. He holds that urbanization har ms both villages and cities. It 
robs the village of its most intelligent people, whil e the migration of the riff-raffs 
of the villages and small towns to the cities increases crimes and vice. He is of the 
view that this dual harm has been one of the major c auses, though an indirect 
one, of the decline of nations, cultures and civiliza tions. 33  Another writer, Mirium 
Beard says, "Men suffered on the land Beard says, "Men  suffered on the land but 
survived; while in the cities they flourished - and fa ded." 34  Thus the virtues of a 
small community are being more and more realized. Si milarly, the agrarianism of 
Gandhiji has also its supporters in the dynamic Israel and in the highly 
industrialized U.S.A. There is a school of thought whi ch holds that agriculture is 
both a basic occupation and a natural way of life. 35 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19 The parasitic nature of modern industrialism is disturb ing the balance of nature 
and many scientists are worried about it. It is resulti ng in increasing deforestation, 
soil-erosion and the destruction of many such insects, wo rms and animals as play 
an important part in the restoration and maintenance  of soil-equilibrium. The 
heavy calls it makes on mineral resources has also distu rbed some in the west. E. F 
Schumacher was a staunch advocate of 'renewable econo my' as against 'non-
renewable economy'. It, combined with the undesirabl e sociological consequences 
of modern industrialism has compelled some to favour t he substitution of the 
centralized mode of production by the decentralized  one and a check on the 
present craze for higher and higher standard of livi ng. True, their number is yet 
very small, but it may increase with time. A factor very favourable to 
decentralization is that modern science is quite capab le of developing a new 
technology of decentralized production which may ha ve most of the advantages of 
the present system without its demerits. The trend t owards the invention of small 
or portable instruments may prove a prelude to it. 
As regards simplicity of life, there is, first of all, a growing realisation that all is 
not well with a materialistic outlook of life and wi th too much affluence. Adlai 
Stevenson says, "The dreary failure in history of al l classes committed to pleasure 
and profit alone, the vacuity and misery accompanyin g the sole pursuit of ease, 
the collapse of the French aristocracy, the corruptio n of imperial Rome, all these 
facts of history do not lose their point because pleasu res of today are no longer 
the enjoyment of the elite." Doubts are also being ex pressed if the present trend 
of expanding economy can be maintained for long in view of the revolt of Asia and 
Africa. But this is not all. Other virtues of a simple life are also gaining 
recognition. A. E. Morgan writes, "Simple living and  self-sustaining activity makes 
less demand of the haves on the have-nots, reduce the  element of competitive 
status and in effect make the world favourable for a much greater proportion of 
people to live with satisfaction and without frustrat ion." 37  This is one 
consideration. The second, as expressed by Wilfred Wel lock, is," The fact that Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20 peoples' circumstances compel them forever to be thi nking about the increase of 
earnings, dulls spiritual interest and perception, lowe rs the quality of the mind 
and spirit and jeopardises the spiritual quality of th e home. Less and less interest 
is taken in public affairs. As a result the Governments meet with less criticism, 
which in times of crisis may be disastrous." 38 
Intimately connected with the principle of simple li ving is another Gandhian 
principle of self-sufficiency. This principle, whose use fulness as a defence measure 
needs no elucidation these days, is also being apprecia ted in the West for its other 
merits. Says Wellock, "The achievement of self-sufficie ncy is intensely satisfying, 
it saves a nation from worrying about whether it will  be able to keep its markets. 
Were a largely self-sufficient economy the general ru le, most of the tensions 
which arise between nations today would be eliminate d. It would then be possible 
to make the transition from expansionist materialism to  a creative, spiritually 
motivated economy, from the quantitative to a quali tative civilization." 39  And he 
further writes," A bitter struggle for world market a nd supplies lie ahead. The 
weaker nations' will be faced with economic breakdow n and the spread of 
communism. The alternative is the adoption generally  of a reasonable self-
sufficient economy and a qualitative civilization to gether with a vigorous policy of 
international co-estistance." 40 
Though Gandhiji ruled out all machinery ideally, in  practice his approach was 
pragmatic. The final position as it emerged was that he was not opposed to 
machinery as such but to the craze for it and to its d ominance over humans. He 
had no objection to simple tools and to such machine s as saved individual labour 
and lightened the burden of the millions. He was also  not opposed to centralized 
key industries and to the use of machinery for such wo rk as could not be 
undertaken by human labour. Generally his attitude t owards machinery was 
determined by Indian conditions, and once he even sai d, "I would favour the use of 
machinery if thereby India's pauperism and resulting i dleness be avoided. I have Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21 suggested hand- spinning as the only ready means of driv ing away penury and 
making famine of work and wealth impossible." 41 Humans being the supreme 
consideration with him, he judged everything from th e point of view of their total 
welfare, and considered that economics false which ign ored moral values. 
Gandhiji's view of machinery, especially in the conte xt of Indian conditions, has 
the support of many. S. Moos, a British economist, said  in a B.B.C. talk in 1953, 
"Western ideas, if they are to suit Indian conditions w ill have to be revised. Is it 
really good economics to spend scarce resources for the import or output of labour 
saving machines for use in industries which can command gigantic armies of un-
employed?" 42  Similarly, Professor John K. Galbraith, an eminent economist and 
formerly U.S. ambassador in Delhi, is of the view tha t "full employment is more 
desirable than increased production combined with une mployment." 43  However, 
what is more important is that Gandhiji's attitude tow ards machinery is now being 
better appreciated in the west. Richard B. Gregg obse rves," He (Gandhiji) belongs 
to India but there are increasing signs that apprecia tion of him and his wisdom is 
growing greater in some other parts of the world, e specially in America whose 
ways seem to be wholly opposed to his. Perhaps that is be cause Americans have 
experienced the futility of unchecked industrialism and are beginning to realize 
that it is a blind alley leading to a desert." 44 
Thus the conception of economic decentralization rep resents a progressive 
movement to eliminate the evils of large-scale indust rialization. It is no index of 
medievalism as is generally thought by Indian intellec tuals. In fact, it is the 
centralists devoted to the cult of the colossal who ar e, really speaking, 
conservative and behind the times. 
 
Political Ideas 
The fundamental idea of Gandhiji in the field of po litical science is of political 
decentralization. It has its basis in his principle of n on-violence. The ultimate Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22 sanction behind every form of government is and has b een of the military and the 
police, but it is all the more so in a government w herein power and authority are 
centralized. The common people who are not active p articipants in it and who 
very often even fail to understand the problems facin g society, cannot and 
generally do not feel that they have any stake in ma intaining that government. On 
the other hand, the concentration of power into the  hands of a few excites 
jealousy in others who try to oust them from power. Recent experience has 
demonstrated the danger that lurks in this struggle for power, and the opportunity 
it offers to ambitious military generals to seize pow er for themselves. Thus non-
violence demands decentralization in which the citi zen is not a mere occasional 
passive voter, but an active and vigilant participant  in the political administration 
of society to the maximum extent possible. An admini stration enjoying an active 
support and cooperation of the common people would r ely least on the military 
and the police. 
This idea of decentralization is further reinforced b y Gandhiji's conception of 
democracy and self government. To him, democracy mea ns in essence "The art 
and science of mobilizing the entire physical, econom ic and spiritual resources of 
all the various sections of the people in the service o f the common good of all; 45  
and self-government is a 'continuous effort to be inde pendent of government 
control, whether it is foreign government or it is na tional." 46 His touchstone for a 
true democracy is that it 'runs its affairs smoothly an d effectively without much 
state interference'47 .Thus Gandhiji arrived at his idea of participatory d emocracy 
wherein there is as much of effective local self-gove rnment as is consistent with 
the unity of a country. Here as well, Gandhiji is not  alone to think on these lines. 
Many in the West too are perturbed at the growing 'a lienation' and 
'dehumanisation' in their society, and they characte rize their democracy as 'formal' 
and 'inorganic'. In order to remove this defect they  have been compelled to think 
in terms of either, devolution or decentralization. These, no doubt, are two 
different concepts especially in their spirits, but in  early stages decentralization Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23 can have its beginning only in devolution of power i n the centralized states of 
today. While Bertrand Russell pleads for devolution la ying down the general 
principle that smaller bodies should be left with all those functions which do not 
prevent the larger bodies from fulfilling their fun ctions, 48 , Erich Fromm uses the 
word 'decentralization'. He is of the view that so f ar the development of 
democracy has been in the extension of franchise, but now further progress lies in 
a step recognizing that true democracy cannot be mad e in an atmosphere of mass 
voting, but in relatively small group corresponding p erhaps to the old Town 
Meeting. In small groups the issues can be discussed thoro ughly, and people have 
personal contact with each other which makes it more difficult for demagogic and 
irrational influences to work on their minds 49 . He writes, "The aim of humanistic 
socialism can be attained only by the introduction of  maximum of decetralization 
compatible with a minimum of centralization necessar y for the functioning of an 
industrial society. The functions of a centralized sta te must be reduced to the 
minimum, while the voluntary activity of freely coo perating citizens constitutes 
the central. mechanism of social life." 50  However, it is G.D.H.Cole who is nearest 
to Gandhiji when he observes, "I am neither a Commun ist nor a Social Democrat, 
because I regard both as creeds of centralization and bureaucracy, whereas I feel 
sure that a socialist society that is true to its equali tarian principle of human 
sister/brotherhood must rest on the widest possible diffusi on of power and 
responsibility, so as to enlist the participation of a s many as possible of its citizens 
in the task of democratic self-government." 51 
It is remarkable that when Gandhiji put his finger on  the defect of the prevailing 
type of democracy, the thing was not as visible as it is now. The non-participatory 
democracy did serve society as a useful transitional sta ge from autocracy when 
common people lacked political consciousness and the state did not interfere 
much in the life of the people. But now with the spr ead of education and the 
various mass media, with the increasing centralization of functions and power, 
there is bound to be a revolt against the formal dem ocracy of today. The students Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24 revolt with a demand for participation in decision m aking is only a pointer in that 
direction. 
 
Basic Education 
Of all the items of Gandhiji's Constructive Programme , the most important is Nai 
Talim. Gandhiji himself regarded it as a spearhead o f a silent social revolution. 
The fundamental principles of this system of education are two - all education 
must be woven round a craft, and the produce of the craft be made economically 
remunerative to meet the recurring cost of education . This system of education is 
expected to bridge the gulf between the city and th e village, between the 
intellectual and manual workers, and thereby to brin g about a classless society.  
The first principle of Nai Talim (Basic Education) co mmands the support of many 
famous psychologists and educationists, e.g., Stanley Hal l, T. R Nunn, John Dewey 
and A. E. Morgan. Dewey said to Shriman Narayan in 1949, "Gandhiji's system of 
education is, I am sure, one step ahead of all other s ystems. It is full of immense 
potentialities and we all hope to learn much from In dia in this revolutionary 
efforts." 52  More recently, Gunnar Myrdal has recommended it for  Indian primary 
and secondary schools. 53  In the communist countries they combine work with 
education to bring about the labourization of the i ntellectual and the 
intellectualization of the labourer. Nai Talim repr esents a deeper process of the 
same by imparting education itself through work. Thus it is both psychologically 
correct and socially progressive. 
 
Satyagraha 
Gandhiji's international prestige is largely due to  his developing the technique of 
Satyagraha. More than half a century ago William Ja mes had felt the need of a 
moral equivalent of war, but it is Gandhiji who imp arted tangibility to that dream. 
Since war is considered to be a lunacy in this age of hydrogen bomb, a search for a Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25 technique of civilian defence is briskly on in Engla nd, Sweden, the U.S.A. and else- 
where. In this field the ideas and methods of Gandhij i act both as a guide and as a 
source of inspiration. No doubt, thinking on the subje ct is yet at a preliminary 
stage, but it is no cause for dejection because the f uture is with it and in certain 
countries governments are also anxious that the techni que of civilian defence is 
developed. Alstair Buchan, Director of the Institute  of Stratagic Studies, London, 
says, "For it may be that in concepts like the nonvio lent defence of countries lies 
the key to the preservation of society in a world o rder that contains so many 
explosive new forms of power, physical, psychological  and economic, that fire-
arms will become too dangerous to use." 54  Another well-known writer, commander 
Stephen King-Ball, has advocated non-violent defence  in his book 'Defence in a 
Nuclear Age'. 
The non-violent techniques of Gandhiji are proving h ighly contagious. The Black 
movement in the U.S. under the leadership of the lat e Martin Luther King Jr. had 
followed a Gandhian pattern and the non-violent resi stance by Czechs to the 
Russians, though not successful, are noteworthy. A more recent example is of the 
resistance initially offered by the people of Bangla desh to the military dictatorship 
of General Yahya Khan under the leadership of Shaik h Mujibur Rahman. True, it 
only proved to be a passing phase because in the face of the violence of the 
Pakistani army, they were compelled to resort to gue rilla warfare, but it is 
nonetheless significant. Civil disobedience had also be en resorted to in Poland and 
Russia. Fasts for peace had also been witnessed in the co lleges and universities of 
the USA, and thousands of people had courted imprison ment there for refusing to 
fight in Viet Nam. Thus Gandhiji has been very much a live in America and to some 
extent elsewhere as well. No doubt, in many cases, the re had been a misuse of 
the Gandhian technique, and Gandhiji would not have  approved of them had he 
been alive, but it was what could have been expected . It may well be hoped that 
with time the inner spirit of his satyagraha concep t would come to be appreciated 
and accepted. What is of more importance now is that what could not be imagined Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26 in the forties, became a reality in the sixties with b etter prospects for the future. 
This should suffice to show that Gandhiji had a deep a nd penetrating 
understanding of the basic problems of our times. 
 
Concluding Remarks 
The various ideas of Gandhiji dealt with above are in timately related to each 
other even though their treatment might have left a n impression that they are not 
interconnected. To site an example, the capability f or any civilian defence 
depends much on the type of economy that prevails in that society. Economic 
equality, decentralized production, self-sufficient economy, simplicity of life, all 
these are bound to increase the capability for it. On  the contrary, centralized 
production of basic needs, a very high standard of liv ing, economic and social 
inequalities resulting in class animosities, are sure to u ndermine that capability. 
Satyagraha, too, to be fully effective must be accep ted as a way of life rather 
than as a mere technique of resolving conflicts. 
My line of approach in the above essay has been to di scuss the important ideas of 
Gandhiji in the light of some important problems and the various suggestions made 
by some reputed thinkers to solve them. In this matte r their own independent: 
thinking has brought them very close to Gandhiji. It does not matter much if they 
do not agree in details with him. No two persons think  exactly alike, and then 
one's thinking is always conditioned, to a lesser or g reater extent by one's 
environment, upbringing and the particular problem one's society faces. Hence 
there is nothing surprising if Gandhiji's ideas too, in  their expressions and 
applications, bear an impress of Indian traditions, ou tlook, culture and conditions. 
It is enough if present-day top thinkers, who can ne ver be accused of being out of 
date, agree basically with his ideas. It is also not at  all material if they reject his 
logic while they agree with his conclusions. Gandhiji had his limitations. His ideas 
are sometimes couched in a language that does not app eal to most modern minds, Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27 the truth that he sees may also be 'relative', but t hey do not thereby lose their 
validity. The prophets and seers of the past had to wai t for centuries for the 
acceptance of their visions, but in the world today the speed of social change is so 
rapid that what appeared to be out of date in his l ifetime, is now being recognized 
as up to date. His ideas have not only relevance toda y but would prove even 
relevant in future, for there is much in them of per ennial value. 
 
Footnotes:  
1.  S. Radhakrishan (Ed.) : Mahatma Gandhi -100 years PR  266-67. 
2.  ibid., p. 267 
3.  ibid., p. 86 
4.  Religion and Society, p. 18. 
5.  M.A.Elliot and F.E.Merile, Social Disorganization, p .214 
6.  The Sane Society, pp. 139-40. 
7.  Hippies- Hypocrisy and 'Happiness', p.32. 
   (Ambassador College, Pasadona, California, 1968), 
8.   ibid., p.11. 
9.  G.N.Dhawan in J.S.Bains (Ed.), Studies in Political S cience, p.253. 
10.  The Conduct of life, p.ll. 
11.  Principles of Socieal Reconstruction, P43. 
12.  Truth is God, p.7. 
13.  ibid., p.10. 
14.  G.Ramchandra Rao, An Atheist with Gandhi, p.31 
  The author was more popularly known as 'Goraju' 
15.  Principles of Social Reconstruction, p.245. 
16.  Science and the Idea of God, p.69. 
17.  An Atheist with Gandhi, p44. 
18.  N. K. Bose : Selection from Gandhi, p. 28. Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28 19.  Man for Himself, p. 28 
20.  The Art of Living, p. 17 
21.  ibid. 
22.  N. K. Bose, Op. cit., p. 300 
23.  The Challenge of Asia, p. 177 
24.  Sane Sex Order, p. 125 
25.  ibid, pp. 112-113 
26.  ibid. p. 113 
27.  The Art of Loving, p. 68 
28.  The Long Road, p. 75 
29.  Folkert Wilken: New Forms of Ownership and Industry, p p. 75-76 
30.  Pyarelal: The Last Phase, Vol. 1, p. 546 
31.  M. K. Gandhi : From Yeravada Mandir, pp. 63-64 
32.  ibid. p. 66 
33.  The Community of the Future, pp. 52-53 
34.  Cited in Pyarelal : Towards New Horizons, p. 10 
35.  J. S. Roucek (Ed.) Twentieth Century Political Thou ght, pp. 198-202 
36.  Cited in George Murray in Bhoodan, 14.11.1959, p. 2 27 
37.  Search for a Purpose, p. 136 
38.  Not by Bread Alone, p. 15 
39.  ibid., p. 21 
40.  ibid 
41.  Young India, 30.11.1921 
42.  Economic Review, 15.8.1953 
43.  Cited by Shreeram Narayan in 'Principles of Gandhian  Planning', p. 325 
44.  Philosophy of Indian Economic Development, p. 179 
45.  Harijan, 27.5.1939 
46.  Young India, 6.8.1925 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29 47.  Harijan, 11.1.1936 
48.  Authority of the Individual, pp. 98-105 
49.  The Sane Society, p. 341 
50.  Bhoodan, 20.8.1960, p.142 
51.  A History of Socialist Thought, Vol. V, p. 337 
52.  Shriram Narayan in 'Khadi Gramodyog' of March, 1969  
53.  ibid 
54.  Foreword to the First British Edition of Civilian Def ence (Ed. T. K. 
Mahadevan, Adam Roberts and Gene Sharp) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30 PART TWO  
GANDHI'S RELEVANCE IN TODAY S WORLD  
In the earlier section we have mostly examined the v alidity of Gandhiji's ideas in 
the light of what some of the greatest thinkers of t he 20th century have to say and 
we have found great support for them, in principle. As said earlier, all thinkings 
take place in particular contexts and there can be d ifference of views on the 
matter of details which need not be given much impor tance. Gandhiji himself was 
aware of it and that is why he did not want to leave  any sect after him and said 
that others were not his followers but fellow workers.  His has been 
experimentation with truth and his own ideas had been  evolving with time in a 
pragmatic manner on the basis of his fundamental appr oach. Every thinking has its 
permanent and temporary elements and it is the former  which make it last. Dr. J. 
D. Sethi said in the Patel lectures of 1979: Thirty y ears after his death and nearly 
seventy years after he wrote his seminal, though crud ely written book, 'Hind 
Swaraj', Gandhiji is suddenly emerging as a possible a nswer to the global crisis of 
human values and numerous unsolved contradictions, such as between affluence 
and poverty, freedom and repression, technology and h uman beings, social tension 
and alienation. 55 
To examine the validity of this claim, Let us examine  some of the major problems 
besetting humankind today. 
All these problems are global though their intensity v aries from country to 
country. 
The most important of them are poverty, the danger o f environmental disaster, 
the danger of nuclear annihilation and terrorism, b oth Islamic and Maoist or 
Naxalite. I take them one by one. 
The problem of poverty is chiefly a problem of deve loping countries though it also 
exists in the richer countries. If it does not loom lar ge there before the public Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31 mind, it is because they are able to provide relief i n various ways to the poorer 
sections of their countries. This poverty in the devel oping countries has been 
traced to three causes: (a) one-third of the world usi ng more than three-fourths of 
the world resources and the growing gap between the  rich and poor countries as a 
result of it; (b) a built-in structure of demand and policy framework in the 
developed world to keep the consumption growing to m aintain full employment 
and (c) concentration of economic and political pow er in the hands of small 
minorities within the poor countries and their attemp ts to imitate the standard of 
living of the developed world. J. D. Sethi rightly observes that there can be no 
solution of the problems of poverty in these poor coun tries as long as their ruling 
elites resort to tyranny and corruption to achieve fo r themselves a standard of 
living similar to that of ruling elite of the devel oped countries. 56 
This is primarily a question of values for which an answ er lies in Gandhiji's thinking 
with its emphasis on consideration for the last human b eing. To cite Sethi: 'The 
Gandhian framework is a direct and irrefutable answe r to the challenges faced by 
the third world countries. Their poverty and illiter acy, exploitation and 
superstition, ethnic, tribal, religious or caste confl icts, the callousness of their 
ruling elites, authoritarian structures and inhuman to rtures of political opponents, 
development models dependency, etc., defy all preva iling models of change and 
revolution." And he also says: "Gandhiji would insist  on the first things first: the 
life-style of the power elite has to be identified wi th the little man for having a 
moral right to demand the restructuring of the world  order." 
This universal urge for a higher and higher standard o f living is the primary cause 
of the increasing danger of environmental disasters. Th e then U. N. Secretary-
General had said in his report to it in 1969 : "For the first time in the history of 
humankind, there is arising a crisis of worldwide propo rtion involving developed 
and developing countries alike - the crisis of human e nvironment." 59  He attributed 
it to the explosive growth in populations, the poor i ntegration of a powerful and Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32 efficient technology with environmental requirement s, the deterioration of 
agricultural lands, the unplanned extension of urban areas, the decrease of 
available space and the growing danger of extinction  of many forms of animal and 
plant life. It is increasingly apparent, he said, tha t if the current trend continues, 
the future of life on earth could be endangered. 
The seventies of the last century had witnessed a lot of  literature on it, both for 
and against. However, the consensus was that technology is a good servant but a 
bad master and that the growing morality gap between  developing technology and 
the state of human culture is highly dangerous. Arno ld Toynbee had then written : 
"My hope is that we shall have a period of technologi cal slowing down and a new 
wave of spiritual advance." 60  He had also then advocated for" a new philosophical  
and religious outlook covering the whole of life" an d that "it must be such as to 
change our ideals, bringing with it a change in the order of our priorities." 61 
Gandhiji might not have referred to ecological prob lems in words, but his thinking 
and some of his statements show his concern for them. F or example, he had said 
that there was enough in the world for everyone's nee d but not for everyone's 
greed. However, the lacuna had been further filled by J. C.Kumarappa who had 
pleaded for an 'economy of permanence'. It may also  be remarked here that with 
times the critics of 'limits to growth' are proving wr ong. The growing damage to 
the ozone layer on the Antartic, the recent calamit ies of Tsunami and Katrina are 
the warning signs of Nature's vengeance at its increasi ng exploitation and 
environmental degradation. 
To take up the problem of the danger of nuclear ann ihilation, one may point out 
to the increasing acceptance of the need of non-viol ence in the field of 
international relations. Even a Russian scholar wrote i n the later eighties : "There 
is yet another aspect of Gandhian heritage which inva riably draws the attention of 
Soviet scholars. It is the humanitarian idea of non- violence as adopted in 
international relations. He (Gandhiji) was an irrecon cilable enemy of war. Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33 Hiroshima was for him an event which had confronted humankind with either 
starting disarmament immediately or perishing." 62 
The danger of a nuclear war seems to have receded for  the time being because of 
the possession of nuclear bombs by countries at loggerh eads, for example India 
and Pakistan, and the rising feeling that the settlem ent of disputes through 
peaceful means is likely to produce better results. Ho wever, the use of crude 
nuclear bombs by the Islamic terrorists cannot be ruled  out and they too can cause 
great havoc, both immediate and lasting. This danger is there because the 
technology of making nuclear bombs is reported to h ave passed into their hands. 
Hence there is an urgent need to tackle that terrori sm. It is quite evident that 
mere use of force cannot achieve that objective. It also needs an analysis of its 
basic causes and their removal. 
Its causes lie in the perceptions of the Muslims with the ir Pan-Islamic feelings, of 
their political and economic exploitation along wit h their  jehadi  conception in its 
fundamentalist and narrow sense, though they are not i n accord with the 
teachings of Prophet Muhammad. To deal with this terr orism, suppression by the 
use of force may help to some extent, but it would help more if their economic 
and political grievances are removed to the extent; they are real. It is something 
for those western countries to do which attempt to ex tend their economic 
imperialism over them, sometimes even in league with their ruling' classes. It is 
however, for the Muslim intelligentsia to wean them a way of their wrong 
interpretation of Islam. Unfortunately, they are pro ving equal to the task both 
because of the dread of the Ulemas with their influen ce on the Muslim masses and 
because they themselves are not probably totally free of fundamentalist thinking. 
Those who are outside the pale of Islam can render hel p in it by not denouncing 
Islam for it and thereby confirming their jehadi _outlook. 
Gandhiji always emphasized the nobler side of Islam and  preached the 'equality of 
all religions'. He did not consider religion to be an  opiate and he knew like Erich Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34 Fromm that the need of religion is rooted in the basi c conditions of the human 
species. 63  However, instead of laying emphasis on creeds and dog mas, he laid 
emphasis on their ethical aspects which are common to a ll higher religions. The 
same had been the case with Vinobaji who had studied t he  Koran  in original and 
held the Prophet in very high esteem. The Muslim inte lligentsia can learn much 
from them. Another form of prevailing terrorism, tho ugh not as serious as the first 
one is the Maoist or Naxalite terrorism which is a pro blem in several South-Asian 
countries, including India. They are the product of various social, economic and 
political injustices prevailing in those countries. Ga ndhiji was as keen to cure 
those ills as he was for country's independence, and he had tried to do it at the 
same time, though he had to give priority to the lat ter because he had felt, and 
rightly so, that the former is essential for it. But u nfortunately he was no more 
when he could have fully attended to it. However, V inobaji tried for it and had 
even been able to build up requisite public opinion but the governments failed to 
use that climate to remove the old prevailing injust ices and with time. The well-
off people in the country came to be influenced mor e and more by the western 
craze for higher and higher standards of living. These  terrorists too have to realize 
that violence can only highlight their grievances an d that only non-violent methods 
of struggle can help them to achieve their goal. 
And now, at the end, on the process of change since th e problems of today 
demand a revolution both in values and social structu res. In the past, it was the 
idealist view which predominated. It held that chang e in ideas is primary and 
change in society follows it. Then came the Marxist v iew which accorded primacy 
to the change of social structure and regarded chang e of ideas as a consequence 
of it. However, in the post-Stalin period, the Sovi et Marxists had been diluting the 
orthodox thesis and according greater importance to change in ideas and to the 
role of individuals in the process of revolution. The Gandhian thinking steers 
midway between the two. According to Vinobaji, "The  importance of changing 
social structure is not denied. But it should be brough t about only through the Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35 development of particular moral attributes… It is no  good making a fetish of social 
reconstruction. After all, it is the people who const ruct (constitute) a society. 
Hence a society will be as the individuals making it. Hence, any scheme of change 
must be not only subject to the preservation -indeed, enhancement - of standards 
of character and moral values, but the change must be  brought about by the 
means and strength of character and moral values." 65 
Thus while attaching importance to the change of soc ial structure, Vinobaji gives 
some priority to the building up and strengthening of  moral values in the people. 
In this, he has the support of Sorokin who says : "The t ransformation should be 
carried on simultaneously along all the three fronts : personal, cultural and social. 
The effortful transmutation of the individual may sl ightly precede the others." 66 
Thus with the passage of time, considering Gandhiji as o ut of date is on the way 
out, though there is a greater realization of it in the west than in India, the land 
of his birth and later activities, to which he attac hed much importance. He 
believed that his success in India would have its effect  all over the world. 
1.  Gandhian Values and twentieth Century Challenges ( Pu blication, N. Delhi, 
1979) 
2.  ibid, pp. 31 & 33 
3.  ibid, p.34 
4.  ibid, p.35 
5.  The Summarized version of the report in the Gandhi Marg, July 1972, p. 212 
6.  Surviving the Future (Oxford University Press, London , 1971) p. 40 
7.  ibid, p. 43 
8.  O. Martyshin, Gandhi in the Eyes of Soviet Scholars in  Mainstream, 1980 
Republic Day Number. 
9.  To Have or To Be (Bantam Books, 1982), p. 122 
10.  Introduction to K. G. Mashruwala, Gandhi and Marx (N avajivan, Ahmedabad, 
1951) p. 11 Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36 11.  Pitirim Sorokin, The Reconstruction of Humanity (Bha ratiya Vidya Bhavan, 
Bombay, 1958), p. 209 
 
Epigrams From Gandhiji 
/head2right Swadeshism is not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless service 
that has its roots in the purest ahimsa, i.e. love. 
/head2right Cent per cent swadeshi gives sufficient scope for the  most insatible 
ambition for service and can satisfy every kind of talent. 
/head2right My nationalism is as broad as my swadeshi. I want India's rise so that the 
whole world may benefit. 
/head2right I swear by swadeshi as it affords occasion for an ample  exercise of all 
our faculties and as it tests every one of the millio ns of men and 
women, young and old. 
/head2right Swadeshi is the only doctrine consistent with the law of humanity and 
love. 
/head2right I must not serve distant neighbour at the expense of the nearest. 
/head2right I refuse to buy from anybody anything however nice or beautiful if it 
interferes with my growth or injures those whom Natur e has made my first 
care. 
/head2right My modesty has prevented me from declaring from the h ouse-top that the 
message of non-co-operation, non -violence and swadeshi  is a massage to 
the world. 
/head2right Swaraj of a people means the sum total of the Swaraj (self-rule) of 
individuals. 
/head2right Swaraj, from its very nature, is not in the giving of anybody. 
/head2right Even swadeshi, like any other good thing, can be rid den to death if it is 
made a fetish. 
/head2right Swaraj is a hardy tree of patient growth. Is Gandhi out of date? 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37 /head2right India must protect her primary industries even as a mo ther protects her 
children against the whole world without being hostil e to it. 