 
Journalist Gandhi 
 
(Selected Writings of Gandhi) 
 
 
Compiled by : Sunil Sharma 
 
 
First Edition : August 1994 
 
 
Price : Rs. 15/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by:  
Gandhi Book Center, Bombay Sarvodaya Mandal 
299, Tardeo Road, Nana Chowk, Mumbai 400 007 (INDIA ) 
Tel. +91-22-2387 2061 Email: info@mkgandhi.org  
Website: www.mkgandhi.org  
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2    
PREFACE  
I started reading Harijan soon after my arrival in Bombay in June 1939. By then 
it was the most talked-about journal in India. Prin ted on hand-made paper it 
was the voice of Mahatma Gandhi and, by extension, the Voice of India. It was 
not a news paper in the usual sense of the term. It  was more a views paper, 
conveying to an eager world what the Mahatma though t on a wide range of 
subjects. And was the range wide! It was almost enc yclopaedic. Gandhiji had 
definite views and had no hesitation in expressing them. He wrote on politics, 
economics, sociology, religion, and whatever came t o his mind in response to 
questions posed to him by his numerous readers. We youngsters thought that 
some of his views were hilarious, but we discussed them endlessly nonetheless 
because even if one did not agree with him, he was provocative in an endearing 
way. 
He did not duck difficult questions but faced them head- on. That was his 
greatness. His intellectual honesty was disarming. One could be angry with him, 
but it was impossible to stay that way for long. He  elicited strong responses but 
these, too, were published along with his comments.  
Reference has been made to his style. He wrote in a  manner that anybody 
could understand. His sentences were short and he q uickly came to the point. It 
is difficult if not impossible to find a polysyllab ic word in any of his writings. He 
was writing for Everyman so that Everyman could und erstand him easily. He had 
no literary pretensions but what he wrote was liter ature. 
This is because he wrote with his heart and not wit h his mind. He wanted the 
content to be studied, not the style. If the Mahatm a had a style it was not a 
cultivated one but what was natural to the man. It stunned because of its very 
simplicity. It carried conviction because of its in nate honesty. Till 1942 we 
learnt a great deal about the Mahatma from the writ ings of his faithful 
secretary Mahadev Desai. Mahadev Desai was more tha n a secretary; he was the 
Mahatma's conscience keeper. No man could have hope d for a great Boswell. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3  Mahadev Desai recorded almost every word that the M ahatma said to those who 
sought his interview. He sat in on the interviews a nd took down what was said 
and this was later published for posterity. 
That Mahadev Desai died while he was incarcerated a long with the Mahatma in 
the Aga Khan Palace was a blow from which the Mahat ma never recovered. One 
can look at the Mahatma's journalistic forays in ei ther of two ways; as the mor-
alist who took to journalism or as the journalist w ho undertook a moral 
crusade. That the Mahatma was a crusader par excell ence is unquestionable. 
He crusaded for morality in politics and in public life. He left his reader - 
especially all Congressmen - in no doubt as to what  he expected of them. 
He was serious, but could when the occasion demande d it, be teasing, but 
purposefully so. He was demanding but this was beca use he made great 
demands on himself. He could be strict but he made allowances for human 
frailty. Pompous he was not. He could not be. His s ense of the incongruous 
never deserted him. 
After his death, his disciples attempted to keep Ha rijan alive. Commendable as 
the effort was, it had its great shortcomings, for Harijan without Gandhiji was 
like a body without the soul. Men like Mashruwala t hen whom there were not 
more faithful Gandhians tried hard to keep the jour nal going but they must 
have known from the very beginning that they had se t for themselves an 
impossible task. It became more and more apparent a s the weeks rolled by 
until ennui overtook the editors and the journal ha d to be given up. 
Harijan presented the Mahatma when he was alive in his many moods: friend, 
philosopher, guide, politician, statesman, saint. H e was all that and much 
more. He was the complete editor. There never was a n editor like him before 
and there never will be another like him in the fut ure. The times, of course, 
made the man. But the man contributed to his times in many wondrous ways. 
We read him now with a mixture of curiosity and awe , marvelling at his 
uniqueness in journalist Gandhi'. I am happy that s uch a work by Sunil Sharma is Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4  now available to the general reader if only to show  that such a man once lives 
amidst us and laboured to the last. 
(M.V. Kamath) 
Former Editor 
The Illustrated Weekly Of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5   
EDITOR'S NOTE 
In fact, Gandhiji had brought in many new elements which introduced a fresh 
life in the field of journalism. It was his human-a pproach-which gave his 
writings a character. His voice was the echo of hum anity - not the voice of a 
pamphleteer. He wanted to bring a real change in th e country and the world. 
Gandhiji believed, "The sole aim of journalism shou ld be service. The true 
function of journalism is to educate the public min d and read the mind of the 
country and to give definite and fearless expressio n to that mind." 
According to him, a journalist may be a patriot, a party member, or a faithful 
employee, but his loyalty should primarily be to hi s readers. Public has the 
right to know the truth. It must be informed object ively as to what is 
happening. If the paper loses confidence of its rea ders, it has lost all that is 
worth in journalism. 
The subject matter he chose was down to the ground.  He was able to put the 
villages of India on the wider and lively canvas of  Indian writing. 
Unfortunately, Gandhiji's contribution to journalis m has not received the due 
recognition it deserves. I have selected celebrated  writings of Gandhiji from 
'Harijan' - a gospel of truth, which became the mos t influential journal involved 
in the movement for Indian independence. Through it s pages readers came to 
know and respond to the central political currents of the country. 
Gandhiji was an ardent fighter for the freedom of p ress also. He often said, 
"Freedom of the press is a precious privilege that no country can forego. The 
liberty of the press is a dear privilege, apart fro m the advisability or otherwise 
of civil disobedience." Definitely the Press has po wer but to misuse that power 
is crime. 
Unfortunately, all his ideals remain a distant drea m. As a journalist, Gandhiji's 
dedication, sacrifice and social concerns are found  only in a minuscule section 
of the journalists. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  In my two years in journalism, I have not yet met a  journalist as visualized by 
Gandhiji. Most of them appear to be helping the exp loiters. The young 
journalists are often not encouraged to nurture the ir latent talents by the 
senior journalists. 
Producing this book has been a matter of great pers onal happiness. The work 
was tough, but was made easier by generous help of God, gurus and friends. If 
this work can be of help to a young and upcoming jo urnalist, my efforts will be 
worth the while. 
Sunil Sharma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7   
INTRODUCTION 
Editor with a difference 
Gandhiji has proved that style is the man. To him w ords flowed like the rippling 
rivulet. Like a bird he chirped at ease, and merril y too. His English was Biblical. 
Some compared it with that of masters like Ruskin o r Thoreau. 
He was meticulous about the use of English words. H e chose carefully the 
correct word at the right place. Above all, his sen tences were simple and lucid. 
The fact that he wrote from his heart made his writ ings all the more absorbing. 
This style was a complete departure from the one th at was in vogue in India 
when he reached the country. Giants like Shri Suren dranath Banerjee, Shri 
Bipin Chandra Pal, Shri Balgangadhar Tilak, Shri Au robindo Ghose were writing 
in their Macaulayan style. These writings were heav y in form and content. 
Sentences were unusually long. For an average reade r these were difficult to 
follow. Compare this Macaulayan amplitude and richn ess of phrasing and weight 
of trajectory learning with Gandhiji's wisely utili tarian, clear and direct 
language. 
Gandhiji not only revolutionized the political thin king of the day but English 
writing of his countrymen as well. It had no scream ing headline, no catchy sub-
headings or magic typography. But it was universall y read. 
His thunder acquires a suave majesty, his appeal hi s persuasiveness, his 
confession, his poignancy, as much by proper use of  the proper word as, by his 
personality. Sometimes, he is styly humorous or pla yful. With him, beauty of 
expression has to be an humble housemaid to truth. 
Harijan was first published in 1933. Shri Jawaharla l Nehru got copies of it while 
under detention. "I was delighted," Shri Nehru wrot e to Gandhiji from 
Dehradun, after reading the first two copies of Har ijan, "To see the old rapier 
touch of overmuch kindness and inexhaustible patien ce which extinguishes, or 
as you say, neutralizes the opponent." Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  Younger generation of writers got influenced by his  style. They tried to emulate 
him. Gone were the days of pompous style or verbosi ty. Not only the 
contributors to Young India or Harijan but those to  other papers and magazines 
also started writing in simple English. A new class  of journalists was coming to 
the fore. 
More important than the style was the content of hi s writing. The subject-
matter he chose was down to the ground. Gandhiji wa s able to divert the 
attention of the rising journalists and authors fro m cities to villages. He 
impressed on them the fact that India lived in her villages; that the journalist's 
or author's job was to write about village and vill agers. Thus he was able to put 
the villages of India on the wider and lively canva s of Indian writing. The 
Gandhian era of writing, a golden era came into exi stence. 
Presiding over the Gujarat literary conference on N ovember 2, 1936, Gandhi 
asked, "For whose sake are we going to have our lit erature? Not certainly for 
the great gentry of Ahmedabad. They can afford to e ngage literary men and 
have great libraries in their homes. But what about  the poor man at the well 
who with unspeakable abuse is goading his bullocks to pull the big leather 
bucket? Years ago I had asked a friend, who I am so rry is too aged and ill to be 
here in our midst, if he could give me something, i nspired tunes or ditties, 
which this man at the well could lustily sing and f orget for ever the filthy 
abuse? I have hundreds of such folks for whom I wan t real life-giving literature. 
How am I to do so? I live in Segaon today where in a population of six hundred a 
little over ten are literate." 
"As I am speaking to you just now, I think of Dean Farrar and his book on the 
life of Christ. I may fight the British rule, but I  do not hate the English or their 
language. In fact, I appreciate their literary trea sures. And Dean Farrar's book is 
one of the rare treasures of the English language. You know how he laboured to 
produce the book? He read everything about Jesus in  English language, and then 
he went to Palestine, saw every place and spot in t he Bible that he could 
identify, and then wrote the book in faith and pray er for the masses in English, 
in a language which all of them could understand. I t is not in Dr. Johnson's style Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  but in the easy style of Dickens. Here have we men like Farrar, who will 
produce great literature for the village folk? 
The Gandhian impact on contemporary Indian literatu re was great. As regards 
the writer's choice of language, one result of the Gandhian influence had been 
a general preference for the mother tongue or the r egional language and 
occasionally a purposeful bilingualism, the same wr iter, handling with mastery 
his own mother tongue as well as English. Besides, whatever the language 
medium chosen, the stress had been more on simplici ty and clarity and 
immediate effectiveness than on ornateness or profu ndity and artistry; and this 
has been as marked in English writing as in writing  in the regional language. As 
regards the choice of themes and the portrayal of c haracter, the Gandhian 
influence has been no less marked. There has been a  more or less conscious 
shift of emphasis from the city to the village. He tried to emphasis a marked 
contrast between the urban luxury and sophisticatio n on the one hand and rural 
modes and manners on the other. 
Gandhiji, in fact, brought in many new elements whi ch introduced a fresh life 
in the field of journalism. As a result of his wide  interest, his genius for 
simplification, his eagerness to reach the largest number of people, and the 
startling nature of his activities, there was a qui ckening of life in journalism. 
Many of his followers were moved to write and publi sh in the Indian languages, 
and in imitation of his own direct style they wrote  simple prose. Regional 
journalism began to acquire an importance and there  was hardly an area of the 
country which did not have its newspapers. 
Gandhiji's English had been praised by knowledgeabl e persons. He never made a 
mistake in the use of this foreign language. 
Gandhiji undoubtedly introduced a new and a noble e lement in the field of 
journalism. It was his human approach - which gave his writings a unique 
character. He never looked upon the reading public as target for propaganda. 
He regarded them as living reality whose interests,  tastes and foibles he 
willingly shared and fathomed in order to bring a r eal change in the country 
and the world. He belonged to the people by identif ying himself with them and Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  wrote about their feelings and aspirations. His voi ce was the voice of humanity 
- not the voice of a pamphleteer. He wanted to chan ge the human character 
and was never satisfied by changing a few laws or a cts, here and there. 
To whom should the journalist be loyal? To the prop rietor, one's own self or the 
particular class he belongs to? This has often been  debated with different 
conclusions. But to Gandhiji, readers were most imp ortant. A journalist may be 
a patriot, a party member, or a faithful employee; but his loyalty according to 
him should primarily be to his readers. Public has the right to know the truth. It 
must be informed objectively as to what is happenin g. If the paper loses 
confidence of its readers, it has lost all that is worth in journalism. 
Progress of science and education was continuously raising the intellectual level 
of the public. Certain papers were inspired to beco me promoters of ideals. This 
was particularly true in the Victorian era when the  British press, by and large, 
started educating people on political and moral val ues. Gandhiji, when he first 
started journalism in South Africa, grew in this cl imate. Though industrial 
civilization later dominated every aspect of human life, Gandhiji was still 
preaching high standards and trying to introduce a sense of value through his 
writings. 
The educational mission that the press is capable o f accomplishing depends, in 
a large measure, upon the talent of those who write  for the papers. If a 
journalist possesses personality, he can accustom h is readers to follow him into 
almost every field and, in the end, impose upon the m a veritable education. 
The public is fascinated by the radiation of his pe rsonality. The reader is 
automatically attracted by personal magnetism. If a  journalist, on the other 
hand, is strongly individual, he will, from time to  time, make his articles almost 
always unreadable as he asks too much of the reader . To give his readers an 
elementary course of politics would demand a great deal of tact, and still more 
talent. He perforce confines himself to writing in his usual style, which is 
incomprehensible for the public and often prevents it from taking interest in 
political happenings. In brief, the writer alone is  in a position to link up with 
the very sources of life an important event, be it political, social or economic Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11  and in a few words, bring it into the strictly huma n domain which is accessible 
to all. 
This was Gandhiji's magic that made his readers rea d his writings as gospel 
truth. His personality would attract readers, his w ritings would elevate them to 
a higher plane, would help them in a holy communion  with God, which in his 
case was the truth. 
There was not only a new thought but a new language  in newspaper writing and 
what he wrote was the best in political thought and  finest in journalistic 
writings. No editor could escape being influenced b y Gandhiji's writings. 
Gandhiji sometimes reviewed books. That was also do ne from the point of view 
of service to the community. If he would come acros s a book which would prove 
useful to the people, he would write about it with his comments. He reviewed, 
at length, Mr. F.L. Brayne's books on rural upliftm ent activities in Gurgaon 
district of Haryana. He reflected on the good point s and the bad points of the 
book vis-a-vis a better solution, as he thought of the rural problems. 
He would ignore reference of books if those were no t useful Even in South 
African days when he had to compromise on small mat ters for the ultimate 
good of his paper, he was strict about reviews, in Indian Opinion. In his letter 
to Shri Chhaganlal Gandhi, dated September 30, 1905 , he wrote, "I have seen 
today the book written by Sheikh Mehtab. Do not tak e any notice of it in the 
Opinion." Sheikh, it may be mentioned, was his scho ol mate. 
At times he could be highly critical of harmful boo ks. The best example is his 
review of Miss Mayo's Mother India. Under the title  'Drain Inspector's Report', he 
wrote in Young India dated September 15, 1927, "Mis s Mayo has herself 
favoured me with a copy of her book. The book is cl everly and powerfully 
written. But the impression it leaves on my mind is  that it is the report of a 
drain inspector sent out with the one purpose of op ening and examining the 
drains of the country to be reported upon or to giv e graphic description of the 
stomach exuded by the opened drains." He wrote at l ength with supporting 
extracts from the book and concluded, "That a book like Miss Mayo's can Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  command a large circulation furnishes a sad comment ary on western literature 
and culture." 
Gandhi was a prolific writer. On his way to South A frica from England in 1909, 
he utilized his time to write the manuscript of the  book-Hind Swaraj. It is in the 
form of 20 brief dialogues between 'Reader' and 'Ed itor'. It"covers subjects like 
India and England, Civilization, Swaraj, Machinery,  Hindu-Muslim unity, Non-
violence, Satyagraha, etc. What Gandhiji thought an d said and did during 40 
years of his active life i.e. from 1908-48, was epi tomized in the book. The 
manuscript was found intact even after many years. Shri Prabhudas Gandhi 
said, "Turning over the pages of the manuscript, on e realises Gandhiji's genius 
as a writer. In the 275 hand written pages, only th ree lines have been scratched 
out. A few words here and there have changed. When Gandhiji got tired of 
writing with his right hand, he wrote with his left ." He finished the whole 
manuscript in ten days time. 
He was later asked as to whether he would like to m ake any change in the 
book. He made only one change. The word 'prostitute ' used in connection with 
parliament was taken out. This was done to satisfy the sentiment of an English 
lady who was annoyed over the use of the word. 
What was Gandhiji's attitude towards the vernacular  press? Did he like 
conducting English papers at the cost of vernacular  ones? Was he happy in 
communicating his ideas with readers through the me dium of a foreign 
language? These and many other questions will natur ally crop up while 
discussing Gandhiji as a journalist. He had his def inite views on the subject. 
Kaka Saheb Kalelkar mentioned an incident which occ urred immediately after 
Gandhiji came back from South Africa. A Parsi journ alist interviewed him and 
as was the custom of those days, started asking que stions in English. Gandhiji, 
politely but firmly replied, "Friend, you are an In dian and I too, an Indian. Your 
mother tongue is Gujarati, and so is mine. Why, the n, do you ask your questions 
in English? Do you imagine that I have forgotten my  native tongue because I 
lived in South Africa or do you consider it more di gnified to talk in English 
because I am a barrister." Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  Newspapers widely carried this story. In those days  when effective English 
conversation and European dress were criteria for a  successful politician, at 
least here was a man who was not ashamed to speak h is language if he could. 
Personally Gandhiji did not like to write much in E nglish though he loved the 
language and developed a style of his own. He knew that English could not be 
the national language of India. But so long as the national language, Hindustani, 
was not developed, he had to choose a medium throug h which his message 
could be reached to the four corners of the country . Indian publicists in those 
days had to-be, of necessity, bilingual. Raja Rammo han Roy wrote in Bengali as 
well as in English. 'Lokamanya' Tilak edited Kesari  in Marathi and 'Maratha' in 
English. Sri Aurobindo Ghose edited Bandemataram an d Karmayogin in English 
and Dharma in Bengali. 
Discussing objectives of Young India, the first jou rnal he edited in India, 
Gandhiji declared, "....I recognise that for a few years to come, until we have 
accepted 'Hindustani' as the common medium among th e cultured classes and 
until 'Hindustani' becomes compulsory in our school s as a second language, 
educated India, specially in the Madras presidency,  must be addressed in 
English." 
There was a suggestion from a correspondent that th e English edition should be 
stopped to help the growth of Indian language editi ons, "Should not he give a 
lead and propagate his ideas through the local lang uage? Otherwise how would 
'Hindustani' thrive?" Gandhiji was also, for someti me, thinking on that line. 
Once he resolved to write for the Harijan in nothin g but Gujarati and Hindi, and 
his articles were to be translated into English. 
Gandhiji explained the position thus, "I cannot sto p the English edition for the 
reason that Englishmen, as well as the Indian schol ars of the English language 
consider me to be a good writer in the English lang uage. My relations with the 
West are also increasing every day.... I do not wis h to forget that language, nor 
do I wish all the Indians to give up or forget it."  
Gandhiji's Gujarati style was as commendable as his  English style. He set a new 
style in Gujarati literature about which Shri K.M. Munshi discussed at length, in Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  the book Gujarata and its literature. Gujarati lang uage is greatly indebted to 
Gandhiji. It had its heyday while he was editing an d writing for Navajivan and, 
later on, in the Gujarati edition of Harijan. Even earlier he used to contribute 
Gujarati articles in the Gujarati section of Indian  opinion. 
His Autobiography – Atmakatha - Satyagraha in South  Africa, Arogya vise 
Samanyajnana were all written originally in Gujarat i. So long there were two 
distinct trends of Gujarati literature. One was the  Gujarati style and the other 
Saurashtra style. Both were pedantic, with liberal use of Sanskrit or Persian. 
Moreover, there were unnecessary literary flourishe s. Under Gandhiji's 
influence the Gujarati and Saurashtrian trends were  not only combined but 
were made into a powerful people's language. It was  simple and direct. There 
was no verbosity in it, nor were sanskrit or Persia n words unnecessarily mixed. 
Mr. J.H. Holmes wrote: 
"Gandhi's literary achievement is more remarkable i n view of the fact that he 
was never, in any sense of the phrase, a literary m an. Unlike his great 
contemporary, Rabindranath Tagore, and his accompli shed successor, Pandit 
Nehru, the Mahatma had no special grace of style. S eldom, if ever, in his 
writings, did he rise to heights of eloquence and b eauty. Memorable passages 
i.e.-memorable for their own sake are rarely found.  Gandhiji's interests were 
never aesthetic, but rather pragmatic. He had no de sire or ambition, no time, 
to be an artist. His one thought was of his own peo ple, and his struggle to make 
them free. So he wrote with disciplined simplicity,  seeking only to make 
himself clearly understood. The result was the one most important quality of 
literary act-namely, clarity. I doubt, if, in all h is works, Gandhiji ever wrote a 
sentence which failed to express with utter precisi on the thought he had in 
mind to convey. Gandhiji mastered his medium. He wr ought a style which was 
perfect for his purpose of communication. To read h is writings is to think of 
content and not of style which means a triumph in t he adaption of means to 
ends." 
Gandhiji's letters, small or big, official or perso nal, were pure gems. These 
were appropriately worded and spoken from heart. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  Not only did Gandhiji introduce style in Gujarati, he tried to do something for 
the children and coming generation as well. Gandhij i tried to write primers for 
the children. It was a new style that he introduced -in the form of a dialogue-in 
telling things to the children. The dialogue was be tween the mother and the 
child. Gandhiji hoped that the mother in India will , in future, be her child's 
teacher. 
Apart from Gandhiji's writing in original Gujarati,  he took a great lead in 
translating other useful materials into Gujarati la nguage. In fact, he created a 
team of translation experts in the Navajivan Press.  They translated many pieces 
and books and published them through the columns of  the Navajivan. 
Gandhiji was interested in the flourish of all Indi an languages. Towards the end 
of his life he tried to learn Bengali. His own hand writings in Bengali can still be 
found. Even the day before he was killed he wrote a  passage in Bengali and 
showed it to his teacher-Mrs. Abha Gandhiji. 
Early in his South African life Gandhiji started to  learn Tamil so that he could 
easily communicate with the Tamil people residing i n South Africa. In a letter 
to Shri Chhaganlal Gandhi dated April 17, 1905, Gan dhiji wrote, "I am studying 
Tamil very diligently and, if all is well, I may be  able to fairly understand the 
Tamil articles within two months at the outside. I am rather anxious to get the 
Tamil books." 
But Gandhiji made it his life's mission to make Hin dustani the Lingua Franca of 
the people. As a nationalist he wanted a common lan guage for the country and, 
though aware of the richness of the Gujarati litera ture, did not hesitate to 
support and foster the claim of Hindustani for this  honour. He made all efforts 
to make the language acceptable all over India and for that he did not spare 
time, men or money. 
 
The first Gandhiji Journal 
The columns of a newspaper had long served Gandhiji  well in his continuing 
efforts to communicate with those who would hear an d respond. His first paper Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  was Indian Opinion, founded in South Africa in 1903 . Gandhiji was responsible 
for its policy, finances and editing, even though h e was not its official editor. 
The journal was intended to advance the moral, poli tical and social condition 
of Indians in South Africa. Gandhiji has explained that without Indian opinion 
the movement for civil rights which he prosecuted f or almost two decades in 
South Africa would have been impossible. 
 
Young India and Navjivan 
Within a few years of his return to India, after mo re than twenty years of active 
leadership in S. Africa, Gandhiji once again turned  to a journal as both 
necessary for the promotion of his ideas and progra mmes and congenial to the 
style of his growing political leadership. Young In dia had first been established 
as an organ of the Home Rule League of Bombay. Soon  after the inauguration of 
the Rowlatt Satyagraha campaign in 1919, Gandhiji t ook over its editorship. He 
stripped the journal of all advertising and brought  to its pages his message to 
the Congress party, setting before the country his programme of swadeshi 
aimed at making every village sufficiently producti ve to meet its own needs. 
In both the weeklies- Young India and Navjivan, his  trademark was a straight 
forward, disciplined style. In simple yet forceful language, he propagated and 
elaborated his percepts of truth, nonviolence and s atyagraha. He advocated 
inter-caste marriage and Hindu-Muslim unity, urging  a many-pronged attack 
upon all forms of social disability. His achievemen t was all the greater in that 
he gained remarkable popularity for his papers whil e focusing entirely without 
sensation upon ways to bringing about social change . He had learned to write 
with telling effect. Rival Gujarati papers declined  in popularity, and the 
circulation of Navjivan more than doubled within a year of his assuming its 
editorship. 
 
Harijan 
There is no journal with which Harijan can adequate ly be compared. It was not 
a newspaper in the usual sense, for Harijan made mo re news than it reported. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  Its inception in 1933, the impact of its suspension  in 1940, the drama of its 
complete suppression in 1942, and its resumption of  publication in 1946 were 
events of historical moments. There were highlights  in the challenging decades 
leading to Indian independence. 
Harijan was not a party organ, yet it became the mo st influential journal 
involved in the movement for Indian independence. T hrough its pages readers 
came to know and respond to the central political c urrents of the country. 
Resolutions, policies and decisions of political ac tion taken by the Indian 
National Congress party were reported and commented  upon in Harijan. But 
beyond that, the journal provided the medium of mor al instruction through 
which Congressmen learned what Gandhiji expected of  them. "Let me think 
aloud", wrote Gandhiji in his editorial." I hope th at Congressmen will make it a 
point to read Harijan as if it was a weekly bulleti n containing instructions for 
them." 
The word Harijan literally means God's people. It w as the name coined by 
Gandhiji to designate the so-called untouchables of  India. The journal Harijan 
reflects the many social and individual concerns wh ich were a part of Gandhiji's 
complex and continuing analysis of the human predic ament. Harijan is indeed a 
highly political journal, and that is so because Ga ndhiji directly related the 
concerns expressed throughout its pages to the poli tical fact that the India 
which gave rise to the founding of Harijan was a su bject nation; freedom, as 
Gandhiji perceived and publicly pursued it, begins with the individual. And both 
individual freedom and national freedom are threads  woven into the entire 
fabric of life. 
The Correspondence columns of Harijan were unrivall ed archives of opinion. 
Debates conducted through these columns were rich i n content and revealed 
the deepest human concerns. Their universality was suggested not only by the 
distinguished contributors attracted to the journal  from India and abroad 
(Harijan drew more international contributors than any other Indian 
publication), but also by their scope and the chara cter of approach and style 
which was uniquely Gandhian. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  Above all, Harijan was Gandhiji's paper. He founded  and used it as his most 
effective means of access to an ever-increasing fol lowing. During the eight 
years it survived him, Harijan provided a faithful echo of his foremost concerns. 
There can be few public documents which exhibit a g reat man with such unself 
conscious vividness. Gandhiji's own writings, addre ssed to the day-to-day 
business of a nation struggling to be free, togethe r with the enchanting diary of 
his career kept from issue to issue by Mahadev Desa i, bring Gandhiji to us with 
incomparable clarity. 
The special value of reading Gandhiji through the p ages of Harijan is that of 
placing what he thought and wrote in context. The j ournal occupied a good 
third of Gandhiji's time. Through its columns he me ets his correspondents and 
joins their argument. Reflected in letters to him a re the many facets of the 
tense epoch preceding independence. Hindu-Muslim te nsions, social inequities, 
disabling poverty, civil disturbances, and war. Har ijan provided a meeting 
ground for the East and the West, for defenders and  challengers of orthodoxy, 
for advocates and detractors of policies designed t o effect change. 
The reader can follow Gandhiji through these column s as he advises, responds, 
teaches and, above all, searches. He was a great an d formidable teacher for 
the very reason that he had an unquenchable desire to learn. Early in life he 
had determined to discover how to understand, manag e and resolve his own 
inner conflicts. As he pursued this search, he soug ht to make his new 
approaches to conflict meaningful to others and fur ther sought to render these 
approaches viable on all levels, whether intra-or i nter-personal, intergroup or 
international. 
Here, then, is a record of Gandhiji and his works f rom 1933 onwards, 
interrupted by suspension of the weekly papers in 1 940 and again from 1942 to 
1946. After Gandhiji's Death in 1948, Harijan becam e representative of the 
dedicated efforts of many of his ablest disciples t o develop the implications of 
Gandhiji's life and work. 
Gandhiji's own observations about the objectives of  a newspaper were spelled 
out in Young India, "I have taken up journalism not  for its sake but merely as an Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19  aid to what I have conceived to be my mission in li fe. My mission is to teach by 
example and present under severest restraint the us e of the matchless weapon 
of satyagraha which is a direct corollary of non vi olence." 
With characteristic candour about his personal invo lvement, commitment, and 
the uses of journalistic writing, Gandhiji added: 
"To be true to my faith I may not write in anger or  malice. I may not write idly. 
I may not write merely to excite passion. The reade r can have no idea of the 
restraint. I have to exercise from week to week in the choice of topics and 
vocabulary. It is a training for me. It enables me to peep into myself and to 
make discoveries of my weaknesses, often my vanity dictates a smart 
expression of my anger a harsh objective. It is a t errible ordeal but a fine 
exercise to remove these weeds. The reader sees the  pages of Young India 
fairly well dressed-up and sometimes with Romain Ro lland he is inclined to say, 
"What a fine old man this must be. Well, let the wo rld understand that the 
fineness is carefully and prayerfully cultivated... " 
Gandhiji came to exert a powerful influence on the editors of other newspapers 
and frequently exhorted them to express their views  fearlessly even though 
they might not support his views or the policies of  the Congress party. On 
occasion, he wrote to individual editors acknowledg ing the weight of a point in 
criticism or explaining his point of view in great detail with an earnestness that 
clearly showed his anxiety to remove misunderstandi ng. 
The first charge of sedition brought against Gandhi ji (in 1922) was based upon 
four articles he had written in Young India. Among the notable statements he 
made in his defence at this famous trial was one re lating directly to the 
suppression of the press. 
"...It has been a precious privilege for me to be a ble to write what I have in the 
various articles tendered in evidence against me. I  am here, therefore, to 
invite and cheerfully submit to the highest penalty  that can be inflicted upon 
me for what in law is a deliberate crime and what a ppears to me to be the 
highest duty of a citizen...." Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  The Judge sentenced Gandhiji to six year's Imprisio nment, a sentence which 
was remitted when Gandhiji fell ill in 1924. 
Many of Gandhiji's articles were scribbled in the t hird class compartmnets of 
trains as he travelled the length and breadth of In dia. Among the foremost 
purposes which they served were those of inspiring his countrymen with 
courage and promoting the regeneration of national life. By the mid-twenties, 
Gandhiji was recognized as a Mahatma-great soul-a t itle with which he never 
felt comfortable. He had come to measure India's pr ogress in terms of relieving 
the plight of the most desperate and had dedicated himself to the tasks of far-
reaching reform. Satyagraha the complex technique f or pressing the active 
struggle not only for national independence, but al so for removal of social 
disabilities and economic hardship, had been tried and on occasion found 
wanting. He never ceased the effort to evolve and r efine his method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON DEMOCRACY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
01. HOW DEMOCRACY WORKS  
A valued correspondent has written to me two letter s, one issuing a timely 
warning about the ill effects of hasty decontrol an d the other about the 
possibility of an outbreak of Hindu-Muslim riots. I  have dealt with both the 
letters in a letter which has become unexpectedly a rgumentative and gives my 
view of democracy which can only come out of nonvio lent mass action. I, 
therefore, reproduce the letter below without givin g at the same time the 
letters to which it is in answer. There is enough i n the answer to enable the 
reader to know the purport of the two letters. I ha ve purposely refrained from 
giving the name of my correspondent and the scene o f action, not because the 
letters are confidential; but because nothing is to  be gained from disclosing 
either: 
"You still write as if you had a slave mind, though  the slavery of us all is 
abolished. If decontrol has produced the effect you  attribute to it, you should 
raise your voice, even though you may be alone in d oing so and your voice may 
be feeble. As a matter of fact you have many compan ions and your voice is by 
no means feeble unless intoxication of power has en feebled it. Personally, the 
bogey of the shooting up of prices by reason of dec ontrol does not frighten me. 
If we have many Sharks and we do not know how to co mbat them, we shall 
deserve to be eaten up by them. Then we shall know how to carry ourselves in 
the teeth of adversity. Real democracy people learn  not from books, not from 
the government who are in name and in reality their  servants. Hard experience 
is the most efficient teacher in democracy. The day s of appeals to me are 
gone. The cloak of non-violence which we had put on  during the British regime 
is no longer now necessary. Therefore, violence fac es us in its terrible 
nakedness. Have you also succumbed or you too never  had non-violence? This 
letter is not to warn you against writing to me and  giving me your view of the 
picture, but it is intended to tell you why I would  swear by decontrol even if 
mine was a solitary voice. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  'Your second letter about Hindu-Muslim tension is m ore to the point than the 
first. Here too you should raise your voice openly against any soft handling of 
the situation or smug satisfaction. I shall do my p art but I am painfully 
conscious of my limitations. Formerly I could affor d to be monarch of all I 
surveyed. Today I have many fellow monarchs, if I m ay still count myself as 
such. If I can, I am the least among them. The firs t days of democracy are 
discordant notes which jar on the ear and give you many headaches. If 
democracy is to live in spite of these killing note s, sweet concord has to rise 
out of this seemingly discordant necessary lesson. How I wish that you would be 
one of the masters who would contribute to the prod uction of concord out of 
discord! 
"You will not make the mistake of thinking that you r duty is finished when you 
have apprised me of the situation in your part of t he country." 
Harijan, 11-1-1948  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24   
02. CIVIL LIBERTY  
Gurudev has given the poetry of Civil liberty. It b ears reproduction in a weekly 
journal like HARIJAN, although the statement has go ne round the world. The 
reader will find it in another column. It is a para phrase of "Work out trine own 
salvation", or "Man is his own enemy and his own fr iend". 
Civil Liberty is not Criminal Liberty. When Law and  Order are under popular 
control the Ministers in charge of the Department c annot hold the portfolio for 
a day, it they act against the popular will. It is true that the Assemblies are not 
sufficiently representative of the whole people. Ne vertheless the suffrage is 
wide enough to make it representative of the Nation  in matters of Law and 
Order. In seven Provinces the Congress rules. It se ems to be assumed by some 
persons that, in these Provinces at least, individu als can say and do what they 
like. But so far as I know the Congress mind, it wi ll not tolerate any such 
licence. Civil Liberty means the fullest liberty to  say and do what one likes 
within the ordinary law of the land. The word 'ordi nary' has been purposely 
used here. The Penal Code and the Criminal Procedur e Code, not to speak of 
the Special Powers Legislation, contain provisions which the foreign rulers have 
enacted for their own safety. These provisions can be easily identified, and 
must be ruled out of operation. The real test, howe ver, is the interpretation by 
the Working Committee of the power of the Ministers  of law and Order. 
Subject, therefore, to the general instructions lai d down by the Working 
Committee for the guidance of Congress Ministers, t he Statutory Powers limited 
in the manner indicated by me, must be exercised by  the Ministers against 
those who, in the name of Civil liberty, preach law lessness in the popular sense 
of the term. 
It has been suggested that Congress Ministers who a re pledged to nonviolence 
cannot resort to legal processes involving punishme nts. Such is not my view of 
the nonviolence accepted by the Congress. I have, p ersonally, not found a way 
out of punishments and punitive restrictions in all  conceivable cases. No doubt 
punishments have to be nonviolent, if such an expre ssion is permissible in this Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25  connection. Just as violence has its own technique,  known by the military 
science, which has invented means of destruction un heard of before, 
nonviolence has its own science and technique. Nonv iolence in politics is a new 
weapon in the process of evolution. Its vast possib ilities are, yet unexplored. 
The exploration can take place only if it is practi sed on a big scale-and in 
various fields. Congress Ministers, if they have fa ith in nonviolence, Will 
undertake the explorations. But whilst they are doi ng this, or whether they do 
so or not, there is no doubt that they cannot ignor e incitements to violence and 
manifestly violent speech, even though they may the mselves run the risk of 
being styled violent. When they are not wanted, the  public will only have to 
signify its disapproval through its representatives  in the absence of definite 
instructions from the Congress. It would proper for  the Ministers to report what 
they consider is a violent behaviour of any member of the public to their own 
Provincial Congress Committee or the working commit tee, and seek 
instructions. If the superior authority does not ap prove of their 
recommendations, they may offer to resign. They may  not allow things to drill 
so far s to have to summon the aid of the military.  In my opinion, it would 
mount to Political bankruptcy, when any Minister is  obliged to fall back in the 
military, which does not belong to the people, and which, in any scheme of 
nonviolence, must be ruled out of count for the obs ervance of internal peace. 
One interpretation I put upon the India Act is that  it is an unconscious challenge 
to Congressmen to demonstrate the virtue of nonviol ence and the sincerity of 
their conviction about it. If the Congress can give  such a demonstration, most 
of the safeguards fall into desuetude, and the Cong ress can achieve its goal 
without a violent struggle, and also without iii di sobedience. If the Congress has 
not impregnated the people with the nonviolent spir it, it has to become a 
minority, and remain in opposition, unless it will alter its creed. 
Harijan, 23-10-1937  
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
03. RIGHTS OR DUTIES?  
"I want to deal with one great evil that is afflict ing society today. The capitalist 
and the Zamindar talk of their rights, the labour o r the other hand, the prince 
of  his divine right to rule, the ryot of his right  to resist it. If all simply insist on 
rights and no duties, there will be utter confusion  and chaos. 
"If instead of insisting on rights everyone does hi s duty, there will immediately 
be the rule of order established among mankind. The re is no such a thing as the 
divine right of kings to rule and the humble duty o f the ryots to pay respectful 
obedience to their masters. Whilst it is true that these hereditary inequalities 
must go as being injurious to the well-being of soc iety, the unabashed assertion 
of rights of the hitherto down-trodden millions is equally injurious, if not more 
so to the same well-being. The latter behaviour is probably calculated to injure 
the millions rather than the few claimants of divin e or other rights. They could 
but die a brave or cowardly death but those few dea d would not bring in the 
orderly life of blissful contentment. It is therefo re. necessary to understand the 
correlation of rights and duties. I venture to sugg est that rights that do not 
directly from duty well performed are not worth hav ing. They will be nations 
sooner discarded the better. A wretched parent who claims obedience from his 
children without first doing his duly by them excit es nothing but contempt. It is 
distortion of religious precept for a dissolute hus band and to expect compliance 
in every respect from his dutiful wife. But childre n who flout their parent who 
is, ever ready to do his duty towards them would be  considered ungrateful and 
would harm themselves more than their parent. The s ame can be said about 
husband and wife. If you apply this simple and univ ersal rule to employers and 
labourers, landlords and tenants, the princes and t heir subjects or the Hindus 
and the Muslims, you will find that the happiest re lations can be established in 
all walks of life without creating disturbance in a nd dislocation of life and 
business which you see in India as in the other par ts of the world. What I call 
the law of satyagraha is to be deduced from an appr eciation of duties and 
rights flowing there from." Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  Taking the relations between the Hindus and the Mus lims for his illustration, 
Gandhiji, resuming his remarks on rights and duties . 
"What is the duty of the Hindu towards his Muslim n eighbour? His duty is to 
befriend him as man, to share his joys and sorrows and help him in distress. He 
will then have the right to expect similar treatmen t from his Muslim neighbour 
and will probably get the expected response. Suppos ing the Hindus are in a 
majority in a village with a sprinkling of Muslims in their midst, the duty of the 
majority towards the few Muslim neighbours is incre ased manifold, so much so 
that the few will not feel that their religion make s any difference in the 
behaviour of the Hindus towards them. The Hindus wi ll then earn the right, not 
before, that the Muslims will be natural friends wi th them and in times of 
danger both the communities will act as one man, bu t suppose that the few 
Muslims do not reciprocate the correct behaviour of  the many Hindus and show 
fight in every action, it will be a sign of unmanli ness. What is then the duty of 
the many Hindus? Certainly not to over-power them b y the brute strength of 
the many., that will be usurpation of an unearned r ight. Their duty will be to 
check their unmanly behaviour as they would that of  their blood brothers. It is 
unnecessary for me to dilate further upon the illus tration. I will close it by 
saying that the application will be exactly the sam e if the position is reversed. 
From what I have said it is easy enough to extend t he application with profit to 
the whole of the present state which has become baf fling because people do 
not apply in practice the doctrine of deriving ever y right from a prior duty well 
performed. 
"The same rule applies to the Princes and the ryots . The former's duty is to act 
as true servants of the people. They will rule not by right granted by some 
outside authority, never by the right of the sword.  They will rule by right of 
service, of greater wisdom. They will then have the  right to collect taxes 
voluntarily paid and expect certain services equall y voluntarily rendered, not 
for themselves but for the sake of the people under  their care. If they fail to 
perform this simple and primary duty, the ryots not  only owe no return duty 
but the duty devolves on them of resisting the prin cely usurpation. It may be Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  otherwise said that the ryots earn the right of res isting the usurpation or 
misrule. But the resistance will become a crime aga inst man in terms of duty if 
it takes the form of murder, rapine and plunder. Fo rce that performance of 
duty naturally generates is the non-violent and inv incible force that satyagraha 
brings into being." 
Harijan 28-6-1947  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON COMMUNALISM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30   
04. HINDU-MUSLIM  
Thus writes a Khan Bahadur from Delhi 
"This is a letter for the Question Box in Harijan. 
In your article in Harijan of April 6, you observe as follows: 
'I should be failing in my duly if I did not warn t he Mussalmans against the 
untruth that is being propagated amongst them. This  warning is a duty because 
I have faithfully served them in their hour of need  and because Hindu-Muslim 
unity has been and is my life's mission." 
I will request you to consider the Hindu-Muslim pro blem from our point of view. 
The stumbling block to any negotiations for a settl ement of the communal 
question has been the refusal of the Congress to re cognise the All India Muslim 
League as the authoritative and sole representative  body of the Indian 
Mussalmans. The Congress claims that it speaks for whole India and that it has 
on its rolls a considerable number of Mussalmans. T he very fact that the 
Congress has made several attempts to come to terms  with Mr. Jinnah shows 
that it is not fully confident of its representativ e character as far as the 
Mussalmans are concerned, But do you not honestly f eel that the Congress 
Mussalmans are the real stumbling block in the way of Hindu-Muslim unity, and 
that it is for their sake that the Congress is not making a serious effort to solve 
the problem? Believe me, they are a lazy lot who ar e enjoying their present 
position because they are in the Congress. 
You know what the Muslim masses did to your Preside nt in Calcutta where for 
years he had been leading Id prayer. You also know that they have no courage 
to address a Muslim meeting to convert the Mussalma ns to their point of view. 
You blame the British for creating Princes, Moderat es and Khan Bahadurs like 
me. You blame the British for trying to create anot her Ulster in India. Has not 
the Congress created equivalent Moderates and Khan Bahadurs in Azads, Asaf 
Alis and Kidwais. Is not the action of the Congress  tantamount to creation of a 
Muslim Ulster? Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  You may cite the case of Mr. Asaf Ali succeeding in  the municipal elections of 
Delhi. I may inform you that but for a division in the Provincial league and bad 
handling of the situation Mr. Asaf Ali would have n ever won the election. I may 
inform you that even as it is, when Delhi Congress wanted to contest the 
municipal elections as a party, Mr. Asaf Ali, who i s now a member of the 
Congress Working Committee, had declined to take a Congress ticket. 
Therefore, Mr. Asaf Ali's election was not a test c ase; and if, you pardon my 
saying so, even now let Mr. Asaf Ali re-seek electi on on a Congress ticket, and I 
am confident that any league candidate would defeat  him. You will thus 
realise, that your being baffled by the Lahore reso lution of the League is not. 
Justified when Mussalmans have ceased to trust in y our file's mission regarding 
Hindu-Muslim unity. On the other hand they are conv inced that the sole aim of 
the Congress, for the last ten years at least, has been to divide and rule the 
Mussalmans. I will beg of you to reconsider your at titude towards the League. 
Please don't trust the Congressite Mussalmans, for they are not only the 'Mir 
Jafars amongst us, but the enemies of Hindu-Muslim accord and India's 
freedom." 
Just now I am inundated with letters of protest fro m Muslim friends. Most 
writers do not argue. They give themselves satisfac tion by abusing Pyarelal, 
who opens and deals with the daily post, gives me o nly those letters which he 
thinks I should see. Of these I take notice of thos e I think I must. In some cases 
I answer them privately. Therefore correspondents w ho never receive 
acknowledgement either through Harijan or the post should know the reason. 
There are some Muslim letters of sympathy too. One of them says that in his 
house he has to listen to wildest criticism of me. No adjective is too bad to use. 
Much criticism he knows to be false. What is he to do, he asks. Is he to leave 
the house, or is he to engage in endless disputatio n and convert his house into a 
bear garden? I have advised my correspondent neithe r to leave the house nor to 
engage in a discussion. If he can, he may put in a mild word when he knows 
that a manifest falsehood is being uttered and beli eved. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  The correspondence in my possession and the Urdu pr ess cuttings and even 
some English cuttings from journals owned by Muslim s go to show that I am 
believed to be the arch enemy of Islam and Indian M uslims. If I was at one time 
acclaimed as their greatest friend and suffered the  praise, I must suffer too to 
be described as an enemy. Truth is known only to Go d. I am confident that in 
nothing that I am doing, saying or thinking I am th eir enemy. They are blood 
brothers and will remain so, though they may disown  me ever so much. 
Now for the Khan Bahadur's letter. 
I have never understood the reason behind the deman d for the recognition by 
the Congress of the All India Muslim League as the sole and authoritative Muslim 
body. Why should such an admission be demanded or e xpected? How is it 
compatible with a genuine desire for a settlement? 
The Congress attempts to represent all. But it has never demanded recognition 
as such from anybody. The all India status has to b e deserved. But whether it 
be deserved or not, admission thereof is a superflu ity. The Congress has never 
claimed that it represents the whole of Indian Musl ims. It has not claimed to 
represent any single community wholly. But it does claim to represent every 
single national interest irrespective of class, cas te, colour or creed, even that 
claim need not be admitted by those who deal with i t. It should be sufficient 
consolation to each party that it is considered by the other important enough to 
seek friendship with. 
The Congress has always frankly admitted that it ha s not on its register as many 
Muslims as it would like. But it has been proud to have had the support of many 
eminent Muslims. Hakim Shaheb Ajmal Khan was the ta llest among them. Qaid-
e-Azam himself was a great Congressman. It was only  after non-cooperation 
that he, like many other Congressmen belonging to s everal communities, left it, 
Their defection was purely political. They disliked  direct action. 
It is wrong to swear at the nationalist Muslims sim ply because they are attached 
to the Congress. If they become members of the Leag ue, they will become 
worthy Muslims!!! My correspondent simply does not know how much Congress 
Muslims are trying to bring about unity. When unity  is re-established, as it must Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  be, I have no doubt that nationalist Muslims will g et their due both from Hindus 
and Muslims. 
It is torture of truth to suggest that they are so many Mir Jafars. They are 
betraying neither Islam nor India. They are as true  Muslims according to their 
lights as members of the League claim to be, It is equal torture of truth to 
suggest that the Congress is following the British method of divide and rule. 
The Congress is a political party with one single a im. It would be a bad day for 
India if the Congress could be proved to have mean motives. Is it mean to woo 
Muslim opinion by the fairest means imaginable? Rig htly or wrongly the 
Congress does not believe in watertight compartment s on a communal basis. If 
religion is allowed to be as it is, a personal conc ern and a matter between God 
and man, there are many dominating common factors b etween the two which 
will compel common life and common action. Religion s are not for separating 
men from one another, they are meant to bind them. It is a misfortune that 
today they are so distorted that they have become a  potent cause of strife and 
mutual slaughter. 
It will perhaps now be clear why I can have no conc ern with Asaf Ali Saheb's 
case. I would grant that he would be beaten in a co ntest between him and a 
Leaguer. let it be further granted that such will b e the case in the majority of 
such contests. It will in no way weaken my position . It will prove the superior 
organizing ability of the League and its popularity  among the Muslims. I have 
not doubted either. My case is incredibly simple. I  must not be called upon to 
make any admissions about the status of the League before thinking of unity 
through the League. I must not be disloyal to the M uslim nationalists however 
insignificant they may be considered to be. I ask t he Khan Bahadur, the writer 
of the letter under discussion, to exert his influe nce to bring the two 
communities together. 
Harijan, 4-6-1940 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34   
05. HINDU-MUSLIM TANGLE  
The partition proposal has altered the phase of the  Hindu Muslim problem. I 
have called it an untruth. There can be no compromi se with it. At the same 
time I have said that, if the eight crores of Musli ms desire it, no power on earth 
can prevent it, notwithstanding opposition violent or nonviolent. It cannot 
come by honorable agreement. 
That is the political aspect of it. But what about the religious and the moral 
which are greater than the political? For at the bo ttom of the cry for partition 
is the belief that Islam is an exclusive brotherhoo d and anti-Hindu. Whether it 
is against other religions it is not stated. The ne wspaper cuttings in which 
partition is preached describe Hindus as practicall y untouchables. Nothing good 
can come out of Hindus or Hinduism. To live on the Hindu rule is a sin. Even 
joint Hindu Muslim rule is not to be thought of. Th e cuttings show that Hindus 
and Muslims are already at war with one another and  that they must prepare 
for the final tussle. 
Time was when Hindus thought that Muslims were the natural enemies of 
Hindus. But as is the case with Hinduism, ultimatel y it comes to terms with 
their enemy and makes friends with it. The process had not been completed. As 
if nemesis had overtaken Hinduism, the Muslim Leagu e started the game and 
taught that there could not be blending of the two cultures. In this connection, 
I have just read a booklet by Shri Atulanand Chakra barti which shows that ever 
since the contact of Islam with Hinduism there has been an attempt on the part 
of the best mind of both to see the good points of each other, and to 
emphasize inherent similarities rather than seeming  dissimilarities. The author 
has shown Islamic history in India in a favorable l ight. If he has stated the truth 
and nothing but the truth, it is a revealing bookle t which all Hindus and Muslims 
may read with profit. He has secured a very favorab le and reasoned preface 
from Sir Shafaat Ahmed Khan and several other Musli m testimonials. If the 
evidence collected there reflects the true evolutio n of Islam in India, then the 
partition propaganda is anti-Islamic. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35  Religion binds man to God and man to man. Does Isla m bind Muslim only to 
Muslim and antagonize the Hindu? Was the message of  the Prophet peace only 
for and between Muslims and war against Hindus or n on-Muslims? Are eight 
crores of Muslims to be fed with this which I can o nly describe as poison? Those 
who are instilling this poison into the Muslim mind  are rendering the greatest 
disservice to Islam. I know that it is not Islam. I  have lived with and among 
Muslims not for one day but closely and almost unin terruptedly for twenty 
years. Not one Muslim taught me that Islam was an a nti-Hindu religion. 
Harijan, 29-4-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
06. COMMUNAL UNITY  
Freedom will not come through parliamentary effort.  Therefore communal 
pacts, whilst they are good if they can be had, are  valueless unless they are 
backed by the union of hearts. Without it there can  be no peace in the land. 
Even Pakistan can bring no peace, if there is no un ion of hearts. This union can 
come only by mutual service and co-operative work. 
Separate electorates have resulted in the separatio n of hearts. They 
presupposed mutual distrust and conflict of interes ts. They have tended to 
perpetuate differences and deepen the distrust. 
How to get out of the tangle is the question. I wan t just now to confine myself 
to the four Muslim majority provinces. In them ther e is natural Pakistan in the 
sense that the permanent majority can rule the mino rity. I hold it to be utterly 
wrong thus to divide man from man by reason of reli gion which is liable to 
change. What conflict of interest can there be betw een Hindus and Muslims in 
the matter of revenue, sanitation, police, justice,  or the use of public 
conveniences? The difference can only be in religio us usage and observances 
with which a secular state has no concern. 
Congressmen, if they are not to merge in the Hindus  as Hindus, must rigidly 
abstain from the legislatures and local bodies gove rned by separate 
electorates. In these provinces the separate electo rates must be taken to have 
come from the Hindu demand and in the supposed Hind u interest. But a 
Congress Hindu has no interest apart from his Musli m brother. Therefore he 
must not enter the electoral bodies, where Hindu an d Muslim interests are 
falsely regarded as separate and even antagonistic.  If he enters these bodies, 
he can do so only to divide the majority members, i .e. to take sides with one 
Muslim party or another. If I could make all Hindus  Congress-minded, I would 
withdraw every Hindu member from these bodies and p ut the Muslim members 
on their honor. I would seek to influence them from  outside these bodies by 
being friends with them and rendering disinterested  service. I would be 
indifferent to their manning all the services. At t he most an infinitesimal Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  percentage can have a share in them. And it is a su perstition to suppose that 
these services can oppress a people who have become  conscious of human 
dignity and human rights and know how to enforce th em. Since the vast 
majority of Congressmen are Hindus in at least thre e Muslim Majority provinces, 
they have a rare opportunity of showing their non-v iolent strength, their 
disinterestedness, their utter freedom from the com munal taint, and their 
ability to submit to the rule of their Muslim fello w countrymen. They will do 
this not in a huff but as true nationalists and fri ends of the Muslims. Remaining 
outside they will probably better protect the just interest of Hindu as citizens. 
For a Congress Hindu is not any the less a Hindu be cause he claims to represent 
equally, as he must, all the other faiths in himsel f. For as I have said, so far as 
the State is concerned its capacity for service sto ps short of the service of the 
different faiths, and the services it can render ap ply to all irrespective to their 
faiths. Therefore Congressmen have a rare opportuni ty of showing undefiled 
nationalism in these provinces. They will incidenta lly show the other minorities 
that they have nothing to fear from the majorities if they know the true way. 
We must get out of the miasma of religious majoriti es and minorities. Why is a 
Parsi's interest different from a Hindu's or Muslim 's so far as the state is 
concerned? Did not Dadabhai and Pherozeshah rule th e Congress while they 
lived, not by Congress grace or patronage, but by r ight of service and merit? 
Did their rule injure any Hindu or Muslim interest?  Were these interests ever in 
conflict on the Congress platform? And is not the C ongress a voluntary State? 
Harijan 20-1-1942  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38   
07. A PUZZLE  
A friend writes: 
"It would be well not to discuss even by way of jok e the possibility of a war 
between our two States. But you have gone so far as  to express the opinion that 
in the event of a war between the two, the Muslims of the Union should fight 
against those of Pakistan. Does it not then follow that the Hindus and other 
non-Muslims should do likewise? Now if such a war a rises out of the communal 
question , no argument is likely to make the Muslim s of the Union fight those of 
Pakistan and likewise the Hindus and the Sikhs of P akistan. If, however, a war 
takes place between the two for other than the comm unal cause, you will not 
contend that the Hindus of Pakistan and the Muslims  of the Union should fight 
Pakistan." 
It is undoubtedly true that the possibility between  the two States should not be 
discussed by way of a joke. The adverb 'even' does not fit in. For if the 
possibility is reality it would be a duty to discus s it. It might be folly not to do 
so. 
It is my firm opinion that the rule applies to the Muslims of the union must in 
the same circumstance apply to the Hindus and other  non-Muslims of Pakistan. I 
have expressed this view in my after-prayer speeche s and also in my talks with 
friends here. 
Of course, behind the opinion lies a train of reaso ning. Loyalty cannot be 
evoked to order. If circumstances do not warrant it , it may be said impossible 
to achieve. There are a large number of people who do not believe in the 
possibility of such genuine loyalty and hence laugh  out my opinion. Surely, 
there is nothing to laugh at in conceiving such a p ossibility. The Muslims of the 
Union will fight those of the Pakistan when they re gard it as a duty, in other 
words when it is clear to them that they are being fairly treated in the Union 
and that the non-Muslims are not so treated in Paki stan. Such a state is not 
beyond the range of possibility. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39  Similarly, if the non-Muslims of Pakistan clearly f eel that they are being fairly 
treated there and that they can reside there in saf ely and yet the Hindus of the 
Union mal-treat the minorities, the minorities of P akistan will naturally fight 
the majority in the Union. Then the minorities will  not need any argument to 
induce them to do their duty. 
It was our misfortune that the country was divided into two parts. The division 
was avowedly by reason of religious cleavage. Behin d it might be economic and 
other causes. They could not have brought out the c leavage. The poison that 
fills the air arose also from the same communal cau se. Irreligion masquerades 
as religion. It sounds nice to say that it could ha ve been better if there had 
been no communal question. But how could the fact b e undone? 
It has been repeatedly asked whether in the event o f a war between the two, 
the Muslims of the union will fight against the Mus lims of Pakistan and the 
Hindus of one against those of the other. However, unlikely it may appear at 
present, there is nothing inherently impossible in the conception. There is any 
day more risk in distrusting the profession of loya lty that in trusting it and 
courageously facing the danger of trusting. The que stion can be more 
convincingly put in this way: Will the Hindus ever fight the Hindus and the 
Muslims their coreligionists for the sake of truth and justice? It can be answered 
by a counter question. Does not history provide suc h instances? 
In solving the puzzle the great stumbling block in the way is that truth is at a 
discount. Let us hope that in this holocaust some t here are who will stand firm 
in their faith in the victory of truth. 
Harijan, 17-10-1947 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON UNTOUCHABILITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
08. RIGHT OF MINORITY  
A sanatanist asks:- 
"As a sanatanist I have a difficulty about temple e ntry by Harijans. Supposing 
among temple-goers of a particular temple there is a majority of 99 to 1 in 
favor of Harijans entering the temple and the templ e is opened. What about 
the minority of one who has objection to worshippin g in a temple visited by 
Harijans? If reformers have their way, will it not be an undue inference with 
the right of worship which belongs to the sanatanis ts from time immemorial?" 
There may be a public church of the Roman Catholics  s well as a public Church 
of protestants in an English town. Even if the Prot estants be in a majority they 
would not interfere with the conduct of affairs in the Roman Catholic Church. 
Why then should the reformers (even though in the m ajority) interfere with the 
conduct of affairs in a public temple belonging to the sanatanists. 
I should answer the questions by putting another. I f the one solitary sanatanist 
has the right, as he undoubtedly has, what about th e majority? Have they no 
rights? The parallel quoted does not apply. The que stioner has imagined the 
existence side by side of two churches belonging to  different denominations. It 
would be a monstrous impertinence on the pad of Pro testants to interfere with 
the rights of Roman Catholics or vice versa. But su ppose all the Protestants but 
one decided to admit to their temple persons whom t hey had ex-communicated 
for ages. Surely, they would have every right to li ft the ban. Here there would 
be no question of changing one's religion, as there  is in the case imagined by 
the questioner. In the temple entry movement, refor mers do not seek to alter 
their faith. If they did, in theory at least, not e ven a unanimous decision of 
temple-goers of a temple should entitle them to use  a temple for purposes 
never intended by the founders. Here the reformers claim that the faith they 
profess in common with the sanatanists permits the use of their temples by 
fellow-Hindus, the Harijans. It is, therefore, a qu estion of interpretation, and 
in such matters, the opinion of a majority must pre vail. If it did not, it would 
amount to the coercion of a majority, by a minority , and there would be an end Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  to all progress. Indeed, the doctrine the questione r propounds would mean 
decay and death to a society that subscribes to it.  It should be remembered 
that the minority is free to build a temple for its elf. And so far as I am 
concerned, I have given my opinion that even a mino rity of one should have its 
prejudices so far respected that a special hour may  be set apart so as to enable 
it to offer worship free from the intrusion, whethe r of reformers or of Harijan. 
Harijan 9-11-1934 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43   
09. UNTOUCHABILITY  
Untouchability as at present practised is the great est blot on Hinduism. It is 
(with apologies to Sanatanists) against the Shastra s. It is against the 
fundamental principles of humanity, it is against t he dictates of reason that a 
man should, by mere reason of birth, be forever reg arded as an untouchable, 
even unapproachable and unseeable. These adjectives  do not convey the full 
meaning of the thing itself. It is a crime for cert ain men, women and their 
children to touch, or to approach within stated dis tances, or to be seen by 
those who are called caste-Hindus. The tragedy is t hat millions of Hindus 
believe in this institution as if it was enjoined b y the Hindu religion. 
Happily, Hindu reformers have recoiled with horror from this practice. They 
have come to the conclusion that it has no support in the Hindu Shastras taken 
as a whole. Isolated texts torn from their context and considered by themselves 
can no doubt be produced in support of this, practi ce, as of any evil known to 
mankind, But there is abundant authority in the Sha stras to warrant the 
summary rejection, as being un-Hindu, of anything o r any practice that is 
manifestly against, the fundamental principles of h umanity or morality, 
of Ahimsa or Satya.  
This movement against untouchability has been daily  gathering strength. It was 
in last September that leading Hindus, claiming to represent the whole of Hindu 
India, met together and unanimously passed a resolu tion, condemning 
untouchability and pledging themselves to abolish i t by law if possible during 
the existing regime, and, failing that, when India had a Parliament of her own. 
Among the marks of untouchability to be removed was  the prohibition against 
temple entry by Harijans. In the course of the stru ggle, it was discovered that 
the British Courts in India had recognised this evi l custom, so much so that 
certain acts done by untouchables as such came to b e offences under the 
British Indian Penal Code. Thus, the entry by an un touchable into a Hindu 
temple would be punishable as a crime under the I.P .C. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  Before, therefore, the movement of temple entry can  make headway. It has 
become imperative to have this anomaly removed. It is for this purpose that 
Sjt. Ranga lyer has given notice of two bills to be  introduced in the Central 
Legislature. After ascertaining the opinion of the Provincial Governments, H. E. 
the Viceroy has sanctioned the introduction of thes e Bills. But, being private 
Bills, they have a poor chance of becoming the law of the land, unless the 
Government and the members of the Assembly refrain from obstructing its 
consideration. It may be argued that, being pledged  to neutrality in matters of 
religion, the Government are bound to facilitate th e passage of the first Bill at 
any rate, in as much as it merely seeks to undo the  effect produced by the 
decisions of British Indian Courts, and this it doe s by withdrawing legal 
recognition from untouchability. 
There are practices in various religions professed by the inhabitants of this land 
whose breach is not regarded as criminal, though it  would be regarded as very 
serious by the respective religious codes. Thus, be ef eating by a Hindu is an 
offence in the eye of the Hindu religious code, but  rightly not punishable as a 
crime under the Indian Penal Code. Is there, then, any reason why the common 
law of India should punish a breach of the custom o f untouchability? If there are 
many Hindus learning in the Hindu scriptures who fi nd support in them for the 
present practice of untouchability, there are quite  a number of equally learned 
Hindus holding the opposite view. Though this opini on of the Pundits has 
already appeared in the press, it is reproduced els ewhere for ready reference. 
Let it be noted that the signatories are all orthod ox Hindus, as much lovers of 
their faith as are the learned men of the opposite school. On the 25th of 
January 1933 was held the session of the All-India Sanatan Dharma Sabha, 
presided over by Pundit Malaviyaji and attended by over one hundred learned 
men. It passed a resolution to the effect that Hari jans were as much entitled to 
temple entry as the rest of Hindus. 
If the bills are not passed, it is obvious that, th e central part o the reform will 
be hung up almost indefinitely. Neutrality in matte rs of religion, ought not to 
mean religious stagnation and hindrance to reform. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  With due regard to the Sanatanists, it is difficult  to understand the cry of 
'religion in danger'. Under neither bill will a sin gle temple be opened against 
the will of the majority of temple goers in questio n. The second bill expressly 
says so. The first bill takes up a neutral attitude . It does not help a Harijan to 
force his way into a temple. The reformers do not s eek to compel the 
opponents to their will. They desire, by the faires t means possible, to convert 
the majority or the minority, as the case may be, t o their view of 
untouchability. 
I is said that the Harijans themselves do not want temple entry and that they 
want only betterment of their economic and politica l condition. The reformer, 
too, wants the latter, but he believes that this be tterment will be much 
quicker brought about, if religious equality is att ained. The reformer denies 
that the Harijans do not want temple entry. But it may be that they are so 
disgusted with caste Hindus and Hindu religion itse lf as to want nothing from 
them. They may in sullen discontent choose to remai n outside the religious 
pale. Any penance on the part of caste Hindus may b e too late. 
Nevertheless the caste Hindus who recognise that un touchability is a blot on 
Hinduism have to atone for the sin of untouchabilit y. Whether, therefore, 
Harijans desire temple entry or not, caste Hindus h ave to open their temples to 
Harijans, precisely on the same terms as the other Hindus. For a caste Hindu 
with any sense of honour, temple prohibition is a c ontinuous breach of the 
Pledge taken at the Bombay meeting of September las t. Those, who gave their 
word to the world and to God that they would have t he temples opened for the 
Harijans, have to sacrifice their all, if need be, for redeeming the pledge. It 
may be that they did not represent the Hindu mind. They have, then, to own 
defeat and do the proper penance. Temple entry is t he one spiritual act that 
would constitute the message of freedom to the unto uchables and assure them 
that they are not outcastes before God. 
Harijan 11-2-1933 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON MORALITY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
10. POLITICS v/s MORALS  
In response to my suggestion in my article on the C ongressman Shri M. N. Roy 
has sent a long letter not to Dr. Rajendra Prasad b ut to me. He asks for a public 
discussion of the points raised by him. Omitting th e prefatory paragraphs, 
which have no interest for the reader, the letter i s reproduced elsewhere. 
To take the ministerial resignations first, I feel sure that they have added to 
the prestige of the Congress. The Working Committee  would no doubt have 
done better to have accepted my proposal, only if i t could have assimilated 
nonviolence with all the implications suggested by me. But the members of the 
Working Committee were too conscious of their duty to accept my proposal 
mechanically and without heart belief. The Working Committee's resolution 
was, therefore, the only true course for the Workin g Committee to adopt. 
Having done so resignations were the logical result . 
It would have been unbecoming to have retained offi ce for the doubtful 
advantage of guarding civil liberty. If they were m inisters of autonomous 
States, they could never have been ignored as they were about the war. Having 
been ignored, they would have been given satisfacti on, when the attention of 
the British Government was drawn by the Working Com mittee to the grievous 
omission and when they were told how they could rep air the mischief and 
retain India's co-operation in the prosecution of t he war. The least that the 
ministers could do, therefore, was to resign if onl y to show the hollowness of 
autonomy. To remain in office after the discovery o f their importance would 
have been to court ignominy. To retain office for t he protection of civil liberty 
would have been to mistake the wood for the tree. A nd Shri Roy may feel quite 
sure that the weakened ministers would have been po or guardians of civil 
liberty. The Governors would have set aside their d ecisions and caught hold of 
those whom they would have chosen to imprison. The ministers had taken 
office principally to advance independence. When th ey failed, they were bound 
to forego every other advantage however great in it self. And they can never go 
back to their offices so long as the demand of the Congress remains unsatisfied. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  Civil disobedience is by no means the next inevitab le forward step. It depends 
upon a variety of circumstances some of which I hav e already mentioned. 
Inaction is often the most effective action in the strategy of war-more so when 
the war is nonviolent. 
Now for the crucial point. Nonviolence is the centr al fact of the civil 
disobedience technique. It was in 1920 that the Con gress hooked its politics 
deliberately to fundamental morals and vital social  reform. It came to the 
conclusion that Swaraj could not be won without non violence and certain 
definite social reform, viz. prohibition and remova l of untouchability. It also 
put the charkha at the centre of its economic, prog ramme indeed it eschewed 
the then known political programme i.e. the parliam entary. Hence, the 
introduction of morals into Congress politics was n ot and is not irrelevant to the 
Congress fight for freedom. It is its core. There w ere a few grumblers then. But 
the vast majority welcomed the programme as the Con gress had never done in 
the whole of its brilliant history. The programme j ustified itself by giving rise to 
a mass awakening on a phenomenal scale. By it the C ongress gained an 
importance it had never before enjoyed. Shri Roy wo uld not expect me at this 
stage to repeat here the argument that led to the e nthusiastic acceptance of 
the Programme. He should turn to the pages of Young  India if he would know 
the pros and cons of the subject. The Congress beca me a mass democratic 
organisation from the time of acceptance of the pro gramme, and it framed a 
democratic organisation, which stands to this day w ithout much material and 
fundamental alteration. 
The Congress has a double function. It Is a democra tic organisation in peace 
time. It becomes a nonviolent army in war time. In its second capacity it has no 
voting power. Its will is expressed by its general whoever he may be. Every unit 
has to tender him willing obedience in thought, wor d and deed. Yes, even in 
thought, since the fight is nonviolent. 
Shri Roy and other Congressmen do not need to be to ld that I am not in the 
habit of losing co-workers. I go a long way with th em in winning their affection 
and retaining it. But there does come a limit beyon d which my compromise Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49  does not and cannot and should not go. No compromis e is worth the name 
which endangers chances of success. 
Harijan 14-11-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON CASTE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51   
11. DR. AMBEDKAR & CASTE  
The following has just been received from Dr. Ambed kar:- 
"At the end of our conversation on Saturday last yo u asked me to send a 
message for insertion in the first issue of your ne w weekly 'Harijan'. I feel I 
cannot give a message. For I believe it will be a m ost unwarranted presumption 
on my part to suppose that I have sufficient worth in the eyes of the Hindus 
which would make them treat any message from me wit h respect. I can only 
speak as man to man. As such it may be desirable th at the Hindus should know 
my views on the momentous issue of Hindu social org anization with which you 
have chosen to occupy yourself. I am, therefore, se nding you the accompanying 
statement for publication in your 'Harijan'." 
 
Statement  
"The Out-caste is a bye-product of the Caste-system . There will be out-castes 
as long as there are castes. Nothing can emancipate  the Out-caste except the 
destruction of the Caste-system. Nothing can help t o save Hindus and ensure 
their survival in the coming struggle except the pu rging of the Hindu Faith of 
this odious and vicious dogma." 
 
B. R. Ambedkar  
Dr. Ambedkar is bitter. He has every reason to feel  so. He has received a liberal 
education. He has more than the talents of the aver age educated Indian. 
Outside India he is received with honour and affect ion, but, in India, among 
Hindus, at every step he is reminded that he is one  of the out-castes of Hindu 
society. It is nothing to his shame, for, he has do ne no wrong to Hindu Society. 
His exterior is as clean as that of the cleanest an d the proudest Brahmin. Of his 
interior, the world knows as little as of that of a ny of us. In spite of all this, he 
"believes that it will be a most unwarranted presum ption on his part to suppose Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  that he has sufficient worth in the eyes of the Hin dus which would make them 
treat any message from him with respect. This is th e caste Hindus' shame, not 
his, but I would like him to feel that there are to day thousands of caste Hindus 
who would listen to his message with the same respe ct and consideration that 
they would give to that of any other leader and tha t in their estimation there is 
no person high and no person low. I would like him,  too, to know that 'Harijan' 
is not my weekly. So far as the proprietary rights are concerned, it belongs to 
the Servants of Untouchables Society and, therefore , I would like him to feel 
that it is as much his as of any other Hindu. As to  the burden of his message, 
the opinion he holds about the caste system is shar ed by many educated 
Hindus. I have not, however, been able to share tha t opinion. I do not believe 
the caste system, even as distinguished from Varnas hram, to be an 'odious and 
vicious dogma'. It has its limitations and its defe cts, but there is nothing sinful 
about it, as there is about untouchability, and, if  it is a by-product of the caste 
system it is only in the same sense that an ugly gr owth is of a body, or weeds of 
a crop. It is as wrong to destroy caste because of the out-caste, as it would be 
to destroy a body because of an ugly growth in it, or of a crop because of the 
weeds. The outcaste-ness, in the sense we understan d it, has, therefore, to be 
destroyed altogether. It is an excess to be removed , if the whole system is not 
to perish. Untouchability is the product, therefore , not of the caste system, but 
of the distinction of high and low that has crept i nto Hinduism and is corroding 
it. The attach on untouchability is thus an attach upon this high-and-low-ness. 
The moment untouchability goes, the caste system it self will be purified, that 
is to say, according to my dream, it will resolve i tself into the true 
Varnadharma, the four divisions of society, each co mplementary of the other 
and none inferior or superior to any other, each as  necessary for the whole 
body of Hinduism as any other. How it can be and wh at that Varnashram is, it is 
not necessary to examine here. But, such being my f aith, I have always 
respectfully differed from those distinguished coun trymen, Dr. Ambedkar 
among them, who have held that untouchability will not go without the 
destruction of Varnashramdharma. They have made no distinction between 
caste and Varna. But that is another story. At the present moment, it is the Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53  untouchable, the outcaste, with whom all Hindu refo rmers, whether they 
believe in Varnashram or not, have agreed to deal. The opposition to 
untouchability is common to both. Therefore, the pr esent joint fight is 
restricted to the removal of untouchability, and I would invite Dr. Ambedkar 
and those who think with him to throw themselves, h eart and soul, into the 
campaign against the monster of untouchability. It is highly likely that at the 
end of it we shall all find that there is nothing t o fight against in Varnashram. 
If, however, Varnashram even then looks an ugly thi ng, the whole of Hindu 
Society will fight it. For this campaign against un touchability is not one of 
compulsion, but of conversion. At the end of the ch apter, I hope that we shall 
all find ourselves in the same camp. Should it prov e otherwise, it will be time 
enough to consider how and by whom Varnashram is to  be fought. 
Harijan,11-2-1933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON WOMEN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55   
12. WHAT IS WOMAN'S ROLE?  
With certain omissions I quote below the following from a highly educated 
sister: 
"You have shown the world, through Ahimsa and Satya graha, the dignity of the 
soul. These two words are the only solution to the problem of how to overcome 
man's baser nature. 
Education through crafts is not only a great idea, but the only right way of 
teaching, if we want our children to have self-reli ance. It is you who have said 
it, and solved in one sentence the whole vast educa tional problem. The details 
could be worked out according to circumstances and experience. 
I beg you to solve the problem of us, the women. Ra jaji says that there is no 
women's problem. Perhaps not in the political sense . Perhaps it could be made 
by legislation not to matter in the professional se nse, that is, all professions 
could be made equally open to men and women. But th ese things would not 
alter the fact that we are women, and, as such, of a different quality from 
men. We need an additional set of principles beside s ahimsa and satyagraha to 
overcome our baser qualities. A woman's spirit like  a man's strives to attain 
better things. But just as there is need for ahimsa  and brahmacharya for a man 
to get rid of his aggressive spirit, lust, brutish instincts of inflicting pain, etc., 
there is for woman need of certain principles that would enable her to get rid 
of her baser qualities, which are different from me n and commonly said to 
belong by nature to her. The natural qualities of h er sex, the upbringing meted 
out to her because of her sex, and her environment which is created because of 
her sex, all are against her. And in her work these  things, namely her nature, 
upbringing and surroundings always get in the way a nd hinder her and give 
occasion for the hackneyed phrase, 'She is only a w oman, after all.' This is what 
I mean by sex hanging round one's neck. And I think  that, if we only possess the 
correct solution, the correct method of improving o urselves, we could make our 
natural qualities, such as sympathy and tenderness,  a help instead of a Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  hindrance. The improvement, just as your solution i n the case of men and 
children, must come from within us. 
I said nature, upbringing and environment. I will g ive an example to make 
myself clearer. 
Women by nature are intended to be soft, tender-hea rted, sympathetic, to 
mother children. These things influence her to a gr eat extent unconsciously. So 
when it comes to doing things, she becomes too emot ional. When moving with 
men, she commits blunders. She is soft-hearted when  she should not be so. She 
is temperamental, easily gets vain and generally ac ts in a silly way. 
When I came to see you, although I had desired the meeting very much and 
spent the previous night sleepless thinking over it , when in your presence I was 
asked to sit down, I went and sat behind the broad back of Shri Desai. I could 
not hear and I prevented myself from seeing you! Wh at a silly thing to do! 
Further, I found I could not explain myself, could not articulate. This I attribute 
to my being saddled with an emotional nature which gets out of control easily. 
Of course suitable training would have cured that p articular fault, but I dare 
say, I would commit some other equally silly act. 
A friend of mine showed me the answers she has writ ten to a questionnaire sent 
by the National Planning Sub-committee for women's role. The questions, as 
you no doubt know, are numbered, and are something like this: To what 
extent, in your part of the country, is woman entit led to hold, acquire, inherit, 
sell or dispose of property in her own right? What provision has been made, or 
facilities available, for the appropriate education  and training of women for the 
several kinds of work and employment that women of different capacities may 
need to engage in? She has not replied to the quest ions, but has written, "We 
cannot say with an ounce of truth that women were n ot getting any education 
as such in the good old ancient days," and, "in the  Vedic period the wife, on her 
marriage, was at once given an honoured position in  the house and she was 
mistress in her husband's home," etc., and has quot ed Manu. I asked her what 
necessity there was to write about ancient customs when the questionnaire was 
about present-day ones. She murmured something abou t thinking that a reply in Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57  the form of an essay would be nice, and brightened up saying Mrs. Some-one-
else's reply was worse than hers. I think this mist ake of my friend is due to lack 
of proper training, which was denied to her because  she is a woman. Even a 
clerk would know that when one is asked a question one should not write an 
essay on a different matter in reply. 
I do not think I need go on quoting examples and ex plaining myself. You, with 
your vast experience of women of all kinds, would k now whether I am right in 
saying that women lack the vital principle that wou ld set them right. 
Your advice to me was to read Harijan. I do so eage rly. But so far I have not 
come across, well, the advice for the inner spirit.  Spinning and fighting for the 
national freedom are only some aspects of the train ing. They do not seem to 
contain the whole solution, For I have seen women w ho do spin and do try to 
work out the Congress ideals and still commit blund ers which are attributed to 
the fact of their being women. 
I do not want woman to become like man. But just as  you have taught men 
ahimsa for their baser nature, do teach us the thin g that would remove our 
sillier qualities. Tell us, please, how to make the  best use of our qualities, how 
to turn our disadvantages into advantages. 
This, the burden of my sex, is with me always. Ever y time I have someone say, 
"She is a woman, after all," in a sneering way, my soul winces, if, that is, a soul 
is capable of wincing. A man to whom I talked of th ese things laughed at me 
and said, 'Did you see that child at our friend's h ouse? He was playing at trains, 
and chug chugged along until he came against a pill ar. Instead of going round it 
he just tried to push it aside with his shoulders, thinking, in his childish mind, 
that he could remove it. You remind me of him. What  you say is a psychological 
thing. You make me laugh in your attempt to underst and and solve it." 
I had flattered myself that my contribution to the woman's cause definitely 
began with the discovery of Satyagraha. But the wri ter of the letter is of the 
opinion that the fair sex requires treatment differ ent from men. If it is so, I do 
not think any man will find the correct solution. N o matter how much he tries, 
he must fail because nature has made him different from woman. Only the toad Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  under the harrow knows where it pinches him. Theref ore ultimately woman will 
have to determine with authority what she needs. My  own opinion is that, just 
as fundamentally man and woman are one, their probl em must be one in 
essence. The soul in both is the same. The two live  the same life, have the 
same feelings. Each is a complement of the other. O ne cannot live without the 
other's active help. 
But somehow or the other man has dominated woman fr om ages past, and so 
woman has developed an inferiority complex. She has  believed in the truth of 
man's interested teaching that she is inferior to h im. But the seers among men 
have recognised her equal status. 
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that at some point there is bifurcation. Whilst 
both are fundamentally one, it is also equally true  that in the form there is a 
vital difference between the two. Hence the vocatio ns of the two must also be 
different. The duly of motherhood, which the vast m ajority of women will 
always undertake, requires qualities which man need  not possess. She is 
passive, he is active. She is essentially mistress of the house. He is the bread-
winner, she is the keeper and distributor of the br ead. She is the care-taker in 
every sense of the term. The art of bringing up the  infants of the race is her 
special and sole prerogative. Without her care the race must become extinct. 
In my opinion it is degrading both for man and woma n that woman should be 
called upon or induced to forsake the hearth and sh oulder the rifle for the 
protection of that hearth. It is a reversion to bar barity and the beginning of the 
end. In trying to ride the horse that man rides, sh e brings herself and him 
down. The sin will be on man's head for tempting or  compelling his companion 
to desert her special calling. There is as much bra very in keeping one's home in 
good order and condition as there is in defending i t against attack from 
without. 
As I have watched millions of peasants in their nat ural surroundings id and as I 
watch them daily in little Segaon, the natural divi sion of spheres of work has 
forced itself on my attention. There are no women b lacksmiths and carpenters. 
But men and women work on the fields, the heaviest work being done by the Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59  males. The women keep and manage the homes. They su pplement the meagre 
resources of the family, but man remains the main b read-winner. 
The division of the spheres of work being recognise d, the general qualities and 
culture required are practically the same for both the sexes. 
My contribution to the great problem lies in my pre senting for acceptance truth 
and ahimsa in every walk of life, whether for indiv iduals or nations. I have 
hugged the hope that in this woman will be the unqu estioned leader and, 
having thus found her place in human evolution, wil l shed her inferiority 
complex. If she is able to do this successfully, sh e must resolutely refuse to 
believe in the modern teaching at everything is det ermined and regulated by 
the sex impulse. I fear I have put the proposition rather clumsily. But I hope my 
meaning is clear. I not know that the millions of m en who are taking an active 
part in the war are obsessed by the sex spectre. No r are the peasants working 
together in their fields worried or dominated by it . This is not to say or suggest 
that they are free from the instinct implanted in m an, and woman. But it most 
certainly does not dominate their lives as it seems  to dominate lives of those 
who are saturated with the modern sex literature. N either man nor woman has 
time for such things when he or she is faced with t he hard fact of living life in 
its grim reality. I have suggested in these columns  that woman is the 
incarnation of ahimsa. Ahimsa means infinite love, which again means infinite 
capacity suffering. Who but woman, the mother of ma n, shows this capacity in 
largest measure? She shows it as she carries the in fant and feeds it ring nine 
months and derives joy in the suffering involved. W hat can at the suffering 
caused by the pangs of labour? But she forgets them  in the joy of creation. Who 
again suffers daily so that her babe may wax from d ay to day? Let her transfer 
that love to the whole of humanity, let her forget she ever was or can be the 
object of man's lust. And she will occupy her proud  position by the side of man 
as his mother, maker and silent leader. It is given  to her to teach the art of 
peace to the warring world thirsting for that necta r. She can become the leader 
in Satyagraha which does not require the learning t hat books give but does 
require the stout heart that comes from suffering a nd faith. My good nurse in Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  the Sassoon Hospital, Poona, as I was lying on a si ck bed years ago, told me the 
story of a woman who refused to take chloroform bec ause she would not risk 
the life of the babe she was carrying. She had to u ndergo painful operation. 
The only anesthetic she had was her love for the ba be, to save whom no 
suffering was too great. Let not women, who can cou nt many such heroines 
among them, ever despise their sex or deplore that they were not born men. 
The contemplation of that heroine often makes me en vy woman the status that 
is hers, if she only knew. There is as much reason for man to wish that he was 
born a woman as for woman to do otherwise. But the wish is fruitless. Let us be 
happy in the state to which we are born and do the duty for which nature has 
destined us. 
Harijan 12-2-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61   
13. FOR WOMEN REFORMERS  
From a serious discussion I had with a sister I fea r that my position on the use 
of contraceptives has not yet been sufficiently und erstood. My opposition is not 
due to their having come to us from the West. I tha nkfully use some western 
things when I know that they benefit us as they ben efit those in the West. My 
opposition to contraceptives is based on merits. 
I take it that the wisest among the protagonists of  contraceptive restrict their 
use to married women who desire to satisfy their an d the husbands' sexual 
appetite without wanting children. I hold this desi re as unnatural in the human 
species and its satisfaction detrimental to the spi ritual progress of the human 
family. As against this is often cited the followin g testimony among others of 
Lord Dawson of Penn: 
"Sex love is one of the clamant, dominating forces of the World. Here we have 
an instinct, so fundamental, so imperious that its influence is a fact which has 
to be accepted: suppress it you cannot. You may gui de it into healthy channels 
but an outlet it will have, and if that outlet is i nadequate or unduly obstructed, 
irregular channels will be forced. Self-control has  a breaking point, and if in 
any community marriage is difficult or late of atta inment, an increase of 
irregular unions will inevitably result. All are ag reed that union of body should 
be in association with union of mind and soul; all are agreed that the rearing of 
children is pre-eminent purpose. Has not sexual uni on over and over again been 
the physical expression of our love without thought  or intention of procreation? 
Have we all been wrong? Or is it that the Church la cks that vital contact with 
the realities of life which accounts for the gulf b etween her and the people? 
Authority, and I include under authority the church es, will never gain the 
allegiance of the young unless their attitude is mo re frank, more courageous, 
and more in accordance with realities. 
Sex love has, apart from parenthood, a purport of i ts own. It is an essential 
part of health and happiness in marriage. If sexual  union is a gift from God it is 
worth learning how to use it. Within its own sphere  it should be cultivated so as Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  to bring physical satisfaction to both not merely o ne. The attainment of mutual 
and reciprocal joy in their relations constitutes a  firm bond between two 
people and make for durability of their marriage ti e. More marriages fail from 
inadequate and clumsy sex-love than from too much s ex love. Passion is a 
worthy possession; most men who are any good are ca pable of passion. Sex love 
without passion is a poor lifeless thing. Sensualit y on the other hand is on a 
level with gluttony, a physical excess. Now that th e revision of the Prayer Book 
is receiving consideration, I should like to sugges t, with great respect, that 
addition be made to the objects of marriage in the Marriage Service in these 
terms, 'The complete realization of the love of thi s man and this man, the one 
for the other.' 
I will pass on to consider the all-important questi on of birth control. Birth 
control is here to stay. It is an established fact,  and for good or evil to be 
accepted. No denunciations will abolish it. The rea sons which lead parents to 
limit their offspring are sometimes selfish, but mo re often honourable and 
cogent. The desire to marry and to rear children we ll equipped for life's 
struggle, limited incomes, the cost of living burde nsome taxation are forcible 
motives; and, further, amongst the educated classes  there is the desire of 
women to take part in life and their husbands' care ers, which is incompatible 
with off-recurring pregnancies. Absence of birth co ntrol means late marriages, 
and these carry with them irregular unions and all the baneful consequences. It 
is idle to decry illicit intercourse and interpose obstacles to marriage at one 
and the same time. But say many, 'Birth control may  be necessary, but the only 
birth control which is justifiable is voluntary abs tention. Such abstention would 
be either ineffective or, if effective, impracticab le and harmful to health and 
happiness. To limit the size of a family to say, fo ur children, would be to 
impose on a married couple an amount of abstention which for long periods 
would almost be equivalent to celibacy, and when on e remembers that owing 
to economic reasons the abstention would have to mo st strict during the earlier 
years of marriage life when desires are strongest. I maintain a demand is being 
made which, for the mass Of people, it is impossibl e to meet; that the 
endeavours to meet it would impose a strain hostile  to health and happiness Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63  and carry with them grave dangers to morals. The th ing is preposterous. You 
might as well put waterby the side of a man sufferi ng from thirst and tell him 
not to drink it. No birth control by abstention is either ineffective, or, if 
effective, is pernicious. 
It is said to be unnatural and intrinsically immora l. Civilization involves the 
chaining of natural forces and their conversion to man's will and uses. When 
anaesthetics were first used at child birth there w as an outcry that their use 
was unnatural and wicked, because God meant woman t o suffer. It is no more 
unnatural to control childbirth by artificial means . The use of child birth 
control is good, its abuse bad. May I end by an app eal that the Church approach 
this question, in common with certain others, in th e light of modern knowledge 
and the needs of a new world and unhampered by trad itions which have 
outworn their usefulness?" 
Lord Dawson's eminence is not to be denied. But wit h all due respect to his 
greatness as a physician, I am tempted to question the value of his evidence, 
specially when it is pitted against the experience of men and women who have 
lived a life of continence without suffering any mo ral or physical harm. 
Physicians generally come across those who have so defied laws of health that 
they have contracted some illness. They, therefore,  often successfully 
prescribe what sufferers should do to become well, but they cannot always 
know what healthy men and women can do in any parti cular direction. Lord 
Dawson's evidence, therefore, about the effect of c ontinence on married 
people has to be taken with the greatest caution. N o doubt the tendency 
among married people is to regard sexual satisfacti on for itself as legitimate. 
But in the modern age in which nothing is taken for  granted and everything is 
rightly scrutinized, it is surely wrong to take it for granted that because we 
have hitherto indulged in the sexual appetite in ma rried life, the practice is 
either legitimate or healthy. Many old practices ha ve been discontinued with 
good results. Why should this particular practice b e exempt from examination 
especially in the light of the experience of those who even as married men and Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  women are living a life of restraint with mutual be nefit both physical and 
moral? 
But I object to contraceptives also on special grou nds in India. Young men in 
India do not know what sexual restraint is. It is n ot their fault. They are 
married early. It is the custom. Nobody tells them to exercise restraint in 
married life. Parents are impatient to see grandchi ldren. The poor girl-wives 
are expected by their surroundings to bear children  as fast as they can. In such 
surroundings, the use of contraceptives can only fu rther aggravate the 
mischief. The poor girls who are expected to submit  to their husbands' desires 
are now to be taught that it is a good thing to des ire sexual satisfaction without 
the desire to have children. And in order to fulfil l the double purpose they are 
to have recourse to contraceptives!!! 
I regard this to be most pernicious education for m arried women. I do not 
believe that woman is prey to sexual desire to the same extent as man. It is 
easier for her than for man to exercise self-restra int. I hold that the right 
education in this country is to teach woman the art  of saying no even to her 
husband, to teach her that it is no part of her dut y to become a mere tool or a 
doll in her husband's hands. She has rights as well  as duties. Those who see in 
Sita a willing slave under Rama do not realize the loftiness of either her 
independence or Rama's consideration for her in eve rything. Sita was no 
helpless weak woman incapable of protecting herself  or her honour. To ask 
India's women to take to contraceptives is, to say the least, putting the cart 
before the horse. The first thing is to free her fr om mental slavery, to teach 
her the sacredness of her body and to teach her the  dignity of national service 
and the service of humanity. It is not fair to assu me that India's women are 
beyond redemption and that they have therefore to b e simply taught the use of 
contraceptives for the sake of preventing births an d preserving such health as 
they may be in possession of. 
Let not the sisters who are rightly indignant over the miseries of women who 
are called upon to bear children whether they will or no, be impatient. Not 
even the propaganda in favour of contraceptives is going to promote the Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65  desired end overnight. Every method is a matter of education. My plea is for 
the right type. 
Harijan 2-5-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66   
14. BIRTH CONTROL  
A co-worker who is a careful reader of my writings was disturbed to read that I 
was likely to approve of the 'safe period' method o f birth control. I endeavoured 
to make it clear to the friend that the safe period  method did not repel me as 
did the use of contraceptives and that it was open largely only to married 
couples. But the discussion of the topic led us int o much deeper waters than 
either of us had expected. The fact that my friend was repelled by the sate 
period method as much as by that of contraceptives showed to me that he 
believed in the possibility of ordinary persons pra ctising the restraint imposed 
by the Smriti i.e. that the union between husband a nd wife was permitted only 
when the parties really desired to have children. W hilst I knew the rule I had 
never regarded it in the light that I began to do a t the discussion. All these long 
years I had regarded it as a counsel of perfection not to be carried out literally 
and that so long as married couples carried on inte rcourse by mutual consent 
but without special regard to the desire for progen y, they were carrying out the 
purpose of marriage without breaking any positive i njunction of the Smriti. But 
the new light in which I viewed the Smriti text was  a revelation to me. I 
understood now as I never had done before the state ment that married people, 
who strictly observed the injunction of the Smriti were as much brahmacharis 
as those who were never married and lived chaste li ves. 
The sole object of sexual intercourse according to the new light was the desire 
for progeny, never gratification of the sexual inst inct. Simple gratification of 
the instinct would be counted according to this vie w of marriage as lust. This 
may appear to be a harsh expression to use for our enjoyment which has 
hitherto been regarded as innocent and legitimate. But I am not dealing with 
custom. I am dealing with the science of marriage a s propounded by Hindu 
sages. Their presentation may be faulty, it may be altogether wrong. But for 
one like me who believes in several Smriti texts as  inspired and based on 
experience, there is no escape from a full acceptan ce of their meaning. I know 
no other way of finding the truth of things and tes ting certain old texts in Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67  accordance with their full meaning no matter how ha rd the test may appear 
and how harsh its deductions may sound. 
In the light of what I have said above, birth contr ol by contraceptives and the 
like is a profound error. I write thus with a full sense of my responsibility. I 
have great regard for Mrs. Margaret Sanger and her followers. She impressed 
me much by her great zeal for her cause. I know tha t she has great sympathy 
for the women who suffer because they have to bear the burden of carrying and 
rearing unwanted children. I know also that this me thod of birth control has the 
support of many Protestant divines, scientists, lea rned men and doctors, many 
of whom I have the honour of knowing personally and  for whom I entertain high 
regard. But I should be false to my God who is Trut h and nothing but truth, if I 
concealed my belief from the reader or these great advocates of method. 
Indeed if I hid my belief, I should never discover my error if present belief is 
one. Moreover, its declaration is due to those many  men and women who 
accept my guidance and advice in many moral problem s including this one 
concerning birth control. 
That birth requires to be regulated and controlled is common cause between 
the advocates of contraceptives and the like. The d ifficulty of control through 
self-restraint is not to be denied. Yet there is no  other way of attaining the end 
if mankind is to fulfill its destiny. It is my inne rmost conviction that if the 
method under discussion gains universal acceptance,  mankind will suffer moral 
deterioration. This I say in spite of evidence to t he contrary that is often 
produced by the advocates of method. 
I believe I have no superstition in me. Truth is no t truth merely because it is 
ancient. Nor is it necessarily to be regarded with suspicion because it is 
ancient. There are some fundamentals of life which may not be lightly given up 
because they are difficult of enforcement in one's life. 
Birth control through self-control is no doubt diff icult. But no one has yet been 
known seriously to dispute its efficacy and even su periority over the use of 
contraceptives. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  Then, I feel that the full acceptance of the implic ation of the injunction of the 
Shastras as to the strictly confined use of the sex ual act, makes the observance 
of self-control much easier than if one regards the  act itself as a source of 
supreme enjoyment. The function of the organs of ge neration is merely to 
generate progeny obviously of the highest type poss ible for a married couple. 
This can and should only take place when both parti es desire, not sexual union 
but progeny, which is the result of such union. Des ire for such union therefore, 
without the desire for progeny, must be considered unlawful and should be 
restrained. 
Harijan 14-3-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON HIS OWN LIFE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70   
15. AM I A MESSENGER OF GOD?  
A Muslim friend writes a long letter which pruned d own read as follows: 
"The chief difficulty that stands in your way of ri ght thinking is that your heart 
has so hardened by looking at and interpreting thin gs in the light of your self-
assumed principles, that you cannot bring to beat a n open mind on anything, 
how so ever valuable it may be. 
If God has not appointed you as His messenger, what  you say or teach cannot 
be claimed to be a word of God. No one would contes t the truthfulness of truth 
and nonviolence as teachings of the prophets and pr inciples of very high 
spiritual value, but their true understanding and a pplication require a soul that 
is in direct communion with God. Any person who has  only polished his soul by 
suppressing or acting against the desires and cravi ngs of the flesh and the self is 
not a prophet. 
The fact that you stand as a teacher of the world a nd claim to have diagnosed 
the disease from which the world is suffering, and proclaim that the truth of 
your choice and practice and the nonviolence of you r conviction and application 
are the only cures for the afflicted world, betrays  your utter disregard and 
misconception of the truth. You admit you make mist akes. Your nonviolence is 
actually a concealed violence as it is not based on  actual spiritual life and is 
not the earnest of true inspiration from God. 
As a true believer, and in pursuance of that teachi ng of Islam which enjoins on 
every Muslim to convey the truth to every human bei ng, I would request you to 
clear your mind of all complexes, to place yourself  in the position of an 
ordinary human being who wants to learn and not to teach and to become a 
real seeker after truth. 
If you wish to find out the truth, I would request you to study the Quran and 
the life of the Prophet Mohamed (Peace of God be up on him) written by Shebli 
Nowani and M. Sulaiman Nadwi with an open mind. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71  As for unity among the different communities inhabi ting India, it can never 
come in terms of a single nation. Broad-minded tole ration of each other's 
religion and practices and an agreement based on th e recognition of the 
Muslims as a nation with their own complete code of  life and culture to guide 
them and an equality of status in political life, s hall bring harmony and peace 
to India." 
I have omitted no argument used by the writer. 
I have not hardened my heart. I have never claimed to be messenger of God 
except in the sense in which all human beings are. 
I am a mortal as liable to err as any other. Nor ha ve I claimed to be a teacher. 
But I cannot prevent admirers from calling me a tea cher or a Mahatma, as I 
cannot prevent traducers from calling me all sorts of names and ascribing to me 
vices to which I am a stranger. I lay both praise a nd blame at the feet of the 
Almighty and go my way. For the information of my c orrespondent, who is a 
schoolmaster in a high school, I may say that I hav e reverently studied the 
works he mentions and also many other works on Isla m, I have more than once 
read the Quran. My religion enables me, obliges me,  to imbibe all that is good 
in all the great religions of the earth. This does not mean that I must accept 
the interpretation that my correspondent may put up on the message of the 
Prophet of Islam or any other Prophet. I must use t he limited intelligence that 
God has given me to interpret the teachings bequeat hed to mankind by the 
Prophets of the world. I am glad to find that my co rrespondent agrees that 
truth and nonviolence are taught by the holy Quran.  Surely it is for him, as for 
every one of us, to apply these principles to daily  life according to the light 
given to us by God. 
The last paragraph in the letter lays down a danger ous doctrine. Why is India 
not one nation? Was it not one during, say, the Mug hal period? Is India 
composed of two nations? If it is, why only two? Ar e not Christians a third, 
Parsis a fourth, and so on? Are the Muslims of Chin a a nation separate from the 
other Chinese? Are the Muslims of England a differe nt nation from the other 
English? How are the Muslims of the Punjab differen t from the Hindus and the Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  Sikhs? Are they not all Punjabis, drinking the same  water, breathing the same 
air and deriving sustenance from the same soil? Wha t is there to prevent them 
from following their respective religious practices ? Are Muslims all the world 
over a separate nation? Or are the Muslims of India  only to be a separate nation 
distinct from the others? Is India to be vivisected  into two parts, one Muslim 
and the other non-Muslim? And what is to happen to the handful of Muslims 
living in the numerous villages where the populatio n is predominantly Hindu, 
and conversely to the Hindus where, as in the Front ier Province or Sind, they 
are a handful? The way suggested by the corresponde nt is the way of strife. 
Live and let live or mutual forbearance and tolerat ion is the law of life. That is 
the lesson I have learnt from the Quran, the Bible,  the Zend Avesta and the 
Gita. 
Harijan 21-10-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73   
16. MY LIFE  
The following from its Allahabad Correspondent appe ars in The Bombay 
Chronicle: "Starting revelations have come to light  regarding what has been 
going round the House of Commons about Gandhiji. It  is reported that Mr. 
Edward Thompson, the British historian who visited Allahabad recently, threw 
some light on the curious mentality prevailing in E ngland. Mr. Thompson, who 
met some political leaders here, is reported to hav e told them three things 
going round the House of Commons regarding Gandhiji : 
1. Gandhiji was for unconditional co-operation with  the British Government. 
2. Gandhiji could still influence the Congress.  
3. There were various stories about Gandhiji’s sens ual life it being the 
impression that Gandhiji had ceased to be saint. 
Impressions about Gandhiji's 'sensual life’, Thomps on, were based on some 
Marathi papers.  He spoke about them, I understand to Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru, 
who repudiated them. He spoke about them to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Mr. 
P.N. Sapru also, who strongly repudiated them. 
It appears Mr. Thompson, before leaving England, ha d seen several members of 
the House of Commons. Mr. Thompson, before leaving Allahabad, sent a letter 
to Mr. Greenwood, M. P., on the suggestion of Pandi t Nehru pointing out that 
the stories regarding Gandhiji were absolutely base less." 
Mr. Thompson was good enough to visit Segaon. He co nfirmed the report as 
substantially correct. 
The 'unconditional co-operation' is dealt with in a nother note. 
The country will presently know the influence I hav e over the Congress. 
The third charge needs clearing. Two days ago I rec eived a letter signed by four 
or five Gujaratis sending me mission seems to be to  paint me as black as it to 
be painted. According to its headline it is a paper  devoted to 'the organisation 
of Hindus'. The charges against me are mostly taken  from my confessions and Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  distorted from their setting. Among many other char ges, the charge of 
sensuality is most marked. My brahmacharya is  said  to be a cloak to hide my 
sensuality. Poor Dr. Sushila Nayar has been dragged  before the public gaze for 
the crime of giving me massage and medicated baths,  the two things for which 
she is the best qualified among those who surround me. The curious may be 
informed that there is no privacy about these opera tions which take  over 1 ½  
hours and during  which I often go off to sleep but  during which I also transact 
business with Mahadev, Pyarelal or other co-workers . 
The charges, to my knowledge, began with my active campaign against 
untouchability. This was when it was included in th e congress programme and I 
began to address crowds on the subject and insisted  on having Harijans at 
meetings and in the Ashram. It was then that some S anatanists, who used to 
help me and befriend me, broke with me and began a campaign of vilification. 
Later, a very high-placed Englishman joined the Cho rus. He picked out my 
freedom with women and showed up my 'saintliness' a s sinfulness. In this chorus 
there were also one or two well-known Indians. Duri ng the Round Table 
Conference American Journals indulged in cruel cari catures of me. Mirabai who 
used to look after me was the target of their attac k. As far as I could 
understand Mr. Thompson, who knows the gentlemen wh o have been behind 
these charges, my letters to Premaben Kantak, who i s a member of the 
Sabarmati Ashram, have also been used to prove my d epravity. She is a 
graduate and worker of proved merit. She used to as k questions relating to 
brahmacharya and other topics. I sent her full repl ies. She thought they might 
be of general use and she published them with my pe rmission. I hold them to 
be absolutely innocent and pure. 
Hitherto I have ignored these charges. But Mr. Thom pson's talks about them and 
the importunity of the Gujarati correspondents, who  say the indictment sent by 
them is but a sample of what is being said about me , impel me to repudiate 
them. I have no secrets of my own in this life. I h ave owned my weaknesses. If I 
were sensually inclined, I would have the courage t o make the confession. It 
was when I developed detestation of sensual connect ion even with my own wife Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75  and had sufficiently tested myself that I took the vow of Brahmacharya in 1906, 
and that for the sake of better dedication to the s ervice of the country. From 
that day began my open life. I do not remember havi ng ever slept or remained 
with my own wife or other women with closed doors e xcept for the occasions 
referred to in my writings in Young India and Navaj ivan. Those were black 
nights with me. But as I have said repeatedly God h as saved me in spite of 
myself. I claim no credit for any virtue that I may  possess. He is for me the 
Giver of all good and has saved me for His service.  
From that day when I began brahmacharya, our freedo m began. My wife 
became a free woman, free from my authority as her lord and master, and I 
became free from my slavery to my own appetite whic h she had to satisfy. No 
other woman had any attraction for me in the same s ense that my wife had. I 
was too loyal to her as husband and too loyal to th e vow I had taken before my 
mother to be slave to any other woman. But the mann er in which my 
brahmacharya came to me irresistibly drew me to wom an as the mother of 
man. She became too sacred for sexual love. And so every woman at once 
became sister or daughter to me. I had enough women  about me at Phoenix. 
Several of them were my own relations whom enticed to South Africa. Others 
were co-workers wives or relatives. Among these wer e the Wests and other 
Englishmen. The Wests included West, his sister, hi s wife, and his mother-in-
law who had become the Granny of the little settlem ent. As has been my wont, 
I could not keep the new good thing to myself. So I  presented Brahmacharya for 
the acceptance of all the settlers. All approved of  it. And some took it up and 
remained true to the ideal. My brahmacharya knew no thing of the orthodox 
laws governing its observance. I framed my own rule s as occasion necessitated. 
But I have never believed that all contact with wom an was to be shunned for 
the due observance of brahmacharya. That restraint which demands abstention 
from all contact, no matter how innocent, with the opposite sex is a forced 
growth, having little or no vital value. Therefore,  natural contacts for service 
were never restrained. And I found myself enjoying the confidences of many 
sisters, European and Indian, in South Africa. And when I invited the Indian 
sisters in South Africa to join the civil resistanc e movement. I found myself one Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  of them. I discovered that I was specially fitted t o serve womankind. To cut the 
(for me enthralling) story short, my return to Indi a found me in no time one 
with India's women. The easy access I had to their hearts was an agreeable 
revelation to me. Muslim sister never kept purdah b efore me here even as they 
did not in South Africa. I sleep in the Ashram surr ounded by women for they 
feel safe with me in every respect. It should be re membered that there is no 
privacy in the Segaon Ashram. 
It I were sexually attracted towards women, I have courage enough, even at 
this time of life, to become a polygamist. I do not  believe in free love-secret or 
open. Free open love I have looked upon as dog's lo ve. Secret love is besides 
cowardly. 
Santanist Hindus may abhor my nonviolence. I know m any of them think that 
Hindus will become cowards if they remain under my influence. I know of no 
man having become a coward under my influence. They  may decry my 
nonviolence as much as they like. But they will ser ve themselves or Hinduism 
by indulging in palpable lies. 
Harijan 30-10-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON RELIGION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78   
17. A MODEL TEMPLE  
It was impossible that side by side with the moveme nt for temple entry by 
Harijans there should not be a demand for temple re form. The modern Hindu 
temple is a hot-bed of superstition, as are more or  less other 'Houses of God'. I 
published the other day a letter from an American F riend, gently pleading with 
me not to have anything to do with the temple entry  movement. A friend who 
is a devout follower of Islam has carried on a long  correspondence with me, 
trying to do with me in his own way what the Americ an friend did in his own. 
There is undoubtedly a great deal of substance in w hat they have said. But I 
have not been able to subscribe to their corollary that the remedy for the 
abuse lies in the destruction of temples. 
But by far the largest number of persons believes i n the reform, not destruction 
of temples. I mentioned only the other day an ambit ious scheme set on foot for 
a model temple in Rajkot. Several correspondents ha ve taken me to task for 
advocating temple entry for Harijans without emphas izing the necessity of 
temple reform. There is no doubt that temple reform  is necessary. But here, 
again, there is need for caution. Some of them thin k that it is possible to 
replace all the existing temples with new ones, I d o not share that view. All 
temples will never be alike. They will always vary,  as they have done in the 
past, with the varying human needs. What a reformer  should be concerned with 
is a radical change more in the inward spirit than in the outward form. If the 
first is changed, the second will take care of itse lf. If the first remains 
unchanged, the second, no matter how radically chan ged, will be like a whited 
sepulchre. A mausoleum, however beautiful, is a tom b and not a mosque, and a 
bare plot of consecrated ground may be a real Templ e of God. 
Therefore the first desideratum is the priest. My i deal priest must be a man of 
God. He must be a true servant of the people. He sh ould have the qualifications 
of a guide, friend and philosopher to those among w hom he is officiating. He 
must be a whole-timer with the least possible needs  and personal ties. He 
should be versed in the Shastras. His whole concern will be to look after the Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79  welfare of his people. I have not drawn a fanciful picture. It is almost true to 
life. It is based on the recollections of my childh ood. The priest I am recalling 
was looked up to by the prince and the people. They  flocked round him for 
advice and guidance in the time of their need. 
If the sceptic says such a priest is hard to find n owadays, he would be partly 
right. But I would ask the reformer to wait for bui lding the temple of his ideal 
till he finds his priest. 
Meanwhile let him cultivate in himself the virtues he will have in the priest of 
his imagination. Let him expect these from the prie sts of existing temples. In 
other words, by his gentle and correct conduct, let  him infect his immediate 
surroundings with the need of the times and let him  have faith that his thought, 
surcharged with his own correct conduct, will act m ore powerfully than the 
mightiest dynamo. Let him not be impatient to see t he result in a day. A 
thought may take years of conduct to evolve the req uisite power. What are 
years or generations in the life of a great reform?  
Now, perhaps, the reader will follow my view of a m odel temple. I can present 
him with no architect's plan and specification. Tim e is not ripe for it. But that 
does not baffle me and it need not baffle the refor mer. He can choose the site 
for his future temple. It must be as extensive as h e can get it. It need not be in 
the heart of a village or a city. It should be easi ly accessible to the Harijans and 
the other poor and yet it must not be in insanitary  surroundings. If possible, it 
should be higher than its surroundings. In any case , I would aim at making the 
plinth of the actual temple as high as possible. An d on this site I should select 
my plot for daily worship. Round this will come int o being a school, a 
dispensary, a library, secular and religious. The s chool may serve also as a 
meeting or debating hall. I should have a dharmshala or guest house connected 
with the temple, each one of these will be a separa te institution and yet 
subordinate to the temple and may be built simultan eously or one after another 
as circumstances and funds may permit. The building s may or, may not be 
substantial. If labour is voluntary, as it well may  be, with mud and straw a 
beginning may be made at once. But the temple is no t yet built. The foundation Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  was laid when the site was procured, the plot for t he temple was selected and 
the first prayer was offered. For the Bhagavat  says, ‘wherever people meet and 
utter His name from their hearts, there God dwells,  there is His temple.’ The 
building, the deity, the consecration, the province  of the priest. When he is 
found, he will set about his task, but the temple b egan its existence from the 
time of the first prayer. And if it was the prayer of true men and women, its 
continuous progress was assured. 
So much for the temple of the future. The reader wh o cares to study the Rajkot 
scheme will find that the outward form of my model temple materially 
corresponds to that in the scheme. Indeed, there is  nothing new in my idea or 
the Rajkot scheme. The village temples of yore had almost all the adjuncts 
suggested by me. 
But we must also deal with the existing temples. Th ey can become real House 
of God today, if the worshippers will insist on the  priests conforming to the 
ideal presented by me. 
Harijan 29-4-1933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON SWADESHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82   
18. IF I WERE THE MINISTER  
The talks with the Ministers concerned at Poona on village-crafts and basic 
education have given rise to a lot of correspondenc e and private discussion. For 
the guidance of the Provincial Governments and othe rs interested in the 
question of Khadi which has naturally occasioned th e bulk of the 
correspondence and discussion, I set forth below my  thoughts on the subject. 
I refer the reader to my note. My views, then expre ssed, remain unaltered. One 
thing has created a misunderstanding. Some friends have read compulsion in 
that note. I am sorry for the obscurity. In it I ha d answered the question as to 
what representative governments could do if they wi shed. I had, I hope 
pardonably, assumed that such government's notices too could not be 
interpreted as compulsion. For every act of a bona fide representative 
government would assume consent of the voters repre sented. The voters would 
mean the whole populace, whether registered as vote rs or not. With that 
background, I wrote that the government should noti fy to the villagers that mill 
cloth would not be supplied to the villagers after a certain fixed date, so as to 
enable them to wear Khadi prepared by themselves. 
Whatever the meaning of my article, I want to state  that any scheme adopted 
about Khadi, without the willing co-operation of th ose concerned, must mean 
death to Khadi as a means for attaining Swaraj. The n the taunt that. Khadi was 
a return to the darkness and slavery of the Middle Ages would be true. But I 
have held the contrary view. Whilst Khadi under com pulsion was a badge of 
slavery, Khadi intelligently and voluntarily prepar ed, primarily for one's own 
use, was easily the badge of our freedom. Freedom i s nothing if it is not all-
round self-help. I, for one, would have nothing to do with Khadi, if it were not 
a free man's privilege as well as duty. 
A friendly critic asks whether Khadi thus prepared could also and at the same 
time be for sale. Yes, if sale is its secondary use ; not if manufacture for sale is 
its only or even primary use. That we began with sa le of Khadi shows temporary 
necessity as well as our limited vision. Experience  is a great teacher. It has Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83  taught us many things. Not the least is its primary  use. But it is by no means 
the last. But I must leave this fascinating field o f speculation and proceed 
definitely to answer the question put in the headin g. 
My first business as the minister in charge of revi val of the villages as the 
centre of all governmental activity would be to fin d out from among the 
Permanent Service honest and incorruptable men capa ble for the work. I would 
put the best among them in touch with the A. I. S. A. and the A. I. V. I. A., 
creations of the Congress, and bring in a scheme fo r giving the village-crafts 
the greatest encouragement. I would stipulate, ther e should be no compulsion 
on the villagers, that they must not slave for othe rs and that they should be 
taught to help themselves and rely upon their own l abour and skill for the 
production of articles of food, cloth and other nec essaries. The scheme would 
thus have to be comprehensive. I would instruct my first man, therefore, to see 
the Hindustani Tamili Sangh and see what it has to say. 
Let me assume that the scheme, thus produced, conta ins a clause saying that 
the villagers themselves declare that they would no t want mill cloth, say, after 
one year from a fixed date, that they require cotto n, wool and necessary 
implements and instruction, not as a gift but to be  paid for on the easiest 
terms. The scheme provides too, that it will not ap ply at once to the whole of 
any province but only to a part to begin with. The scheme further tells one that 
the A. I. S. A. will guide and assist the working o f the scheme. 
Being convinced of its soundness, I would give it l egal form in consultation with 
the law department and issue a notification, fully describing the genesis of the 
scheme. The villagers as well as the mill-owners an d others would have been 
party to it. The notification will show clearly tha t it is the people's measure, 
though bearing the Government stamp. The Government  money will be used for 
the benefit of the poorest villagers, making the la rgest return possible to the 
people concerned. It will, therefore, be probably t he most profitable 
investment in which expert assistance will be volun tary and overhead charges 
the least item. The notification will give in detai l, the whole cost to the 
country and the return to the people. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  The only question for me as minister is whether the  A. I. S. A. has the 
conviction and capacity to shoulder the burden of c reating and guiding a Khadi 
scheme to success. If it has, I would put my little  barque to sea with all 
confidence. 
Harijan, 26-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85   
19. MISSION OF KHADI  
The mission of khadi is not merely to supply the to wns people with fashionable 
khadi that will vie with the mill manufactures and thus like other industries 
supply a few artisans with employment, but is to be come a supplementary 
industry to agriculture. This mission still remains  unfulfilled. 
In order that it may fulfill this mission, it has t o be self-sustained and its use 
must spread in the villages. Just as the villagers cook their own roti or rice so 
must they make their own khadi for personal use. Th e surplus if any they may 
sell. This mission cannot be delivered unless the K hadi Service changes its 
complexion and the Spinners' Association its policy . 
Every member of the Khadi Service should know the p rocesses through which 
cotton passes before it becomes khadi. 
When emphasis is put on self-sufficient khadi, comm ercial production will be 
restricted to the real wants of townspeople. It wil l then pass into the hands of 
private businessmen instead of being centralized in  the hands of the 
Association. 
In trying to commercialize khadi, the Association h as been hitherto dominated 
by the ruling prices. Thus the spinning wage has be en the worst of all the wages 
for any form of labour. They have also varied with provinces. Therefore the 
prices of khadi too have varied with the provinces.  It is all very well for mere 
profiteering bodies to countenance and even stimula te cut-throat competition, 
but associations whose sole purpose is to serve the  pauper millions cannot 
afford to join such competition. There is no reason  why a spinner in Bihar 
should get less than her sister in Gujarat. No doub t prices vary in different 
provinces because the standard of living varies. Bu t the Association cannot 
afford to take things as they are. It has to change  them, if they are unjust. 
There is no reason why the price of one hour's labo ur in spinning should be less 
than one in weaving. There is more skill involved i n spinning than in simple 
weaving. Simple weaving is a purely mechanical proc ess. Simplest spinning 
requires the cunning of the hand. Yet the spinner g ets one pie per hour against Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86  the weaver's minimum of six; the carder too does be tter, almost as well as the 
weaver. There are historical reasons for this state  of things. But they are not 
just merely because they are historical. Time has c ome for the Association to 
equalize if not also to stabilize the prices of all  labour regulated by it. This, in 
many cases, will mean inviting the weaver to lower his scale of wages where he 
gets more than one anna per hour. Time may never co me when all the weavers 
will voluntarily consent to the equalization proces s. But if the doctrine of 
equality of wages for all productive labour is soun d, the Association must strive 
to approach the ideal as near as may be. Unless the  whole jump is taken at 
once, the beginning must be made with raising the w ages of spinners to a 
decent level for a decent hour's work. Vinoba is ex perimenting with spinning at 
the rate of nearly nine hours per day at the same t ime that he is taking his 
classes. His output per hour should be regarded as the standard output per hour 
entitling the spinner to the standard wage. I hope to publish shortly the results 
of Vinoba's labours. 
My scheme presupposes living contact with the spinn ers' life. A body that would 
give an unexpected rise in wages will watch the cou rse of the nickle pieces that 
may be distributed. It will be useless to raise wag es gratuitously if they are to 
be wasted in drink or extravagant marriage or other  feasts. The mission of 
khadi is almost like that of untouchability. The so -called higher classes have for 
ages utterly neglected the lower classes with the r esult that the latter do not 
know the art of living. They 
think that they are mere 'hewers of wood and drawer s of water'. The so-called 
upper classes have not escaped the punishment of th eir misdeeds for they too 
do not know the art of living and would perish toda y if they had no help from 
the 'lower classes'. The mission of khadi is to cor rect this double evil by inviting 
the 'upper classes' to penance towards the 'lower c lasses'. 
Let the village industries workers too see to it th at the villagers occupied in the 
various industries organized by them get the minimu m wage that may be fixed 
by the Association.  
- Hariian, 6-6-1935 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON SOCIALISM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88   
20. WHO IS A SOCIALIST?  
Socialism is a beautiful word and so far as I am aw are in socialism all the 
members of society are equal-none low, none high. I n the individual body the 
head is not high because it is the top of the body,  nor are the soles of the feet 
low because they touch the earth. Even as members o f the individual body are 
equal, so are the members of society. This is socia lism. 
In it the prince and the peasant, the wealthy and t he poor, the employer and 
the employee are all on the same level. In terms of  religion there is no duality 
in socialism. It is all unity. Looking at society a ll the world over there is nothing 
but duality or plurality. Unity is conspicuous by i ts absence. This man is high, 
that one is low, that is a Hindu, that a Muslim, th ird a Christian, fourth a Parsi, 
fifth a Sikh, sixth a Jew. Even among these there a re subdivisions. In the unity 
of my conception there is perfect unity in the plur ality of designs. 
In order to reach this state we may not look at thi ngs philosophically and say 
that we need not make a move until all are converte d to socialism. Without 
changing our lives we may go on giving addresses, f orming parties and hawk-
like seize the game when it comes our way. This is no socialism. The more we 
treat it as a game to be seized, the farther it mus t recede from us. 
Socialism begins with the first convert. If there i s one such, you can add zeros 
to the one and the first zero will account for ten and every addition will 
account for ten times the previous number. If, howe ver, the beginner is a zero, 
in other words, no one makes the beginning, multipl icity of zeros will also 
produce zero value. Time and paper occupied in writ ing zeros will be so much 
waste. 
This socialism is as pure as crystal. It, therefore , requires crystal-like means to 
achieve it. Impure means result in an impure end. H ence the prince and the 
peasant will not be equalized by cutting off the pr ince's head, nor can the 
process of cutting off equalize the employer and th e employed. One cannot 
reach truth by untruthfulness. Truthful conduct alo ne can reach truth. Are not Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89  nonviolence and truth twins? The answer is an empha tic 'no'. Non-violence is 
embedded in truth and vice versa. Hence has it been  said that they are faces of 
the same coin. Either is inseparable from the other . Read the coin either way. 
The spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. This blessed 
state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbo ur impurity of mind or body 
and you have untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore, only truthful; nonviolent and pure-heart ed socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the wo rld. To my knowledge there is 
no country in the world which is purely socialistic . Without the means described 
above the existence of such a society is impossible . 
Harijan 6-7-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90   
21. EQUAL DISTRIBUTION  
In last week's article on the Constructive Programm e I mentioned equal 
distribution of wealth as one of the 13 items. 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural needs and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarte r of a pound of flour for his 
bread and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their 
wants. To bring this ideal into being the entire so cial order has got to be 
reconstructed. A society based on nonviolence canno t nurture any other ideal. 
We may not perhaps be able to realise the goal, but  we must bear it in mind 
and work unceasingly to near it. To the same extent  as we progress towards our 
goal we shall find contentment and happiness, and t o that extent too shall we 
have contributed towards the bringing into being of  a nonviolent society. 
It is perfectly possible for an individual to adopt  this way of life without having 
to wait for others to do so. And if an individual c an observe a certain rule of 
conduct, it follows that a group of individual can do likewise. It is necessary for 
me to emphasis the fact that no one need wait for a nyone else in order to 
adopt a right course. Men generally hesitate to mak e a beginning if they feel 
that the objective cannot be had in its entirety. S uch an attitude of mind is in 
reality a bar to progress. 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be b rought about through 
nonviolence. The first step towards it is for him w ho has made this ideal part of 
his being to bring about the necessary changes in h is personal life. He would 
reduce his wants to a minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His 
earnings would be free of dishonesty. The desire fo r speculation would be 
renounced. His habitation would be in keeping with the new mode of life. 
There would be self-restraint exercised in every sp here of life. When he has 
done all that is possible in his own life, then onl y will he be in a position to 
preach this ideal among his associates and neighbou rs. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91  Indeed at the root of this doctrine of equal distri bution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for the superfluous weal th possessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a ru pee more than their 
neighbours. How is this to be brought about? Nonvio lently? Or should the 
wealthy be dispossessed of their possessions? To do  this we would naturally 
have to resort to violence. This violent action can not benefit society. Society 
will be the poorer, for it will lose the gifts of a  man who knows how to 
accumulate wealth. Therefore, the nonviolent way is  evidently superior. The 
rich man will be left in possession of his wealth, which he will use what he 
reasonably requires for his personal needs and will  act as a trustee for the 
remainder to be used for the society. In this argum ent honesty on the part of 
the trustee is assumed. 
As soon as a man looks upon himself as a servant of  society, earns for its sake, 
spends for its benefit, purity enters into his earn ings and there is ahimsa in his 
venture. Moreover, if men's minds turn towards this  way of life, there will come 
about a peaceful revolution in society, and that wi thout any bitterness. 
It may be asked whether history at any time records  such a change in human 
nature. Such changes have certainly taken place in individuals. One may not 
perhaps be able to point to them in a whole society . But this only means that 
up till now there has never been an experiment on a  large scale in nonviolence. 
Somehow or the other wrong belief has taken possess ion of us that ahimsa is 
pre-eminently a weapon for individuals and its use should therefore be limited 
to that sphere. In fact, this is not the case. Ahim sa is definitely an attribute of 
society. To convince people of this truth is at onc e my effort and my 
experiment. In this age of wonders no one will say that a thing or idea is 
worthless because it is new. To say it is impossibl e because it is difficult is 
again not in consonance with the spirit of the age.  Things undreamt of are daily 
being seen, the impossible is ever becoming possibl e. We are constantly being 
astonished these days at the amazing discoveries in  the field of violence. But I 
maintain that far more undreamt of and seemingly im possible discoveries will 
be made in the field of non-violence. The history o f religion is full of such Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  examples. To try to root out religion itself from s ociety is a wild goose chase. 
And were such an attempt to succeed, it would mean the destruction of 
society. Superstition, evil customs and other imper fections creep in from age to 
age and mar religion for the time being. They come and go. But religion itself 
remains. Because the existence of the world in a br oad sense depends on 
religion. The ultimate definition of religion may b e said to be obedience to the 
law of God. God and His law are synonymous terms. T herefore, God signifies an 
unchanging and living law. No one has ever really f ound Him. But AVATARS and 
PROPHETS have, by means of their 'tapasya' (penance ), given to mankind a faint 
glimpse of the eternal law. 
If, however, in spite of the utmost effort, the ric h do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latt er are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In t rying to find the solution to 
this riddle. I have lighted on nonviolent non-coope ration and civil disobedience 
as the right and infallible means. The rich cannot accumulate wealth without 
the co-operation of the poor in society. Man has be en conversant with violence 
from the beginning, for he has inherited this stren gth from the animal in his 
nature. It was only when he rose from the state of a quadruped (animal) to that 
of a biped (man) that the knowledge of the strength  of ahimsa entered into his 
soul. This knowledge has grown within him slowly bu t surely. If this knowledge 
were to penetrate to and spread amongst the poor, t hey would become strong 
and learn how to free themselves by means of nonvio lence from the crushing 
inequalities which have brought them to the verge o f starvation. 
Harijan 19-8-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93   
22. DUTY OF BREAD LABOUR  
"Brahma created His people with the duty of sacrifi ce laid upon them and said, 
'By this do you flourish. Let it be the fulfiller o f all your desires.'...He who eats 
without performing this sacrifice eats stolen bread ,"- thus says the Gita. 'Earn 
thy bread by the sweat of thy brow,' says the Bible . Sacrifices may be of many 
kinds. One of them may well be bread labour. If all  laboured for their bread 
and no more, there would be enough food and enough leisure for all. Then 
there would be no cry of over-population, no diseas e, and no such misery as we 
see around. Such labour will be the highest form of  sacrifice. Men will no doubt 
do many other things either through their bodies or  through their minds, but all 
this will be labour of love, for the common good. T here will then be no rich and 
no poor, none high and none low, no touchable and n o untouchable. 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not,  therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if without fulfilling the whole law of  sacrifice, that is, the law of 
our being, we performed physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should 
go a long way towards the ideal. 
If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our foo d would be simple. We 
should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyon e who doubts the accuracy of 
this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he wil l derive the greatest relish 
from the productions of his labour, improve his hea lth and discover that many 
things he took were superfluities. 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the body 
must be supplied by the body. "Render unto Ceaser t hat which is Cesar's" 
perhaps applies here well. 
Mere mental, that is intellectual labour is for the  soul and is its own 
satisfaction. It should never demand payment. In th e ideal state, doctors, 
lawyers and the like will work solely for the benef it of society, not for self. 
Obedience to the law of bread labour will bring abo ut a silent revolution in the 
structure of society. Man's triumph will consist in  substituting the struggle for Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  existence by the struggle for mutual service. The l aw of the brute will be 
replaced by the law of man. 
Return to the village means a definite voluntary re cognition of the duty of 
bread labour and all it connotes. But says the crit ic, "millions of India's children 
are today living in the villages and yet they are l iving a life of semi-starvation." 
This, alas, is but too true. Fortunately we know th at theirs is not voluntary 
obedience. They would perhaps shirk body labour if they could, and even rush 
to the nearest city if they could be accommodated i n it. Compulsory obedience 
to a master is state of slavery, willing obedience to one's father is the glory of 
sonship. Similarly, compulsory obedience to the law  of bread labour breeds 
poverty, disease and discontent. It is a state of s lavery. Willing obedience to it 
must bring contentment and health. And it is health  which is real wealth, not 
pieces of silver and gold. The Village Industries A ssociation is an experiment in 
willing bread labour. 
Harijan 29-6-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON CAPITALISM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96   
23. CAPITALISM AND STRIKES  
How should capital behave when labour strikes? This  question is in the air and 
has great importance at the present moment. One way  is that suppression 
named or nicknamed 'American'. It consists in suppr ession of labour through 
organized goondaism (hooliganism). Everybody would consider this as wrong 
and destructive. The other way, right and incurable , consists in considering 
every strike on its merits and giving labour its du e- not what capital considers 
as due but what labour itself would so consider and  enlightened public opinion 
acclaim as just. 
One preliminary question will justly arise: why sho uld there be a strike at all in 
any well-regulated concern? Strikes ought to be imp ossible when there is 
perfect understanding between capital and labour, m utual respect and 
recognition of equality. And since differences ther e would be sometimes 
between employers and employed even in the best-reg ulated concerns, why 
should there not be a system of arbitration between  the parties so that they 
will always readily carry out in perfect good faith  awards of arbitrators? 
But we have to consider things not as they should b e but as they are. As time 
progresses, the labour world is getting more insist ent in its demands which are 
daily increasing, and it does not hesitate to resor t to violence in its impatient 
enforcement of those demands. New methods of forcin g them are being 
employed. Workers do not hesitate to injure the pro perty of the employers, 
dislocate machinery, harass old men and women who w ould not join the strike 
and forcibly keep out blacklegs. In these circumsta nces, how are the employers 
to behave? 
In my opinion, employers and employed are equal par tners even if employees 
are not considered superior. But what we see today is the reverse. The reason 
is that the employers harness intelligence on their  side. They have the superior 
advantage which concentration of capital brings wit h it and they know how to 
make use of it. One individual rupee has very littl e potency but when money 
combines as capital, the combine derives a power di fferent from and far in Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97  excess of the mere sum total of the individual rupe es.  A million drops 
individually are negligible. But in combination the y make the ocean carrying on 
its bosom a fleet of ocean hounds. Whilst capital i n India is fairly organized, 
labour is still in a more or less disorganized cond ition in spite of unions and 
their federations. Therefore, it lacks the power th at true combination gives. 
Moreover, it lacks intelligence, so much so that in dividuals fight against 
individuals, unions against unions. Lack of intelli gence leads to its exploitation 
by selfish and unscrupulous men even to the point o f creating and promoting 
mischief. They know no better, being ignorant of th e secret non-violence. The 
net result is that the workers suffer. If labour we re to understand the working 
of non-violence, the power generated by combination  would any day exceed 
the power of dead metal in the hands of a few capit alists. 
Hence my advice to the employers would be that they  should willingly regard 
workers as the real owners of the concern which the y fancy they have created. 
They should further regard it as their duty to equi p the employees with sound 
education that would draw out the intelligence dorm ant in them and gladly 
promote and welcome the power that this combination  of the workers gives 
them. 
This noble work cannot be done in a day by the empl oyers. Meanwhile, what 
should those do who have to face the destruction wr ought by strikers in their 
concerns? It would unhesitatingly advice such emplo yers that they should once 
offer the strikers full control of the concern whic h is as much the strikers as 
theirs. They will vacate their premises not in a hu ff but because it is right, and 
to show their goodwill they would offer the employe rs will find in the end that 
they will lose nothing. Indeed their right action w ill disarm opposition and they 
will earn the blessings of their men. They will hav e made proper use of their 
capital. I would not consider such action as benevo lent. It would be an 
intelligent use by the capitalists of their resourc es and honest dealing in regard 
to the employees whom they would have convert into honourable partners. 
Harijan 23-3-1936 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON NON-VIOLENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99   
24. NON-VIOLENCE v/s VIOLENCE  
I must resume the argument about the implications o f the Rajkot where I left it 
the week before. 
In theory, if there is sufficient nonviolence devel oped in any single person, he 
should be able to discover the means of combating v iolence, no matter how 
wide-spread or severe, within his jurisdiction. I h ave, repeatedly admitted my 
imperfections. I am no example of perfect ahimsa. I  am evolving. Such ahimsa 
as has been developed in me has been found enough t o cope with situations 
that have hitherto arisen. But today I feel helples s in the face of the 
surrounding violence. There was a penetrating artic le in the Statesman on my 
Rajkot statement. The editor therein contended that  the English had never 
taken our movement to be true Satyagraha, but being  practical people they had 
allowed the myth to continue though they had known it to be a violent revolt. 
It was none the less so because the rebels had no a rms. I have quoted the 
substance from memory. When I read the article, I f elt the force of the 
argument. Though I had intended the movement to be purely nonviolent 
resistance, as I look back upon the happenings of t hose days, there was 
undoubtedly violence among the resisters. I must ow n that had I been perfectly 
tuned to the music of ahimsa, I would have sensed t he slightest departure from 
it and my sensitiveness would have rebelled against  any discord in it. 
It seems to me that the united action of the Hindus  and the Muslims blinded me 
to the violence that was lurking in the breasts of many. The English who are 
trained diplomats and administrators are accustomed  to line of least 
resistance, and when they found that it was more pr ofitable to conciliate a big 
organization than to crush it by extensive frightfu lness, they yielded to the 
extent that they thought was necessary. It is, howe ver, my conviction that our 
resistance was predominantly, nonviolent in action and will be accepted as 
such by the future historian. As a seeker of truth and nonviolence, however, I 
must not be satisfied with mere action if it is not  from the heart. I must Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  declare from the house-tops that the nonviolence of  those days fell far short of 
the violence as I have so often defined. 
Nonviolent action without the co-operation of the h eart and the head cannot 
produce the intended result. The failure of our imp erfect ahimsa is visible to 
the naked eye. Look at the feud that is going on be tween Hindus and Muslims. 
Each is arming for the fight with the other. The vi olence that we had harboured 
in our breasts during the non-cooperation is now re coiling upon ourselves. The 
violent energy that was, generated among the masses , but was kept under 
cheek in the pursuit of common objective, has now b een let-loose and is being 
used among and against ourselves. 
The same phenomenon is discernible, though in a les s crude manner, in the 
dissension among Congressmen themselves and the use  of forcible methods that 
the Congress ministers are obliged to adopt in runn ing the administrations 
under their charge. 
This narrative clearly shows that the atmosphere is  surcharged with violence. I 
hope it also shows that nonviolent mass movement is  an impossibility unless the 
atmosphere is radically changed. To blind one's eye s to the events happening 
around us is to court disaster. It has been suggest ed to me that I should declare 
mass civil disobedience and all internal strife wil l cease, Hindus and Muslims 
will compose their differences, Congressmen will fo rget mutual jealousies and 
fights for power. My reading of the situation is wh olly different. If any mass 
movement is undertaken at the present moment in the  name of nonviolence, it 
will resolve itself into violence largely unorganiz ed and organized in some 
cases. It will bring discredit on the Congress, spe ll disaster for the Congress 
struggle for independence and bring ruin to many a home. This may be a wholly 
untrue picture born of my weakness. If so, unless I  shed that weakness, I cannot 
lead a movement which requires great strength and r esolution. 
But if I cannot find an effective purely nonviolent  method, outbreak of violence 
seems to be a certainty. The people demand self-exp ression. They are not 
satisfied with the constructive programme prescribe d by me and accepted 
almost unanimously by the Congress. As I have said before, the imperfect Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101  response to the constructive programme is itself pr oof positive of the skin-deep 
nature of the nonviolence of Congressmen. 
But, if there is an outbreak of violence, it would not be without cause. We are 
yet far from the independence of our dream. The irr esponsibility of the Centre, 
which eats up 80 per cent of the revenue, grinds do wn the people and thwarts 
their aspirations, is daily proving more and more i ntolerable. 
There is a growing consciousness of the terrible au tocracy of the majority of 
the States. I admit my responsibility for the suspe nsion of civil resistance in 
several States. This has resulted in demoralization  both among the people and 
the Princes. The people have lost nerve and feel th at all is lost. The 
demoralization among the Princes consist in their t hinking that now they have 
nothing to fear from their people, nothing substant ial to grant. Both are wrong. 
The result does not dismay me. In fact I had foreto ld the possibility of these 
results when I was discussing with Jaipur workers t he advisability of suspending 
the movement, even though it was well circumscribed  with rules and 
restrictions. The demoralization among the people s hows that there was not 
non-violence in thought and word, and therefore, wh en the intoxication and 
excitement of jail-going and the accompanying demon strations ceased, they 
thought that the struggle was over. The Princes cam e to the hasty conclusion 
that they could safely consolidate their autocracy by adopting summary 
measures against the resisters and placating the do cile element by granting 
eye-wash reforms. 
Both the people and the Princes might have reacted in the right manner - the 
people by recognizing the correctness of my advice and calmly generating 
strength and energy by quiet and determined constru ctive effort, and the 
Princes by seizing the opportunity, afforded by sus pension, of doing justice for 
the sake of justice and granting reforms that would  satisfy the reasonable but 
advanced section among their people. This could onl y happen, if they 
recognized the time-spirit. It is neither too late for the people nor the Princes. 
In this connection I may not omit the Paramount Pow er. There are signs of the 
Paramount Power repenting of the recent declaration s about the freedom to Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  the Princes to grant such reforms to their people a s they chose. There are 
audible whispers that the Princes may not take thos e declarations literally. It is 
an open secret that the Princes dare not do anythin g that they guess is likely to 
displease the Paramount Power. They may not even me et persons whom the 
Paramount Power may not like them to meet. When the re is this tremendous 
influence exercised over the Princes, it is but nat ural to hold the Paramount 
Power responsible for the unadulterated autocracy t hat reigns supreme in many 
States. 
So, if violence breaks out in this unfortunate land , the responsibility will have 
to be shared by the Paramount Power, the Princes, a nd above all by 
Congressmen. The first two have never claimed to be  nonviolent. Their power 
is frankly derived from and based on the use of vio lence. But the Congress has 
since 1920 adopted nonviolence as its settled polic y and has undoubtedly 
striven to act up to it. But as Congressmen never h ad nonviolence in their 
hearts, they must reap the fruit of the defect, how ever unintentional it was. At 
the crucial moment the defect has come to the surfa ce and the defective 
method does not seem to meet the situation. Nonviol ence is never a method of 
coercion, it is one of conversion. We have failed t o convert the Princes, we 
have failed to convert the English administrators. It is no use saying that it is 
impossible to persuade persons willingly to part wi th their power. I have 
claimed that Satyagraha is a new experiment. It wil l be time to pronounce it a 
failure when Congressmen have given it a genuine tr ial. Even a policy, if it is 
honestly pursued, has to be pursued with all one's heart. We have not done so. 
Hence Congressmen have to convert themselves before  the Paramount Power 
and the Princes can be expected to act justly. 
But if the Congressmen can or will go no further th an they have done in the 
direction of nonviolence, and if the Paramount Powe r and the Princes do not 
voluntarily and selfishly do the right thing, the c ountry must be prepared for 
violence, unless the new technique yields a new mod e of nonviolent action 
which will become an effective substitute for viole nce as a way of securing Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103  redress of wrongs. The fact that violence must fail  will not prevent its 
outbreak. Mere constitutional agitation will not do . 
Harijan 4-7-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104   
25. ATOM BOMB AND AHIMSA  
It has been suggested by American friends that the atom bomb will bring in 
ahimsa (nonviolence) as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant that its 
destructive power will so disgust the world that it  will turn it away from 
violence for the time being. This is very like a ma n glutting himself with 
dainties to the point of nausea and turning away fr om them only to return with 
redoubled zeal after the effect of nausea is well o ver. Precisely in the same 
manner will the world return to violence with renew ed zeal after the effect of 
disgust is worn out. 
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God's , not man's plan. Man knows 
that only evil can come out of evil, as good out of  good. 
That atomic energy though harnessed by American sci entists and army men for 
destructive purposes may be utilized by other scien tists for humanitarian 
purposes is undoubtedly within the realm of possibi lity. But that is not what 
was meant by my American friends. They were not so simple as to put a 
question which connoted an obvious truth. An incend iary uses fire for his 
destructive and nefarious purpose, housewife makes daily use of it is preparing 
flourishing food for mankind. 
So far as I can see, the atomic bomb has deadened t he finest feeling that has 
sustained mankind for ages. There used to be the so -called laws of war which 
made it tolerable. Now we know the naked truth. War  knows no law except 
that of might. The atom bomb brought an empty victo ry to the allied arms but 
it resulted for the time being in destroying the so ul of Japan. What has 
happened to the soul of the destroying nation is ye t too early to see. Forces of 
nature act in a mysterious manner. We can but solve  the mystery by deducing 
the unknown result from the known results of simila r events. A slave-holder 
cannot hold a slave without putting himself or his deputy in the cage holding 
the slave. Let no one run away with the idea that I  wish to put in a defence of 
Japanese misdeeds in pursuance of Japan's was more unworthy ambition. The 
difference was only one of degree. I assume that Ja pan's greed was more Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105  unworthy. But the greater unworthiness conferred no  right on the less unworthy 
of destroying without mercy men, women and children  of Japan in a particular 
area. 
The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme  tragedy of the bomb is 
that it will not be destroyed by counter-bombs even  as violence cannot be by 
counter-violence. Mankind has to get out of violenc e only through non-violence. 
Hatred can be overcome only by love. Counter-hatred  only increases the 
surface as well as the depth of hatred. I am aware that I am repeating what I 
have many times stated before and practised to the best of my ability and 
capacity. What I first stated was itself nothing ne w. It was as old as the hills. 
Only I recited no copybook maxim but definitely ann ounced what I believed in 
every fibre of my being. Sixty years of practice in  various walks of life has only 
enriched the belief which experience of friends has  fortified. It is however the 
central truth by which one can stand alone without flinching. I believe in what 
Max Muller said years ago, namely that truth needed  to be repeated as long as 
there were men who disbelieved it. 
Harijan 1-7-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106   
26. RELIGION V. NO RELIGION  
A correspondent writes: 
"In the Harijanbandhu of the 5 th  May you have written that your nonviolence 
contemplates destruction of animals dangerous to ma nkind, such as leopards, 
wolves, snakes, scorpions etc. 
"You do not believe in giving food to dogs etc. Sev eral other people besides the 
Gujaratis look upon the feeding of dogs as a merito rious act. Such a belief may 
not be justifiable in times of food shortage like t he present. Yet we must 
remember that these animals can be very useful to m an. One can feed them 
and take work out of them. 
"You had put 27 questions to Shri Raichandbhai from  Durban. One of these 
questions was: What should a seeker do when a snake  attacks him? His answer 
was: He should not kill the snake and, if it bites,  he should let to do so. How is 
it that you speak differently now?" 
I have written a lot on this subject in the past. A t that time the topic vas the 
killing of rabid dogs. There was much discussion on  the subject but all that 
seems to have been forgotten. 
My nonviolence is not merely kindness to all living  creatures. The emphasis laid 
on the sacredness of sub-human life in Jainism is u nderstandable. But that can 
never mean that one is to be kind to this life in p reference to human life. While 
writing about the sacredness of such life, I take i t that the sacredness of human 
life has been taken for granted. The former has bee n overemphasized. And, 
while putting it into practice, the idea has underg one distortion. For instance, 
there are many who derive complete satisfaction in feeding ants. It would 
appear that the theory has become a wooden, lifeles s dogma. Hypocrisy and 
distortion are passing current under the name of re ligion. 
Ahimsa is the highest ideal. It is meant for the br ave, never for the cowardly. 
To benefit by others' killing and delude oneself in to the belief that one is being 
very religious and nonviolent is sheer self-decepti on. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107  A so-called votary of nonviolence will not stay in a village which is visited by a 
leopard every day. He will run away and, when someo ne has killed the leopard, 
will return to take charge of his hearth and home. This is not nonviolence. This 
is a coward's violence. The man who has killed the leopard has at least given 
proof of some bravery. The man who takes advantage of the killing is a coward. 
He can never expect to know true nonviolence. 
In life it is impossible to eschew violence complet ely. The question arises, 
where is one to draw the line? The line cannot be t he same for everyone. 
Although essentially the principle is the same, yet , everyone applies it in his or 
her own way. What is one man's food can be another' s poison. Meat-eating is a 
sin for me. Yet, for another person, who has always  lived on meat and never 
seen anything wrong in it, to give it up simply in order to copy me will be a sin. 
If I wish to be an agriculturist and stay in the ju ngle, I will have to use the 
minimum unavoidable violence in order to protect my  fields. I will have to kill 
monkeys, birds and insects which eat up my crops. I f I do not wish to do so 
myself, I will have to engage someone to do it for me. There is not much 
difference between the two. To allow crops to be ea ten up by animals in the 
name of ahimsa while there is a famine in the land is certainly a sin. Evil and 
good are relative terms. What is good under certain  conditions can become an 
evil or a sin under a different set of conditions. 
Man is not to drown himself in the well of Shastras  but he is to dive in their 
broad ocean and bring out pearls. At every step he has to use his discrimination 
as to what is ahimsa and what is himsa. In this the re is no room for shame or 
cowardice. The poet has said that the road leading up to God is for the brave, 
never for the cowardly. 
Finally, Raichandbhai's advice to me was that if I had courage, if I wanted to 
see God face to face, I should let myself be bitten  by a snake instead of killing 
it. I have never killed a snake before or after rec eiving that letter. That is no 
matter of credit for me. My ideal is to be able to play with snakes and scorpions 
fearlessly. But it is merely a wish so far. Whether  and when it will be realized I 
do not know. Everywhere I have let my people kill b oth. I could have prevented Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  them if I had wished. But how could I? I did not ha ve the courage to take them 
up with my own hands and teach my companions a less on in fearlessness. I am 
ashamed that I could not do so. But my shame could not benefit them or me. 
If Ramanama favours me I might still attain that co urage some day. In the 
meantime, I consider it my duty to act as I have st ated above. Religion is a 
thing to be lived. It is not mere sophistry. 
Harijan 29-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON STUDENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110   
27. STUDENTS AND STRIKES  
A college student or Bangalore writes: 
"I have read your article in HARIJAN and request yo u to let me know your 
opinion on students taking part in strikes like And amans Day, Abattoir Day, 
etc.," 
Whilst have pleaded for the removal of restrictions  on the speech and 
movements of students, I am not able to support pol itical strikes or 
demonstrations. Students should have the greatest f reedom of expression and 
of opinion. They may openly sympathize with any pol itical party they like. But 
in any opinion they may not have freedom of action whilst they are studying. A 
student cannot be an active politician and pursue h is studies at the same time. 
It is difficult to draw hard and fast lines at the time of big national upheavals. 
Then they do not strike or, if the word 'strike' ca n be used in such 
circumstances, it is a wholesale strike; it is a su spension of studies. Thus what 
may appear to be an exception is not one in reality . 
As a matter of fact the question such as the corres pondent has raised should 
not arise in the Congress Provinces. For there can be no curb which the best 
mind of the students will not willingly accept. The  majority of them are, must 
be, Congress-minded. They may not do anything that would embarrass the 
Ministries. If they struck, they would do so becaus e the Ministers wanted them 
to. But cannot conceive of Congress Ministers wanti ng them to strike except 
when the Congress is no longer in office, and when the Congress declares, 
maybe, a nonviolent active war against the Governme nt of the day. And even 
then, I should think that to invite students in the  first instance to suspend their 
studies for strikes would be tantamount to a declar ation of bankruptcy. If the 
people in general are with the Congress for any dem onstration in the nature of 
strikes, students will be left alone except as a la st resort. During the last war 
the students were not the first to be called out bu t they were the last so far as 
recollect, and then only college students. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  But another correspondent writes in connection with  it: 
"If we allow paid State officials, teachers and oth ers to participate in politics, it 
would become a hell. No Government could be carried  on, if their policies are 
subjected to debates among Government or other Stat e officials who have to 
carry them out. Your desire that national hopes, de sires and ideas of patriotism 
should have free play is of course proper. But I fe ar your article is likely to be 
misunderstood unless you make your position quite c lear." 
I had thought that my position was quite clear. Whe re there is a national 
Government there is rarely any friction between it and its officials or the 
students. My note guards itself against all indisci pline. What the schoolmaster 
resents, and rightly, is espionage and suppression of free thought which has 
been the rule of the day hitherto. Congress Ministe rs themselves are of the 
people and from the people. They have no secrets. T hey are expected to be in 
personal touch with every public activity including  the student mind. They have 
at their disposal the whole of the Congress machine ry which, as the interpreter 
of the popular will, is surely more than the law, t he police and the military. 
Those who have not that machinery to back them are spent bullets. For those 
Ministers who have the Congress at their back, the law, the police and the 
military may be said to be a useless appendage. And  the Congress is nothing if 
it is not an embodiment of discipline. Therefore wi th the Congress in power 
there should be voluntary, not forced, discipline e verywhere. 
Harijan 2-10-1937 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112   
28. HIGHER EDUCATION  
The Rt. Hon. Shri Srinivasa Sastri has criticized a s he had a perfect right to do, 
the view I timidly and very briefly expressed some time ago on Higher 
Education. I entertain a very high regard for him a s man, patriot and scholar. It 
is therefore always painful to me when I find mysel f disagreeing with him. And 
yet duty compels me to re-express my views on Highe r Education more 'fully 
than before, so that the reader may make out for hi mself the difference 
between his views and mine.' 
I admit my limitations; I have no university educat ion worth the name. My high 
school career was never above average. I was thankf ul if I could pass my 
examinations. Distinction in the school was beyond my aspiration. Nevertheless 
I do hold very strong views on education in general  including what is called 
Higher Education. And I owe it to the country that my views should be clearly 
known and taken for what they may be worth. I must shed the timidity that has 
led almost to self-suppression. I must not fear rid icule, and even loss of 
popularity or prestige. If I hide my belief, I shal l never correct errors of 
judgement. I am always eager to discover them and m ore than eager to correct 
them. 
Let me now state my conclusion held for a number of  years and enforced 
wherever I had opportunity of enforcing them: 
(1) I am not opposed to education even of the highe st type attainable in the 
world. 
(2) The State must pay for it wherever it has defin ite use for it. 
(3) I am opposed to all higher education being paid  for from the general 
revenue. 
(4) It is my firm conviction that the vast amount o f the so-called education in 
arts, given in our colleges, is sheer waste and has  resulted in unemployment 
among the educated classes. What is more, it has de stroyed the health, both Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  mental and physical of the boys and girls who have the misfortune to go 
through the grind in our colleges. 
(5) The medium of a foreign language through educat ion has been imported in 
India has caused in and moral injury to the nation.  We are too near our own 
times to judge the  enormity of the damage done. An d we who have received 
have both to be victims and judges- an almost impos sible feat. 
I must now give my reason for the conclusion set fo rth can best do, perhaps, by 
giving a chapter from my own experience. 
Up to the age of 12 all the knowledge I gained was through Gujarati, my mother 
tongue. I knew then something of Arithmetic, Histor y and Geography. Then I 
entered a high school. For the mother tongue was st ill the medium. But the 
schoolmaster’s business was to drive English into t he pupil's head. Therefore, 
our time was given to learning English and masterin g and pronunciation. It was 
a painful discovery to have to learn a language tha t was not pronounced as it 
was written. It was a strange experience to have to  learn the spelling by heart. 
But that is by the way, and irrelevant to my argume nt. However, for the first 
three years, it was comparatively plain sailing. 
The pillory began with the fourth year. Everything had to be learnt through 
English-Geometry, Algebra, Chemistry, Astronomy, Hi story, and Geography. The 
tyranny of English was so great that even Sanskrit or Persian had to be learnt 
through English, not through the mother tongue. If any boy spoke in the class in 
Gujarati which he understood, was punished. It did not matter to the teacher if 
a boy spoke bad English which he could neither pron ounce correctly nor 
understand fully. Why should the teacher worry? His  own English was by no 
means without blemish. It could not be otherwise. E nglish was a language to 
him as to his pupils. The result was chaos. We the boys had to learn many 
things by heart, though we could not understand the m fully and often not at 
all. My head used to reel as the teacher was strugg ling to make his exposition 
on Geometry understood by us. I could make neither head nor tail of Geometry 
till we reached the 13th theorem of the first book of Euclid. And let me confess 
to the reader that in spite of all my love for the mother tongue, I do not to this Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  day know the Gujarati equivalents of the technical terms of Geometry, Algebra 
and the like. I know now that what I took four year s to learn of Arithmetic, 
Algebra, Chemistry and Astronomy, I should have lea rnt easily in one year, if I 
had not to learn them through English but Gujarati,  the subjects would have 
been easier and clearer. My Gujarati vocabulary wou ld have been richer. I 
would have made use of such knowledge in my own hom e. This English medium 
created an impassable barrier between me and the me mbers of my family, who 
had not gone through English schools. My father kne w nothing of what I was 
doing. I could not, even if I had wished it, intere st my father in what I was 
learning. For though he had ample intelligence, he knew not a word of English. 
I was fast becoming a stranger in my own home. I ce rtainly became a superior 
person. Even my dress began to undergo imperceptibl e changes. What 
happened to me was not an uncommon experience. It w as common to the 
majority. 
The first three years in the High School made littl e addition to my stock of 
general knowledge. They were a preparation for fitt ing the boys for teaching 
them everything through English. High Schools were schools for cultural 
conquest by the English. The knowledge gained by th e three hundred boys of 
my High School became a circumscribed possession. I t was not for transmission 
to the masses. 
A word about literature. We had to learn several bo oks of English prose and 
English poetry. No doubt all this was nice. But tha t knowledge has been of no 
use to me in serving or bringing me in touch with t he masses. I am unable to 
say that if I had not learnt what I did of English prose and poetry, I would have 
missed a rare treasure. If I had, instead, passed t hose precious seven years in 
mastering Gujarati and had learnt mathematics, Scie nces, and Sanskrit and 
other subjects through Gujarati, I could easily hav e shared the knowledge so 
gained with my neighbours. I would have enriched Gu jarati, and who can say 
that I would not have, with my habit of application  and my inordinate love for 
the country and the mother tongue, made a richer an d greater contribution to 
the service of the masses? Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115  I must not be understood to decry English or its no ble literature. The columns 
of HARIJAN are sufficient evidence of my love of En glish. But the nobility of its 
literature cannot avail the Indian nation any more than the temperate climate 
or the scenery of England can avail her. India has to flourish in her own 
climate, and scenery, and her own literature, even though all the three may be 
inferior to the English climate, scenery and litera ture. We and our children 
must build on our own heritage. If we borrow anothe r, we impoverish our own. 
We can never grow on foreign victuals. I want the n ation to have the treasures 
contained in that language, and for that matter the  other languages of the 
world, through its own vernaculars. I do not need t o learn Bengali in order to 
know the beauties of Rabindranath's matchless produ ctions. I get them through 
good translations. Gujarati boys and girls do not n eed to learn Russian to 
appreciate Tolstoy's short stories. They learn them  through good translations. It 
is the boast of Englishmen that the best of the wor ld's literary output is in the 
hands of that nation in simple English inside of a week of its publication. Why 
need I learn English to get at the best of what Sha kespeare and Milton thought 
and wrote? It would be good economy to set apart a class of students whose 
business would be to learn the best of what is to b e learnt in the different 
languages of the world and give the translation in the vernaculars. Our masters 
chose the wrong way for us, and habit has made the wrong appear as right. 
I find daily proof of the increasing and continuing  wrong being done to the 
millions by our false de-indianizing education. Tho se graduates who are my 
valued associates themselves flounder when they hav e to give expression to 
their innermost thoughts. They are strangers in the ir own homes. Their 
vocabulary in the mother tongue is so limited that they cannot always finish 
their speech without having recourse to English wor ds and even sentences. Nor 
can they exist without English books. They often wr ite to one another in 
English. I cite the case of my companions to show h ow deep the evil has gone. 
For we have made a conscious effort to mend ourselv es. 
It has been argued that the wastage that occurs in our colleges need not worry 
us if, out of the collegians, one Jagadish Bose can  be produced by them. I Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116  should freely subscribe to the argument, if the was tage was unavoidable. I hope 
I have shown that it was and is even now avoidable.  Moreover the creation of a 
Bose does not help the argument. For Bose was not a  product of the present 
education. He rose in spite of the terrible handica ps under which he had to 
labour. And his knowledge became almost intransmiss ible to the masses. We 
seem to have come to think that no one can hope to be like a Bose unless he 
knows English. I cannot conceive a grosser supersti tion than this. No Japanese 
feels so helpless as we seem to do. 
Nothing but a heroic remedy can deal with the deep- seated evil which I have 
endeavoured to describe. The Congress Ministers can , it they will, mitigate it, if 
they cannot remove it. 
Universities must be made self-supporting. The Stat e should simply educate 
those whose services it would need. For all other b ranches of learning it should 
encourage private effort. The medium of instruction  should be altered at once 
and at any cost, the provincial languages being giv en their rightful place. I 
would prefer temporary chance in higher education t o the criminal waste that 
is daily accumulating. 
In order to enhance the status and the market value  of the provincial 
languages, I would have the language of the law cou rts to be the language of 
the province where the court is situated. The proce edings of the Provincial 
Legislatures must be in the language, or even the l anguage of the province 
where a province has more than one language within its borders. I suggest to 
the legislators that they could, by enough applicat ion, inside of a month, 
understand the languages of their provinces. There is nothing to prevent a 
Tamilian from easily learning the simple grammar an d a few hundred words of 
Telugu, Malayalam and Kanarese, all allied to Tamil . At the centre Hindustani 
must rule supreme. 
In my opinion this is not a question to be decided by academicians. They cannot 
decide through what language the boys and girls of a place are to be educated. 
That question is already decided for them in every free country. Nor can they 
decide the subjects to be taught. That depends upon  the wants of the country Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  to which they belong. Theirs is the privilege of en forcing the nation's will in the 
best manner possible. When the country becomes real ly free, the question of 
medium will be settled only one way. The academicia ns will frame the syllabus 
and prepare text-books accordingly. And the product s of the education of a 
free India will answer the requirements of the coun try as today they answer 
those of the foreign ruler. So long as we, the educ ated classes play with this 
question, I very much fear we shall not produce the  free and healthy India of 
our dream. We have to grow by strenuous effort out of our bondage, whether it 
is Educational, Economical, Social or Political. Th e effort itself is three-fourths 
of the battle. 
Thus I claim that I am not an enemy of Higher Educa tion. But I am an enemy of 
Higher Education as it is given in this country. Un der my scheme there will be 
more and better libraries, more and better laborato ries, more and better 
research institutes. Under it we should have an arm y of chemists, engineers 
and other experts who will be real servants of the nation, and answer the 
varied and growing requirements of a people who are  becoming increasingly 
conscious of their rights and wants. And all these experts will speak not a 
foreign language, but the language of the people. T he knowledge gained by 
them will be the common property of the people. The re will be truly original 
work instead of mere imitation. And the cost will b e evenly and justly 
distributed. 
Harijan 9-7-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118   
29. WHAT, AFTER FINISHING STUDIES?  
Q. A student has seriously posed this question: "Wh at am I to do after finishing 
my studies?" 
A. We are today a subject race and our educational system has been devised to 
serve the interests of our rulers. But even as the most selfish person is obliged 
to hold out some lure to those whom he is out to ex ploit, a number of 
temptations for studying in their institutions have  been brought into being by 
the rulers. Moreover, all members of Government are  not alike. There are some 
liberal minded among them who will consider the pro blem of education on 
merits. Therefore, there is no doubt some good even  in the present system. But 
the prevailing education is willy-nilly put to wron g use, i.e., it is looked upon as 
a means of earning money and position. 
The ancient aphorism, 'Education is that which libe rate,' is as true today as it 
was before. Education here does not mean mere spiri tual knowledge nor does 
liberation signify only spiritual liberation after death. Knowledge includes all 
training that is useful for the service of mankind and liberation means freedom 
from all manner of servitude even in the present li fe. Servitude is of two kinds: 
slavery to domination from outside and to one's own  artificial needs. The 
knowledge acquired in the pursuit of this ideal alo ne constitutes true study. 
Realizing that a form of education devised by forei gn rulers could only be 
calculated to subserve their interests, the Congres s accepted in 1920, among 
other things, the principle of the boycott of all G overnmental educational 
institutions. But that era seems to be over. The de mand for entrance to 
Government institutions and those imparting educati on on similar lines is 
increasing faster than the number of such schools a nd colleges. The ranks of 
examinees are ever swelling. In spite of this hypno tic spell, however, 1 hold 
that true education is what 1 have defined. 
A student who is superficially attracted by the edu cational ideal set forth by 
me and leaves his studies is liable to repent of hi s action later. 1 have, Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  therefore, suggested a safer course. While continui ng his studies in the 
institution which he has joined he should ever keep  before him the ideal of 
service set forth by me and use his studies with a view to serve that ideal, 
never for making money. Moreover, he should try to make up the lack in the 
present education by application of his leisure hou rs to the ideal. He will, 
therefore avail himself to the utmost of whatever o pportunity offers for taking 
part in the constructive programme. 
Harijan 1-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON HIS SON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121   
30. TO MY NUMEROUS MUSLIM FRIENDS  
The newspapers report that about a fortnight ago my  eldest son Harilal, now 
nearing fifty years, accepted Islam and that on Fri day 29th May in the midst of 
a large congregation in the Juma Masjid at Bombay h e was permitted to 
announce his acceptance amid great acclamation and that after his speech was 
finished, he was besieged by his admirers who vied with one another to shake 
hands with him. If acceptance was from the heart an d free from any worldly 
considerations, I should have no quarrel. For 1 bel ieve Islam to be as true a 
religion as my own. 
But I have the gravest doubt about this acceptance being from the heart or free 
from selfish considerations. Everyone who knows my son Harilal, knows that he 
has been for years addicted to the drink evil and h as been in the habit of 
visiting houses of ill-fame. For some years he has been living in the charity of 
friends who have helped him unstintingly. He is ind ebted to some Pathans from 
whom he had borrowed on heavy interest. Up to only recently he was in dread 
of his life from his Pathan creditors in Bombay. No w he is the hero of the hour 
in that city. He had a most devoted wife who always  forgave his many sins 
including his unfaithfulness. He has three grown-up  children, two daughters and 
one son, whom he ceased to support long ago. 
Not many weeks ago he wrote to the press complainin g against Hindus- not 
Hinduism- and threatening to go over to Christianit y or Islam. The language of 
the letter showed quite clearly that he would go ov er to the highest bidder. 
That letter had the desired effect. Through the goo d offices of a Hindu 
councilor he got a job in Nagpur municipality. And he came out with another 
letter to the Press about recalling the first and d eclaring emphatic adherence 
to his ancestral faith. 
But, as events have proved, his pecuniary ambition was not satisfied and in 
order to satisfy that ambition, he has embraced Isl am. There are other facts 
which are known to me and which strengthen my infer ence. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  When I was in Nagpur in April last, he had come to see me and his mother and 
he told me how he was amused by the attentions that  were being paid to him 
by the missionaries of rival faiths. God can work w onders. He has been known 
to have changed the stoniest hearts and turned sinn ers into saints, as it were, 
in a moment. Nothing will please better than to fin d that during the Nagpur 
meeting and the Friday announcement he had repented  of the past and had 
suddenly become a changed man having shed the drink  habit and sexual lust. 
But the Press reports give no such evidence. He sti ll delight in sensation and in 
good living. If he had changed, he would have writt en to me to gladden my 
heart. All my children have had the greatest freedo m of thought and action. 
They have been taught to regard all religions with the same respect that they 
paid to their own. Harilal knew that if he had told  me that he had found the 
key to a right life and peace in Islam, I would hav e put no obstacle in his path. 
But no one of us, including his son now twenty-four  years old and who is with 
me, knew anything about the event till we saw the a nnouncement in the Press. 
My views on Islam are well-known to the Mussalmans who are reported to have 
enthused over my son's profession. A brotherhood of  Islam has telegraphed to 
me thus, "Expect like your son you truth-seeker to embrace Islam truest religion 
of world." 
I must confess that all this has hurt me. I sense n o religious spirit behind this 
demonstration. I feel that those who are responsibl e for Harilal's acceptance of 
Islam did not take the most ordinary precautions th ey ought to have in a case of 
this kind. 
Harilal's apostacy is no loss to Hinduism and his a dmission to Islam a source of 
weakness to it if, as I apprehend, he remains the s ame wreck that he was 
before. 
Surely conversion is a matter between man and his M aker who alone knows His 
creatures' hearts. And conversion without a clean h eart is, in my opinion, a 
denial of God and religion. Conversion without clea nness of heart can only be a 
matter for sorrow, not joy, to a godly person. 
Harijan 6-6-1936 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON SOCIAL SERVICE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124   
31. QUALIFICATIONS OF A PEACE BRIGADE  
Some time ago I suggested the formation of a Peace Brigade whose members 
would risk their lives in dealing with riots, espec ially communal. The idea was 
that this Brigade should substitute the police and even the military. This reads 
ambitious. The achievement may prove impossible. Ye t, if the Congress is to 
succeed in its nonviolent struggle, it must develop  the power to deal peacefully 
with such situations. Communal riots are engineered  by politically minded men. 
Many of those who take part in them are under the i nfluence of the latter. 
Let us, therefore, see what qualifications a member  of the contemplated Peace 
Brigade should possess. 
(1) He or she must have a living faith in nonviolen ce. This is impossible without 
a living faith in God. A nonviolent man can do noth ing to save by the power and 
grace of God. Without it he won't have the courage to die without anger, 
without fear and without retaliation. 
(2) This messenger of peace must have equal regard for all the principal 
religions of the earth. Thus, if he is a Hindu, he will respect the other faiths 
current in India. 
(3) Generally speaking, this work of peace can only  be done by local men in 
their own localities. 
(4) The work can be done singly or in groups. 
(5) This messenger of peace will cultivate through personal service contacts 
with the people in his locality or chose circle, so  that when he appears to deal 
with ugly situations, he does not descend upon the members of a riotous 
assembly as an utter stranger liable to be looked u pon as a suspect or an 
unwelcome visitor. 
(6) Needless to say, a peace bringer must have a ch aracter beyond reproach 
and must be known for his strict impartiality. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125  (7) Generally there are previous warnings of coming  storms. If these are known, 
the peace brigade will not wait till the conflagrat ion breaks out but will try to 
handle the situation in anticipation. 
(8) Whilst, if the movement spreads, it might be we ll if there are some whole-
time workers, it is not absolutely necessary that t here should be. The idea is to 
have as many good and true men and women as possibl e. These can be had only 
if volunteers are drawn from those who are engaged in various walks of life but 
have leisure enough to cultivate friendly relations  with the people living in 
their circle and otherwise possess the qualificatio ns required of a member of 
the Peace Brigade. 
(9) There should be a distinctive dress worn by the  members of the 
contemplated brigade so that in course of time they  will be recognized without 
the slightest difficulty. 
These are but general suggestions. Each centre can work out its own 
constitution on the basis here suggested. 
Lest false hopes may be raised, I must warn workers  against entertaining the 
hope that 1 can play any active part in the formati on of Peace Brigades. I have 
not the health, energy or time for it. I find it ha rd enough to cope with the 
tasks 1 dare not shirk. I can only guide and make s uggestions through 
correspondence or these columns. Therefore those wh o appreciate the idea and 
feel they have the ability, take the initiative the mselves. I know that the 
proposed Brigade has great possibilities and that t he idea behind it is quite 
capable of being worked out in practice. 
Harijan 7-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ON POLITICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127   
32. TWO PARTIES  
Private and public appeals are being made to me to call all parties together and 
arrive at a common agreement, and then, they say, w e shall get what we want 
from Great Britain. These good friends forget one c entral fact. The Congress, 
which professes to speak for India and wants Unadul terated Independence, 
cannot strike a common measure of agreement with th ose who do not. To act 
otherwise would be to betray its rust. In the natur e of things, therefore, there 
can be no "all parties conference" unless all have a common purpose. 
The British government would not ask for a common a greement, if they 
recognised any one party to be strong enough to tak e delivery. The Congress, it 
must be admitted, has not that strength today. It h as come to its present 
position in the face of opposition. If it does not weaken and has enough 
patience, it will develop sufficient strength to ta ke delivery. It is an illusion 
created by ourselves that we must come to an agreem ent with all parties 
before we can make any progress. 
There is only one democratically elected political organization, i.e. the 
Congress. All the others are self-appointed, or ele cted on a section basis. The 
Muslim League is an organization which, like the Co ngress, is popularly elected. 
But it is frankly communal and wants to divide Indi a into two parts, one Hindu 
and the other Muslim. I read an appeal by a Muslim Leaguer suggesting that the 
British Government should come to terms with the Mu slims and depend upon 
Muslim aid. That would be one way of settling the q uestion but also of 
perpetuating British rule. The Hindu Mahasabha will  no doubt want favoured 
treatment for Hindus including Hindu States. 
Thus, for the present purpose there are only two pa rties - the Congress and 
those who side with the Congress, and the parties w ho do not. Between the two 
there is no meeting ground without the one or the o ther surrendering its 
purpose. The other parties must be presumed to be a s constant in their purpose 
as the Congress claims to be in it. Therefore there  is a stalemate. But the 
stalemate is only apparent. An agreement independen tly of evolving a common Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  demand the Congress must seek and has always sought . It is the process of 
conversion. Its nonviolence forbids the Congress fr om standing aloof and riding 
the high horse as the opponents say. On the contrar y it has to woo all parties, 
disarm suspicion and create trust in its bona fades. This it can only do when it 
has cleaned its own stables. The process may take t ime. That time must be 
given. It will be no waste. But if the Congress los es hope and faith and comes to 
the conclusion that it must surrender its original position for the purpose of 
getting a common measure of agreement, it will ceas e to be the power it is. 
Today it is the sheet-anchor of India's hope and fa ith. It will be well with it, if 
it refuses to move away from its moorings. Whether it is in a minority or a 
majority. 
Harijan 11-6-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129   
33. MEMBERS OF THE R.S.S.  
Only Sacrifice Is Not Enough  
Addressing about 500 members of the Rashtriya Sevak  Sangha at the Bhangi 
Colony, Gandhiji said that he had visited the Rasht riya Sevak Sangh Camp years 
ago at Wardha, when the founder Shri Hedgewar was a live. The late Shri 
Jamnalal Bajaj had taken him to, the camp and he (G andhiji) had been very 
impressed by their discipline, complete absence of untouchability and rigorous 
simplicity. Since then this Sangh had grown. Gandhi ji was convinced that any 
organization which was inspired by the ideal of ser vice and self-sacrifice was 
bound to grow in strength. But in order to be truly  useful, self-sacrifice had to 
be combined with purity of motive and true knowledg e. Sacrifice without these 
two had been known to prove ruinous to society. 
 
Sanatani Hindu  
The prayer that was recited at the beginning was in  praise of Mother India, 
Hindu culture and Hindu religion. He claimed to be a Sanatani Hindu. He took 
the root meaning of the word Sanatana. No one knew accurately the origin of 
the word Hindu. The name was given to us and we had  characteristically 
adopted it. Hinduism had absorbed the best of all t he faiths of the world and in 
that sense it was not an exclusive religion. Hence,  it could have no quarrel with 
Islam or its followers, as unfortunately was the ca se today. When the poison of 
untouchability entered Hinduism, the decline began.  One thing was certain, 
and he had been proclaiming it from house tops, tha t if untouchability lived, 
Hinduism must die. Similarly, if the Hindus felt th at in India there was no place 
for anyone else except the Hindus and if non-Hindus , especially Muslims. 
wished to live here, they had to live as the slaves  of the Hindus, or they would 
kill Hinduism. Similarly if Pakistan believed that in Pakistan only the Muslims 
had a rightful place and the non-Muslims had to liv e there on sufferance and as 
their slaves, it would be the death-knell of Islam in India. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 130   
Good for Evil  
It was an unfortunate fact that India had been divi ded into two parts. If one 
part went mad and did ugly deeds, was the other par t to follow suit? There was 
no gain in returning evil for evil. Religion taught  us to return good for evil. 
 
The Sangh's Claim  
He had seen their Guruji a few days ago. He had men tioned to him the various 
complaints about the Sangh that he had received in Calcutta and Delhi. The 
Guruji had assured him that though could not vouchs afe for the correct 
behaviour of every member of the Sangh, the Policy Of the Sangh was purely 
service of Hindus and Hinduism and that too not at the cost of anyone else. The 
Sangh did not believe in aggression. It did not bel ieve in ahimsa. It taught the 
art of self-defence. It never taught retaliation. 
The ship of India was passing through troubled wate rs. The leaders in charge of 
the Government were the best that India possessed. Some people were 
dissatisfied with them. He would ask them to produc e better men if they could 
and he would advise the old guard to hand over the reins to their betters. After 
all, Sardar was an old man and Pandit Jawaharlal, t hough not old in years, 
looked old and haggard under the burden he was carr ying. They were doing 
their utmost to serve the people, but they could on ly act according to their 
light. If the vast bulk of the Hindus wanted to, go  in a particular direction. even 
though it might be wrong, no one could prevent them  from doing so. But even a 
single individual had the right to raise his voice against it and give them the 
warning. That is what Gandhiji was doing. He was to ld that he was the friend of 
the Muslims and the enemy of the Hindus and the Sik hs. It was true that he was 
a friend of the Muslims, as he was of the Parsis an d others. In this respect he 
was the same today as he had been since the age of twelve. But those who 
called him the enemy of the Hindus and the Sikhs di d not know him. He could 
be enemy of none, much less of the Hindus and the S ikhs. Journalist Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 131   
Result OF Wrong Doing?  
If Pakistan persisted in wrong doing, there was bou nd to be war between India 
and Pakistan. If he had his way, he would have no m ilitary; no police even. But 
all this was tall talk. He was not the Government. Why did not Pakistan plead 
with the Hindus and the Sikhs and asked them not to  leave their homes and 
ensure their safety in every way? Why could not the y in the Indian Union ensure 
the safety of every Muslim? 
Both the parties appeared to have gone crazy. The r esult could be nothing but 
destruction and misery. 
 
Deeds And Words  
The Sangh was a well-organized, well-disciplined bo dy. Its strength could be 
used in the interests of India or against it. He di d not know whether there was 
any truth in the allegations made against the Sangh . It was for the Sangh to 
show by their uniform behaviour that the allegation s were baseless. 
 
Who Can Punish?  
At the conclusion of the speech, Gandhiji invited q uestions. One person asked if 
Hinduism permitted killing of an evil-doer. Gandhij i replied that it did and it 
did not. One evil-doer could not punish another. To  punish was the function of 
the Government, not that of the public. 
Harijan 28-9-1947 
 