 
Key To Health 
 
 
 
 
Written by: M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Translated by: Sushila Nayar 
 
 
Rs. 5/-  
 
 
 
First Published: October 1948 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com  
Website: www.navajivantrust.org  
  
Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
PREFACE 
For the benefit of the readers of the Indian Opinion  (South Africa), I wrote a 
few articles under the heading Guide to Health  in or about the year 1906. 
These were later published in book form. I found th at it was known to the 
Indian public. But copies were not available in Ind ia. The late Swami 
Akhandanand asked for my permission to publish an I ndian edition. The 
enterprise proved very popular. The book was transl ated into several Indian 
languages. An English translation also appeared. Th is reached the West, and 
was translated in several European languages. The r esult was that the book 
became the most popular of all my writings. I have never been able to 
understand the reason for this popularity. I had wr itten those articles casually, 
and I did not attach much importance to them. But p erhaps the reason for the 
popularity is to be sought in the fact that I have looked upon the problem of 
health from the orthodox methods adopted by doctors  and  vaidyas . Whether my 
presumption is correct or not, many friends have be en pressing me to publish a 
new edition, putting forth my views to date. I have  never been able to revise 
the original. I have never had the time for it. The  present enforced rest offers 
me such an opportunity and I am taking advantage of  it. I have not even got the 
original with me. The experience of so many years c annot but have left its 
mark upon my thought. But those who have read the o riginal book will notice 
that there is no fundamental difference between my ideas of today and those 
of 1906. But my mind is responsive. Therefore, what ever change the reader 
may find will, I hope, be in the nature of a progre ss. 
I am giving a new name: Key to Health . Anyone who observes the rules of 
health mentioned in this book will find that he has  got in it a real key to unlock 
the gates leading him to health. He will not need t o knock at the doors of 
doctors or vaidyas  from day to day. 
Aga Khan Palace, 
Yeravda, 27Y8Y’42        M. K. Gandhi Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4   
01. THE HUMAN BODY 
It is necessary to understand the meaning of the wo rd health, before entering 
upon a description of the human body. In health, me ans body ease. He is a 
healthy man whose body is free from all disease; he  carries on his normal 
activities without fatigue. Such a man should be ab le with ease to walk ten to 
twelve miles a day, and perform ordinary physical l abour without getting tired 
He can digest ordinary simple food. His mind and hi s senses are in a state of 
harmony and poise. This definition does not include  prize fighters and such like. 
A man with extraordinary physical strength is not n ecessarily healthy. He has 
merely developed his musculature, possibly at the e xpense of something else. 
It is necessary to have enough knowledge of the hum an body which is expected 
to attain the above standard of health. 
God alone knows what kind of education was prevalen t in ancient times. 
Research workers on the subject may be able to tell  us something, but only 
something, about it. But all of us have some experi ence of modern education in 
this country. It has no relation with our everyday life. Thus, it leaves us almost 
utterly ignorant about our own body. Our knowledge of our own village and our 
fields shares a similar fate. We are taught on the other hand, much about thing 
that have no bearing on our daily life. I do not me an to say that such knowledge 
is of no use. But everything has its own place. We must first know enough of 
our own body, our own house, our village and its su rroundings, the crop that 
grow there and its history before going on to anyth ing else. General knowledge 
broadYbased on this primary knowledge, alone can en rich our life. 
The human body is composed of what the ancient phil osophers have described 
as the five elements. These are earth, water, vacan cy, light and air. 
All human activity is carried on by means of the mi nd aided by the ten senses. 
These are the five senses of action, i.e. hands, fe et, mouth, anus and the 
genitals, and the five senses of perception, i.e. t he nose, of taste through the 
tongue, of seeing through the eyes and of hearing t hrough the ears. Thinking is Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  the function of the mind and some people have calle d the eleventh sense. In 
health all the senses and the mind act in perfect c oYordination. 
The inner working of the human machine is wonderful . The human body is the 
universe in miniature. That which cannot be found i n the body is not found in 
the universe. Hence the philosopher’s formula, that  the universe within reflects 
the universe without. It follows thereY fore that o ur knowledge of our body 
could be perfect we would know the universe. But ev en the very best of 
doctors and hakims and maids have not been able to acquire it. It will not 
presumptuous for a layman to aspire to it. No one h as yet discovered an 
instrument which can give us any information about the human mind. Scientists 
have given attractive description of the activities  going on within and without 
the body, but no one can say what sets the wheel go ing. Who can explain the 
why and wherefore of death or foretell its time? In  short, after infinite reading 
and writing, after infinite experience, man has com e to know how little he 
knows. 
A happy working of the human machine depends upon t he harmonious activity 
of the various component parts. If all these work i n an orderly manner, the 
machine runs smoothly. If even one of the essential  part is out of order, it 
comes to a stop. For instance, if the digestion is out of order, the whole body 
becomes slack. Therefore, he who takes indigestion and constipation lightly 
does not know the aYbYc of the rules of health. The se two are the root cause of 
the innumerable aliments. 
The question that demands our attention next is: wh at is the use of human 
body? Everything in the world can be used and abuse d. This applies to the body 
also. We abuse it when we use it for selfish purpos es, for selfYindulgence or in 
order to harm another. It is put to its right use i f we exercise selfYrestraint and 
dedicate our self to the service of the whole world . The human soul is the part 
of the universal spirit of God. When all our activi ties is directed towards the 
realization of this link, the body becomes a temple  worthy for the spirit to live 
in. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6  The body has been described as a mine of dirt. Look ed at in its proper 
perspective, there is no exaggeration in this state ment. If the body was nothing 
else but this, there could be no point in talking s uch pains to look after it. But 
if this soYcalled mine of dirt can be put to its pr oper use, it became our first 
duty to cleanse it and keep it in a fit condition. The mines of precious stones 
and gold also have the look of ordinary earth on th e surface. The knowledge 
that there are gold and precious stones underneath,  induces men to spread 
millions and engage scientific brains in order to g et at what lies in those mines. 
Similarly, we cannot take too much pain over keepin g in a fit condition the 
temple of the spiritYthe human body. 
Man came into the world in order to pay off the deb t owed by him to it, that is 
to say, in order to serve God and His creation. Kee ping this point of view in 
front of him, man acts as a guardian of his body. I t becomes his duty to take 
such care of his body as to enable it to practice t he idea of serving to the best 
of its ability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7   
02. AIR 
No one can live without air as one can without wate r for a few days and 
without food much longer. Therefore, nature has sur rounded us with air on all 
sides so that we can get it without any effort. 
We take in air through our nose into our lungs. The  lungs act as a sort of 
bellows. The atmospheric air which we breath in has  a lifeYgiving substance Y a 
gas known as oxygen. The air that we breath out con tains poisonous gases. 
These can kill us if they are not immediately allow ed to spread out and get 
diluted by the atmospheric air. Hence the necessity  of proper ventilation. 
The air comes into close contacts with blood in the  lungs and purifies it. Many 
people do not know the act of breathing. This defec t prevents an adequate 
purification of their blood. Some people breath thr ough their mouth instead of 
their nose. This is a bad habit. Nature has so desi gned the nose that it acts as a 
sort of filter for the ingoing air and also warms i t. In mouth breathers the 
atmospheric air reaches the lungs without the preli minary filtration or 
warming. It follows therefore that those who do not  know how to breathe 
should take breathing exercises. They are as easy t o learn as are useful. I do 
not wish to go into a discussion of the various asanas  or postures. I do not mean 
to say that these are not important or useful. But I do wish to emphasize that a 
wellYregulated life outweighs the advantage of stud ying elaborate postures that 
ensure breathing through the nose and free chest ex pansion is enough for our 
purposes. 
If we keep the mouth tightly close, the breathing w ould have to be carried out 
by the nose. Just as we wash our mouth every mornin g, the nose should be also 
be cleaned. Clean water, cold or lukewarm water is the best agent for this 
purpose. It should be taken in a cup in the palm of  the hand and draw up 
through the nostrils. It is possible to draw the wa ter up through one nostril, the 
other remains closed, and expel in through the othe r by opening it and closing 
the former. The process should be carried out gentl y so as to avoid discomfort. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8  In order to cleanse the back portion of the nose kn own as nasopharynx, water 
should be brought out by the mouth or even swallowe d. 
We must see that the air that we breath in is fresh . It is good to cultivate a 
habit of sleeping in the open under the star. The f ear of catching a chill could 
be dismissed from the mind. Cold can be kept out by  plenty of covering. This 
covering should not extend beyond the neck. If cold  is felt on the head, it can 
be covered with separate piece of cloth. The openin g of the respiratory passage 
Y the nose Y should never be covered up. 
The day clothes should be changed for loose night c lothes before retiring. As a 
matter of fact no clothes are necessary at night wh en one sleeps covered with 
a sheet. TightYfitting clothes should be avoided ev en during day. 
The atmospheric air around us is not always pure, n either it is the same in 
every country. The choice of the country does not a lways lie in our hands but 
the choice of a suitable house in a suitable locali ty does rest with us till some 
extent. The general rule should be to live in a loc ality which is not too 
congested and insist upon the house being well ligh ted and wellventilated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9   
03. WATER 
Next to air, water is the necessity of life. We can not live without it for more 
than a few days, just as without air we cannot live  for more than a few 
minutes. Therefore, as in the case of the air, natu re has provided us with 
ample amount of water. Man cannot live on barren la nd where there is no vast 
tracts of desert land lie utterly uninhabited. 
In order to keep healthy, everyone should take 5lbs . of water or other liquid 
food in 24 hours. Drinking water must be pure. In m any places it is difficult to 
get pure water. There is always risk in drinking we ll water. The water of 
shallow wells, and even deep wells with stairY case  leading down to the water 
level, should be considered absolutely unfit for dr inking purposes. The 
difficulty is that the appearance and even the tast e of water are no guide to its 
purity. Water which appears perfectly harmless to l ook at and to taste, can act 
as poison. The own custom of not drinking from an u nknown well or from a 
stranger’s house is worth copying. 
In Bengal almost every house has a kachcha tank att ached to it. As a rule the 
water of these is unfit for drinking purpose. River  water is also frequently not 
fit for drinking, particularly where the river is u sed for navigation or where it 
passes by a big city and receives its drainage and sewage water. 
In spite of what I have said, I know there are mill ions of people who had to 
drink what I have described as impure water. But th at does not mean that their 
example is worth of being copied. Nature has provid ed us with sufficient 
reserves of vitality. But for that, man would have long ago disappeared from 
the face of the earth because of his own mistake an d transgressions of the rules 
of health. 
Here we are concerned merely with the role of water  with regards of health. 
Whenever we are doubtful about the purity of water,  it should be boiled before 
drinking. In practice it amounts to this that every one should carry his drinking 
water with him. Many orthodox Hindus in India do no t drink water whilst Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  traveling on account of religious prejudices. Surel y, the enlightened can do for 
the sake of health. What the unenlightened do in th e name of religion! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
04. FOOD 
Whilst it is true that man cannot live without air and water, the thing that 
nourishes the body is food. Hence the saying, food is life. 
Food can be divided into three categories: vegetari an, flesh and mixed. Flesh 
food includes fowl and fish. Milk is an animal prod uct and cannot be any means 
is included in a strictly vegetarian diet. It serve s the purpose of meat to a very 
large extent. In medical language it is classified as animal food. A layman does 
not consider milk to be a animal food. On the other  hand eggs are regarded by 
the layman as a flesh food. In reality, they are no t. Nowadays sterile eggs are 
also produced. The hen is not allowed to see the co ck and yet it lays eggs. A 
sterile egg never evolves into a chick. Therefore, he who can take milk should 
have no objection to take sterile eggs. 
Medical opinion is mostly in favor of a mixed diet,  although there is a growing 
school, which is strongly of the opinion that anato mical and physiological 
evidence is in favor of man being a vegetarian. His  teeth, his stomach, 
intestines etc., seem to improve that nature has me ant to man to be a 
vegetarian. 
Vegetarian diet besides grains, pulses, edible root s, tubers and leaves, includes 
fruits, both fresh and dry. Dry fruits include nuts  like almonds, pistachio, 
walnut etc. 
I have always been favour of pure vegetarian diet. But experience has taught 
me that in order to be perfectly fit, vegetarian di et must include milk and milkY
products such as curd, butter, ghee, etc. This sign ificant departure from my 
original idea. I excluded milk from my diet for six  years. At that time, I felt 
none the worse for the denial. But in year 1917, as  a result of my ignorance, I 
was laid down with severe dysentery. I was reduced to a skeleton, but I 
stubbornly refused to take any medicine and with eq ual stubbornness refused 
to take milk or buttermilk. But I could not build u p my body and pick up 
sufficient strength to leave the bed. I had taken a  vow of not taking milk. A Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  medical friend suggested that at the time of taking  a vow, I could have in my 
mind only the milk of cow and buffalo; why would th e vow prevent me from 
taking goat’s milk? My wife supported him and I yie lded. Really speaking, for 
one who has given up milk, though at the time of ta king the vow only the cow 
and the buffalo were in mind, milk should be taboo.  All animal milks have 
practically the same composition, though the proY p ortion of the components 
varies in each case. So I may be said to have kept merely the letter, not the 
spirit, of the vow. But that as it may, goat’s milk  was produced immediately 
and I drank it. It seemed to bring me new life. I p icked up rapidly and was soon 
able to leave the bed. On account of this and sever al similar experiences, I 
have been forced to admit the necessity of adding m ilk to the strict vegetarian 
diet. But I am convinced that in the vast vegetable  kingdom there must be 
some kind, which, while supplying those necessary s ubstances which we derive 
from milk and meat, is free from their drawbacks, e thical and other. 
In my opinion there a definite drawbacks in taking milk or meat. In order to get 
meat we have to kill. And we are certainly not enti tled to any other milk 
except the mother’s milk in our infancy. Over and a bove the moral drawback, 
there are others, purely from the point of view of health. Both milk and meat 
bring with them the defects of the animal from whic h they are derived. 
Domesticated cattle are hardly ever perfectly healt hy. Just like man, cattle 
suffer from innumerable diseases. Several of these are overYlooked even when 
the cattle are subjected to periodical medical exam inations. Besides, medical 
examination of all the cattle in India seem to be a n impossible feat, at any rate 
for the present. I am conducting a dairy at the Sev agram Ashram. I can easily 
get help from medical friends. Yet I cannot say wit h certainty that all the 
cattle in the Sevagram Dairy are healthy. On a cont rary, a cow that had been 
considered to be healthy by everybody was found to be suffering from 
tuberculosis. Before this diagnosis was made, the m ilk of that cow had been 
used regularly in the Ashram. The Ashram also takes  milk from the farmers in 
the neighborhood. Their cattle had not been medical ly examined. It is difficult 
to determine whether a particular specimen of milk is safe for consumption or 
not. We have to rest content with as much safety as  boiling of the milk can Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13  assure us of. If the Ashram cannot boast of foolYpr oof medical examination of 
its cattle, and be certain of the safety of its dai ry products, the situation 
elsewhere is not likely to be much better. What app lies to the milch cattle 
applies to a much greater extent to the animals sla ughtered for meat. As a 
general rule, man just depends upon luck to escape from such risks. He does 
not seem to worry much about his health. He conside rs himself to be quite safe 
in his medical fortress in the shape of doctors, vo ids and hakims. His main 
worry and concern is how to get wealth and positive  in society. This worry 
overshadows all the rest. Therefore, so long as som e selfless scientist does not, 
as a result of patient research work, discover a ve getable substitute for milk 
and meat, man will do on taking meat and milk. 
Now let us consider mixed diet. Man requires food w hich supply tissue building 
substances to provide for the growth and daily wear  and tear of the body. It 
should also contain something which can supply ener gy, fat, certain salts and 
roughage to help the excretion of waste matter. Tis sue building substances are 
known as proteins. They are obtained from milk, mea t, eggs, pulses and nuts. 
The protein contained in milk and meat, in other wo rds, the animal protein 
being more digestible and assimilable, are much val uable than vegetable 
proteins. Milk is superior to meat. The medicos tel l us that in cases when meat 
cannot be digested, milk is digested quite easily. For vegetarians milk being the 
only source of animal proteins, is a very important  article of diet. The proteins 
in raw eggs are considered to be the most easily di gestible of all proteins. 
But everybody cannot afford to drink milk. And milk  is not available in all 
places. I would like to mention here a very importa nt fact with regards to milk. 
Contrary to the popular belief, skimmed milk is a v ery valuable article of diet. 
There are times when it proves even more useful tha n whole milk. The chief 
function of milk is to supply animal proteins for t issue building andtissue repair. 
Skimming while it partially removes the fats, does not affect the proteins at 
all. Moreover, the available skimming instrument ca nnot remove all the fats 
from milk. Neither there is any likelihood of such an instrument being 
constructed. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  The body requires other things besides milk, whole or skimmed. I give the 
second place to cerealsYwheat, rice, jowar, bajra e tc. These are used as the 
staple diet. Different cereals are used to staple i n different provinces in India. 
In many places, more than one kind of cereals are e aten at the same time, for 
instance, small quantities of wheat, bajra and rice  are often served together. 
This mixture is not necessary for the nourishment o f the body. It makes it 
difficult to regulate the quantity of food intake, and puts an extra strain upon 
digestion. As all these varieties supply starch mai nly, it is better to take one 
only, at a time. Wheat may well be described a king  among the cereals. If we 
glance at the world map, we find that wheat occupie s the first place. From the 
point of view of health, if we can get wheat, rice and other cereals become 
unnecessary. If wheat is not available and jowar, e tc. cannot be taken on 
account of dislike or difficulty in digesting them,  rice has to be resorted to. 
The cereals should be properly cleansed, ground on a grinding stone, and the 
resulting flour used as it is. Sieving of the flour  should be avoided. It is likely to 
remove the bhusi or the per carp which is a rich so urce of salt and vitamins, 
both of which are most valuable form the point of v iew of nutrition. The 
pericarp also supplies roughage, which helps the ac tion of the bowels. Rice 
grain being very delicate, nature has provided it w ith an outer covering or 
epicure. This is not edible. In order to remove thi s inedible portion, rice has to 
be pounded. Pounding should be just sufficient to r emove the epicarp or the 
outer skin of the rice grain. But machine pounding not only removes the outer 
skin, but also polishes the rice by removing its pe ricarp. The explanation of the 
popularity of polished rice lies in the fact that p olishing helps preservation. The 
pericarp is very sweet and unless it is removed, ri ce is easily attracted by 
certain organY isms. Polished rice and wheat withou t its pericarp, supply us 
with almost pure starch. Important constituents of the cereals are lost with the 
removal of their pericarp. The pericarp of the rice  is sold as rice polishings. 
This and the pericarp of wheat can be cooked and ea ten by themselves. The 
can be also made into chapattis or cakes. It is pos sible that rice chapattis may 
be more easily digestible than whole rice and in th is form a lesser quantity may 
result in full satisfaction. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15  We are in the habit of dipping each morsel of chapa ti in vegetable or dal gravy 
before eating. The result is that most people swall ow their food without proper 
mastication. Mastication is an important step in th e process of digestion, 
especially that of starch. Digestion of starch begi ns on its coming into contact 
with saliva in the mouth. Mastication ensures a tho rough mixing of food with 
saliva. Therefore, starchy food should be eaten in a relatively dry form, which 
results in a greater flow of saliva and also necess itates their thorough 
mastication. 
After the starch supplying cereals come the protein  supplying pulsesYbeans, 
lentils etc. 
Almost everybody seems to think that pulses are ess ential constituent of diet. 
Even meat eaters should have pulses. It is easy to understand that those who 
have to do hard manual work and who cannot afford t o drink milk, cannot do 
without pulses. But I can say without any hesitatio n whatsoever that those who 
follow sedentary occupations as for instance, clerk s, business men, doctors and 
those who are not to poor to buy milk, do not requi re pulses. Pulses are 
generally considered to be difficult to digest and are eaten in a much smaller 
quantity than cereals. Out of variety of pulses, pe as, gram and haricot beans 
are considered to be the most and mung (green grams ) and masoor (lentils) the 
least difficult to digest. 
Vegetables and fruits should come third on our list . One would expect them to 
be cheap and easily available in India. But it is n ot so. They are generally 
considered to be delicacies meant for the city peop le. In the villages fresh 
vegetable are a rarity, and in most places fruits a re also not available. This 
shortage of greens and fruits is a slur on the admi nistration of India. The 
villagers can grow plenty of green vegetables if th ey wish to. The question of 
fruits cannot be solved so easily. The land legisla ture is bad from the villager’s 
standpoint. But I am transgressing. 
Among fresh vegetables, a fare amount of leafy vege tables must be taken every 
day. I do not include potatoes, sweet potatoes, sar an etc, which supply starch 
mainly, among vegetables. They should be put down i n same category as starch Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  supplying cereals. A fair helping of ordinary fresh  vegetables is advisable. 
Certain varieties such as cucumber, tomatoes, musta rd and cress and other 
tender leaves need not be cooked. They should be wa shed properly and eaten 
in raw in small quantities. 
As for fruits, our daily diet should include availa ble fruits of the season, e.g. 
mangoes, grapes etc. should all be used in their se ason. The best time for 
taking fruits is in early morning. A breakfast of f ruits and milk should give full 
satisfaction. Those who take an early lunch may hav e a breakfast of fruits only. 
Banana is a good fruit. But as it is very rich in s tarch, it takes the place of 
bread. Milk and banana make a perfect meal. 
A certain amount of fat is also necessary. This can  be had in the form of ghee 
or oil. If ghee can be had, oil becomes unnecessary . It is difficult to digest and 
is not so nourishing as pure ghee. An ounce and hal f of ghee per head per day, 
should be considered ample to supply the needs of t he body. Whole milk is also 
a source of ghee. Those who cannot afford it should  take enough oil to supply 
the need for fat. Among oils, sweet oil, coconut oi l, and ground nut oil should 
be given preference. Oil must be fresh. If availabl e, it is better to use handY
pressed oil. Oil and ghee sold in the bazaar are ge nerally quiet useless. It is a 
matter of great sorrow and shame. But so long as ho nesty has not become an 
integral part of business morals, whether through l egislation or through 
education, the individual will have to procure the pure article with patience 
and diligence. One should never be satisfied to tak e what one can get, 
irrespective of its quality. It is far better to do  with ghee oil altogether than to 
eat rancid oil and adulterated ghee. As in the case  of fats, a certain amount of 
sugar is also necessary. Although sweet fruits supp ly plenty of sugar, there is no 
harm in taking one to one and half ounces of sugar,  brown or white in a day. If 
one cannot get sweet fruits sugar may become a nece ssity. But the undue 
prominence given to sweet things towards nowadays i s wrong. City folk eat too 
much of sweet things. Milk puddings, milk sweets an d sweets of other kinds are 
consumed in large quantities. They are all unnecess ary and are harmful except 
when taken in very small quantity. It may be said w ithout any fear of Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17  exaggeration that the partake of sweet meals and ot her delicacies, in a country 
where the millions do not get an ordinary full meal , is equivalent to robbery. 
What applies to sweets, applies with equal force to  ghee and oil. There is no 
need to eat food fried in ghee or oil. To use ghee in making puris and laddus is 
thoughtless extravagancy. Those who are not used to  such food cannot eat 
these things at all. Those who do eat them I have o ften seen fall ill. Taste is 
acquired, not born with us. All the delicacies of t he world cannot equal the 
relish, that hunger gives to food. A hungry man wil l eat a dry piece of bread 
with the greatest relish, whereas one who is not hu ngry will refuse the best of 
sweetmeats. 
Now let us consider how often and how much should o ne eat. Food should be 
taken as a matter of duty even as a medicine to sus tain the body, never for the 
satisfaction of the palate. Thus, pleasurable feeli ng comes from satisfaction of 
real hunger. Therefore, we can say that relish is d ependent upon hunger and 
not outside it. Because of our wrong habits and art ificial way of living, very few 
people know what their system requires. Our parents  who bring us into this 
world do not, as a rule, cultivate selfYcontrol. Th eir habits and their way of 
living influence the children to a certain extent. The mother’s food during 
pregnancy is bound to affect the child. After that during childhood, the mother 
pampers the child with all sorts of tasty foods. Sh e gives the child a little bit 
out of whatever she herself may be eating and the c hild’s digestive system gets 
a wrong training from its infancy. Habits once form ed are difficult to shed. 
There are very few who succeed in getting rid of th em. But when the 
realization comes to man that he is his own bodygua rd, and his body has been 
dedicated to service, he desires to learn law of ke eping his body in a fit 
condition and tries hard to follow them. 
We have now reached a point when we can lay down th e amount of various 
foods required by a man of sedentary habits, which most men and women who 
read this pages, are: 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18   Cow’s milk 2 lbs. 
 Cereals 
 (wheat, rice, bajra in all) 6 oz. 
 Vegetable leafy 3 oz. 
 Vegetable others 5 oz. 
 Vegetables raw 1 oz. 
 Ghee 1 1/2 oz. 
 or Butter 2 oz. 
 Gur White Sugar 1 1/2 oz. 
Fresh fruits according to one’s taste and purse. In  any case it is good to take 
two sour limes a day. The juice should be squeezed and taken with vegetables 
or in water, cold or hot. All these weights are of raw stuff. I have not put down 
the amount of salt. It should be added afterwards a ccording to taste. 
Now, how often should one eat? Many people take two  meals a day. The 
general rule is to take three meals: breakfast earl y in the morning and before 
going out to work, dinner at midday and supper in t he evening or late. There is 
no necessity to have more than three meals. In citi es some people keep on 
nibbling from time to time. This habit is harmful. The digestive apparatus 
requires rest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
05. CONDIMENTS  
I have not said anything about condiments in the la st chapter. Common salt 
may be rightly counted as the king among condiments . Many people cannot eat 
their food without it. The body requires certain sa lts and common sat is one of 
them. These salts occur naturally in the various fo odstuffs but when food is 
cooked in an unscientific way, e.g., throwing away water in which rice, 
potatoes, other vegetables have been boiled, the su pply becomes inadequate. 
The deficiency then has to be made up by a separate  addition of salt. As 
common salt is one of the most essential salts for the body, I have said in the 
last chapter that it might be supplemented in small  quantities. 
But several condiments are not required by the body  as a general rule, e.g., 
chilies fresh or dry, pepper, turmeric, coriander, caraway, mustard, methi, 
asafetida, etc. These are taken just for the satisf action of the palate. My 
opinion, based on my personal experience of fifty y ears, is that not one of them 
is needed to keep perfectly healthy. Those whose di gestion has become very 
feeble might take these things as medicine for a ce rtain length of time, if 
considered necessary. But one should make it a poin t to avoid their use for the 
satisfaction of the palate. All condiments, even sa lt, destroy the natural flavor 
of the foodstuff much more than after the addition of salt or other condiments. 
That is why I have said that salt should be taken w hen necessary as an adjunct. 
As for chilies, they burn the mouth and irritate th e stomach. Those who are not 
in a habit of taking chilies cannot bear them in th e beginning. I have seen 
several cases of sore mouth caused by the taking of  chilies. I know of one case 
who was very fond of chilies, and an excessive use resulted in his premature 
death. The Negro in south Africa will not touch con diments. He cannot bear the 
color of turmeric in his food. In the same way, Eng lishmen also do not readily 
take to our condiments. 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20   
06. TEA, COFFEE AND COCOA 
None of these is required by the body. The use of t ea is said to have originated 
in China. It has a special use in that country. As a rule one cannot rely on the 
purity of drinking water in China and therefore it must be boiled before use to 
ensure safety. Some clever Chinaman discovered a gr ass called tea which when 
added to boiled water in a very small quantity gave  it a golden color. The color 
did not appear unless the water was really boiled. Thus the grass became an 
infallible test for seeing when a given quantity of  water was boiled. The way, 
the test is used, is to put the tea leaves in a str ainer. If the water was boiled it 
will assume a golden color. Another quality of tea leaves is said to be that they 
impart a delicate flavor to the water. 
Tea prepared as above is harmless. But the tea that  is generally prepared and 
taken has not only nothing to recommend it, it is a ctually harmful. The leaves 
contain tannin which is harmful to the body. Tannin  is generally used in the 
tanneries to harden leather. When taken internally it produces a similar effect 
upon the mucous lining of the stomach and intestine . This impairs digestion and 
cause dyspepsia. It is said that in England innumer able women suffer from 
various ailments on account of their habit of drink ing tea which contains 
tannin. Habitual tea drinkers begin to feel restles s if they do not get their cup 
at the usual time. In my opinion, the usefulness of  tea, if any, consists in the 
fact that it supplies a warm sweet drink which cont ains some milk. The same 
purpose may well be served by taking boiled hot wat er mixed with a little milk 
and sugar. 
What I have said about tea applies more or less to coffee also. There is a 
popular saying about coffee in Hindustani which say , “Coffee allays cough and 
relieves flatulence, but it impairs physical and se xual vigor and making of blood 
watery, so that there are three disadvantages again st its two advantages.” I do 
not know how far the saying is justified. 
I hold similar opinion with regard to cocoa. Those whose digestion works 
normally, do not require the help of tea, coffee or  cocoa. A healthy man can Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21  get all the satisfaction that he needs out of ordin ary food. I have freely 
partaken of all the three. I used to suffer from on e aliment or another while I 
was using them. By giving them up I have lost nothi ng, and have benefited a 
good deal. I can get the same satisfaction from a c lear vegetable soup that I 
used to derive from tea etc. Hot water, honey and l emon make a healthy 
nourishing drink, which can well substitute tea or coffee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22   
07. INTOXICANTS  
The intoxicants used in India might be taken as the  following: alcohol, bhang, 
ganja, tobacco and opium. Alcohol or liquor include  the country made liquor 
and arak, besides the large quantity of liquor impo rted from foreign countries. 
All these should be strictly prohibited. Alcohol ma kes a man forget himself and 
while its effects last, he becomes utterly incapabl e of doing anything useful. 
Those who take a drinking, ruin themselves and ruin  their people. They lose all 
sense of decency and propriety. 
There is a school who favour limited and regulated consumption of alcohol and 
believe it to be useful. I have not found any weigh t in their argument. Even if 
we accept their view for a moment, we have still to  face the fact that 
innumerable human beings cannot be kept under disci pline. Therefore it 
becomes our duty to prohibit alcoholic drinks even if it were only for the sake 
of this vast majority. 
Parsis have strongly supported the use of tadi. The y say that although tadi is an 
intoxicant it is also a food and even helps to dige st other foodstuffs. I have 
carefully examined this argument and have read a fa ir account of literature 
pertaining to this subject. But I have been a witne ss of the terrible straits to 
which tadi reduces the poor and therefore I have co me to the conclusion that it 
can have no place in man’s food. 
The advantages, attributed to tadi, are all availab le from other foodstuffs. Tadi 
is made out of khanjur juice. Fresh khanjur juice i s not an intoxicant. It is 
known as nira in Hindustani and many people have be en cured of their 
constipation as a result of drinking nira. I have t aken it myself though it did not 
act as a laxative with me. I found that it had the same food value as sugarcane 
juice. If one drinks a glass of nira in the morning  instead of drinking tea, etc., 
he should not need anything for breakfast. As in th e case of sugarcane juice, 
palm juice can be boiled to make jaggery. Khanjuri is a veriety of palm tree. 
Several verities of palm grow spontaY neously in ou r country. All of them yield 
drinkable juice. As nira gets fermented very quickl y, it has to be used up Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23  immediately and therefore on the spot. Since this c ondition is difficult to fulfill 
except to a limited extent, in practice, the best u se of nira is to convert it into 
palm jaggery. Palm jaggery can well replace sugarYc ane jaggery. In fact some 
people prefer it to the latter. One advantage of pa lm jaggery over sugarYcane 
jaggery is that it is less sweet and therefore one can eat more of it. The All 
Indian Village Association has done a great deal to  popularize palm jaggery, but 
much remains to be done. If the palms that are used  for making tadi are used 
for making jaggery, India will never lack sugar and  the poor will be able to get 
good jaggery for very little money. Palm jaggery ca n be converted into 
molasses and refined sugar. But the jaggery is much  more useful than refined 
sugar. The salts present in the jaggery are lost in  the process of refining. Just 
as refined what flour and polished rice lose some o f their nutritive value 
because of the loss of the pericarp, refined sugar also loses some of the 
nutritive value of the jaggery. One may generalize that all foodstuff are richer 
if taken in their natural state as far as possible.  
Taking of tadi I naturally began to talk of nira an d from that I went on to the 
topic of jaggery. But let us return to liquor for t he moment. 
None of the public workers perhaps have the same bi tter experience of the 
evils of the drinking as I have had. In South Afric a, most of the Indians going 
there as indentured labourers were addicted to drin king. The law there did not 
in my time permit Indians to take liquor to their h ouses except under a medical 
certificate. They could go to the drinking booths a nd drink as much as they 
liked. Even the women had fallen victims to this ev il habit. I have seen them in 
the most pathetic condition. One who has seen those  scenes near the public 
bars will never support drinking. 
African Negroes were not given to drinking original ly. Liquor may be said to 
have simply ruined them. Large numbers of Negro lab ourers are seen to waste 
all their earnings in drinking so that their lives become devoid of any grace. 
And what about Englishmen? I have seen respectable Englishmen falling in the 
gutter under the effect of alcohol. There is no exa ggeration in this statement. 
During the war many EnglishY men had to leave the T ransvaal. Some of them Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  were taken in my home. One of them was an engineer and a good man in every 
way, when not under the effects of alcohol. He was a theosophist. 
Unfortunately , he was addicted to drink and lost a ll control over himself when 
he was drunk. He tried hard to give up the habit, b ut as far as I know he never 
succeeded. 
On my return from South Africa to India I had a sim ilar painful experience of 
the evils of drink. Several Princes have been and a re being ruined by liquor. 
What applies to them applies more or less to many a  rich youth. The condition 
of labour as a result of taking alcohol is also pit iable. That, as a result of such 
bitter experience, I have become a staunch opponent  of alcohol, will not 
surprise the readers. 
In a nut shell, alcohol one physically, morally, in tellectually and economically. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
08. OPIUM 
The criticism leveled against alcohol applies equal ly to opium, although the two 
are very different in their action. Under the effec t of alcohol a person becomes 
a rowdy, whereas opium the addict dull and lazy. He  becomes even drowsy and 
incapable of doing anything useful. The evil effect  of alcohol strikes the eyes 
every day, but those of opium are not so glaring. A nyone wishing to see its 
devastating effect should go to Assam or Orissa. Th ousands have fallen victim 
of this intoxicant, in those provinces. They give o ne the impression on living on 
the verge of death. 
But China is said to have suffered the most from th e evils of opium. The 
Chinese possess a better physique than the Indians.  But Chinese addicted to 
opium look miserable and more dead than alive. An o pium addict will stoop to 
anything in order to procure his dose of opium. 
Several years ago, what is known as Opium War took place between China and 
Great Britain. China did not wish to buy opium from  India. But the English 
wanted to impose it on China. India was also to bla me in that several Indians 
had taken opium contacts in India. The trade paid w ell and the treasury 
received crore of rupees as opium revenue. This was  obviously an immoral 
trade and yet it went on flourishing. Finally, as a  result of a mighty agitation in 
England, it was stopped. A thing of this type, whic h simply ruin people, should 
not be tolerated for a single minute. 
After having had my say on opium as an intoxicant, I must admit that its place 
in Material Medic is incontestable. It is impossibl e to do without this drug 
medical agents. But that can be no reason for using  it as a intoxicant. Opium is 
a wellYknown poison and its use as an intoxicant sh ould be strictly prohibited. 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26   
09. TOBACCO 
Tobacco have simply worked havoc among mankind. Onc e caught in its tangle, 
it is rare to find anyone get out again. The use of  tobacco is prevalent all over 
the world in one form or another. Tolstoy has calle d it the worst of all 
intoxicants. This verdict of that great man should command our attention and 
respect. He had freely indulged in the use of tobac co and alcohol in his early 
days and was familiar with the harmful effects of b oth. I must admit, however, 
that in spite of this, I cannot talk about the evil s of tobacco with the same 
authority knowledge as in the case of opium and alc ohol. But I can certainly say 
that I am not aware of a single advantage occurring  from the use of tobacco. 
Smoking is an expensive habit. I know of an English man who used to spend five 
pounds, i.e., seventyYfive rupees on tobacco every month. His monthly earning 
was twentyYfive pounds, so that he smoked away one fifth of his monthly 
income. 
Tobacco smokers become callous and careless of othe rs’ feeling. NonYsmokers 
generally cannot bear the smell of tobacco smoke, b ut one often comes across 
people in railway train and tramways who just go on  smoking, heedless of 
feeling of their neighbors. Smoking causes salivati on and most smokers have no 
hesitation in spitting anywhere. 
Tobacco smokers’ mouth emits a foul smell. Probably  tobacco kills the finer 
feelings and perhaps it is to this end that men tak e to smoking. There is no 
doubt that tobacco is an intoxicant and while under  its effects one forgets 
one’s worries and misfortunes. One of Tolstoy’s cha racter had to do a ghastly 
deed. Tolstoy’s makes him drink liquor at first. Th e man was to murder 
someone. In spite of the effects of liquor, he hesi tated to do so. Lost in thought 
he lights a cigar and begin to smoke. As he watches  the smoke curling up he 
exclaimed, “what a coward I am! When it my duty to commit this murder, why 
should I hesitate to do so? Get up, go ahead, and d o your job.” Thus his 
wavering mind finally decided to commit it. I know,  this argument is not very 
convincing. All smokers are not bad men. I know tha t millions of smokers seem Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27  to live ordinary straightforward lives. All the sam e the thoughtful should ponder 
above quotation. What Tolstoy perhaps means is that  smoker keep on 
committing minor crimes which generally pass unnoti ced. 
In India people use tobacco for smoking, snuffing a nd also for chewing. Some 
believe that snuff produces a benefit effect, and t hey use it under the advise of 
vaids and hakims. I think that it is not necessary.  A healthy man should never 
have such requirements. 
As for chewing tobacco, it is the dirtiest of all t he three ways in which tobacco 
is used. I have always maintained that its uselessn ess is a mere figment of the 
imagination. I have found no reasons to change my o pinion. There is a popular 
saying in Gujarati which says, all the three are eq ually guilty: the smoker fills 
his house with smoke, the chewer dirties every corn er and the snuffer his 
clothes. 
Tobacco sheers, if they are sensible, keep a spitto on at hand. But the vast 
majority spit on the floor, in the corners and on t he wall unabashed. The 
smoker fills his house with smoke and runs the rash  of it catching fire, and he 
takes snuff soils his clothes. If there are any who  keep handkerchief and thus 
save their clothes from soiling, they are exception  that prove the general rule. 
Lovers of health, if they are slaves to any of thes e evil habit, will resolutely get 
out of the slavery. Several people are addicted to one, two or all the three of 
these habits. 
They do not appear loathsome to them. But if we thi nk over it calmly, there is 
nothing becoming about blowing of smoke or keeping the mouth stuffed with 
tobacco and pan practically the whole day long or o pening a snuffbox and 
taking snuff every now and then. All the three are most dirty habits. 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28   
10. BRAHMACHARYA  
Brahmacharya literally means that mode of life whic h lead to the realization of 
God. That realization is impossible without practic ing selfYrestraint. SelfY
restraint means restraint of all the senses. But or dinarily brahmacharya is 
understood to mean control of sexual organs and pre vention of seminal 
discharge through complete control over the sexual instinct and the sexual 
organs. This becomes natural for the man who exerci ses selfYrestraint all round. 
It is only when observance of brahmacharya becomes natural to one that he or 
she derives the greatest benefit from it. Such a pe rson should be free from 
anger and kindhearted passion. The so called brahma charis, that one generally 
comes across, behaves as if their one occupation in  life was the display of bad 
temper.  
One notices that these people disregard the ordinar y rules of brahmacharya and 
merely aim at and expect to prevent seminal dischar ges. They fail to achieve 
their object. Some of them become almost insane whi le others betray a sickly 
appearance. They are unable to prevent the discharg e and if they succeed in 
restraining themselves from sexual intercourse, the y think that they have 
attained all that was needed. Now mere abstention f rom sexual intercourse 
cannot be termed brahmacharya. So long as the desir e for intercourse is there, 
one cannot be said to have attained brahmacharya. O nly he who has burnt 
away sexual desire in it’s entirely may be said to have attained control over his 
sexual organs. The absence of seminal discharges is  a straightforward result of 
brahmacharya, but is not all. There is something ve ry striking about a fullY
fledged brahmachari. His speech, his thought, and h is action, all bespeak 
possession of vital force. 
Such a brahmachari do not flee from the company of women. He may not 
hanker after it nor may he avoid it even when it me ans rendering of necessary 
survive. For him the distinction between men and wo men almost disappears. No 
one should distort my words and use them as an argu ment in favor of 
licentiousness. What I mean to say is that, a man w hose sexual desire has been Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29  burnt up ceases to make a distinction between men a nd women. It must be so. 
His conception of beauty alters. He will not look a t the external form. He or 
she whose character is beautiful will be beautiful in his eyes. Therefore, the 
sight of women called beautiful will not ruffle or exited him. Even his sexual 
organs will begin to look different. In other words , such a man has so controlled 
his sexual instinct that he never gets erections. H e does not become impotent 
for lack of the necessary secretions of sexual glan ds. But these secretions in his 
case are sublimated into a vital force pervading hi s whole being. It is said that 
an important man is not free form sexual desire. So me of my correspondents 
belonging to this group tell me that they desire er ection but they fail to get it 
and yet have seminal discharges. Such men have eith er become impotent or are 
on the way to become so for loss of the necessary s ecretions. This is a pitiable 
state. But the cultivated impotency of the man, who se sexual desire has been 
burnt up and whose sexual secretion are being conve rted into vital force, is 
wholly different. It is to be desired by everybody.  It is true that such a 
brahmachari is rare to find.  
I took the vow of brahmacharya in 1906. In other wo rds, my efforts to become 
a perfect brahmachari started 36 years ago. I canno t say I have attained the 
full brahmacharya of my definition, but in my opini on I have made substantial 
progress towards it. If God wills it, I might attai n even perfection in this life. 
Anyway, there is no relaxation of efforts nor is th ere any despondence in me. I 
do not consider 36 years too long a period for effo rt. The richer the prize, the 
richer the effort must be. Meanwhile, my ideas rega rding the necessity for 
brahmacharya have become stronger. Some of my exper iments have not 
reached a stage when they might be placed before th e public with advantage. I 
hope to do so some day if they succeed to my satisf action. Success might make 
the attainment of brahmacharya comparatively easier . 
But the brahmacharya on which I wish to lay emphasi s in this chapter is limited 
to the conservation of sexual secretions. The glori ous fruit of perfect 
brahmacharya is not to be had from the observance o f this limited Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  brahmacharya. But no one can reach perfect brahmach arya without reaching 
the limited variety. 
And maintenance of perfect health should be conside red almost an utter 
impossibility without the brahmacharya leading to t he conservation of the 
sexual secretions. To countenance wastage of a secr etion which has the power 
of creating another human being is, to say the leas t, an indication of gross 
ignorance. A firm grasp of the fact that semen is m eant to be used only for 
procreation and not for selfYindulgence, leaves no room whatsoever for 
indulging in animal passion. Assimilation of the kn owledge that the vital fluid is 
never meant for waste should restrain men and women  from becoming crazy 
over sexual intercourse. Marriage will then come to  have a different 
significance and the way it is treated at present w ill appear disgusting. 
Marriage ought to signify a union of heart between two partners. A married 
couple is worthy of being considered dared brahmach aris if they never think of 
sexual intercourse except for the purposes of procr eation. Such an intercourse 
is not possible unless both parties desire it. It w ill never be restored to in order 
to satisfy passion without the desire for a child. After intercourse which has 
been performer as a matter of duty, the desire to r epeat the process should 
never arise. 
What I am saying may not be taken as copy book wisd om. The reader should 
know that I am writing this after a long personal e xperience. I know that what I 
am writing is contrary to the common practice. But in order to make progress 
we have often to go beyond the limits of common exp erience. Great discoveries 
have been possible only as a result of challenging the common experience or 
commonly held beliefs. The invention of the simple match stick was challenged 
to the common experience and the discovery of elect ricity confounded all 
preconceived notions.  
What is true of physical thing is equally true of t hings spiritual. In the early 
days there was no such thing as marriage. Men and w omen, as in the case of 
animals, mated promiscuously. SelfYrestraint was un known. Some advanced 
men went beyond the rut of common practice and disc over the law of selfYKey To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31  restraint. It is our duty to investigate the hidden  possibilities of the law of selfY
restraint. Therefore, when I say it the duty of eve ry man and woman to take 
the marital relations to the state indicated by me it is not to be dismissed as 
utterly impracticable. If human life is molded as i t ought to be, conservation of 
vital fluid can become a natural thing for everyone . 
The sexual glands are all the time secreting the se men. This secretion should 
be utilized for enhancing one's mental, physical an d spiritual energy. He, who 
would learn to utilize it thus, will find that he r equires very little food to keep 
his body in a fit condition. And yet he will be as capable as any of undertaking 
physical labour. Mental exertion will not tire him easily nor will he show the 
ordinary signs of old age. Just as a ripe fruit or an old leaves falls off naturally, 
so will such a brahmachari when his times comes pas s away with all his 
faculties intact. Although with the passage of time  the effects of the natural 
wear and tear must be manifest in his body, his int ellects instead of showing 
signs of decay should show progressive clarity. If all this is correct, the real key 
to health lies in the conservancy of vital energy. 
I gave here the rules for the conservation of vital  force I know them. 
1. Sexual desire has its root in one's thought. The refore, complete control over 
through is necessary. The way to achieve it is this . Never let your mind remain 
ideal. Keep it filled with good and useful ideas. I n other words keep thinking of 
whatever duty you have on hand. There need be no wo rry about it, but think 
out how can you become an expert in your department  and then put your 
thoughts into action. There should be no waste of t houghts. Japa (repetition of 
God's name) is a great support when ideal thoughts haunt you. Contemplate 
God in the form you have pictured Him unless you kn ow Him as formless. While 
japa is going on, no other thoughts should be allow ed to enter one's mind. This 
is the ideal state. But if one cannot reach it and all sorts of uninvited thoughts 
invade one's mind, one should not become dishearten ed. Namajapa should be 
continued faithfully and in the confidence that ult imate victory is bound to 
follow.  Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  2. As with our thoughts, so with our reading and ta lking. These should be 
healthy and clean. Erotic literature should be avoi ded. Idle, incidence talk 
leads to indecent action. It is obvious that one wh o do not wish to feed his 
animal passions will avoid occupations which tend t o include them. 
3. Like the mind, the body must also be kept well a nd usefully occupied, so 
that the fatigue of the day may lead to refreshing dreamless sleep. As far as 
possible, work should be in open. Those who for som e reason or the other, 
cannot undertake physical labour, should make it a point to take regular 
exercise. In my opinion, a brisk walk in the open i s the best form of exercise. 
During the walk the mouth should be closed and brea thing should be done 
through the nose. Sitting or walking, the body must  be held erect. To sit or 
stand otherwise is a size of laziness and laziness is the enemy of selfYrestraint. 
Yogic exercisesY asanas Yare also useful. This much I can say from my perso nal 
experience that one who keeps his hands and feet, e yes and ears, healthily 
occupied does not have much difficulty in controlli ng the animal appetite. 
Everyone can test this for himself.  
4. A Sanskrit text say that a man becomes what he e ats. A glutton who 
exercises no restraint in eating is a salve to his animal passions. One who has 
not been able to control his palate, will never be able to control the other 
senses. If this is true, it is clear that one shoul d take just enough food for the 
requirements of the body and no more. The diet shou ld be healthy and wellY
balanced. The body was never meant to be treated as  a refuse bin holding the 
foods that the palate demands. Food is meant to sus tain the body. His body has 
been given to man as a means of selfYrealization. S elfYrealization means 
realization of God. A person who has made this real ization the object of his or 
her life, will never become a salve to the animal p assion. 
5. Man should look upon every woman as his mother, sister or daughter. No one 
ever entertains impure thoughts with regard to his mother, sister or daughter. 
Similarly, women should look upon every man as her father, brother or son. 
I have given more hints than these in my other writ ing, but they are all 
contained in the five given above. Anyone who obser ves them should find it Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33  easy to overcome what has been called the greatest of all passions. A person, 
who has real desire for brahmacharya, will not give  up the effort because he or 
she regards the observance of these rules as imposs ible or at least within the 
reaches of one in a million. The effort is a joy in  itself. To put it in another 
way, the joy of possessing perfect health is not to  be compared with any other, 
and perfect health is unattainable by slaves. Slave ry of one's animality is 
perhaps the worst of all.  
A few words about contraceptives will not be out of  place here. The practice of 
preventing progeny, by means of artificial methods,  is not a new thing. In the 
past such methods were practiced secretly and they were crude. Modern 
society have given them respectable place and made improvements. They have 
been given a philanthropic grab. The advocates of c ontraceptives say that 
sexual desire is a natural instinctYsome call it a blessing. They therefore say 
that it is not suppress the desire even if it were possible. Birth control by 
means of selfYrestraint is, in their opinion, diffi cult to practice. If a substitute 
for selfYrestraint is not prescribed, the health of  innumerable is bound to suffer 
through frequent pregnancies. They add that if birt hs are not regulated, over 
population will ensue; individual families will be pauperized and their children 
will be ill fed, ill clothed and ill educated. Ther efore, they argue, it is the duty 
of scientists to devise harmless and effective meth ods of birth control. This 
argument has failed to convince me. The use of cont raceptives is likely to 
produce evils of which we have no conception. But t he worse danger is that the 
use of contraceptives bids fair to kill the desire for selfYrestraint. In my opinion 
it is too heavy a price to pay for any possible imm ediate gain. But this is not 
the place to argue my point. Those who would like t o pursue this subject 
further should procure the booklet called SelfYRest raint v. Self Indulgence read 
the digest what I have said therein and then do as their heads and heart may 
dedicate. Those who have not the desire or the leis ure to read booklet will, if 
they follow my advice, avoid contraceptive as poiso n. They should try their 
best to exercise selfYrestraint. They should take u p such activities as would 
keep their bodies and minds fully occupied and give  a suitable outlet to their 
energy. It is necessary to have some healthy recrea tion when one is tired by Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  physical labour. There should not be a single momen t of idleness for the devil 
to creep in. In this way, true conjugal love will b e established and directed into 
healthy channels. Both the partners will make a pro gressive rise in their moral 
height. The joy of true renunciation, once they com e to know it, will prevent 
them from turning to animal enjoyment. SelfYdecepti on is the greatest stabling 
block. Instead of controlling the mind, the fountai n of all animals desire, men 
and women involve themselves in the vain endeavor t o avoid the physical act. If 
there is a determination to control the thought and  the action, victory is sure 
to follow. Man must understand that woman is his co mpanion and helpmate in 
life and not the means of satisfying his carnal des ire. There must be a clear 
perception that the purpose of human creation was w holly different from that 
of the satisfaction of the animal wants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART II 
NATURAL THERAPEUTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36   
01. EARTH 
These chapters are written in order to introduce th e reader to this most 
important branch of therapeutics and tell him how I  have made use of these 
methods in my own life. The subject has been touche d upon in the foregoing 
chapters. It will be dealt here. The science of nat ural therapeutics is based on 
a use, in the treatment of disease, of the same fiv e elements which constitute 
the human body. To refresh the reader’s memory, the se are earth, water, 
ether, sunlight and air. It is my effort to point o ut how they can be utilized for 
health purposes. 
Up till the year 1901, although I did not rush to d octors whenever I happened to 
get ill, I did use their remedies to a certain exte nt. I used to take fruit salt for 
constipation. The late Dr. Pranjivan Mehta who had come to Natal introduced 
me to certain drugs to remove general lassitude. Th is led me to read literature 
on the uses of drugs. Add to this a little put in a t a cottage hospital in Natal. 
This enabled me to carry on for some time, but none  of the drugs did me to 
carry on for some time, but none of the drugs did m e any good in the end. 
Headaches and loss of a sense of general wellbeing persisted. I was very 
dissatisfied with this state of things and what lit tle faith I had in medicines 
began to fade. 
All through this interval my experiments in dieteti cs were continued. I had 
great faith in nature cure methods, but there was n obody to help me with 
practical guidance in their use. With the help of w hatever knowledge I could 
gather by reading little of nature cure literature,  I tried to treat myself by diet 
regulation. My habit of going out for long walks al so stood me in good stead, 
and thanks to that habit I did not have actually to  take to bed. While I was thus 
managing to keep going somehow, Mr. Polak handed me  just’s book, called 
Return to nature. He did not follow just’s instruct ions himself, except that he 
tried to regulate his diet more or less according t o Just’s teaching. But knowing 
me as he did, he thought I would like the book. Jus t lays great emphasis on the 
use of earth. I felt that I ought to give it a tria l. For constipation, Just advises Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37  cold mud poultice on the lower abdomen throughout t he night. The result was 
most satisfactory. I had a natural wellYformed moti on the next morning and 
from that day onwards I have hardly ever touched fr uit salt. Occasionally, I feel 
the need of a purgative and take less than a desser t spoonful of castor oil early 
in the morning. The mud poultice should be 3 inches  broad, 6 inches long and 1 
inch thick. Just claim that mud can cure man bitten  by a poisonous snake. He 
would pack wet earth all round the body. I mention this for what it is worth. I 
would like to put down here what I have tested and proved applied to the head, 
relieves headache may be due to several causes, but  whatever the cause, as a 
general rule, an application of mud poultice reliev es it for the time being. 
Mud poultices cure ordinary boils. I have applied m ud to discharging abscesses 
as well. For these cases I prepare the poultice by packing the mud in a clean 
piece of cloth dipped in potassium permanganate lot ion. In the majority of 
cases this treatment results in complete cure. I do  not remember a single case 
in which it has failed me. Mud application immediat ely relieves the pain of a 
wasp sting. I have used it in many cases of scorpio n bite though with much less 
success. Scorpions have becomes a nuisance in Sevag ram. We have tried all the 
known treatments for scorpion bite, but none has pr oved infallible. I can say 
this that the results of mud application are not in ferior to those of any other 
form of treatment. 
In high lever, an application of mud poultice on th e head and abdomen is very 
useful. Although it does not always bring down the temperature, it does 
invariably soothe the patient and make him feel bet ter, so that the patients 
themselves ask for these applications. I have used it in several cases of typhoid 
fever. The fever no doubt run sits own course but m ud applications seem to 
relieve restlessness and abate the suffering. We ha ve had about ten cases of 
typhoid fever. I have not used any drugs in the tre atment of these cases. I have 
made use of other nature cure methods besides mud p oultices, but about those 
in their own place. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  In Sevagram we have made free use of hot mud poulti ces as substitute for 
antiphlogistine. A little oil and salt is added to the mud and it is heated 
sufficiently long to ensure sterilization. 
I have not told the reader what kind of earth shoul d be used for mud poultices. 
In the beginning I used to procure sweet smelling c lean red earth. It emits a 
delicate smell when it is mixed with water. But thi s kind of earth is not easy to 
obtain. In a city like Bombay it is a problem to ge t any kind of earth. It is safe 
to use soft alluvial clay, which is neither gritty nor sticky. On e should never 
use of earth taken from mannured soil. Earth should  be dried, pounded, and 
passed through a fine sieve. If there is any doubt as to its cleanliness, it should 
be well heated and thus sterilized. Mud used as a p oultice on a clean surface 
need not a thrown away after use. It can be used ag ain and again after drying it 
in the sun or on fire and pounding and sieving it I  am not aware that mud 
poultice made out of the same earth again and again  as described above, is any 
the less efficacious. I have myself use it in this way and did not find it any the 
less efficacious for repeated use. Some friends who  regularly used mud 
poultices tell me that mud from Jumna’s banks is pa rticularly good for this 
purpose. 
 
Eating Earth 
Just writes that clean earth may be eaten in order to overcome constipation. 
Five to ten grams is the maximum does. The rational e is said to be this. Earth is 
not disgusted. It acts as roughage and must pass ou t. The peristalsis thus 
stimulated pushes out of the faucal matter as well.  I have not tried myself. 
Therefore those who wish to do so, should try it on  their own responsibility. I 
am inclined to think that a trial or two is not lik ely to harm anyone. 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
02. WATER 
Hydrotherapy is a wellYknown and ancient form of th erapy. Many books have 
been written on the subject, but in my opinion the form of hydrotherapy 
suggested by Kuhne is simple and effective. Kuhne’s  book on nature cure is very 
popular in India. Andhra has the greatest number of  Kuhne’s followers. He has 
written a good deal about diet as well, but here I wish to confine myself to his 
experiments in hydrotherapy. 
Hip bath and sitz bath are the most important of Ku hne’s contribution to 
hydrotherapy. He has devised a special tub for use though one can do without 
it. Any tub thirty to thirty six inches long accord ing to the patient’s height 
generally serves the purpose. Experience will indic ate the proper size. The tub 
should be filled with fresh cold water so that it d ose not overflow when the 
patient sits in it. In summer the water may be iced , if it is not cold enough, to 
give a gentle shock to the patient. Generally, wate r kept in earthen jars 
overnight answers the purpose. Water can also be co oled by putting a piece of 
cloth on the surface of the water and then fanning it vigorously. The tub should 
be kept against the bathroom wall and a plank put i n the tub to serve as back 
rest. The patient should sit in the tub keeping his  feet outside. Portions of the 
body outside the water should be kept well covered so that the patient does 
not feel cold. After the patient is comfortably sea ted in the tub, gentle friction 
should be taken for live to thirty minutes. When it  is over, the body should be 
rubbed dry and the patient put to bed. 
Hip bath brings down the temperature in high fever and given in the manner 
described above it never does any harm, and may do much good. It relieves 
constipation and improves digestion. The patient fe els fresh and active after it. 
In cases of constipation, Kuhne advises a brisk wal k for half an hour 
immediately after the bath. It should never be give n on a full stomach. 
I have tried hip baths on a fairly large scale. The y have proved efficacious in 
more than 75 cases out of 100. In case of hyperpyre xia, if the patient’s 
condition permits of his being seated in the tub, t he temperature immediately Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  invariably falls at least by two to three degrees a nd, the onset of delirium is 
averted. 
The rationale of the hip bath according to Kuhne is  this. Whatever the apparent 
cause of fever, the real cause in every case is one  and the same, i.e. 
accumulation of waste matter in the intestines. The  heat generated by the 
putrefaction of this waste matter is manifested in the form of fever and several 
other ailments. Hip bath brings down this internal fever so that fever and other 
ailments which are the external manifestations ther e of subside automatically. 
How far this reasoning is correct, I cannot say. It  is for experts to do so. 
Although the medical profession have taken up some things from nature cure 
methods, on the whole they have given cold shoulder  to naturopathy. In my 
opinion both the parties are to be blamed for this state of affairs. The medical 
professions have got into the habit of confining th emselves to whatever is 
included in their own curriculum. They present an a ttitude of indifference, if 
not that of contempt, for anything that lies outsid e their groove. On the other 
hand, the nature curists nurse a feeling of grievan ce against the medicos and, 
in spite of their very limited scientific knowledge  they make tall claims. They 
take the spirit of organization. Each one is selfYs atisfied and works by himself 
instead of all pooling their recourses for the adva ncement of their system. No 
one tries to work out in a scientific spirit all th e implications and possibilities of 
the system. No one tries to cultivate humility, (if  it is possible to cultivate 
humility). 
I have not said all this in order to belittle the w ork of the naturopaths. As a lay 
coYworker I wish them to see things in their true c olour so that they may make 
improvements wherever possible. It is my conviction  that so long as some 
dynamic personality, from among the naturopaths the mselves, does not come 
forward with the zeal of missionary, things will co ntinue as they are. Orthodox 
medicine has its own science, medical unions and te aching institutions. It has 
too a certain measure of success. The medical profe ssion should not be 
expected to put faith, all of a sudden, in things w hich are yet to be fully tested 
and scientifically proved. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41  In the meantime the public should know that the spe cialty of nature cure 
methods lies in the fact that being natural, they c an be safety practiced by 
laymen. If a man, suffering from headache, wets a p iece of cloth in cold water 
and wraps it round his head, it can do no harm. The  addition of earth to cold 
water enhances the utility of the cold pack. 
Now about the size or friction bath. The organ of r eproduction is one of the 
most sensitive parts of the body. There is somethin g illusive about the 
sensitiveness of the glans penis and the foreskin. Anyone, I know not how to 
describe it. Kuhne has made use of this knowledge f or therapeutic purposes. He 
advises application of gentle friction to the outer  end of the external sexual 
organ by means of a soft wet piece of cloth, while cold water is being poured. 
In the case of colour. The sheet used for these pat ients, should afterwards be 
sterilized by soaking it in boiling water leaving i t in it till It cools down 
sufficiently and then washed with soap and water. 
In cases where circulation has become sluggish, the  leg muscles feel sore and 
there is a peculiar ache and feeling of discomfort in the legs, an ice massage 
does a lot of good. This treatment is more effectiv e in summer months. 
Massaging a weak patient with ice in winter might p rove a risky affair. 
Now a few words about the therapeutics of hot water . An intelligent use of hot 
water gives relief in many cases. Application of io dine is a very popular remedy 
for all injuries and the like. Application of hot w ater will prove equally 
effective in most of these cases. Tincture of iodin e is applied on swollen and 
bruised areas. Hot water fomentations are likely to  give equal relief, if not 
more. Again, iodine drops are used in cases of eara che. Irrigation of the ear 
with warm water is likely to relieve the pain in mo st of these cases. The use of 
iodine is attended with certain risks. The patient may have allergy towards the 
drug. Iodine mistaken for something else and taken internally might prove 
disastrous. But there is no risk whatsoever in usin g hot water. Boiling water is 
as good a disinfectant as tincture of iodine. I do not mean to belittle the 
usefulness of iodine is one of he few drugs which I  regard most useful and 
necessary, but if is an expensive thing. The poor c annot afford to buy it and Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  moreover its use cannot be safely entrusted to ever ybody. But water is 
available everywhere. We may not despise its therap eutic value because it is 
obtained so easily. Knowledge of common household r emedies often proves a 
godsend in many crisis. 
In cases of scorpion bite where all remedies have f ailed, immersion of the part 
in hot water has been found to relieve the pain to a certain extent. 
A shivering fit or a rigor can be made to subside b y putting buckets of hot 
boiling water all round the patient who is well wra pped up or by saturating the 
atmosphere of the room with steam by some other dev ice. A rubber hot water 
bag is a most useful thing, but it is not to found in every household. A glass 
bottle with a well fitting cork, filled with hot wa ter and wrapped in a piece of 
cloth, serves the same purpose. Care should be take n to choose bottles that 
will not crack on hot water being poured into them.   
Stream is a more valuable therapeutic agent. It can  be used to make the 
patient sweat. Steam baths are most useful in cases  of rheumatism and other 
jointYpains. The easiest as well as the oldest meth od of taking steam bath is 
this. Spread a blanket or two on a sparsely but tig htly woven cot and put one or 
two covered vessels full with boiling water under i t. Make the patient lie flat on 
the cot and cove him up in such a way that ends of the covering blankets touch 
the ground and thus prevent the steam from escaping  and the outside air from 
getting in. After arranging everything as above, th e lid from the vessels 
containing boiling water is removed and steam soon gets on to the patient lying 
between the blankets. It may necessary to change th e water once or twice. 
Usually in India people keep an angithi under the p ots to keep the water 
boiling. This ensures continuous discharge of steam , but is attended with risk of 
accidents. A single spark might set fire to the bla nkets or to the cot and 
endanger the patient’s life. Therefore, it is advis able to use the method 
described by me even though it might seem slow and tedious. 
Some people add neem leaves or other herbs to the w ater used for generating 
steam. I do not know if such an addition increases the efficiency of steam. I do Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43  not know if such an addition increases the efficien cy of steam. The object is to 
induce sweat and that is attained by mere steam. 
In cases of cold feet and legs, the patient should be made to sit with his fit and 
legs immersed up to the knees in as hot water as he  can bear. A little mustard 
powder can be added to the water. The foot bath sho uld not last for more than 
fifteen minutes. This treatment improves the local circulation and gives 
immediate relief. 
In cases of common cold and sore throat a steam ket tle which is very much like 
an ordinary tea kettle with a long nozzle can be us ed for applying steam to the 
nose or throat. A rubber tube of required length ca n be attached to any 
ordinary kettle for this purposes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44   
03. AKASH ( ETHER ?) 
Akash is difficult word to translate as are indeed all the other four elements so 
called. For pani is not mere water in the original,  nor Vayu wind, or prithvi 
earth, or teja light. Akash is either least of all.  Perhaps the nearest equivalent 
is emptiness taken in its literal sense. And it is horribly in expressive of the 
original. All the five in the original are as livin g as life. If however we take 
either as the nearest equivalent for akash, we must  say that we know very little 
about ether itself and akash much less. Our knowled ge of its therapeutic uses is 
still more limited. Akash might be taken for the em pty space surrounding the 
earth and the atmosphere round it. On a clear day, on looking up, one sees a 
beautiful mauve blue canopy which is known as the a kash or sky. So far as we 
are concerned, this sky or the either is limitless.  We are surrounded by it on 
every side, and there is no nook or corner without it. Generally we imagine that 
the sky is something resting upon the high it is th e blue canopy above us. But 
the sky is as much above is as below and all around  us. We move round and 
round with the earth. Therefore the akash is round and everybody is within it. 
It is an envelope whose outermost surface is measur eless. The lower strata of 
the akash for a number of miles are filled with air . But for this man would 
become suffocated in spite of the emptiness. True, we cannot see the air, but 
we can feel it when in motion. Sky out air say from  an empty bottle and create 
a vacuum, but who can pump out the vacuum itself? T hat is akash. 
This akash we have to make use of to maintain or to  regain health. Air being 
most essential to sustain life, nature has made it omnipresent. But the 
omnipresence of air is only relative. It is not lim itless in reality. Scientists tell 
that after a certain number of miles above the eart h there is no air. It is said 
that earthy creatures cannot exists outside this at mosphere. This statement 
may or may not be true. All that we are concerned w ith here is that akash 
extends beyond the atmosphere. Some day the scienti sts might prove that what 
we call ether is also something which fills the emp ty space akash. Then we will 
have to discover a new name for the empty space tha t holds neither air nor the Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45  ether. Be that a sit may, the mystery of this empty  space all around us is most 
intriguing. We cannot solve it unless we can solve the mystery of God himself. 
This much might be said that the more we utilize th is great element akash the 
healthier we will be. The first lesson to be learnt  is this that we should not put 
any partitions between ourselves and the sky the in finite which is very near and 
yet very far away. If our bodies could be in contac t with the sky without the 
intervention of houses, roofs and even clothes, we are likely to enjoy the 
maximum amount of health. This is not possible for everyone. But all can and 
should accept the validity of the statement and ada pt life accordingly. To the 
extent that we are able to approach the state in pr actice, we will enjoy 
contentment and peace of mind. This train of though t taken to the extreme 
leads us to a condition when even the body becomes an obstacle separating 
man form the infinite. To understand this truth is to become indifferent to the 
dissolution of the body. For to lose oneself in the  infinite is to find oneself. The 
body thud ceases to be a vehicle for selfYindulgenc e. Man will make use of his 
body for the attempt he will discover that he is pa rt of and one with all the life 
that surrounds him. This must mean service of manki nd and through it finding 
God. 
To return from the high flight, this train of thoug ht will make the thinker keep 
his surrounding as open as possible. He will not fi ll the house with unnecessary 
furniture and will use the minimum of clothes that are necessary. Many 
households are so packed with all sorts of unnecess ary decorations and 
furniture which one can very well do without; that a simple living man will feel 
suffocated in those surroundings.  They are nothing  but means of harbouring 
dust, bacteria and insects. Here in the house where  I am under detention, I feel 
quite lost. The heavy furniture, chairs, tables, so fas, bedsteads, innumerable 
lookingYglasses, all get on my nerves. The expensiv e carpets on the floors 
collect large amount of dust and act as a breeding place for insect life. One day 
the carpet in one of the rooms was taken out for du sting. It was not one man’s 
work. Six men spent the afternoon in doing the job.  They must have removed 
at least ten pounds of dust. When the carpet was pu t back in its place it had a 
new feel about it. These carpets cannot be taken ou t and dusted everyday. Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  Such treatment will wear out the carpets and greatl y increase the expenditure 
of labour. But this is by way. What I mean to say i s this that my desire to be in 
tune with the infinite has saved me from many compl ications in life. It led not 
merely to simplicity of house hold and dress but al l round simplicity in the 
mode of my life. In a nutshell, and in the language  of the subject under 
discussion, I have gone on creating more and more c ontact with akash. With the 
increase in the contact went improvement in health.  I had more contentment 
and peace of mind and the desire for belongings alm ost disappeared. He who 
will establish contact with the infinite possesses nothing and yet possesses 
everything. In the ultimate analysis, man owns that  of which he can make 
legitimate use and which he can assimilate. If ever ybody followed this rule, 
there would be room enough for all and there would be neither want nor 
overcrowding. 
It follows that one should make it a point to sleep  in the open. Sufficient 
covering should be used to protect oneself against the in clemencies of the 
weather against cold and dew. In rainy season an um brella like a roof without 
walls should be used for keeping the rain out. For the rest, the starlit blue 
canopy should form the roof so that whenever one op ens one’s eyes, he or she 
can feast them on the ever changing beautiful panor ama of the heavens. He 
will never tire of the scene and it will not dazzle  or hurt his eyes. On the 
contrary, it will have a soothing effect on him. To  watch the different starry 
constellations floating in their majesty is a least  for the eyes. One who 
establishes contact with the stars as living witnes ses to all his thoughts will 
never allow any evil or impurity to enter his mind and will enjoy peaceful, 
refreshing sleep. 
Let us descent from the akash above within and imme diately about us. Thus the 
skin has millions of pores. If we fill up the empty  space within these pores, we 
simply die. Any clogging in the pores therefore mus t interfere with the even 
flow of health. Similarly we must not fill up the d igestive tract with 
unnecessary foodstuffs. We should eat only as much as we need and no more. 
Often one overeats or eats indigestible things with out being aware of it. An Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47  occasional fast, say once a week or once a unable t o fast for the whole day, 
one should miss one is more meals during the day. N ature abhors a vacuum is 
only partially true. Nature constantly demands a va cuum. The vast space 
surrounding us is the standing testimony of the tru th. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48   
04. SUN 
As in the case of the other elements, which have be en already dealt with, man 
cannot do without sunlight. The sun is the source o f light and heat. If there was 
no sun, there would be neither light nor warmth. Un fortunately we do not 
make full use of sunlight and consequently we are u nable to enjoy perfect 
health. Sunbath is as useful as ordinary water bath  though the two cannot 
replace one another. In cases of debility and slow circulation, exposure of the 
uncovered body to the morning sun acts as an allYro und general tonic and 
accelerates the metabolism. The morning sun has the  largest amount of ultraY
violet rays which are a most effective component of  the sun’s rays. If the 
patient feels cold, he should lie in the sun covere d up and gradually expose 
more and more of his body as he gets use to it. One  can also take the sunbath 
pacing up and down in the sun without any clothes o n, in a private enclosure or 
in other place away from public gaze. If such a pla ce is not within easy reach, 
one can just cover up the private parts by trying u p a piece of cloth or a langoti 
and expose the rest of his body to the sun. 
I know and many persons who have been benefited by sunbaths. It is a well 
known treatment for tuberculosis. Sunbaths or helio therapy is no longer 
confined to the sphere of naturopathy. Orthodox med icine has taken it up from 
naturopathy and developed in further. In cold count ries, special glass buildings 
have been constructed under medical supervision, so  that the glass lets in the 
sun’s rays and at the same time protects patients a gainst the cold. 
Sun treatment often results in the cure of intracta ble ulcers. To produce 
sweating I have made patients lie in the sun at abo ut 11 a.m., i.e a little before 
midday. The experiment has been successful and the patients are soon bathed 
in sweat. In these cases the head should be protect ed from the sun by means of 
a cold mud poultice. Banana or any other leaves can  keeping the head cool and 
well protected. The head should never be exposed to  strong sunlight. 
 Key To Health 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
05. AIR 
This fifth element is as important as the four alre ady discussed in the foregoing 
pages. The human body which is composed of the five  elements cannot do 
without any one of them. Therefore no one should be  afraid of air. Generally, 
whenever our people go, they make devices to keep o ut the sun and the air and 
thus jeopardize their health. If one cultivates the  habit of living in the open in 
the midst of plenty of fresh air, right from childh ood, the body will become 
hardened and he or she will never suffer from cold in the head and the like 
ailments. I have said enough about the importance o f fresh air in an earlier 
chapter. There is no occasion, therefore, to repeat  here what has already been 
said. 