The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
The Law and The Lawyers 
 
 
By: M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
Compiled and Edited by: 
S. B. Kher 
 
 
First Published : October 1962 
 
 
Price: Rs. 40/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed 
Navajivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: +91 
E-mail: 
Website: 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
Compiled and Edited by:  
October 1962  
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA)  
Phone: +91 -79-27540635/27542634 
Fax: +91-79-27541329 
mail: jtndrnavajivan@hotmail.com  
Website:  www.navajivantrust.org  
Page 1  The Law and The Lawyers  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
INTRODUCTION  
1. Mahatma Gandhi sailed for England on 4th Septemb er, 1888 to study law and 
become a barrister. He kept terms at the Inner Temp le and after nine months' 
intensive study he took all his subjects in one exa mination which he passed. He 
was called to the Bar on 10th June, 1891 and was en rolled in the High Court of 
England the next day. A day later, he sailed home. After his return to India he 
started practice as a lawyer at first in the High C ourt at Bombay and a little 
later in Rajkot but did not make much headway in th e profession. It was only 
when the hand of destiny guided his steps to South Africa that he soon made his 
mark there as a lawyer and as a public worker. Gand hiji practised as a lawyer 
for over twenty years before he gave up the practic e of the profession in order 
to devote all his time and energy to public service . The valuable experience 
and skill that he acquired in the course of his lar ge and lucrative practice stood 
him in good stead in fighting his battles with the South African and British 
governments for securing political, economic and so cial justice for his fellow-
countrymen. Gandhiji was not a visionary but a prac tical idealist. As Sir 
Stafford Cripps has remarked: "He was no simple mys tic; combined with his 
religious outlook was his lawyer-trained mind, quic k and apt in reasoning. He 
was a formidable opponent in argument." 1 
2. Gandhiji went to South Africa in April 1893 and stayed for a whole year in 
Pretoria in connection with the case of Sheth Dada Abdulla who was involved in 
a civil suit with his near relative Sheth Tyeb Haji  Khan Mahammad who also 
stayed in Pretoria. The year's stay in Pretoria pro ved to be a most valuable 
experience in Gandhiji's life. Here it was that he had opportunities of learning 
public work and acquired some measure of his capaci ty for it. Here it was that 
the religious spirit within him became a living for ce. It was here too that he 
acquired a true knowledge of legal practice and lea rnt the things that a junior 
barrister learns in a senior barrister's chamber an d also gained confidence that 
he would not after all fail as a lawyer. It was lik ewise here that he learnt the 
secret of success as a lawyer. 2 Dada Abdulla's was no small or ordinary case. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  The suit which he had filed against Tyeb Sheth who was his near relative 
claiming £ 40,000/- arose out of business transacti ons and was full of intricacies 
of accounts. The claim was based partly on promisso ry notes and partly on the 
specific performance of promise to deliver promisso ry notes. The defence was 
that the promissory notes had been fraudulently obt ained and lacked sufficient 
consideration 3. There were numerous points of fact and law in thi s intricate 
case and both sides had engaged the best attorneys and counsel. 4 The 
preparation of the plaintiffs case involved much pa tient industry and close 
study of facts. Furthermore it needed clear thinkin g and judgment. 5 Gandhiji 
took the keenest interest in the case and threw him self heart, and soul into it. 6 
He gained the complete confidence of both the parti es and persuaded them to 
submit the suit to an arbitrator of their choice in stead of continuing with 
expensive, prolonged, and bitter litigation. The ar bitrator ruled in Dada Abdulla 
Sheth's favour, and awarded him £37,000/- and costs . It was however 
impossible for Tyeb Sheth to pay down the whole of the awarded amount. 
Gandhiji then managed to persuade Dada Abdulla to l et Tyeb Sheth pay him the 
money in moderate instalments spread over a long pe riod of years, rather than 
ruin him by insisting on an immediate settlement. 7 Gandhiji was overjoyed at 
the success of his first case in South Africa and c oncluded that the whole duty 
of an advocate was not to exploit legal and adversa ry advantages but to 
promote compromise and reconciliation. 8 
3. It was Dada Abdulla's case which enabled Gandhij i to realize early in his 
career the paramount importance of facts. As he obs erves in his autobiography 
"facts mean truth and once we adhere to truth, the law comes to our aid 
naturally". 9 Facts according to Gandhiji constituted three-four ths of the law 
and if we took care of the facts of a case the law would take care of itself. As a 
result of this realization of the paramount importa nce of facts in Dada Abdulla's 
case, Gandhiji was never known afterwards to brush aside or slur over a fact 
however inconvenient or prejudicial it might seem. Strict adherence to this 
principle enabled him more than once in a crisis to  find a way out of what to all 
intents and purposes looked like an impenetrable ri ng of steel. 10  From this and 
several similar experiences Gandhiji learnt to rega rd law not as an intellectual The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  legerdemain to make black appear white and white bl ack, but as "codified 
ethics". The profession of law became to him the me ans to enthrone justice, 
not "entangle justice" in the net of law. 11  
4. From 1893 till 1913 Gandhiji practised in South Africa. Early in his practice 
he realized that "the true function of a lawyer was  to unite parties riven 
asunder". "This lesson", he writes, "was so indelib ly burnt into me that a large 
part of my time during the twenty years of my pract ice as a lawyer was 
occupied in bringing about private compromises of h undreds of cases." 12  
5. If there was one characteristic more than anothe r that stamped Gandhi as a 
man amongst men, it was his extraordinary love of t ruth. The Mahatma was an 
ardent and inveterate votary of truth. Truth, like nonviolence, was the first 
article of his faith and the last article of his cr eed. It was therefore no wonder 
that in his practice of the law, he maintained the highest traditions of the 
profession and did not swerve by a hair's breadth f rom the path of rectitude 
and integrity. He was always valiant for truth, bol d in asserting it in scorn of all 
consequence, and never sold the truth to serve the interests of his clients. He 
never forgot "that if he was the advocate of an ind ividual, and retained  and 
remunerated, often inadequately, for his valuable s ervices, yet he had a prior 
and perpetual retainer  on behalf of truth and justice." It may truly be s aid of 
him that he practised law without compromising trut h. As he observes, "My 
principle was put to the test many a time in South Africa. Often I knew that my 
opponents had tutored their witnesses, and if I onl y encouraged my client or his 
witnesses to lie, we could win the case. But I alwa ys resisted the temptation.... 
In my heart of hearts I always wished that I should  win only if my client's case 
was right. ... I warned every new client at the out set that he should not expect 
me to take up a false case or to coach the witnesse s, with the result that I built 
up such a reputation that no false cases used to co me to me. Indeed some of 
my clients would keep their clean cases for me, and  take the doubtful ones 
elsewhere." 13  
Thorough-going and meticulous as a matter of habit,  he took extraordinary 
pains to study every case. He earned the esteem of his colleagues as much as The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  that of the magistrates and judges who had come to respect him for clarity of 
thought and expression, legal acumen and intellectu al vigour. 14  The way he 
argued his cases before the judges was typical of h im. Free from heat and 
passion, he scrupulously avoided aggressive advocac y and relied entirely on 
facts and reasoning. It was his habit not to hide a ny flaw in his brief. In 
presenting the case he liked to reveal the whole tr uth. The frankness with 
which he would admit a weak point gave him added st rength to put things in 
their proper perspective and to focus attention on the critical issues which 
generally determined the outcome of a legal dispute . 15  Truth was the only 
touchstone by which he judged his duty toward his c lient and the court. 
According to him the greatest wrong a lawyer could commit in the process of 
law was to be a party to the miscarriage of justice . 16  
He had the reputation, among both professional coll eagues and his clients, of 
being a very sound lawyer and was held in the highe st esteem by the courts. 
They all recognized his complete integrity and upri ghtness. 17 Magistrates and 
judges alike paid careful attention to any case tha t he advocated realizing that 
it had intrinsic merits or that he sincerely believ ed that it had. An expert cross-
examiner, he seldom failed to break down a dishones t witness. 18  Gandhiji was, 
however, equally strict with his own clients. He ha d been known to retire from 
a case in open court, and in the middle of the hear ing, having realized that his 
client had deceived him. He made it a practice to i nform his client before 
accepting his brief, that if, at any stage of litig ation, he was satisfied that he 
was being deceived, he would be at liberty to hand back his brief, for, as an 
officer of the Court, he could not knowingly deceiv e it. 19  During his professional 
work it was Gandhiji's habit never to conceal his i gnorance from his clients or 
his colleagues. Wherever he felt himself at sea, he  would advise his client to 
consult some other counsel, or if he preferred to s tick to Gandhiji, he would 
ask his client to let him seek the assistance of se nior counsel. This frankness 
earned Gandhiji the unbounded affection and trust  of  his clients who were 
always willing to pay the fee whenever consultation  with senior counsel was 
necessary. 20  As far as possible, Gandhiji advised his clients t o settle with their 
opponents out of Court. A large part of his legal p ractice was in the interest of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  public work, for which he charged nothing beyond ou t-of-pocket expenses, and 
these too he sometimes met himself. 21  Where poor people were concerned he 
charged them very low fees, or did not charge at al l. In fixing his fees, he never 
made them conditional on his winning the case. Whet her his client won or lost, 
he expected nothing more nor less than his fees. 22  At the same time, he never 
issued a notice of demand against a client who comm itted a default in payment 
of fees due to him, threatening legal proceedings i f the debt was not speedily 
liquidated, and steadfastly refused to invoke the l aw to secure payment of his 
fees, for he held that his client, if an honest man , would pay when he could, 
and if a dishonest man, would not be made the more honest by the use of legal 
compulsion. 23 Indeed, in his every action, the Mahatma vindicated  his hostility 
to the doctrine of force and his abiding faith in t hat of love as a rule of life. 
6. Practice as a lawyer, however, was and always re mained for Gandhiji a 
subordinate occupation. A considerable part of his time during active practice 
was devoted to public service which was almost a pa ssion with him. As his 
Satyagraha campaigns against the South African Gove rnment for its racial and 
discriminatory policies, based on colour prejudice,  against Indians and Negroes, 
gathered momentum and spread throughout the length and breadth of South 
Africa, the compulsion of political events made it increasingly difficult for him 
to attend to the needs of his clients. Besides he a lso felt that in the Satyagraha 
struggle, only devoted Satyagrahis could be relied upon, since in no 
circumstances would they surrender to temptation or  to fear of the 
consequences. Furthermore, as his views about truth  and non-violence 
crystallized and matured, he came to the conclusion  that to earn one's 
livelihood from a profession, which finally made an  appeal to the policeman or 
the jailer to enforce the decrees of the courts, an d thus derived its ultimate 
sanction from physical force, was a denial of Ahims a. 24 Accordingly, in 1910 
Gandhiji entirely abandoned the practice of law and  henceforth devoted his 
entire time and energy to the service of the commun ity. Thereafter, in the 
remaining years of his earthly sojourn, whether in South Africa or in India, 
Gandhiji, as a Satyagrahi, was very often engaged i n breaking laws rather than 
in expounding or interpreting them in the courts of  the land. It may here be The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  recalled that when, after his imprisonment in 1922,  during his first civil 
disobedience movement in India, he was disbarred by  his Inn, he would not 
apply thereafter for reinstatement, as he regarded himself as a farmer and a 
handicraftsman, who had renounced the profession of  law deliberately many 
years before in South Africa. 
7. It may interest the reader to know that the Inne r Temple which had 
disbarred Gandhiji in 1922 after his imprisonment d uring his first civil 
disobedience movement in India has since not only r estored his name on its 
rolls but honoured his immortal memory by unveiling  in 1984 his special portrait 
in the library of the Inner Temple. 25  
Furthermore, Gandhiji's bust now adorns the coffee room of the Inner Temple 
and his statue has been installed in its lawns. 26  
8. Gandhiji's role as a lawyer in society has been very forcefully described by 
the American author Mr. James Cavanagh who in a war m and moving tribute to 
his work observed: 
There is a famous non-lawyer of recent history, who  comes close to being, like 
Lincoln, a transfigured lawyer, a lawyer who has si mply grown beyond the usual 
confines rather than grown away from them, who has enlarged the scope of the 
lawyer's functions rather than changed them, who ha s kept the virtues of the 
lawyer and only deepened them. He loved his country  and its people; he 
respected civil authority even while opposing it; h is weapons were nonviolence 
and passive resistance; his aims were moderate and realistic; he was willing to 
negotiate and to advance step by step; he was humbl e in manner and took as 
his symbols the simple handicrafts of his people. A nd true to the negative 
leadership the lawyer exercises, he became a martyr  to his country's liberty. He 
was an Indian lawyer named Gandhi. 27  
9. Parts I and II of the book deal with Gandhiji as  a law student and as a 
practising barrister. The Editor craves the indulge nce of the reader for 
including in these parts, some portions of Gandhiji 's Autobiography  which, 
strictly speaking, have no bearing on the subject o f this book. This however was The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  unavoidable and had to be done in order to maintain  the thread of continuity in 
the narrative, and to make it clear, coherent and c onsistent. 
10. Part III of the book contains the political tri als of Gandhiji in South Africa 
and in India. Here Gandhiji appears in the role of a Satyagrahi, as a civil 
resister of unjust laws. The trial of Gandhiji at A hmedabad in 1922 on the 
charge of sedition will forever remain one of the m ost momentous and 
memorable events of modern times. The trial aroused  considerable interest not 
only in India, but also in Europe and America. In m any respects it was a most 
remarkable trial. Never before was such a prisoner arraigned before a British 
court of justice. Never before were the laws of an all- powerful government so 
defiantly, yet with such humility, challenged. Men of all shades of political 
opinion, indeed all who had stood aloof from the mo vement and had 
condemned it in no uncertain terms, marvelled at th e wisdom, compassion and 
heroism of the thin spare figure in a loin cloth th undering his anathemas against 
the Government. And yet none could be gentler nor m ore sweet-tempered than 
the prisoner at the bar with a smile and a nod of t hanks and recognition for 
everyone including his prosecutors. 28  The unique personality of the principal 
accused before the Court, his international reputat ion as a saint and patriot, 
the offence with which he was charged, the politica l situation then prevailing 
in the country and the probable consequences of his  conviction on the political 
future of India, all these combined, made the occas ion momentous and 
invested the trial with a historic significance. Th e trial being on so ennobling a 
plane brought forth the best that could conceivably  be expected from the one 
who judged and the one who was judged. The trial in deed was noteworthy, 
both for the dignity of the prisoner at the bar, an d also for the noble utterance 
of the judge who delivered the sentence. Much Of th e bitterness at the time 
was taken away from men's minds owing to the judge' s speech. 29  The late Mrs. 
Sarojini Naidu, a close associate of the Mahatma in  the freedom struggle, who 
was present at the trial, has with her usual felici ty of expression given a very 
vivid and moving account of the trial which will in terest the reader. She Wrote: The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  A convict and a criminal in the eyes of the law: Ne vertheless the entire Court 
rose in an act of spontaneous homage when Mahatma G andhi entered — a frail, 
serene, indomitable figure in a coarse and scanty l oin cloth, accompanied by 
his devoted disciple and fellow-prisoner, Shankarla l Banker. 
'So you are seated near me to give me your support in case I break down,' he 
jested, with that happy laugh of his which seems to  hold all the undimmed 
radiance of the world's childhood in its depths. An d looking round at the hosts 
of familiar faces of men and women who had travelle d far to offer him a token 
of their love, he added, 'This is like a family gat hering and not a Law Court.' 
A thrill of mingled fear, pride, hope and anguish r an through the crowded hall 
when the judge took his seat — an admirable judge d eserving of our praise alike 
for his brave and resolute sense of duty, his flawl ess courtesy, his just 
perception of a unique occasion and his fine tribut e to a unique personality. 
The strange trial proceeded and as I listened to th e immortal words that flowed 
with prophetic fervour from the lips of my beloved master, my thoughts sped 
across the centuries to a different land and a diff erent age, when a similar 
drama was enacted and another divine and gentle tea cher was crucified, for 
spreading a kindred gospel with a kindred courage. I realized anew that the 
lowly Jesus of Nazareth cradled in a manger furnish ed the only true parallel in 
history to this sweet, invincible apostle of Indian  liberty who has loved 
humanity with surpassing compassion and to use his own beautiful phrase, 
'approached the poor with the mind of the poor'. 
The pent-up emotion of the people burst in a storm of sorrow as a long, slow 
procession moved towards him in a mournful pilgrima ge of farewell, clinging to 
the hands that had toiled so incessantly, bowing ov er the feet that had 
overruled so continuously, in the service of his co untry. 
In the midst of this poignant scene of many-voiced and myriad-hearted grief he 
stood untroubled in all his transcendent simplicity , the embodied symbol of the 
Indian Nation, its living sacrifice and sacrament i n one. 30  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  The whole trial lasted one hundred minutes, each mi nute enacting a page in 
the history of the battle of India's freedom. 31 
The three articles written and published by Gandhij i in his weekly paper  Young 
India  for which he was tried on the charge of sedition h ave been reproduced in 
Appendix I at pp. 246-53 
11. The trial which took place on March 18, 1922 in  the small crowded court-
room in Ahmedabad before the District and Sessions Judge Robert Broomfield, 
was so calm, so orderly, so lacking in contentiousn ess and anger, that it 
assumed the character of a quiet confrontation betw een two men who had 
known and studied each other for a long time. The j udge was mild- mannered 
and apologetic. He gave the impression of a man who  was performing a 
distasteful task with courtesy and good sense. Gand hiji was quietly content and 
would sometimes break out in smiles. 32  The judge was the son of a lawyer and 
he had a long experience of the law. He came to Ind ia as a junior barrister 
attached to the Indian Civil Service in 1905, and h ad' spent all his active life 
within the Bombay Presidency. He generally liked th e Indians and had a 
considerable respect amounting almost to affection for Gandhiji. 33 The tone of 
the trial was set by the judge when he took his sea t, bowing gravely to the 
distinguished prisoner. Gandhiji returned the bow. 34  The trial which was listed 
as "Sessions Case No. 45, Imperator V. (1) Mr. M. K . Gandhi, (2) Mr. S. C. 
Banker," was concerned to punish the author of thre e seditious and 
inflammatory articles which had appeared in  Young India  at intervals during the 
previous year 1921. 
12. The trial came to be known as "the great trial" , because both the judge and 
the prisoner behaved with uncommon courtesy and bec ause Gandhiji had stated 
the case for India's freedom with fairness and prec ision. 35  
13. Sir Thomas Strangman who as the Advocate- Gener al of Bombay conducted 
the prosecution of Gandhiji on behalf of the State was deeply moved by the 
prevailing atmosphere of the trial. In his interest ing account of the trial he 
observed: The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  The trial took place at Ahmedabad on the 18th March  1922. I went up from 
Bombay to conduct the prosecution. On arrival I was  at once struck by the 
magnetic influence exercised by Gandhi upon the off icials. The prevailing note 
was one of sadness. It was realized, of course, tha t Gandhi had been 
conducting the most dangerous campaign, that that c ampaign had resulted in 
considerable bloodshed and disorder, and that one c ourse and one only was 
possible, viz., the course which had been adopted. None the less, the thought 
uppermost in the minds of the officials was the ext reme pity of it all — pity 
that it should be necessary to prosecute so charmin g a personality. As 
illustrative of the prevailing atmosphere: The Coll ector who had come up to the 
station to meet me left me to see that various Indi an ladies, supporters of 
Gandhi, who had come up from Bombay «by the same tr ain in order to attend 
the trial, should obtain proper conveyances to thei r destinations. 
Gandhi had prepared a written statement. Before rea ding it he dealt orally 
with what I had said. . . . Gandhi then proceeded t o read the written statement 
in which he set out at length how he had come to lo se faith in the British 
Government and stated that he saw no course open to  him but that which he 
had adopted. Whilst Gandhi was reading the statemen t an incident occurred 
which exemplified the atmosphere of the trial. He r eferred to some incident as 
having taken place in a particular year. The Distri ct Superintendent of Police 
interposed in the most friendly way. He said : "I t hink you have made a 
mistake, surely it took place in the following year ?" Gandhi thanked him for his 
assistance and made the necessary correction in the  statement.. So ended the 
trial. I confess that I myself was not wholly unaff ected by the atmosphere of 
the trial. 36  
14. Gandhiji's speech at the trial pleading guilty to the offence of sedition with 
which he had been charged and inviting Judge Broomf ield to inflict on him the 
severest penalty has now become a part of English L iterature and finds a place 
of honour in the great legal classic  The Law as Literature 37  which contains an 
anthology of great writing about and in the law suc h as essays, accounts, 
letters, opinions, pleas and transcripts from Plato  to the present times. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  15. Barring the trial of Socrates there is perhaps no trial in the" history of 
mankind, comparable to that of Gandhiji, which stim ulated so much interest 
and whose influence on the life of humanity has bee n so profound. Involving as 
it did the issue of morality versus law, it is but natural that the trial of Gandhiji 
must immediately bring to mind that kindred trial i nvolving kindred issue. 
Meletus, the prosecutor of Socrates, indicted the a ccused of two charges: one 
of not worshipping the gods whom the state of Athen s worshipped and the 
other of introducing novel religious practices and of corrupting the young by his 
teachings. He demanded the penalty of death. The si milarity of attitude 
adopted by Socrates and Gandhiji towards the Tribun als which tried them is at 
once manifest, for each placed Truth above law and sought the punishment 
which the breach of the law warranted. 38 16. Why has the trial of Gandhiji been 
universally acknowledged to be a great historic tri al out-shadowing all similar 
trials of leaders and patriots? Surely, not merely because of the personality of 
the accused, nor because of his extra-ordinary sway  over India's teeming 
millions whom he treated as his own, nor because of  its consequences on the 
political future of India. There is no doubt that t hese were all contributory 
factors which invested the trial with a historic si gnificance. However the chief 
and most important factor which made the trial hist oric was the profound issue 
involved in it, namely, that of obedience to law as  against obedience to moral 
duty. It was that issue which elevated the trial to  the highest plane and the 
characters too who played their part in it. The iss ue raised by Gandhiji in the 
trial was not an isolated, sporadic issue arising f rom the breach of Section 124A 
of the Penal Code though it apparently was made to appear so. It was the 
perennial issue of Law versus Conscience, an issue of abiding interest to all 
civilized people of all times. It invoked the inali enable moral right and duty to 
resist a system of governance whose only claim to l oyalty and obedience was 
superior physical might. The trial is of profound a nd momentous significance in 
that Gandhiji during the trial sought to establish beyond doubt the superiority 
of soul force over sheer brute force, born out of t he gospel of self-suffering and 
the doctrine of willful yet holy withdrawal from al l that is foul, base and unholy The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  in human behaviour, a conclusion which will have an  abiding purpose and a 
meaning until humanity survives. 39  
17. Part IV of the book discusses the role of lawye rs in the Satyagraha struggle. 
It also gives an account of the farcical political trials held in the Punjab in 1919 
during the Martial Law regime, when several innocen t persons were sentenced 
by special courts to death or life-imprisonment on the flimsiest of evidence. 
These trials indeed furnish a sad commentary on the  administration of justice 
in Punjab during that period of great storm and str ess. Part V deals with 
Gandhiji's views on sundry and miscellaneous topics  having some bearing on the 
subject of this book. Appendix II contains select t houghts of Gandhiji on the law 
and the lawyers. Appendix III contains the text of the speech of the late B. N. 
Gokhale, ex-judge of the Bombay High Court at the s ymposium organized by the 
Bombay Branch of the Gandhi Smarak Nidhi on 1-7-196 3 in which he dealt with 
Gandhiji's legal philosophy. Appendix IV contains G andhiji's application dated 
16-11-1891 for enrolment as an advocate of the Bomb ay High Court. Appendix V 
contains Gandhiji's certificate of being called to the Bar by Inner Temple. 
Appendix VI contains the certificate from Mr. W. D.  Edwards, author and 
practising barrister in the Supreme Court of Judica ture in England 
recommending Gandhiji's name for admission as an ad vocate of the High Court 
of Bombay. Appendix VII contains the order issued b y the Benchers of Inner 
Temple on 10th November 1922 disbarring Gandhiji an d removing his name 
from the roll of barristers on his conviction and s entence to six years' 
imprisonment on 18th March 1922 by the Court of the  Sessions Judge, 
Ahmedabad. Appendix VIII is a letter from the emine nt judge and jurist Lord 
Denning to the Editor informing him that the Inner Temple which had disbarred 
Gandhiji in 1922 after his imprisonment during his first civil disobedience 
movement in India and had restored his name on its rolls shortly after India 
attained freedom had honoured Gandhiji's memory by unveiling in 1984 his 
special portrait in the library of the Inner Temple . Last is the glossary of Indian 
terms used in the book with their English translati on. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  18. Many people regard the law as something of a my stery, and there is a 
considerable amount of prejudice against the lawyer s which exists in the minds 
of many members of the public. The lawyer's profess ion is regarded by many 
people as a liar's profession. It seems strange and  indeed wrong to the ordinary 
citizen, that a man of honour and integrity should defend a man that he must 
know in his heart to be guilty of the crime with wh ich he is charged and be paid 
for doing so. 'How is it possible', men say, 'for a n advocate to resist an 
argument that appears to be founded on truth, and t o seek to make the worse 
appear the better reason?' For, put quite starkly, the charge against the 
advocate is that he cannot possibly be sincere or i ndeed honest in the conduct 
of his profession. For the ordinary citizen only es pouses some particular cause 
because he believes in it, but the advocate espouse s a cause because he is paid 
to do so, whether he believes in it or not. 40  This is the perennial ethical 
indictment against the profession and it was put in to its most deadly form by 
the strange and erratic genius, Dean Swift,  in Gulliver's Travels,  when he said 
of the Bar that 'they were a society of men bred up  from their youth in the art 
of proving by words multiplied for the purpose, tha t white is black and black is 
white according as they are paid.' This charge is e ffectively answered by the 
Mahatma who believed in spiritualizing not only pub lic life but also the practice 
of the legal profession. Says he, "And there is ano ther thing I would like to warn 
you against. In England, in South Africa, almost ev erywhere I have found that in 
the practice of their profession lawyers are consci ously or unconsciously led 
into untruth for the sake of their clients. An emin ent English lawyer has gone so 
far as to say that it may even be the duty of a law yer to defend a client whom 
he knows to be guilty. There I disagree. The duty o f a lawyer is always to place 
before the judges, and to help them to arrive at, t he truth, never to prove the 
guilty as innocent." 41 
19. Year by year, the enlightened opinion of the wo rld enshrines Gandhi in a 
noble place in the hearts of mankind. The life and example of the Mahatma 
who ennobled the legal profession, who remained fai thful to its highest 
traditions, and who showed the heights to which it can be raised ought to form 
part of the teaching and training of every law stud ent. At a time when the legal The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  and professional standards among both judges and la wyers have fallen 
woefully, it behoves the legal fraternity to bestir  itself and infuse a moral tone 
into the profession by pledging itself with renewed  vigour and deep devotion to 
the ideals and the precepts of Gandhiji and present ing him to the profession as 
a model truly worthy of the closest emulation. 
20. This book will have more than served its purpos e if it inspires the reader, 
be he a lawyer or a layman, with the belief that th e vocation of the lawyer is 
an honourable vocation requiring the highest standa rds of rectitude, integrity 
and uprightness, and that its practice is in no way  inconsistent with the pursuit 
of truth. 
Bombay, 2nd October, 1962 
Sunit B. Kher  
 
1. M. K. Gandhi,  Homage to the Departed,  p. 146 
2. M K. Gandhi,  An Autobiography,  De Luxe Edition Vol. I (1968), p. 195 
3. Ibid, p. 195 
4. Ibid, p. 195 
5. Pyarelal,  Mahatma Gandhi — The Early Phase, Vol.  1, p. 313 
6. M. K Gandhi,  An Autobiography,  Deluxe Edition, Vol.1 (1968), p. 196 
7. Ved Mehta,  Mahatma Gandhi and His Apostles, Penguin Books (1983), pp. 100, 101 
8. Ved Mehta,  Mahatma Gandhi and His Apostles, Penguin Books (1983), p. 101 
9. M. K. Gandhi,  An Autobiography  De Luxe Edition, Vol. I (1968), pp. 196, 197 
10 Pyarelal, Mahatma Gandhi – The Early Phase,  Vol. I, p. 313 
11 Ibid , p. 313 
12. M. K. Gandhi, An Autobiography  (1959), p. 97 
13 M. K. Gandhi,  An Autobiography  (1959), p. 267 
14. Gandhi Ordained in South Africa  by J. U. Uppal p. 87, Publications Division, Minis try of 
Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1995. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  15. Gandhi Ordained in South Africa by J. U. Uppal p. 8 8, Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, Government of Indi a, 1995. 
16 . Ibid p. 87 
17. Polak, Brailsford and Lord Pethick-Lawrence, Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 49 
18. D. G. Tendulkar,  Mahatma,  Vol. I, p. 84 
19. Polak, Brailsford and Lord Pethick-Lawrence, Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 49 
20. M. K. Gandhi,  An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 269-270 
21. Ibid, p. 266 
22 . Ibid 
23. Polak, Brailsford and Lord Pethick-Lawrence, Mahatma Gandhi,  p. 50 
24. Polak, Brailsford and Lord Pethick Lawrence, Mahatma Gandhi, p. 78 
25. See Appendix VII, letter to the Editor by Lord Denning dated 15-12-1984 
26. See column entitled 'Out of Court'  Times of India, 28-10-2001 by Soli S. Sorabjee 
27. James J. Cavanagh,  The Lawyer in Society 
28. Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  3rd ed.. Natesan, Madras, p. 62 
29. Mahatma Gandhiji's Ideas  by C. F. Andrews, pp. 290, 291 
30 . Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  3rd ed., Natesan, Madras, Appendix II,  
p. 45 
31. Chief Justice Shelat's introduction to the  Trial of Gandhi,  p. XXXV, Gujarat High Court 
Publication, 1965 
32. The Life and Death of Mahatma Gandhi  by Robert Payne, Rupa & Co., Mumbai 1997  
p. 361 
33. Ibid p. 363 
34. Ibid p. 368 
35. The Life and Death of Mahatma Gandhi  by Robert Payne, Rupa & Co., Mumbai 1997, p. 
361 
36. Sir Thomas Strangman, Indian Courts and Characters,  William Heinemann Ltd., London 
(1931), pp. 136-143 
37. See The Law as Literature, edited by Ephraim, London (1970), pp. 459-466 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
38. See Chief Justice Shelat's introduction to  The Trial of Gandhi, p.  Ill, Gujarat High 
Court Publication, 1965 
39. See Chief Justice Shelat's introduction to the  Trial of Gandhi,  p. XXXVI 
40. Lord Birkett,  Six Great Advocates,  p. 98 
41.  Young India,  22-12-1927, p. 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Acknowledgements with thanks are due to G. A. Nates an & Co. for quoting 
some extracts from the book, Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  (3rd 
edition), and to Khadi Gramodyog for reproducing th e speech of the late B. N. 
Gokhale, ex-judge of the Bombay High Court dealing with Gandhiji's legal 
philosophy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION  
This book was published in 1962. The sale of the bo ok received a great fillip 
when the Gujarat and the Saurashtra Universities pr escribed the book as a text 
book for the paper on professional conduct, advocac y and drafting in the third 
L.L.B. examination. The second edition was publishe d in 1975. It is a matter of 
great satisfaction that the third edition which was  published in 1981 was sold 
out within two years. 
The year 1983 will above all be remembered as the y ear of the screening of the 
epic movie 'Gandhi'. The film despite certain histo rical and chronological 
inaccuracies revived memories of the greatest man o f this century, received 
universal acclaim and recognition, was adjudged the  best film of the year, won 
several international awards and Oscars, and made a  deep and abiding impact 
on audiences at home and abroad. The film also revi ved public interest in the 
Gandhian literature and as a result several copies of this book were sold 
throughout the country as also abroad. 
While preparing the fourth edition, I came across s ome further useful material 
on the subject which has been referred to in the In troduction and incorporated 
in the book. I earnestly hope that the law students  not only of Gujarat and 
Saurashtra but also of other Universities in the co untry will find the book useful 
and derive inspiration from it in the practice of t heir profession. As Gandhiji 
has rightly observed 'a true lawyer is one who plac es truth and service in the 
first place and the emoluments of the profession in  the next place only.' 
High Court,         Sunit B. Kher 
Bombay, March 19, 1984 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   
TO THE READER  
I would like to say to the diligent reader of my wr itings and to others who are 
interested in them that I am not at all concerned w ith appearing to be 
consistent. In my search after Truth I have discard ed many ideas and learnt 
many new things. Old as I am in age, I have no feel ing that I have ceased to 
grow inwardly or that my growth will stop at the di ssolution of the flesh. What I 
am concerned with is my readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from 
moment to moment, and, therefore, when anybody find s any inconsistency 
between any two writings of mine, if he has still f aith in my sanity, he would do 
well to choose the later of the two on the same sub ject. 
M. K. Gandhi 
Harijan, 29-4-1933 p. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION I 
GANDHIJI AS A LAW STUDENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22   
01. PREPARATION FOR ENGLAND 
I passed the matriculation examination in 1887. It then used to be held at two 
centres, Ahmedabad and Bombay. The general poverty of the country naturally 
led Kathiawad students to prefer the nearer and the  cheaper centre. The 
poverty of my family likewise dictated to me the sa me choice. This was my first 
journey from Rajkot to Ahmedabad and that too witho ut a companion. 
My elders wanted me to pursue my studies at college  after the matriculation. 
There was a college in Bhavnagar as well as in Bomb ay, and as the former was 
cheaper, I decided to go there and join the Samalda s College. I went, but found 
myself entirely at sea. Everything was difficult. I  could not follow, let alone 
taking interest in, the professors' lectures. It wa s no fault of theirs. The 
professors in that college were regarded as first-r ate. But I was so raw. At the 
end of the first term, I returned home. 
We had in Mavji Dave, who was a shrewd and learned Brahman, an old friend 
and adviser of the family. He had kept up his conne ction with the family even 
after my father's death. He happened to visit us du ring my vacation. In 
conversation with my mother and elder brother, he i nquired about my studies. 
Learning that I was at Samaldas College, he said: ' The times are changed. And 
none of you can expect to succeed to your father's  gadi without having had a 
proper education. Now as this boy is still pursuing  his studies, you should all 
look to him to keep the  gadi. It will take him four or five years to get his B.A . 
degree, which will at best qualify him for a sixty rupees' post, not for a 
Diwanship. If like my son he went in for law, it wo uld take him still longer, by 
which time there would be a host of lawyers aspirin g for a Diwan's post. I would 
far rather that you sent him to England. My son Kev alram says it is very easy to 
become a barrister. In three years' time he will re turn. Also expenses will not 
exceed four to five thousand rupees. Think of that barrister who has just come 
back from England. How stylishly he lives! He could  get the Diwanship for the 
asking. I would strongly advise you to send Mohanda s to England this very year. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  Kevalram has numerous friends in England. He will g ive notes of introduction to 
them, and Mohandas will have an easy time of it the re.' 
Joshiji—that is how we used to call old Mavji Dave— turned to me with complete 
assurance, and asked: 'Would you not rather go to E ngland than study here?' 
Nothing could have been more welcome to me. I was f ighting shy of my difficult 
studies. So I jumped at the proposal and said that the sooner I was sent the 
better. It was no easy business to pass examination s quickly. Could I not be sent 
to qualify for the medical profession? 
My brother interrupted me: 'Father never liked it. He had you in mind when he 
said that we Vaishnavas should have nothing to do w ith dissection of dead 
bodies. Father intended you for the bar.' 
Joshiji chimed in: 'I am not opposed to the medical  profession as was Gandhiji. 
Our Shastras are not against it. But a medical degr ee will not make a Diwan of 
you, and I want you to be Diwan, or if possible som ething better. Only in that 
way could you take under your protecting care your large family. The times are 
fast changing and getting harder every day. It is t he wisest thing therefore to 
become a barrister. Turning to my mother he said: ' Now, I must leave. Pray 
ponder over what I have said. When I come here next  I shall expect to hear of 
preparations for England. Be sure to let me know if  I can assist in any way.' 
Joshiji went away, and I began building castles in the air. 
My elder brother was greatly exercised in his mind.  How was he to find the 
wherewithal to send me? And was it proper to trust a young man like me to go 
abroad alone? 
My mother was sorely perplexed. She did not like th e idea of parting with me. 
This is how she tried to put me off: 'Uncle,' she s aid, 'is now the eldest member 
of the family. He should first be consulted. If he consents we will consider the 
matter.' 
My brother had another idea. He said to me: 'We hav e a certain claim on the 
Porbandar State. Mr. Lely is the Administrator. He thinks highly of our family The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  and uncle is in his good books. It is just possible  that he might recommend you 
for some State help for your education in England.'  
I liked all this and got ready to start off for Por bandar. There was no railway in 
those days. It was a five days' bullock-cart journe y. I have already said that I 
was a coward. But at that moment my cowardice vanis hed before the desire to 
go to England, which completely possessed me. I hir ed a bullock-cart as far as 
Dhoraji, and from Dhoraji I took a camel in order t o get to Porbandar a day 
quicker. This was my first camel ride. 
I arrived at last, did obeisance to my uncle, and t old him everything. He 
thought it over and said: 'I am not sure whether it  is possible for one to stay in 
England without prejudice to one's own religion. Fr om all I have heard, I have 
my doubts. When I meet these big barristers, I see no difference between their 
life and that of Europeans. They know no scruples r egarding food. Cigars are 
never out of their mouths. They dress as shamelessl y as Englishmen. All that 
would not be in keeping with our family tradition. I am shortly going on a 
pilgrimage and have not many years to live. At the threshold of death, how 
dare I give you permission to go to England, to cro ss the seas? But I will not 
stand in your way. It is your mother's permission w hich really matters. If she 
permits you, then godspeed! Tell her I will not int erfere. You will go with my 
blessings.' 
'I could expect nothing more from you,' said I. 'I shall now try to win mother 
over. But would you not recommend me to Mr. Lely?' 
'How can I do that?' said he. 'But he is a good man . You ask for an appointment 
telling him how you are connected. He will certainl y give you one and may even 
help you.' 
I cannot say why my uncle did not give me a note of  recommendation. I have a 
faint idea that he hesitated to co-operate directly  in my going to England, 
which was, in his opinion, an irreligious act. 
I wrote to Mr. Lely, who asked me to see him at his  residence. He saw me as he 
was ascending the staircase; and saying curtly, 'Pa ss your B.A. first and then see The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  me. No help can be given  you  now,' he hurried upstairs. I had made elaborate 
preparations to meet him. I had carefully learnt up  a few sentences and had 
bowed low and saluted him with both hands. But all to no purpose! 
I thought of my wife's ornaments. I thought of my e lder brother, in whom I had 
the utmost faith. He was generous to a fault, and h e loved me as his son. 
I returned to Rajkot from Porbandar and reported al l that had happened. I 
consulted Joshiji, who of course advised even incur ring a debt if necessary. I 
suggested the disposal of my wife's ornaments, whic h could fetch about two to 
three thousand rupees. My brother promised to find the money somehow. 
My mother, however, was still unwilling. She had be gun making minute 
inquiries. Someone had told her that young men got lost in England. Someone 
else had said that they took to meat; and yet anoth er that they could not live 
there without liquor. 'How about all this?' she ask ed me. I said: 'Will you not 
trust me? I shall not lie to you. I swear that I sh all not touch any of those 
things. If there were any such danger, would Joshij i let me go?' 
'I can trust you', she said. 'But how can I trust y ou in a distant land? I am dazed 
and know not what to do. I will ask Becharji Swami. ' 
Becharji Swami was originally a Modh Bania, but had  now become a Jain monk. 
He too was a family adviser like Joshiji. He came t o my help, and said: "I shall 
get the boy solemnly to take the three vows, and th en he can be allowed to go.' 
He administered the oath and I vowed not to touch w ine, woman and meat. 
This done, my mother gave her permission. 
An Autobiography , (1959), pp. 26-28 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26   
02. PREPARATION FOR THE BAR 
[Editor's Note : As the Bar examinations did not re quire much study, Gandhiji did not feel 
pressed for time. He therefore thought that he shou ld not only be called to the Bar, but 
have some literary degree as well. He inquired abou t the Oxford and Cambridge University 
courses but gave up the idea of going to either of these places as it would have meant 
greater expense and a much longer stay in England t han he was prepared for. Ultimately 
he decided to study for the London Matriculation. I t appears, however, that from 1888 to 
1889, Gandhiji had enrolled himself as a student in  the University College, London, for 
recently the University College, London has proudly  claimed Gandhiji as one of its 18th 
Century distinguished alumni. The alumni department  of the college dug back its archives 
and found an old card index box containing a small yellowing index card in which is 
handwritten Gandhiji's name and dates of attendance s. It is now established that Gandhiji 
from 1888 to 1889 was enrolled as a student in the University College, London for courses 
in Indian law and jurisprudence. 1] 
I knew that Bar examinations did not require much s tudy, and I therefore did 
not feel pressed for time. My weak English was a pe rpetual worry to me. Mr. 
(afterwards Sir Frederic) Lely's words, 'Graduate f irst and then come to me,' 
still rang in my ears. I should, I thought, not onl y be called to the Bar, but have 
some literary degree as well. I inquired about the Oxford and Cambridge 
University courses, consulted a few friends, and fo und that, if I elected to go to 
either of these places, that would mean greater exp ense and a much longer 
stay in England than I was prepared for. A friend s uggested that, if I really 
wanted to have the satisfaction of taking a difficu lt examination, I should pass 
the London Matriculation. It meant a good deal of l abour and much addition to 
my stock of general knowledge, without any extra ex pense worth the name. I 
welcomed the suggestion. But the syllabus frightene d me. Latin and a modern 
language were compulsory! How was I to manage Latin ? But the friend entered 
a strong plea for it: 
'Latin is very valuable to lawyers. Knowledge of La tin is very useful in 
understanding law-books. And one paper in Roman Law  is entirely in Latin. 
Besides a knowledge of Latin means greater command over the English The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  language.' It went home and I decided to learn Lati n, no matter how difficult it 
might be. French I had already begun, so I thought that should be the modern 
language. I joined a private Matriculation class. E xaminations were held every 
six months and I had only five months at my disposa l. It was an almost 
impossible task for me. But the aspirant after bein g an English gentleman chose 
to convert himself into a serious student. I framed  my own time-table to the 
minute; but neither my intelligence nor memory prom ised to enable me to 
tackle Latin and French besides other subjects with in the given period. The 
result was that I was ploughed in Latin. I was sorr y but did not lose heart. I had 
acquired a taste for Latin, also I thought my Frenc h would be all the better for 
another trial and I would select a new subject in t he science group. Chemistry 
which was my subject in science had no attraction f or want of experiments,  
whereas it ought to have been a deeply interesting study. It was one of the 
compulsory subjects in India and so I had selected it for the London 
Matriculation. This time, however, I chose Heat and  Light instead, of 
Chemistry. It was said to be easy and I found it to  be so. . . .This was also a 
period of intensive study. Plain living saved me pl enty of time and I passed my 
examination. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 38-39 
 
1 See column entitled 'out of court', Times of Indi a, 28-10-2001 by Soli S. Sorabjee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28   
03. 'CALLED'- BUT THEN? 
I have deferred saying anything up to now about the  purpose for which I went 
to England, viz. being called to the bar. It is tim e to advert to it briefly. 
There were two conditions which had to be fulfilled  before a student was 
formally called to the bar: 'keeping terms,' twelve  terms equivalent to about 
three years; and passing examinations. 'Keeping ter ms' meant eating one's 
terms, i.e. attending at least six out of about twe nty-four dinners in a term. 
Eating did not mean actually partaking of the dinne r, it meant reporting oneself 
at the fixed hours and remaining present throughout  the dinner. Usually of 
course every one ate and drank the good commons and  choice wines provided. 
A dinner cost from two and six to three and six, th at is from two to three 
rupees. This was considered moderate, inasmuch as o ne had to pay that same 
amount for wines alone if one dine at a hotel. To u s in India it is a matter for 
surprise, if we are not 'civilized', that the cost of drink should exceed the cost 
of food. The first revelation gave me a great shock , and I wondered how people 
had the heart to throw away so much money on drink.  Later I came to 
understand. I often ate nothing at these dinners, f or the things that I might eat 
were only bread, boiled potato and cabbage. In the beginning I did not eat 
these, as I did not like them; and later, when I be gan to relish them, I also 
gained the courage to ask for other dishes. 
The dinner provided for the benchers used to be bet ter than that for the 
students. A Parsi student, who was also a vegetaria n, and I applied, in the 
interests of vegetarianism, for the vegetarian cour ses which were served to the 
benchers. The application was granted, and we began  to get fruits and other 
vegetables from the benchers' table. 
Two bottles of wine were allowed to each group of f our, and as I did not touch 
them, I was ever in demand to form a quarter, so th at three might empty two 
bottles. And there was a 'grand night' in each term  when extra wines, like 
champagne, in addition to port and sherry, were ser ved. I was therefore 
specially requested to attend and was in great dema nd on that 'grand night'. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  I could not see then, nor have I seen since, how th ese dinners qualified the 
students better for the bar. There was once a time when only a few students 
used to attend these dinners and thus there were op portunities for talks 
between them and the benchers, and speeches were al so made. These 
occasions helped to give them knowledge of the worl d with a sort of polish and 
refinement, and also improved their power of speaki ng. No such thing was 
possible in my time, as the benchers had a table al l to themselves. The 
institution had gradually lost all its meaning but conservative England retained 
it nevertheless. 
The curriculum of study was easy, barristers being humorously known as 'dinner 
barristers'. Everyone knew that the 'examinations h ad practically no value. In 
my time there were two, one in Roman Law and the ot her in Common Law. 
There were regular text-books prescribed for these examinations which could 
be taken in compartments, but scarcely any one read  them. I have known many 
to pass the Roman Law examination by scrambling thr ough notes on Roman Law 
in a couple of weeks, and the Common Law examinatio n by reading notes on 
the subject in two or three months. Question papers  were easy and examiners 
were generous. The percentage of passes in the Roma n Law examination used 
to be 95 to 99 and of those in the final examinatio n 75 or even more. There was 
thus little fear of being plucked, and examinations  were held not once but four 
times in the year. They could not be felt as a diff iculty. 
But I succeeded in turning them into one. I felt th at I should read all the text-
books. It was a fraud, I thought, not to read these  books. I invested much 
money in them. I decided to read Roman Law in Latin . The Latin which I had 
acquired in the London Matriculation stood me in go od stead. And all this 
reading was not without its value later on in South  Africa, where Roman Dutch 
is the common law. The reading of Justinian, theref ore, helped me a great deal 
in understanding the South African law. 
It took me nine months of fairly hard labour to rea d through the Common Law 
of England. For Broom's  Common Law,  a big but interesting volume, took up a 
good deal of time. Snell's  Equity  was full of interest, but a bit hard to The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  understand. White and Tudor's  Leading Cases,  from which certain cases were 
prescribed, was full of interest and instruction. I  read also with interest 
Williams' and Edwards'  Real Property and Goodeve's  Personal Property.  
Williams' book read like a novel. The one book I re member to have read on my 
return to India, with the same unflagging interest,  was Mayne's  Hindu Law.  But 
it is out of place to talk here of Indian law-books . 
I passed my examinations, was called to the bar on the 10th of June 1891, and 
enrolled in the High Court on the 11th. On the 12 th  I sailed for home. 
But notwithstanding my study there was no end to my  helplessness and fear. I 
did not feel myself qualified to practise law. 
 
My Helplessness 
It was easy to be called but it was difficult to pr actise at the bar. I had read 
the laws, but not learnt how to practise law. I had  read with interest 'Legal 
Maxims', but did not know how to apply them in my p rofession. 'Sic utere tuo ut 
alienum non laedas  (Use your property in such a way as not to damage that of 
others) was one of them, but I was at a loss to kno w how one could employ this 
maxim for the benefit of one's client. I had read a ll the leading cases on this 
maxim, but they gave me no confidence in the applic ation of it in the practice 
of law. 
Besides, I had learnt nothing at all of Indian law.  I had not the slightest idea of 
Hindu and Mahommedan Law. I had not even learnt how  to draft a plaint, and 
felt completely at sea. I had heard of Sir Pherozes hah Mehta as one who roared 
like a lion in law courts. How, I wondered, could h e have learnt the art in 
England? It was out of the question for me ever to acquire his legal acumen, but 
I had serious misgivings as to whether I should be able even to earn a living by 
the profession. 
I was torn with these doubts and anxieties whilst I  was studying law. I confided 
my difficulties to some of my friends. One of them suggested that I should seek 
Dadabhai Naoroji's advice. I have already said that , when I went to England, I The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  possessed a note of introduction to Dadabhai. I ava iled myself of it very late. I 
thought I had no right to trouble such a great man for an interview. Whenever 
an address by him was announced, I would attend it,  listen to him from a 
corner of the hall, and go away after having feaste d my eyes and ears. In order 
to come in close touch with the students he had fou nded an association. I used 
to attend its meetings and rejoiced at Dadabhai's s olicitude for the students, 
and the latter's respect for him. In course of time  I mustered up courage to 
present to him the note of introduction. He said : Tou can come and have my 
advice whenever you like." But I never availed myse lf of his offer. I thought it 
wrong to trouble him without the most pressing nece ssity. Therefore I dared 
not venture to accept my friend's advice to submit my difficulties to Dadabhai 
at that time. I forget now whether it was the same friend or someone else who 
recommended me to meet Mr. Frederick Pincutt. He wa s a Conservative, but 
his affection for Indian students was pure and unse lfish. Many students sought 
his advice and I also applied to him for an appoint ment, which he granted. I can 
never forget that interview. He greeted me as a fri end. He laughed away my 
pessimism. 'Do you think,' he said, 'that everyone must be a Pherozeshah Mehta? 
Pherozeshahs and Badruddins are rare. Rest assured it takes no unusual skill to 
be an ordinary lawyer. Common honesty and industry are enough to enable him 
to make a living. All cases are not complicated. We ll, let me know the extent 
of your general reading.' 
When I acquainted him with my little stock of readi ng, he was, as I could see, 
rather disappointed. But it was only for a moment. Soon his face beamed with a 
pleasing smile and he said, 'I understand your trou ble. Your general reading is 
meagre. You have no knowledge of the world, a sine qua non for a vakil. You 
have not even read the history of India. A vakil sh ould know human nature. He 
could be able to read a man's character from his fa ce. And every Indian ought 
to know Indian history. This has no connection with  the practice of law, but you 
ought to have that knowledge. I see that you have n ot even read Kaye and 
Malleson's history of the Mutiny of 1857. Get hold of that at once and also read 
two more books to understand human nature.' These w ere Lavator's and 
Shemmelpennick's books on physiognomy. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  I was extremely grateful to this venerable friend. In his presence I found all my 
fear gone, but as soon as I left him I began to wor ry again. To know a man from 
his face' was the question that haunted me, as I th ought of the two books on my 
way home. The next day I purchased Lavator's book. Shemmelpennick's was not 
available at the shop. I read Lavator's book and fo und it more difficult than 
Snell's  Equity, and scarcely interesting. I studied Shakespeare's physiognomy, 
but did not acquire the knack of finding out the Sh akespeares walking up and 
down the streets of London. 
Lavator's book did not add to my knowledge. Mr. Pin cutt's advice did me very 
little direct service, but his kindliness stood me in good stead. His smiling open 
face stayed in my memory, and I trusted his advice that Pherozeshah Mehta's 
acumen, memory and ability were not essential to th e making of a successful 
lawyer; honesty and industry were enough. And as I had a fair share of these 
last I felt somewhat reassured.  
I could not read Kaye and Malleson's volumes in Eng land, but I did so in South 
Africa as 1 had made a point of reading them at the  first opportunity. 
Thus with just a little leaven of hope mixed with m y despair, I landed at 
Bombay from s. s.  Assam. The sea was rough in the harbour, and I. had to re ach 
the quay in a launch. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 56-59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION II  
GANDHIJI AS A LAWYER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34   
04. HOW I BEGAN LIFE 
I said in the last chapter that the sea was rough i n Bombay harbour, not an 
unusual thing in the Arabain Sea in June and July. It had been choppy all the 
way from Aden. Almost every passenger was sick; I a lone was in perfect form 
staying on deck to see the stormy surge, and enjoyi ng the splash of the waves. 
At breakfast there would be just one or two people besides myself, eating their 
oatmeal porridge from plates carefully held in thei r laps, lest the porridge itself 
find its place there. 
The outer storm was to me a symbol of the inner. Bu t even as the former left 
me unperturbed, I think I can say the same thing ab out the latter. There was 
the trouble with the caste that was to confront me.  I have already adverted to 
my helplessness in starting on my profession. And t hen, as I was a reformer, I 
was taxing myself as to how best to begin certain r eforms. But there was even 
more in store for me than I knew. 
My elder brother had come to meet me at the dock. H e had already made the 
acquaintance of Dr. Mehta and his elder brother, an d as Dr. Mehta insisted on 
putting me up at his house, we went there. Thus the  acquaintance begun in 
England continued in India and ripened into a perma nent friendship between 
the two families. 
My elder brother had built high hopes on me. The de sire for wealth and name 
and fame was great in him. He had a big heart, gene rous to a fault. This 
combined with his simple nature, had attracted to h im many friends, and 
through them he expected to get me briefs. He had a lso assumed that I should 
have a swinging practice and had, in that expectati on, allowed the household 
expenses to become top-heavy. He had also left no s tone unturned in preparing 
the field for my practice. 
The storm in my caste over my foreign voyage was st ill brewing. It had divided 
the caste into two camps, one of which immediately readmitted me, while the 
other was bent on keeping me out. To please the for mer my brother took me to The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35  Nasik before going to Rajkot, gave me a bath in the  sacred river and on 
reaching Rajkot, gave a caste dinner. I did not lik e all this. But my brother's 
love for me was boundless, and my devotion to him w as in proportion to it, and 
so I mechanically acted as he wished, taking his wi ll to be law. The trouble 
about re-admission to the caste was thus practicall y over. 
I had planned reform in the education of children. My brother had children, and 
my own child which I had left at home when I went t o England was now a boy 
of nearly four. It was my desire to teach these lit tle ones physical exercise and 
make them hardy, and also to give them the benefit of my personal guidance. 
In this I had my brother's support and I succeeded in my efforts more or less. I 
very much liked the company of children, and the ha bit of playing and joking 
with them has stayed with me till today. I have eve r since thought that 1 should 
make a good teacher of children. 
The necessity for food 'reform' was obvious. Tea an d coffee had already found 
their place in the house. My brother had thought it  fit to keep some sort of 
English atmosphere ready for me on my return and to  that end, crockery and 
such other things, which used to be kept in the hou se only for special 
occasions, were now in general use. My 'reforms' pu t the finishing touch. I 
introduced oatmeal porridge, and cocoa was to repla ce tea and coffee. But in 
truth it became an addition to tea and coffee. Boot s and shoes were already 
there, I completed the Europeanization by adding th e European dress. 
Expenses thus went up. New things were added every day. We had succeeded in 
tying a white elephant at our door. But how was the  wherewithal to be found? 
To start practice in Rajkot would have meant sure r idicule. I had hardly the 
knowledge of a qualified vakil and yet I expected t o be paid ten times his fee ! 
No client would be fool enough to engage me. And ev en if such a one was to be 
found, should I add arrogance and fraud to my ignor ance, and increase the 
burden of debt I owed to the world ? 
Friends advised me to go to Bombay for some time in  order to gain experience 
of the High Court, to study Indian law and to try a nd get what briefs I could. I 
took up the suggestion and went. In Bombay I starte d a household (at Girgaum). The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  But it was impossible for me to get along in Bombay  for more than four or five 
months, there being no income to square with the ev er-increasing expenditure. 
This was how I began life. I found the barrister's profession a bad job—much 
show and little knowledge. I felt a crushing sense of my responsibility. 
 An Autobiography , (1959), pp. 63-67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37   
05. THE FIRST CASE 
Whilst in Bombay, I began, on the one hand, my stud y of Indian law and, on the 
other, my experiments in dietetics in which Virchan d Gandhi, a friend, joined 
me. My brother, for his part, was trying his best t o get me briefs. 
The study of Indian law was a tedious business. The  Civil Procedure Code I 
could in no way get on with. Not so, however, with the Evidence Act. Virchand 
Gandhi was reading for the Solicitor's Examination and would tell me all sorts of 
stories about barristers and vakils. 'Sir Pherozesh ah's ability,' he would say, 'lies 
in his profound knowledge of law. He has the Eviden ce Act by heart and knows 
all the cases on the thirty- second section. Badrud din Tyabji's wonderful power 
of argument inspires the judges with awe.' 
The stories of stalwarts such as these would unnerv e me. 
'It is not unusual', he would add, 'for a barrister  to vegetate for five or seven 
years. That's why I have signed the articles for so licitorship. You should count 
yourself lucky if you can paddle your own canoe in three years' time' 
Expenses were mounting up every month. To have a ba rrister's board outside 
the house, whilst still preparing for the barrister 's profession inside, was a thing 
to which I could not reconcile myself. Hence I coul d not give undivided 
attention to my studies. I developed some liking fo r the Evidence Act and read 
Mayne's Hindu Law with deep interest, but I had not  the courage to conduct a 
case. I was helpless beyond words, even as the brid e come fresh to her father-
in- law's house! 
About this time, I took up the case of one Mami- ba i. It was a 'small cause'. Tou 
will have to pay some commission to the tout,' I wa s told. I emphatically 
declined. 
'But even that great criminal lawyer Mr. so-and-so,  who makes three to four 
thousand a month, pays commission!' 
'I do not need to emulate him', I rejoined. 'I shou ld be content with Rs. 300/- a 
month. Father did not get more.' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  'But those days are gone. Expenses in Bombay have g one up frightfully. You 
must be businesslike.' 
I was adamant. I gave no commission, but got Mamiba i's case all the same. It 
was an easy case. I charged Rs. 30/- for my fees. T he case was not likely to last 
longer than a day. 
This was my  debut  in the Small Causes Court. I appeared for the defe ndant and 
had thus to cross- examine the plaintiffs witnesses . I stood up, but my heart 
sank into my boots. My head was reeling and I felt as though the whole court 
was doing likewise. I could think of no question to  ask. The judge must have 
laughed, and the vakils no doubt enjoyed the specta cle. But I was past seeing 
anything. I sat down and told the agent that I coul d not conduct the case, that 
he had better engage Patel and have the fee back fr om me. Mr. Patel was duly 
engaged for Rs. 51. To him of course, the case was child's play. 
I hastened from the court, not knowing whether my c lient won or lost her case, 
but I was ashamed of myself, and decided not to tak e up any more cases until I 
had courage enough to conduct them. Indeed I did no t go to court again until I 
went to South Africa. There was no virtue in my dec ision. I had simply made a 
virtue of necessity. There would be no one so fooli sh as to entrust his case to 
me, only to lose it! 
But there  was  another case in store for me at Bombay. It was a m emorial to be 
drafted. A poor Mussalman's land was confiscated in  Porbandar. He approached 
me as the worthy son of a worthy father. His case a ppeared to be weak, but I 
consented to draft a memorial for him, the cost of printing to be borne by him. 
I drafted it and read it out to friends. They appro ved of it, and that to some 
extent made me feel confident that I was qualified enough to draft a memorial, 
as indeed I really was. 
My business could flourish if I drafted memorials w ithout any fees. But that 
would bring no grist to the mill. So I thought I mi ght take up a teacher's job. My 
knowledge of English was good enough, and I should have loved to teach English 
to Matriculation boys in some school. In this way I  could have met part at least 
of the expenses. I came across an advertisement in the papers : 'Wanted, an The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39  English teacher to teach one hour daily. Salary Rs.  75.' The advertisement was 
from a famous high school. I applied for the post a nd was called for an 
interview. I went there in high spirits, but when t he principal found that I was 
not a graduate, he regretfully refused me. 
'But I have passed the London Matriculation with La tin as my second language.' 
'True, but we want a graduate.' 
There was no help for it. I wrung my hands in despa ir. My brother also felt 
much worried. We both came to the conclusion that i t was no use spending 
more time in Bombay. I should settle in Rajkot wher e my brother, himself a 
petty pleader, could give me some work in the shape  of drafting applications 
and memorials. And then as there was already a hous ehold at Rajkot, the 
breaking up of the one at Bombay meant a considerab le saving. I liked the 
suggestion. My little establishment was thus closed  after a stay of six months in 
Bombay. 
I used to attend High Court daily whilst in Bombay,  but I cannot say that I 
learnt anything there. I had not sufficient knowled ge to learn much. Often I 
could not follow the cases and dozed off. There wer e others also who kept me 
company in this, and thus lightened my load of sham e. After a time, I even lost 
the sense of shame, as I learnt to think that it wa s fashionable to doze in the 
High Court. 
If the present generation has also its briefless ba rristers like me in Bombay, I 
would commend them a little practical precept about  living. Although I lived in 
Girgaum I hardly ever took a carriage or a tramcar.  I had made it a rule to walk 
to the High Court. It took me quite forty-five minu tes, and of course, I 
invariably returned home on foot. I had inured myse lf of the heat of the sun. 
This walk to and from the court saved a fair amount  of money, and when many 
of my friends in Bombay used to fall ill, I do not remember having once had an 
illness. Even when I began to earn money, I kept up  the practice of walking to 
and from the office, and I am still reaping the ben efits of that practice. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 67-69 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40   
06. THE FIRST SHOCK 
Disappointed, I left Bombay and went to Rajkot wher e I set up my own office. 
Here I got along moderately well. Drafting applicat ions and memorials brought 
me in, on an average, Rs. 300 a month. For this wor k I had to thank influence 
rather than my own ability, for my brother's partne r had a settled practice. All 
applications etc., which were, really or to his min d of an important character, 
he sent to big barristers. To my lot fell the appli cations to be drafted on behalf 
of his poor clients. 
I must confess that here I had to compromise the pr inciple of giving no 
commission, which in Bombay I had so scrupulously o bserved. I was told that 
conditions in the two cases were different; that wh ilst in Bombay commissions 
had to be paid to touts, here they had to be paid t o vakils who briefed you; and 
that here as in Bombay all barristers, without exce ption, paid a percentage of 
their fees as commission. The argument of my brothe r was, for me, 
unanswerable. 'You see,' said he, 'that I am in par tnership with another vakil. I 
shall always be inclined to make over to you all ou r cases with which you can 
possibly deal, and if you refuse to pay a commissio n to my partner, you are sure 
to embarrass me. As you and I have a joint establis hment, your fee comes to 
our common purse, and I automatically get a share. But what about my partner? 
Supposing he gave the same case to some other barri ster, he would certainly 
get his commission from him.' I was taken in by thi s plea, and felt that, if I was 
to practise as a barrister, I could not press my pr inciple regarding commissions 
in such cases. That is how I argued with myself, or  to put it bluntly, how I 
deceived myself. Let me add, however, that I do not  remember ever to have 
given a commission in respect of any other case. 
Though I thus began to make both ends meet, I got t he first shock of my life 
about this time. I had heard what a British Officer  was like, but up to now had 
never been face to face with one. 
My brother had been secretary and adviser to the la te Ranasaheb of Porbandar 
before he was installed on his  gadi, and hanging over his head at this time was The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  the charge of having given wrong advice when in tha t office. The matter had 
gone to the Political Agent who was prejudiced agai nst my brother. Now I had 
known this officer when in England, and he may be s aid to have been fairly 
friendly to me. My brother thought that I should av ail myself of the friendship 
and, putting in a good word on his behalf, try to d isabuse the Political Agent of 
his prejudice. I did not at all like this idea. I s hould not, I thought, try to take 
advantage of a trifling acquaintance in England. If  my brother was really at 
fault, what use was my recommendation? If he was in nocent, he should submit 
a petition in the proper course and, confident of h is innocence, face the result. 
My brother did not relish this advice. Tou do not k now Kathiawad,' he said, ' 
and you have yet to know the world. Only influence counts here. It is not 
proper for you, a brother, to shirk your duty, when  you can clearly put in a 
good word about me to an officer you know.' 
I could not refuse him, so I went to the officer mu ch against my will. I knew I 
had no right to approach him and was fully consciou s that I was compromising 
my self-respect. But I sought an appointment and go t it. I reminded him of the 
old acquaintance, but I immediately saw that Kathia wad was different from 
England; that an officer on leave was not the same as an officer on duty. The 
Political Agent owned the acquaintance, but the rem inder seemed to stiffen 
him. 'Surely you have not come here to abuse that a cquaintance, have you?' 
appeared to be the meaning of that stiffness, and s eemed to be written on his 
brow. Nevertheless I opened my case. The  sahib was impatient. Tour brother is 
an intriguer. I want to hear nothing more from you.  I have no time. If your 
brother has anything to say, let him apply through the proper channel.' The 
answer was enough, was perhaps deserved. But selfis hness is blind. I went on 
with my story. The  sahib  got up and said : You must go now.' 
'But please hear me out,' said I. That made him mor e angry. He called his peon 
and ordered him to show me the door. I was still he sitating when the peon 
came in, placed his hands on my shoulders and put m e out of the room. 
The  sahib  went away as also the peon, and I departed frettin g and fuming. I at 
once wrote out and sent over a note to this effect : 'You have insulted me. You The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  have assaulted me through your peon. If you make no  amends, I shall have to 
proceed against you'. 
Quick came the answer through his  sowar: 
You were rude to me. I asked you to go and you woul d not. I had no option but 
to order my peon to show you the door. Even after h e asked you to leave the 
office, you did not do so. He therefore had to use just enough force to send you 
out. You are at liberty to proceed as you wish.' 
With this answer in my pocket, I came home crestfal len and told my brother all 
that had happened. He was grieved, but was at a los s as to how to console me. 
He spoke to his vakil friends. For I did not know h ow to proceed against the  
sahib. Sir Pherozeshah Mehta happened to be in Rajkot at this time, having 
come down from Bombay for some case. But how could a junior barrister like 
me dare to see him ? So I sent him the papers of my  case, through the vakil who 
had engaged him, and begged for his advice. 'Tell G andhi,' he said, 'such things 
are the common experience of many vakils and barris ters. He is still fresh from 
England, and hot-blooded. He does not know British officers. If he would earn 
something and have an easy time here, let him tear up the note and pocket the 
insult. He will gain nothing by proceeding against the sahib, and on the 
contrary will very likely ruin himself. Tell him he  has yet to know life.' 
The advice was as bitter as poison to me, but I had  to swallow it. I pocketed 
the insult, but also profited by it. 'Never again s hall I place myself in such a 
false position, never again shall I-try to exploit friendship in this way,' said I to 
myself, and since then I have never been guilty of a breach of that 
determination. This shock changed the course of my life. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 70-72 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43   
07. PREPARING FOR SOUTH AFRICA 
I was no doubt at fault in having gone to that offi cer. But his impatience and 
overbearing anger were out of all proportion to my mistake. It did not warrant 
expulsion. I can scarcely have taken up more than f ive minutes of his time. But 
he simply could not endure my talking. He could hav e politely asked me to go, 
but power had intoxicated him to an inordinate exte nt. Later I came to know 
that patience was not one of the virtues of this of ficer. It was usual for him to 
insult his visitors. The slightest unpleasantness w as sure to put the  sahib  out. 
Now most of my work would naturally be in his court . It was beyond me to 
conciliate him. I had no desire to curry favour wit h him. Indeed, having once 
threatened to proceed against him, I did not like t o remain silent. 
Meanwhile I began to learn something of the petty p olitics of the country. 
Kathiawad, being a conglomeration of small States, naturally had its rich crop 
of politicals. Petty intrigues between States, and intrigues of officers for power 
were the order of the day. Princes were always at t he mercy of others and 
ready to lend their ears to sycophants. Even the  sahib's peon had to be cajoled, 
and the  sahib's shirastedar  was more than his master, as he was his eyes, his 
ears and his interpreter. The  shirastedar's  will was law, and his income was 
always reputed to be more than the  sahib's. This may have been an 
exaggeration, but he certainly lived beyond his sal ary. 
This atmosphere appeared to me to be poisonous, and  how to remain unscathed 
was a perpetual problem for me. 
I was thoroughly depressed and my brother clearly s aw it. We both felt that, if I 
could secure some job, I should be free from this a tmosphere of intrigue. But 
without intrigue a ministership or judgeship was ou t of the question. And the 
quarrel with the  sahib  stood in the way of my practice. 
Porbandar was then under administration, and I had some work here in the 
shape of securing more powers for the prince. Also I had to see the 
Administrator in respect of the heavy  uighoti (land rent) exacted from the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  Mers. The officer, though an Indian, was, I found, one better than the  sahib  in 
arrogance. He was able, but the ryots, appeared to me to be none the better 
off for his ability. I succeeded in securing a few more powers for the Rana, but 
hardly any relief for the Mers. It struck me that t heir cause was not even 
carefully gone into. 
So even in this mission I was comparatively disappo inted. I thought justice was 
not done to my clients, but I had not the means to secure it. At the most I 
could have appealed to the Political Agent or to th e Governor who would have 
dismissed the appeal saying, 'We decline to interfe re'. If there had been any 
rule or regulation governing such decisions, it wou ld have been something, but 
here the  sahib's  will was law. 
I was exasperated. 
In the meantime a Meman firm from Porbandar wrote t o my brother making the 
following offer: 'We have business in South Africa.  Ours is a big firm, and we 
have a big case there in the court, our claim being  £40,000. It has been going 
on for a long time. We have engaged the services of  the best vakils and 
barristers. If you sent your brother there, he woul d be useful to us and also to 
himself. He would be able to instruct our counsel b etter than ourselves. And he 
would have the advantage of seeing a new part of th e world and of making new 
acquaintances.' 
My brother discussed the proposition with me. I cou ld not clearly make out 
whether I had simply to instruct the counsel or to appear in court. But I was 
tempted. 
My brother introduced me to the late Sheth Abdul Ka rim Jhaveri, a partner of 
Dada Abdulla and Co., the firm in question. 'It won 't be a difficult job,' the 
Sheth assured me, 'we have big Europeans as our fri ends, whose acquaintance 
you will make. You can be useful to us in our shop.  Much of our correspondence 
is in English and you can help us with that too. Yo u will, of course, be our guest 
and hence will have no expense whatever.' 
'How long do you require my services?' I asked. 'An d what will be the payment?' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  'Not more than a year. We will pay you a first clas s return fare and a sum of 
£105, all found.' 
This was hardly going there as a barrister. It was going as a servant of the firm. 
But I wanted somehow to leave India. There was also  the tempting opportunity 
of seeing a new country, and of having new experien ce. Also I could send £105 
to my brother and help in the expenses of the house hold. I closed with the 
offer without any higgling and got ready to go to S outh Africa. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 72-73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46   
08. ARRIVAL IN NATAL 
When starting for South Africa I did not feel the w rench of separation which I 
had experienced when leaving for England. My mother  was now no more. I had 
gained some knowledge of the world and of travel ab road, and going from 
Rajkot to Bombay was no unusual affair. 
This time I only felt the pang of parting with my w ife. Another baby had been 
born to us since my return from England. Our love c ould not yet be called free 
from lust, but it was getting gradually purer. Sinc e my return from Europe, we 
had lived very little together; and as I had now be come her teacher, however 
indifferent, and helped her to make certain reforms , we both felt the necessity 
of being more together, if only to continue the ref orms. But the attraction of 
South Africa rendered the separation bearable. 'We are bound to meet again in 
a year,' I said to her, by way of consolation, and left Rajkot for Bombay. 
Here I was to get my passage through the agent of D ada Abdulla and Company. 
But no berth was available on the boat, and if I di d not sail then, I should be 
stranded in Bombay. 'We have tried our best,' said the agent, 'to secure a first 
class passage, but in vain—unless you are prepared to go on deck. Your meals 
can be arranged for in the saloon.' These were the days of my first class 
travelling, and how could a barrister travel as a d eck passenger? So I refused 
the offer. I suspected the agent's veracity, for I could not believe that a first 
class passage was not available. With the agent's c onsent I set about securing it 
myself. I went on board the boat and met the chief officer. He said to me quite 
frankly, 'We do not usually have such a rush. But a s the Governor-General of 
Mozamnique is going by this boat, all the berths ar e engaged ' 
'Could you not possibly squeeze me in?' I asked. 
He surveyed me from top to toe and smiled, "There i s just one way,' he said. 
'There is an extra berth in my cabin, which is usua lly not available for 
passengers. But I am prepared to give it to you.' I  thanked him and got the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  agent to purchase the passage. In April1893 I set f orth full of zest to try my 
luck in South Africa. 
The first port of call was Lamu which we reached in  about thirteen days. The 
Captain and I had become great friends by this time . He was fond of playing 
chess, but as he was quite a novice, he wanted one still more of a beginner for 
his partner, and so he invited me. I had heard a lo t about the game but had 
never tried my hand at it. Players used to say that  this was a game in which 
there was plenty of scope for the exercise of one's  intelligence. The Captain 
offered to give me lessons, and he found me a good pupil as I had unlimited 
patience. Every time I was the loser, and that made  him all the more eager to 
teach me. I liked the game, but never carried my li king beyond the boat or my 
knowledge beyond the moves of the pieces. 
At Lamu the ship remained at anchor for some three to four hours, and I landed 
to see the port. After Lamu the next port was Momba sa and then Zanzibar. The 
halt here was a long one—eight or ten days — and we  then changed to another 
boat. As we had to remain in this port for a week, I took rooms in the town and 
saw a good deal by wandering about the neighbourhoo d. Only Malabar can give 
any idea of the luxuriant vegetation of Zanzibar. I  was amazed at the gigantic 
trees and the size of the fruits. The next call was  at Mozambique and thence 
we reached Natal towards the close of May. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 74-76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48   
09. SOME EXPERIENCES 
The port of Natal is Durban also known as Port Nata l. Abdulla Sheth was there 
to receive me. As the ship arrived at the quay and I watched the people coming 
on board to meet their friends, I observed that the  Indians were not held in 
much respect. I could not fail to notice a sort of snobbishness about the manner 
in which those who knew Abdulla Sheth behaved towar ds him, and it stung me. 
Abdulla Sheth had got used to it. Those who looked at me did so with a certain 
amount of curiosity. My dress marked me out from ot her Indians. I had a frock-
coat and a turban, an imitation of the Bengal  pugree. 
I was taken to the firm's quarters and shown into t he room set apart for me, 
next to Abdulla Sheth's. He did not understand me. I could not understand him. 
He read the papers his brother had sent through me,  and felt more puzzled. He 
thought his brother had sent him a white elephant. My style of dress and living 
struck him as being expensive like that of the Euro peans. There was no 
particular work then which could be given me. Their  case was going on in the 
Transvaal. There was no meaning in sending me there  immediately. And how 
far could he trust my ability and honesty? He would  not be in Pretoria to watch 
me. The defendants were in Pretoria, and for aught he knew they might bring 
undue influence to bear on me. And if work in conne ction with the case in 
question was not to be entrusted to me, what work c ould I be given to do as all 
other work could be done much better by his clerks ? The clerks could be 
brought to book, if they did wrong. Could I be, if I also happened to err? So if 
no work in connection with the case could be given me, I should have to be 
kept for nothing. 
Abdulla Sheth was practically unlettered, but he ha d a rich fund of experience. 
He had an acute intellect and was conscious of it. By practice he had picked up 
just sufficient English for conversational purposes , but that served him for 
carrying on all his business, whether it was dealin g with Bank Managers and 
European merchants or explaining his case to his co unsel. The Indians held him 
in very high esteem. His firm was then the biggest,  or at any rate one of the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  biggest, of the Indian firms. With all these advant ages he had one disadvantage 
— he was by nature suspicious. 
He was proud of Islam and loved to discourse of Isl amic philosophy. Though he 
did not know Arabic his acquaintance with the Holy Koran and Islamic literature 
in general was fairly good. Illustrations he had in  plenty, always ready at hand. 
Contact with him gave me a fair amount of practical  knowledge of Islam. When 
we came closer to each other, we had long discussio ns on religious topics. 
On the second or third day of my arrival, he took m e to see the Durban court. 
There he introduced me to several people and seated  me next to his attorney. 
The Magistrate kept staring at me and finally asked  me to take off my turban. 
This I refused to do and left the court. 
So here too there was fighting in store for me. 
Abdulla Sheth explained to me why some Indians were  required to take off their 
turbans. Those wearing the Mussalman costume might,  he said, keep their 
turbans on, but the other Indians on entering a cou rt had to take theirs off as a 
rule. 
I must enter into some details to make this nice di stinction intelligible. In the 
course of these two or three days I could see that the Indians were divided into 
different groups. One was that of Mussalman merchan ts, who would call 
themselves 'Arabs'. Another was that of Hindu, and yet another of Parsi, clerks. 
The Hindu clerks were neither here nor there, unles s they cast in their lot with 
the 'Arabs'. The Parsi clerks would call themselves  Persians. These three classes 
had some social relations with one another. ' But b y far the largest class was 
that composed of Tamil, Telugu and North Indian ind entured and freed 
labourers. The indentured labourers were those who went to Natal on an 
agreement to serve for five years, and came to be k nown there as  girmitiyas  
from  girmit, which was the corrupt form of the English word 'ag reement'. The 
other three classes had none but business relations  with this class. Englishmen 
called them 'coolies', and as the majority of India ns belonged to the labouring 
class, all Indians were called 'coolies', or 'samis '. 'Sami' is a Tamil suffix 
occurring after many Tamil names, and it is nothing  else than the Sanskrit  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  swami, meaning a master. Whenever, therefore, an Indian r esented being 
addressed as a sami and had enough wit in him, he w ould try to return the 
compliment in this wise: 'You may call me  sami, but you forget that  sami means 
a master. I am not your master !' Some Englishmen w ould wince at this, while 
others would get angry, swear at the Indian and, if  there was a chance, would 
even belabour him; for  sami to him was nothing better than a term of 
contempt. To interpret it to mean a master amounted  to an insult! 
I was hence known as a 'coolie barrister'. The merc hants were known as 'coolie 
merchants'. The original meaning of the word 'cooli e' was thus forgotten, and it 
became a common appellation for all Indians. The Mu ssalman merchant would 
resent this and say: 'I am not a coolie, I am an Ar ab,' or 'I am a merchant,' and 
the Englishman, if courteous, would apologize to hi m. 
The question of wearing the turban had a great impo rtance in this state of 
things. Being obliged to take off one's Indian turb an would be pocketing an 
insult. So I thought I had better bid good-bye to t he Indian turban and begin 
wearing an English hat, which would save me from th e insult and the 
unpleasant controversy. 
But Abdulla Sheth disapproved of the idea. He said,  'If you do anything of the 
kind, it will have a very bad effect. You will comp romise those insisting on 
wearing Indian turbans. And an Indian turban sits w ell on your head. If you wear 
an English hat, you will pass for a waiter.' 
There was practical wisdom, patriotism and a little  bit of narrowness in this 
advice. The wisdom was apparent, and he would not h ave insisted on the Indian 
turban except out of patriotism; the slighting refe rence to the waiter betrayed 
a kind of narrowness. Amongst the indentured Indian s there were three classes 
— Hindus, Mussalmans and Christians. The last were the children of indentured 
Indians who became converts to Christianity. Even i n 1893 their number was 
large. They wore the English costume, and the major ity of them earned their 
living by service as waiters in hotels. Abdulla She th's criticism of the English hat 
was with reference to this class. It was considered  degrading to serve as a 
waiter in a hotel. The belief persists even today a mong many. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  On the whole I liked Abdulla Sheth's advice. I wrot e to the press about the 
incident and defended the wearing of my turban in t he court. The question was 
very much discussed in the papers, which described me as an 'unwelcome 
visitor'. Thus the incident gave me an unexpected a dvertisement in South Africa 
within a few days of my arrival there. Some support ed me while others severely 
criticized my temerity. 
My turban stayed with me practically until the end of my stay in South Africa. 
When and why I left off wearing any head-dress at a ll in South Africa, we shall 
see later. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 76-78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52   
10. ON THE WAY TO PRETORIA 
I soon came in contact with the Christian Indians l iving in Durban. The Court 
Interpreter, Mr. Paul, was a Roman Catholic. I made  his acquaintance, as also 
that of the late Mr. Subhan Godfrey, then a teacher  under the Protestant 
Mission, and father of Mr. James Godfrey, who, as a  member of the South 
African Deputation, visited India in 1924. I likewi se met the late Parsi Rustomji 
and the late Adamji Miyakhan about the same time. A ll these friends who up to 
then had never met one another except on business, came ultimately into close 
contact as we shall see later. 
Whilst I was thus widening the circle of my acquain tance, the firm received a 
letter from their lawyer saying that preparations s hould be made for the case, 
and that Abdulla Sheth should go to Pretoria himsel f or send a representative. 
Abdulla Sheth gave me this letter to read, and aske d me if I would go to 
Pretoria. 'I can only say after I have understood t he case from you,' said I. 'At 
present I am at a loss to know what I have to do th ere.' He thereupon asked his 
clerks to explain the case to me. 
As I began to study the case, I felt as though I ou ght to begin from the A B C of 
the subject. During the few days I had had at Zanzi bar, I had been to the court 
to see the work there. A Parsi lawyer was examining  a witness and asking him 
questions regarding credit and debit entries in acc ount books. It was all Greek 
to me. Book-keeping I had learnt neither at school nor during my stay in 
England. And the case for which I had come to South  Africa was mainly about 
accounts. Only one who knew accounts could understa nd and explain it. The 
clerk went on talking about this debited and that c redited, and I felt more and 
more confused. I did not know what a P. Note meant.  I failed to find the word 
in the dictionary. I revealed my ignorance to the c lerk, and learnt from him 
that a P. Note meant a promissory note. I purchased  a book on book-keeping 
and studied it. That gave me some confidence. I und erstood the case. I saw 
that Abdulla Sheth, who did not know how to keep ac counts, had so much The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  practical knowledge that he could quickly solve int ricacies of book-keeping. I 
told him that I was prepared to go to Pretoria. 
'Where will you put up?' asked the Sheth. 
'Wherever you want me to,' said I. 
'Then I shall write to our lawyer. He will arrange for your lodgings. I shall also 
write to my Memon friends there, but I would not ad vise you to stay with them. 
The other party has great influence in Pretoria. Sh ould any one of them manage 
to read our private correspondence, it might do us much harm. The more you 
avoid familiarity with them, the better for us.' 
'I shall stay where your lawyer puts me up, or I sh all find out independent 
lodgings. Pray don't worry. Not a soul shall know a nything that is confidential 
between us. But I do intend cultivating the acquain tance of the other party. I 
should like to be friends with them. I would try, i f possible, to settle the case 
out of court. After all Tyeb Sheth is a relative of  yours.' 
Sheth Tyeb Haji Khan Muhammad was a near relative o f Abdulla Sheth. 
The mention of a probable settlement somewhat start led the Sheth, I could 
see. But I had already been six or seven days in Du rban, and we now knew and 
understood each other. I was no longer a 'white ele phant'. So he said: 
Y....es, I see. There would be nothing better than a settlement out of court. 
But we are all relatives and know one another very well indeed. Tyeb Sheth is 
not a man to consent to a settlement easily. With t he slightest unwariness on 
our part, he would screw all sorts of things out of  us, and do us down in the 
end. So please think twice before you do anything.'  
'Don't be anxious about that,' said I." I need not talk to Tyeb Sheth, or for that 
matter to anyone else, about the case. I would only  suggest to him to come to 
understanding, and so save a lot of unnecessary lit igation.' 
On the seventh or eighth day after my arrival, I le ft Durban (for Pretoria). 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 79-80 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54   
11. FIRST DAY IN PRETORIA 
I had expected someone on behalf of Dada Abdulla's attorney to meet me at 
Pretoria station. I knew that no Indian would be th ere to receive me, since I 
had particularly promised not to put up at an India n house. But the attorney 
had sent no one. I understood later that, as I had arrived on a Sunday, he could 
not have sent anyone without inconvenience. I was p erplexed and wondered 
where to go, as I feared that no hotel would accept  me. 
Pretoria station in 1893 was quite different from w hat it was in 1914. The lights 
were burning dimly. The travellers were few. I let all the other passengers go 
and thought that, as soon as the ticket collector w as fairly free, I would hand 
him my ticket and ask him if he could direct me to some small hotel or any 
other such place where I might go; otherwise I woul d spend the night at the 
station. I must confess I shrank from asking him ev en this, for I was afraid of 
being insulted. 
The station became clear of all passengers. I gave my ticket to the ticket 
collector and began my inquiries. He replied to me courteously, but I saw that 
he could not be of any considerable help. But an Am erican Negro who was 
standing nearby broke into the conversation. 
I see,' said he, 'that you are an utter stranger he re, without any friends. If you 
will come with me, I will take you to a small hotel , of which the proprietor is 
an American who is very well known to me. I think h e will accept you.' 
I had my own doubts about the offer, but I thanked him and accepted his 
suggestion. He took me to Johnston's Family Hotel. He drew Mr. Johnston aside 
to speak to him, and the latter agreed to accommoda te me for the night, on 
condition that I should have my dinner served in my  room. 
I assure you,' said he, 'that I have no colour prej udice. But I have only European 
custom, and, if I allowed you to eat in the dining- room, my guests might be 
offended and even go away.' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  'Thank you,' said I, 'even for accommodating me for  the night. I am now more or 
less acquainted with the conditions here, and I und erstand your difficulty. I do 
not mind your serving the dinner in my room. I hope  to be able to make some 
other arrangement tomorrow.' 
I was shown into a room, where I now sat waiting fo r the dinner, and musing, as 
I was quite alone. There were not many guests in th e hotel, and I had expected 
the waiter to come very shortly with the dinner. In stead Mr. Johnston 
appeared. He said: ' I was ashamed of having asked you to have your dinner 
here. So I spoke to the other guests about you, and  asked them if they would 
mind your having your dinner in the dining-room. Th ey said they had no 
objection, and that they did not mind your staying here as long as you liked. 
Please, therefore, come to the dining-room, if you will, and stay here as long as 
you wish.' 
I thanked him again, went to the dining-room and ha d a hearty dinner. 
Next morning I called on the attorney, Mr. A. W. Ba ker. Abdulla Sheth had 
given me some description of him, so his cordial re ception did not surprise me. 
He received me very warmly and made kind inquiries.  I explained all about 
myself. Thereupon he said, 'We have no work for you  here as barrister, for we 
have engaged the best counsel. The case is a prolon ged and complicated one, 
so I shall take your assistance only to the extent of getting necessary 
information. And of course you will make communicat ion with my client easy 
for me, as I shall now ask for all the information I want from him through you. 
That is certainly an advantage. I have not yet foun d rooms for you. I thought I 
had better do so after having seen you. There is a fearful amount of colour 
prejudice here, and therefore it is not easy to fin d lodgings for such as you. But 
I know a poor woman. She is the wife of a baker. I think she will take you and 
thus add to her income at the same time. Come, let us go to her place.' 
So he took me to her house. He spoke with her priva tely about me, and she 
agreed to accept me as a boarder at 35 shillings a week. 
I went to Mr. Johnston, paid the bill and removed t o the new lodgings, where I 
had my lunch. The landlady was a good woman. She ha d cooked a vegetarian The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  meal for me. It was not long before I made myself q uite at home with the 
family. 
I next went to see the friend to whom Dada Abdulla had given me a note. From 
him I learnt more about the hardships of Indians in  South Africa. He insisted 
that I should stay with him. I thanked him, and tol d him that I had already 
made arrangements. He urged me not to hesitate to a sk for anything I needed. 
It was now dark. I returned home, had my dinner, we nt to my room and lay 
there absorbed in deep thought. There was not any i mmediate work for me. I 
informed Abdulla Sheth of it. 
An Autobiography , (1959), pp. 85-87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57   
12. PREPARATION FOR THE CASE 
The year's stay in Pretoria was a most valuable exp erience in my life. Here it 
was that I had opportunities of learning public wor k and acquired some 
measure of my capacity for it. Here it was that the  religious spirit within me 
became a living force, and here too I acquired a tr ue knowledge of legal 
practice. Here I learnt the things that a junior ba rrister learns in a senior 
barrister's chamber, and here I also gained confide nce that I should not after all 
fail as a lawyer. It was likewise here that I learn t the secret of success as a 
lawyer. 
Dada Abdulla's was no small case. The suit was for £40,000. Arising out of 
business transactions, it was full of intricacies o f accounts. Part of the claim 
was based on promissory notes, and part on the spec ific performance of 
promise to deliver promissory notes. The defence wa s that the promissory notes 
were fraudulently taken and lacked sufficient consi deration. There were 
numerous points of fact and law in this intricate c ase. 
Both parties had engaged the best attorneys and cou nsel. I thus had a fine 
opportunity of studying their work. The preparation  of the plaintiffs case for 
the attorney and the sifting of facts in support of  his case had been entrusted 
to me. It was an education to see how much the atto rney accepted, and how 
much he rejected from my preparation, as also to se e how much use the 
counsel made of the brief prepared by the attorney.  I saw that this preparation 
for the case would give me a fair measure of my pow ers of comprehension and 
my capacity for marshalling evidence. 
I took the keenest interest in the case. Indeed I t hrew myself into it. I read all 
the papers pertaining to the transactions. My clien t was a man of great ability 
and reposed absolute confidence in me, and this ren dered my work easy. I 
made a fair study of bookkeeping. My capacity for t ranslation was improved by 
having to translate the correspondence, which was f or the most part in 
Gujarati. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  Although, as I have said before, I took a keen inte rest in religious communion 
and in public work and always gave some of my time to them, they were not 
then my primary interest. The preparation of the ca se was my primary interest. 
Reading of law and looking up law cases, when neces sary, had always a prior 
claim on my time. As a result, I acquired such a gr asp of the facts of the case as 
perhaps was not possessed even by the parties thems elves, in as much as I had 
with me the papers of both the parties. 
I recalled the late Mr. Pincutt's advice — facts ar e three-fourths of the law. At a 
later date it was amply borne out by that famous ba rrister of South Africa, the 
late Mr. Leonard. In a certain case in my charge I saw that, though justice was 
on the side of my client, the law seemed to be agai nst him. In despair I 
approached Mr. Leonard for help. He also felt that the facts of the case were 
very strong. He exclaimed, 'Gandhi, I have learnt o ne thing, and it is this, that 
if we take care of the facts of a case, the law wil l take care of itself. Let us 
dive deeper into the facts of this case.' With thes e words he asked me to study 
the case further and then see him again. On a re-ex amination of the facts I saw 
them in an entirely new light, and I also hit upon an old South African case 
bearing on the point. I was delighted and went to M r. Leonard and told him 
everything. 'Right,' he said, 'we shall win the cas e. Only we must bear in mind 
which of the judges takes it.' 
When I was making preparation for Dada Abdulla's ca se, I had not fully realized 
this paramount importance of facts. Facts mean trut h, and once we adhere to 
truth, the law comes to our aid naturally. I saw th at the facts of Dada Abdulla's 
case made it very strong indeed, and that the law w as bound to be on his side. 
But I also saw that the litigation, if it were pers isted in, would ruin the plaintiff 
and the defendant who were relatives and both belon ged to the same city. No 
one knew how long the case might go on. Should it b e allowed to continue to 
be fought out in court, it might go on indefinitely  and to no advantage of either 
party. Both, therefore, desired an immediate termin ation of the case, if 
possible. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  I approached Tyeb Sheth and requested and advised h im to go to arbitration. I 
recommended him to see his counsel. I suggested to him that if an arbitrator 
commanding the confidence of both parties could be appointed, the case would 
be quickly finished. The lawyer's fees were so rapi dly mounting up that they 
were enough to devour all the resources of the clie nts, big merchants as they 
were. The case occupied so much of their attention that they had no time left 
for any other work. In the meantime mutual ill-will  was steadily increasing. I 
became disgusted with the profession. As lawyers, t he counsels on both sides 
were bound to rake up points of law in support of t heir own clients. I also saw 
for the first time that the winning party never rec overs all the costs incurred. 
Under the Court Fees Regulation there was a fixed s cale of costs to be allotted 
as between party and party, the actual costs as bet ween attorney and client 
being very much higher. This was more than I could bear. I felt that my duty 
was to befriend both parties and bring them togethe r. I strained every nerve to 
bring about a compromise. 
At last Tyeb Sheth agreed. An arbitrator was appoin ted, the case was argued 
before him, and Dada Abdulla won. 
But that did not satisfy me. If my client were to s eek immediate execution of 
the award, it would be impossible for Tyeb Sheth to  meet the whole of the 
awarded amount, and there was an unwritten law amon g the Porbandar 
Memans living in South Africa that death should be preferred to bankruptcy. It 
was impossible for Tyeb Sheth to pay down the whole  sum of about £ 37,000 
and costs. He meant to pay not a pie less than the amount, and he did not want 
to be declared bankrupt. There was only one way. Da da Abdulla should allow 
him to pay in moderate installments. He was equal t o the occasion and granted 
Tyeb Sheth installments spread over a very long per iod. It was more difficult 
for me to secure this concession of payment by inst allments than to get the 
parties to agree to arbitration. But both were happ y over the result, and both 
rose in the public estimation. My joy was boundless . I had learnt the true 
practice of law. I had learnt to find out the bette r side of human nature and to 
enter men's hearts. I realized that the true functi on of a lawyer was to unite The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  parties riven asunder. The lesson was so indelibly burnt into me, that a large 
part of my time during the twenty years of my pract ice as a lawyer was 
occupied in bringing about private compromises of h undreds of cases. I lost 
nothing "thereby — not even money, certainly not my  soul. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 95-97 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61   
13. MAN PROPOSES, GOD DISPOSES 
The case having been concluded, I had no reason for  staying in Pretoria. So I 
went back to Durban and began to make preparations for my return home. But 
Abdulla Sheth was not the man to let me sail withou t a send-off. He gave a 
farewell party in my honour at Sydenham. 
It was proposed to spend the whole day there. Whils t I was turning over the 
sheets of some of the newspapers I found there, I c hanced to see a paragraph 
in a corner of one of them under the caption 'India n Franchise'. It was with 
reference to the Bill then before the House of Legi slature, which sought to 
deprive the Indians of their right to elect members  of the Natal Legislative 
Assembly. I was ignorant of the Bill, and so were t he rest of the guests who had 
assembled there. 
I inquired of Abdulla Sheth about it. He said : 'Wh at can we understand in these 
matters? We can only understand things that affect our trade. As you know all 
our trade in the Orange Free State has been swept a way. We agitated about it, 
but in vain. We are after all lame men, being unlet tered. We generally take in 
newspapers simply to ascertain the daily market rat es, etc. What can we know 
of legislation? Our eyes and ears are the European attorneys here.' 
'But' said I, 'there are so many young Indians born  and educated here. Do they 
not help you?' 
'They!' exclaimed Abdulla Sheth in despair. 'They n ever care to come to us, and 
to tell you the truth, we care less to recognize th em. Being Christians, they are 
under the thumb of the white clergymen, who in thei r turn are subject to the 
Government.' 
This opened my eyes. I felt that this class should be claimed as our own. Was 
this the meaning of Christianity? Did they cease to  be Indians because they had 
become Christians? 
But I was on the point of returning home and hesita ted to express what was 
passing through my mind in this matter. I simply sa id to Abdulla Sheth: 'This The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  Bill, if it passes into law, will make our lot extr emely difficult. It is the first nail 
into our coffin. It strikes at the root of our self -respect.' 
'It may,' echoed Sheth Abdulla. 'I will tell you th e genesis of the franchise 
question. We knew nothing about it. But Mr. Escombe , one of our best 
attorneys, whom you know, put the idea into our hea ds. It happened thus. He is 
a great fighter, and there being no love lost betwe en him and the Wharf 
Engineer, he feared that the Engineer might deprive  him of his votes and 
defeat him at the election. So he acquainted us wit h our position, and at his 
instance we all registered ourselves as voters, and  voted for him. You will now 
see how the franchise has not for us the value that  you attach to it. But we 
understand what you say. Well, then, what is your a dvice?' 
• The other guests were listening to this conversat ion with attention. One of 
them said: 'Shall I tell you what should be done? Y ou cancel your passage by this 
boat, stay here a month longer, and we will fight a s you direct us.' 
All the others chimed in: 'Indeed, indeed. Abdulla Sheth, you must detain 
Gandhibhai.' 
The Sheth was a shrewd man. He said: 'I may not det ain him now. Or rather, 
you have as much right as I to do so. But you are q uite right. Let us all persuade 
him to stay on. But you should remember that he is a barrister. What about his 
fees?' 
The mention of fees pained me, and I broke in: 'Abd ulla Sheth, fees are out of 
the question. There can be no fees for public work.  I can stay, if at all, as a 
servant. And as you know, I am not acquainted with all these friends. But if you 
believe that they will cooperate, I am prepared to stay a month longer. There 
is one thing, however. Though you need not pay me a nything, work of the 
nature we contemplate cannot be done without some f unds to start with. Thus 
we may have to send telegrams, we may have to print  some literature, some 
touring may have to be done, the local attorneys ma y have to be consulted, 
and as I am ignorant of your laws, I may need some law-books for reference. All 
this cannot be done without money. And it is clear that one man is not enough 
for this work. Many must come forward to help him.'  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  And a chorus of voices was heard: 'Allah is great a nd merciful. Money will come 
in. Men there are, as many as you may need. You ple ase consent to stay, and 
all will be well.' 
The farewell party was thus turned into a working c ommittee. I suggested 
finishing dinner etc. quickly and getting back home . I worked out in my own 
mind an outline of the campaign. I ascertained the names of those who were on 
the list of voters, and made up my mind to stay on for a month. 
Thus God laid the foundations of my life in South A frica and sowed the seed of 
the fight for national self- respect. 
An Autobiography , (1959), pp. 100-01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64   
14. SETTLED IN NATAL 
Sheth Haji Muhammad Haji Dada was regarded as the f oremost leader of the 
Indian community in Natal in 1893. Financially Shet h Abdulla Haji Adam was the 
chief among them, but he and others always gave the  first place to Sheth Haji 
Muhammad in public affairs. A meeting was, therefor e, held under his 
presidentship at the house of Abdulla Sheth, at whi ch it was resolved to offer 
opposition to the Franchise Bill. 
Volunteers were enrolled. Natal-born Indians, that is, mostly Christian Indian 
youths, had been invited to attend this meeting. Mr . Paul, the Durban Court 
Interpreter, and Mr. Subhan Godfrey, Headmaster of a mission school, were 
present, and it was they who were responsible for b ringing together at the 
meeting a good number of Christian youths. All thes e enrolled themselves as 
volunteers. 
Many of the local merchants were of course enrolled , noteworthy among them 
being Sheths Dawud Muhammad, Muhammad Kasam Kamrudd in, Adamji 
Miyakhan, A. Kolandavellu Pillai, C. Lachhiram, Ran gasami Padiachi, and Amad 
Jiva, Parsi Rustomji was of course there. From amon g clerks were Messrs. 
Manekji, Joshi, Narsinhram and others, employees of  Dada Abdulla & Co. and 
other big firms. They were all agreeably surprised to find themselves taking a 
share in public work. To be invited thus to take pa rt was a new experience in 
their lives. In face of the calamity that had overt aken the community, all 
distinctions such as high and low, small and great,  master and servant, Hindus, 
Mussalmans, Parsis, Christians, Gujaratis, Madrasis , Sindhis, etc. were 
forgotten. All were alike the children and servants  of the motherland. 
The Bill had already passed, or was about to pass, its second reading. In the 
speeches on the occasion the fact that Indians had expressed no opposition to 
the stringent Bill, was urged as proof of their unf itness for the franchise. 
I explained the situation to the meeting. The first  thing we did was to despatch 
a telegram to the Speaker of the Assembly requestin g him to postpone further 
discussion of the Bill. A similar telegram was sent  to the Premier, Sir John The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  Robinson, and another to Mr. Escombe, as a friend o f Dada Abdulla's. The 
Speaker promptly replied that discussion of the Bil l would-be postponed for two 
days. This gladdened our hearts. 
The petition to be presented to the Legislative Ass embly was drawn up. Three 
copies had to be prepared and one extra was needed for the press. It was also 
proposed to obtain as many signatures to it as poss ible, and all this work had to 
be done in the course of a night. The volunteers wi th a knowledge of English 
and several others sat up the whole night. Mr. Arth ur, an old man, who was 
known for his calligraphy, wrote the principal copy . The rest were written by 
others to someone's dictation. Five copies were thu s got ready simultaneously. 
Merchant volunteers went out in their own carriages  or carriages whose hire 
they had paid, to obtain signatures to the petition . This was accomplished in 
quick time and the petition was despatched. The new spapers published it with 
favourable comments. It likewise created an impress ion on the Assembly. It was 
discussed in the House. Partisans of the Bill offer ed a defence, an admittedly 
lame one, in reply to the arguments advanced in the  petition. The Bill, 
however, was passed. 
We all knew that this was a foregone conclusion, bu t the agitation had infused 
new life into the community and had brought home to  them the conviction that 
the community was one and indivisible, and that it was as much their duty to 
fight for its political rights as for its trading r ights. 
Lord Ripon' was at this time Secretary of State for  the Colonies. It was decided 
to submit to him a monster petition. This was no sm all task and could not be 
done in a day. Volunteers were enlisted, and all di d their due share of the 
work. 
I took considerable pains over drawing up this peti tion. I read all the literature 
available on the subject. My argument centered roun d a principle and an 
expedience. I argued that we had a right to the fra nchise in Natal, as we had a 
kind of franchise in India. I urged that it was exp edient to retain it, as the 
Indian population capable of using the franchise wa s very small. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  Ten thousand signatures were obtained in the course  of a fortnight. To secure 
this number of signatures from the whole of the pro vince was no light task, 
especially when we consider that the men were perfe ct strangers to the work. 
Specially competent volunteers had to be selected f or the work, as it had been 
decided not to take a single signature without the signatory fully understanding 
the petition. The villages were scattered at long d istances. The work could be 
done promptly only if a number of workers put their  whole heart into it. And 
this they did. All carried out their allotted task with enthusiasm. But as I am 
writing these lines, the figures of Sheth Dawud Muh ammad, Rustomji, Adamji 
Miyakhan and Amod Jiva rise clearly before my mind.  They brought in the 
largest number of signatures. Dawud Sheth kept goin g about in his carriage the 
whole day. And it was all a labour of love, not one  of them asking for even his 
out- of-pocket expenses. Dada Abdulla's house becam e at once a caravansarai 
and a public office. A number of educated friends w ho helped me and many 
others had their food there. Thus every helper was put to considerable 
expense. 
The petition was at last submitted. A thousand copi es had been printed for 
circulation and distribution. It acquainted the Ind ian public for the first time 
with conditions in Natal. I sent copies to all the newspapers and publicists I 
knew. 
The Times of India,  in a leading article on the petition, strongly sup ported the 
Indian demands. Copies were sent to journals and pu blishers in England 
representing different parties. The London  Times supported our aims, and we 
began to entertain hope of the Bill being vetoed. 
It was now impossible for me to leave Natal. The In dian friends surrounded me 
on all sides and importuned me to remain there perm anently. I expressed my 
difficulties. I had made up my mind not to stay at public expense. I felt it 
necessary to set up an independent household. I tho ught that the house should 
be good and situated in a good locality. I also had  the idea that I could not add 
to the credit of the community, unless I lived in a  style usual for barristers. And 
it seemed to me to be impossible to run such a hous ehold with anything less 
than £300 a year. I therefore decided that I could stay only if the members of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  the community guaranteed legal work to the extent o f that minimum, and I 
communicated my decision to them. 
'But,' said they, 'we should like you to draw that amount for public work, and 
we can easily collect it. Of course this is apart f rom the fees you must charge 
for private legal work.' 
'No, I could not thus charge you for public work,' said I. 'The work would not 
involve the exercise on my part of much skill as ba rrister. My work would be 
mainly to make you all work. And how could I charge  you for that? And when I 
should have to appeal to you frequently for funds f or the work, and if I were to 
draw my maintenance from you, I should find myself at a disadvantage in 
making an appeal for large amounts, and we should u ltimately find ourselves at 
a standstill. Besides, I want the community to find  more than £300 annually for 
public work.' 
'But we have now known you for some time, and are s ure you would not draw 
anything you do not need. And if we wanted you to s tay here, should we not 
find your expenses ?' 
'It is your love and present enthusiasm that make y ou talk like this. How can we 
be sure that this love and enthusiasm will endure f orever? And as your friend 
and servant, I should occasionally have to say hard  things to you. Heaven only 
knows whether I should then retain your affection. But the fact is that I must 
not accept any salary for public work. It is enough  for me that you should all 
agree to entrust me with your legal work. Even that  may be hard for you. For 
one thing I am not a white barrister. How can I be sure that the court will 
respond to me? Nor can I be sure how I shall fare a s a lawyer. So even in giving 
me retainers you may be running some risk. I should  regard even the fact of 
your giving them to me as the reward of my public w ork.' 
The upshot of this discussion was that about twenty  merchants gave me 
retainers for one year for their legal work. Beside s this, Dada Abdulla 
purchased me the necessary furniture in lieu of a p urse he had intended to give 
me on my departure. 
Thus I settled in Natal. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 102-05 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68   
15. COLOUR BAR 
The symbol of a court of justice is a pair of scale s held evenly by an impartial 
and blind but sagacious woman. Fate has purposely m ade her blind, in order 
that she may not judge a person from his exterior b ut from his intrinsic worth. 
But the Law Society of Natal set out to persuade th e Supreme Court to act in 
contravention of this principle and to belie its sy mbol. 
I applied for admission as an advocate of the Supre me Court. I held a 
certificate of admission from the Bombay High Court . The English certificate I 
had to deposit with the Bombay High Court when I en rolled there. It was 
necessary to attach two certificates of character t o the application for 
admission, and thinking that these would carry more  weight if given by 
Europeans, I secured them from two well-known Europ ean merchants whom I 
knew through Sheth Abdulla. The application had to be presented through a 
member of the bar, and as a rule the Attorney Gener al presented such 
applications without fees. Mr. Escombe, who, as we have seen, was legal 
adviser to Messrs. Dada Abdulla and Co., was the At torney General. I called on 
him, and he willingly consented to present my appli cation. 
The Law Society now sprang a surprise on me by serv ing me with a notice 
opposing my application for admission. One of their  objections was that the 
original Englsih certificate was not attached to my  application. But the main 
objection was, that when the regulations regarding admission of advocates 
were made, the possibility of a coloured man applyi ng could not have been 
contemplated. Natal owed its growth to European ent erprise, and therefore it 
was necessary that the European element should pred ominate in the bar. If 
coloured people were admitted, they might gradually  outnumber the 
Europeans, and the bulwark of their protection woul d break down. 
The Law Society had engaged a distinguished lawyer to support their 
opposition. As he too was connected with Dada Abdul la and Co., he sent me 
word through Sheth Abdulla to go and see him. He ta lked with me quite frankly, 
and inquired about my antecedents, which I gave. Th en he said : The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  'I have nothing to say against you. I was only afra id lest you should be some 
colonial born adventurer. And the fact that your ap plication was 
unaccompanied by the original certificate supported  my suspicion. There have 
been men who have made use of diploma which did not  belong to them. The 
certificates of character from European traders you  have submitted have no 
value for me. What do they know about you ? What ca n be the extent of their 
acquaintance with you?' 
'But,' said I, 'everyone here is a stranger to me. Even Sheth Abdulla first came 
to know me here.' 
'But then you say he belongs to the same place as y ou? If your father was Prime 
Minister there, Sheth Abdulla is bound to know your  family. If you were to 
produce his affidavit, I should have absolutely no objection. I would then gladly 
communicate to the Law Society my inability to oppo se your application.' 
This talk enraged me, but I restrained my feelings.  
'If I had attached Dada Abdulla's certificate,' sai d I to myself, 'it would have 
been rejected, and they would have asked for Europe ans' certificates. And what 
has my admission as advocate to do with my birth an d my antecedents? How 
could my birth, whether humble or objectionable, be  used against me?' But I 
contained myself and quietly replied: 
'Though I do not admit that the Law Society has any  authority to require all 
these details, I am quite prepared to present the a ffidavit you desire.' 
Sheth Abdulla's affidavit was prepared and duly sub mitted to the counsel for 
the Law Society. It opposed my application before t he Supreme Court, which 
ruled out the opposition without even calling upon Mr. Escombe to reply. The 
Chief Justice said in effect : 
'The objection that the applicant has not attached the original certificate has 
no substance. If he has made a false affidavit, he can be prosecuted, and his 
name can then be struck off the roll, if he is prov ed guilty. The law makes no 
distinction between white and coloured people. The court has therefore no 
authority to prevent Mr. Gandhi from being enrolled  as an advocate. We admit 
his application. Mr. Gandhi, you can now take the o ath.' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70  I stood up and took the oath before the Registrar. As soon as I was sworn in, the 
Chief Justice, addressing me said: 
You must now take off your turban, Mr. Gandhi. You must submit to the rules of 
the Court with regard to the dress to be worn by pr actising barristers.' 
I saw my limitations. The turban that I had insiste d on wearing in the District 
Magistrate's Court I took off in obedience to the o rder of the Supreme Court. 
Not that, if I had resisted the order, the resistan ce could not have been 
justified. But I wanted to reserve my strength for fighting bigger battles. I 
should not exhaust my skill as a fighter in insisti ng on retaining my turban. It 
was worthy of a better cause. 
Sheth Abdulla and other friends did not like my sub mission (or was it 
weakness?). They felt that I should have stood by m y right to wear the turban 
while practising in the court. I tried to reason wi th them. I tried to press home 
to them the truth of the maxim, 'When at Rome do as  the Romans do.' 'It would 
be right,' I said, 'to refuse to obey, if in India an English officer or judge 
ordered you to take off your turban; but as an offi cer of the court, it would 
have ill become me to disregard a custom of the cou rt in the province of Natal.' 
I pacified the friends somewhat with these and simi lar arguments, but I do not 
think I convinced them completely, in this instance , of the applicability of the 
principle of looking at a thing from a different st andpoint in different 
circumstances. But all my life through, the very in sistence on truth has taught 
me to appreciate the beauty of compromise. I saw in  later life that this spirit 
was an essential part of Satyagraha. It has often m eant endangering my life and 
incurring the displeasure of friends. But truth is hard as adamant and tender as 
a blossom. 
The opposition of the Law Society gave me another a dvertisement in South 
Africa. Most of the newspapers condemned the opposi tion and accused the Law 
Society of jealousy. The advertisement, to some ext ent, simplified my work. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 105-07 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71   
16. SETTLED IN BOMBAY? 
[Editor's Note: In the year 1901 Gandhiji returned to India with the intention of 
permanently settling down here. On Shri Gokhale's a dvice he decided to settle down in 
Bombay, practise at the bar and help him in public work. Within a short time, however, he 
had to give up practice and return to South Africa to carry on his public work there.] 
Gokhale was very anxious that I should settle down in Bombay, practise at the 
bar and help him in public work. Public work in tho se days meant Congress 
work, and the chief work of the institution which h e had assisted to found was 
carrying on the Congress administration. 
I liked Gokhale's advice, but I was not overconfide nt of success as a barrister. 
The unpleasant memories of past failure were yet wi th me, and I still hated as 
poison the use of flattery for getting briefs. 
I therefore decided to start work first at Rajkot. Kevalram Mavji Dave, my old 
well-wisher, who had induced me to go to England, w as there, and he started 
me straightaway with three briefs. Two of them were  appeals before the 
Judicial Assistant to the Political Agent in Kathia wad and one was an original 
case in Jamnagar. This last was rather important. O n my saying that I could not 
trust myself to do justice, Kevalram Dave exclaimed  : Winning or losing is no 
concern of yours. You will simply try your best, an d I am of course there to 
assist you.' 
The counsel on the other side was the late Sjt. Sam arth. I was fairly well 
prepared. Not that I knew much of Indian law, but K evalram Dave had 
instructed me very thoroughly. I had heard friends say, before I went out to 
South Africa, that Sir Pherozeshah Mehta had the La w of Evidence at his finger-
tips and that that was the secret of his success. I  had borne this in mind, and 
during the voyage had carefully studied the Indian Evidence Act with 
commentaries thereon. There was of course also the advantage of my legal 
experience in South Africa. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  I won the case and gained some confidence. I had no  fear about the appeals, 
which were successful. All this inspired a hope in me that after all I might not 
fail even in Bombay. 
But before I set forth the circumstances in which I  decided to go to Bombay, I 
shall narrate my experience of the inconsideratenes s and ignorance of English 
officials. The Judicial Assistant's court was perip atetic. He was constantly 
touring, and vakils and their clients had to follow  him wherever he moved his 
camp. The vakils would charge more whenever they ha d to go out of 
headquarters and so the clients had naturally to in cur double the expenses. The 
inconvenience was no concern to the judge. 
The appeal of which I am talking was to be heard at  Veraval where plague was 
raging. I have a recollection that there were as ma ny as fifty cases daily in the 
place with a population of 5,500. It was practicall y deserted, and I put up in a 
deserted dharmashala  at some distance from the town. But where were the  
clients to stay? If they were poor, they had simply  to trust themselves to God's 
mercy. 
A friend who also had cases before the court had wi red that I should put in an 
application for the camp to be moved to some other station because of the 
plague at Veraval. On my submitting the application , the  sahib asked me: 'Are 
you afraid?' 
I answered: 'It is not a question of my being afrai d. I think I can shift for myself, 
but what about the clients?' 
'The plague has come to stay in India,' replied the  sahib. 'Why fear it? The 
climate of Veraval is lovely. [The  sahib  lived far away from the town in a 
palatial tent pitched on the seashore.] Surely peop le must learn to live thus in 
the open.' 
It was no use arguing against this philosophy. The sahib  told his  shirastedar:  
'Make note of what Mr. Gandhi says, and let me know  if it is very inconvenient 
for the vakils or the clients!' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73  The  sahib  of course had honestly done what he thought was th e right thing. But 
how could the man have an idea of the hardships of poor India ? How was he to 
understand the needs, idiosyncrasies and customs of  the people? How was one, 
accustomed to measure things in gold sovereigns, al l at once to make 
calculations in tiny bits of copper? As the elephan t is powerless to think in the 
terms of the ant, in spite of the best intentions i n the world, even so is the 
Englishman powerless to think in the terms of, or l egislate for, the Indian. 
But to resume the thread of the story. In spite of my successes, I had been 
thinking of staying on in Rajkot for some time long er, when one day Kevalram 
Dave came to me and said: 'Gandhi, we will not suff er you to vegetate here. 
You must settle in Bombay.' 
'But who will find work for me there?' I asked. 'Wi ll you find the expenses?' 
Yes, yes, I will,' said he. 'We shall bring you dow n here sometimes as a big 
barrister from Bombay and drafting work we shall se nd you there. It lies with us 
vakils to make or mar a barrister. You have proved your worth in Jamnagar and 
Veraval, and I have therefore not the least anxiety  about you. You are destined 
to do public work, and we will not allow you to be buried in Kathiawad. So tell 
me, then, when you will go to Bombay.' 
I am expecting a remittance from Natal. As soon as I get it I will go,' I replied. 
The money came in about two weeks, and I went to Bo mbay. I took chambers in 
Payne, Gilbert and Sayani's offices, and it looked as though I had settled' down. 
Though I had hired chambers in the Fort and a house  in Girgaum, God would not 
let me settle down. Scarcely had I moved into my ne w house when my second 
son Manilal, who had already been through an acute attack of smallpox some 
years back, had a severe attack of typhoid, combine d with pneumonia and signs 
of delirium at night. 
Manilal was restored to health, but I saw that the Girgaum house was not 
habitable. It was damp and ill- lighted. So in cons ultation with Shri Ravishankar 
Jagjivan I decided to hire some well-ventilated bun galow in a suburb of 
Bombay. I wandered about in Bandra and Santa Cruz. The slaughter-house in The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  Bandra prevented our choice falling there. Ghatkopa r and places near it were 
too far from the sea. At last we hit upon a fine bu ngalow in Santa Cruz, which 
we hired as being the best from the point of view o f sanitation. 
I took a first class season ticket from Santa Cruz to Churchgate, and remember 
having frequently felt a certain pride in being the  only first class passenger in 
my compartment. Often I walked to Bandra in order t o take the fast train from 
there direct to Churchgate. 
I prospered in my profession better than I had expe cted. My South African 
clients often entrusted me with some work, and it w as enough to enable me to 
pay my way. 
I had not yet succeeded in securing any work in the  High Court, but I attended 
the 'moot' that used to be held in those days, thou gh I never ventured to take 
part in it. I recall Jamiatram Nanubhai taking a pr ominent part. Like other fresh 
barristers I made a point of attending the hearing of cases in the High Court, 
more, I am afraid, for enjoying the soporific breez e coming straight from the 
sea than for adding to my knowledge. I observed tha t I was not the only one to 
enjoy this pleasure. It seemed to be the fashion an d therefore nothing to be 
ashamed of. 
However I began to make use of the High Court libra ry and make fresh 
acquaintances and felt that before long I should se cure work in the High Court. 
Thus whilst on the one hand I began to feel somewha t at ease about my 
profession, on the other hand Gokhale, whose eyes w ere always on me, had 
been busy making his own plans on my behalf. He pee ped in at my chambers 
twice or thrice every week, often in company with f riends whom he wanted me 
to know, and he kept me acquainted with his mode of  work. 
But it may be said that God has never allowed any o f my own plans to stand. He 
has disposed them in His own way. 
Just when I seemed to be settling down as I had int ended, I received an 
unexpected cable from South Africa: 'Chamberlain ex pected here. Please return 
immediately.' I remembered my promise and cabled to  say that I should be The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  ready to start the moment they put me in funds. The y promptly responded. I 
gave up the chambers and started for South Africa. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 178-83 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76   
17. SOME REMINISCENCES OF THE BAR 
Before coming to a narrative of the course my life took in India, it seems 
necessary to recall a few of the South African expe riences which I have 
deliberately left out. 
Some lawyer friends have asked me to give my remini scences of the bar. The 
number of these is so large that, if I were to desc ribe them all, they would 
occupy a volume by themselves and take me out of my  scope. But it may not 
perhaps be improper to recall some of those which b ear upon the practice of 
truth. 
So far as I can recollect, I have already said that  1 never resorted to untruth in 
my profession, and that a large part of my legal pr actice was in the interest of 
public work, for which I charged nothing beyond out - of-pocket expenses, and 
these too I sometimes met myself. I had thought tha t in saying this I had said 
all that was necessary as regards my legal practice . But friends want me to do 
more. They seem to think that, if I described howev er slightly, some of the 
occasions when I refused to swerve from the truth, the legal profession might 
profit by it. 
As a student I had heard that the lawyer's professi on was a liar's profession. But 
this did not influence me, as I had no intention of  earning either position or 
money by lying. 
My principle was put to the test many a time in Sou th Africa. Often I knew that 
my opponents had tutored their witnesses, and if I only encouraged my client or 
his witnesses to lie, we could win the case. But I always resisted the 
temptation. I remember only one occasion when, afte r having won a case, I 
suspected that my client had deceived me. In my hea rt of hearts I always 
wished that I should win only if my client's case w as right. In fixing my fees I do 
not recall ever having made them conditional on my winning the case. Whether 
my client won or lost, I expected nothing more nor less than my fees. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  I warned every new client at the outset that he sho uld not expect me to take 
up a false case or to coach the witnesses, with the  result that I built up such a 
reputation that no false cases used to come to me. Indeed some of my clients 
would keep their clean cases for me, and take the d oubtful ones elsewhere. 
There was one case which proved a severe trial. It was brought to me by one of 
my best clients. It was a case of highly complicate d accounts and had been a 
prolonged one. It had been heard in parts before se veral courts. Ultimately the 
book-keeping portion of it was entrusted by the cou rt to the arbitration of 
some qualified accountants. The award was entirely in favour of my client, but 
the arbitrators had inadvertently committed an erro r in calculation which, 
however small, was serious, inasmuch as an entry wh ich ought to have been on 
the debit side was made on the credit side. The opp onents had opposed the 
award on other grounds. I was junior counsel for my  client. When the senior 
counsel became aware of the error, he was of opinio n that our client was not 
bound to admit it. He was clearly of opinion that n o counsel was bound to 
admit anything that went against his client's inter est. I said we ought to admit 
the error. 
But the senior counsel contended: 'In that case the re is every likelihood of the 
court cancelling the whole award, and no sane couns el would imperil his client's 
case to that extent. At any rate I would be the las t man to take any such risk. If 
the case were to be sent up for a fresh hearing, on e could never tell what 
expenses our client might have to incur, and what t he ultimate result might 
be!' 
The client was present when this conversation took place. 
I said: 'I feel that both our client and we ought t o run the risk. Where is the 
certainty of the court upholding a wrong award simp ly because we do not admit 
the error? And supposing the admission were to brin g the client to grief, what 
harm is there?' 
'But why should we make the admission at all?' said  the senior counsel. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  'Where is the surety of the court not detecting the  error or our opponent not 
discovering it?' said I. 
'Well then, will you argue the case? I am not prepa red to argue it on your 
terms,' replied the' senior counsel with decision. 
I humbly answered: 'If you will not argue, then I a m prepared to do so, if our 
client so desires. I shall have nothing to do with the case if the error is not 
admitted.' 
With this I looked at my client. He was a little em barrassed. I had been in the 
case from the very first. The client fully trusted me, and knew me through and 
through. He said: 'Well, then, you will argue the c ase and admit the error. Let 
us lose, if that is to be our lot. God defend the r ight.' 
I was delighted. I had expected nothing less from h im. The senior counsel again 
warned me, pitied me for my obduracy, but congratul ated me all the same. 
 
Sharp Practice?  
I had no doubt about the soundness of my advice, bu t I doubted very much my 
fitness for doing full justice to the case. I felt it would be a most hazardous 
undertaking to argue such a difficult case before t he Supreme Court, and I 
appeared before the Bench in fear and trembling. 
As soon as I referred to the error in the accounts,  one of the judges said: 
'Is not this sharp practice, Mr. Gandhi?' 
I boiled within to hear this charge. It was intoler able to be accused of sharp 
practice when there was not the slightest warrant f or it. 
'With a judge prejudiced from the start like this, there is little chance of 
success in this difficult case,' I said to myself. But I composed my thoughts and 
answered: 
'I am surprised that your Lordship should suspect s harp practice without hearing 
me out.' 
'No question of a charge,' said the judge. 'It is a  mere suggestion.' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  'The suggestion here seems to me to amount to a cha rge. I would ask your 
Lordship to hear me out and then arraign me if ther e is any occasion for it.' 
'I am sorry to have interrupted you,' replied the j udge. 'Pray do go on with your 
explanation of the discrepancy.' 
I had enough material in support of my explanation.  Thanks to the judge having 
raised this question, I was able to rivet the court 's attention on my argument 
from the very start. I felt much encouraged and too k the opportunity of 
entering into a detailed explanation. The Court gav e me a patient hearing, and 
I was able to convince the judges that the discrepa ncy was due entirely to 
inadvertence. They therefore did not feel disposed to cancel the whole award, 
which had involved considerable labour. 
The opposing counsel seemed to feel secure in the b elief that not much 
argument would be needed after the error had been a dmitted. But the judges 
continued to interrupt him, as they were convinced that the error was a slip 
which could be easily rectified. The counsel labour ed hard to attack the award, 
but the judge who had originally started with the s uspicion had now come 
round definitely to my side. 
'Supposing Mr. Gandhi had not admitted the error, w hat would you have done?' 
He asked. 
'It was impossible for us to secure the services of  a more competent and honest 
expert accountant than the one appointed by us." 
'The Court must presume that you know your case bes t. If you cannot point out 
anything beyond the slip which any expert accountan t is liable to commit, the 
Court will be loath to compel the parties to go in for fresh litigation and fresh 
expenses because of a patent mistake. We may not or der a fresh hearing when 
such an error can be easily corrected,' continued t he judge. 
And so the counsel's objection was overruled. The C ourt either confirmed the 
award, with the error rectified, or ordered the arb itrator to rectify the error, I 
forget which. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  I was delighted. So were my client and senior couns el; and I was confirmed in 
my conviction that it was not impossible to practis e law without compromising 
truth. 
Let the reader, however, remember that even truthfu lness in the practice of 
the profession cannot cure it of the fundamental de fect that vitiates it. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 266-69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81   
18. CLIENTS TURNED CO-WORKERS 
The distinction between the legal practice in Natal  and that in the Transvaal 
was that in Natal there was a joint bar; a barriste r, whilst he was admitted to 
the rank of advocate, could also practise as an att orney; whereas in the 
Transvaal, as in Bombay, the spheres of attorneys a nd advocates were distinct. 
A barrister had the right of election whether he wo uld practise as an advocate 
or as an attorney. So whilst in Natal I was admitte d as an advocate, in the 
Transvaal I sought admission as an attorney. For as  an advocate I could not have 
come in direct contact with the Indians and the whi te attorneys in South Africa 
would not have briefed me. 
But even in the Transvaal it was open to attorneys to appear before 
magistrates. On one occasion, whilst I was conducti ng a case before a 
magistrate in Johannesburg, I discovered that my cl ient had deceived me. I saw 
him completely break down in the witness box. So wi thout any argument I 
asked the magistrate to dismiss the case. The oppos ing counsel was astonished, 
and the magistrate was pleased. I rebuked my client  for bringing a false case to 
me. He knew that I never accepted false cases, and when I brought the thing 
home to him, he admitted his mistake, and I have an  impression that he was 
not angry with me for having asked the magistrate t o decide against him. At 
any rate my conduct in this case did not affect my practice for the worse, 
indeed it made my work easier. I also say that my d evotion to truth enhanced 
my reputation amongst the members of the profession , and in spite of the 
handicap of colour I was able in some cases to win even their affection. 
During my professional work it was also my habit ne ver to conceal my ignorance 
from my clients or my colleagues. Wherever I felt m yself at sea, I would advise 
my client to consult some other counsel, or if he p referred to stick to me, I 
would ask him to let me seek the assistance of seni or counsel. This frankness 
earned me the unbounded affection and trust of my c lients. They were always 
willing to pay the fee whenever consultation with s enior counsel was necessary. 
This affection and trust served me in good stead in  my public work. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  I have indicated in the foregoing chapters that my object in practising in South 
Africa was service of the community. Even for this purpose, winning the 
confidence of the people was an indispensable condi tion. The large-hearted 
Indians magnified into service professional work do ne for money, and when I 
advised them to suffer the hardships of imprisonmen t for the sake of their 
rights, many of them cheerfully accepted the advice , not so much because they 
had reasoned out the correctness of the course, as because of their confidence 
in, and affection for, me. 
As I write this, many a sweet reminiscences come to  my mind. Hundreds of 
clients became friends and real co-workers in publi c service, and their 
association sweetened a life that was otherwise ful l of difficulties and dangers. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 269-70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83   
19. HOW A CLIENT WAS SAVED 
The reader, by now, will be quite familiar with Par si Rustomji's name. He was 
one who became at once my client and co-worker, or perhaps it would be truer 
to say that he first became co-worker and then clie nt. I won his confidence to 
such an extent that he sought and followed my advic e also in private domestic 
matters. Even when he was ill, he would seek my aid , and though there was 
much difference between our ways of living, he did not hesitate to accept my 
quack treatment. 
This friend once got into a very bad scrape. Though  he kept me informed of 
most of his affairs, he had studiously kept back on e thing. He was a large 
importer of goods from Bombay and Calcutta, and not  infrequently he resorted 
to smuggling. But as he was on the best terms with customs officials, no one 
was inclined to suspect him. In charging duty, they  used to take his invoices on 
trust. Some might even have connived at the smuggli ng. 
But to use the telling simile of the Gujarati poet Akho, theft like quicksilver 
won't be suppressed, and Parsi Rustomji's proved no  exception. The good friend 
ran post haste to me, the tears rolling down his ch eeks as he said: 'Bhai, I have 
deceived you. My guilt has been discovered today. I  have smuggled and I am 
doomed. I must go to jail and be ruined. You alone may be able to save me 
from this predicament. I have kept back nothing els e from you, but I thought I 
ought not to bother you with such tricks of the tra de and so I never told you 
about this smuggling. But now, how much I repent it !' 
I calmed him and said: 'To save or not to save you is in His hands. As to me you 
know my way. I can but try to save you by means of confession.' 
The good Parsi felt deeply mortified. 
'But is not my confession before you enough?' he as ked. 
You have wronged not me but Government. How will th e confession made 
before me avail you?' I replied gently. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  'Of course I will do just as you advise, but will y ou not consult with my old 
counsel Mr—? He is a friend too,' said Parsi Rustom ji. 
Inquiry revealed that the smuggling had been going on for a long time, but the 
actual offence detected involved a trifling sum. We  went to his counsel. He 
perused the papers, and said: 'The case will be tri ed by a jury, and a Natal jury 
will be the last to acquit an Indian. But I will no t give up hope.' 
I did not know this counsel intimately. Parsi Rusto mji intercepted: 'I thank you, 
but I should like to be guided by Mr. Gandhi's advi ce in this case. He knows me 
intimately. Of course you will advise him whenever necessary.' 
Having thus shelved the counsel's question, we went  to Parsi Rustomji's shop. 
And now explaining my view I said to him: 'I don't think this case should be 
taken to court at all. It rests with Customs Office r to prosecute you or to let 
you go, and he in turn will have to be guided by th e Attorney- General. I am 
prepared to meet both. I propose that you should of fer to pay the penalty they 
fix, and the odds are that they will be agreeable. But if they are not, you must 
be prepared to go to jail. I am of opinion that the  shame lies not so much in 
going to jail as in committing the offence. The dee d of shame has already been 
done. Imprisonment you should regard as a penance. The real penance lies in 
resolving never to smuggle again.' 
I cannot say that Parsi Rustomji took all this quit e well. He was a brave man, 
but his courage failed him for the moment. His name  and fame were at stake, 
and where would he be if the edifice he had reared with such care and labour 
should go to pieces? 
'Well, I have told you,' he said, 'that I am entire ly in your hands. You may do 
just as you like'. 
I brought to bear on this case all my powers of per suasion. I met the Customs 
Officer and fearlessly apprised him of the whole af fair. I also promised to place 
all the books at his disposal and told him how peni tent Parsi Rustomji was 
feeling. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  The Customs Officer said: 'I like the old Parsi. I am sorry he has made a fool of 
himself. You know where my duty lies. I must be gui ded by the Attorney- 
General and so I would advise you to use all your p ersuasion with him.' 
'I shall be thankful,' said I, 'if you do not insis t on dragging him into court.' 
Having got him to promise this, I entered into corr espondence with the 
Attorney-General and also met him. I am glad to say  that he appreciated my 
complete frankness and was convinced that I had kep t back nothing. 
I now forget whether it was in connection with this  or with some other case 
that my persistence and frankness extorted from him  the remark: 'I see you will 
never take a no for an answer.' 
The case against Parsi Rustomji was compromised. He  was to pay a penalty 
equal to twice the amount he had confessed to havin g smuggled. Rustomji 
reduced to writing the facts of the whole case, got  the paper framed and hung 
it up in his office to serve as a perpetual reminde r to his heirs and fellow 
merchants. 
These friends of Rustomji warned me not to be taken  in by this transitory 
contrition. When I told Rustomji about this warning  he said: 'What would be my 
fate if I deceived you?' 
An Autobiography,  (1959), pp. 270-72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION III 
THE TRIALS OF GANDHIJI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87   
20. BEFORE THE COURT IN 1907 
[Editor's Note: On 22nd November 1905 Messrs. Abdul  Gani (Chairman, British Indian 
Association), Haji Habib (Secretary, Pretoria Commi ttee), E. S. Coovadia, P. Moonsamy 
Moonlight, Ayub Hajee Beg Mahomed and Gandhiji form ed a deputation that waited on 
Lord Selborne, High Commissioner for Britain in Sou th Africa, and made representations in 
regard to the repeal of the Peace Preservation Ordi nance. The Peace Preservation 
Ordinance, as its name implied, although framed to keep out of the Colony dangerous 
characters, was being used mainly to prevent Britis h Indians from entering the Transvaal. 
The working of the law had always been harsh and op pressive. 
The deputation to Lord Selborne, having failed in i ts efforts to obtain redress, the Indians 
led by Mahatma Gandhi organized an agitation in Eng land and succeeded in enlisting the 
sympathy of many Englishmen in the cause of the Sou th African Indians. An influential 
committee with Lord Ampthill as President, Sir M. M . Bhownaggree as Executive Chairman 
and Mr. Ritch as Secretary was formed to guard over  Indian interests and a deputation 
from among the leading sympathizers of the cause of  British Indians in South Africa was 
organized to wait on the Earl of Elgin, the Colonia l Secretary. The deputation which 
consisted of Lord Stanley of Alderley, Mr. H. O. Al ly, Gandhiji, Sir Lepel Griffin, Mr. J. D. 
Rees, Sir George Birdwood, Sir Henry Cotton, Mr. Da dabhai Naoroji, Sir M. M. 
Bhownaggree, Mr. Amir Ali, Mr. Harold Cox and Mr. T hornton, waited on Lord Elgin, on 
Thursday, November 8, 1906 at the Colonial Office. 
Gandhiji's Appeal to Lord Elgin and the efforts of the British Committee in London were 
successful only to the extent of securing from Lord  Elgin a declaration that the Ordinance 
would be hung up until the matter had received the consideration of the Transvaal 
Parliament that was shortly to come into being. A c onstitutional Government was soon 
formed in the Transvaal and the new measure receive d the Royal Assent and became Law. 
The Indian community in Transvaal, seeing that thei r efforts were all in vain, determined 
to fight and risk the consequences of disobedience in accordance with the resolution 
passed at a vast mass meeting of some 3,000 British  Indians held at the Empire Theatre, 
Johannesburg. 
On the 26th December 1907, the Royal Assent to the Immigration Act was announced and 
simultaneously came the news that a number of the l eaders of the two Asiatic 
Communities were warned to appear before the Magist rate to show cause why, having 
failed to apply for registration, as required by th e law, they should not be ordered to The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  leave the Transvaal. They were directed to leave th e Colony within a given period, and 
failing to do so, they were sentenced to simple imp risonment for two months. Gandhiji 
was one of those arrested and brought to trial. 
In Christmas week of 1907, Gandhiji received a tele phone message from Mr. H. F. D. 
Papenfue, Acting Commissioner of Police for the Tra nsvaal, asking him to call at 
Marlborough House. Upon arriving there, he was info rmed that the arrests had been 
ordered of himself and 25 others. 
[The following account of the proceedings in Court is taken from the  Indian Opinion. ] 
Mr. Gandhi gave his word that all would appear befo re the respective 
magistrates at 10 a.m. next day .and the Commission er accepted this 
guarantee. Next morning when he attended at the Bri tish Criminal Court, he 
was asked by the Superintendent whether he held dul y issued registration 
certificates under Law 2 of 1907 and upon receiving  replies in the negative, he 
was promptly arrested and charged under Section 8 S ub-Section 2 of Act 2 of 
1907, in that he was in the Transvaal without a reg istration certificate issued 
under the Act. The Court was crowded to excess and it seemed as if at one 
time the barrier would be overthrown. 
Mr. D. G. Shurman prosecuted on behalf of the Grown . 
Mr. Gandhi pleaded guilty. 
Superintendent Vernon gave evidence as to the arres t. 
Mr. Gandhi asked no question but went into the box prepared to make a 
statement. He said what he was about to state was n ot evidence but he hoped 
the Court would grant him indulgence to make a shor t explanation seeing that 
he was an officer of that Court. He wished to say w hy he had not submitted to 
this. 
Mr. Jordan (Magistrate) : I don't think that has an ything to do with it. The law is 
there, and you have disobeyed it. I do not want any  political speeches made. 
Mr. Gandhi : I do not want to make any political sp eeches. 
Mr. Jordan : The question is, have you registered o r not? If you have not 
registered there is an end of the case. If you have  any explanation to offer as The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  regards the order I am going to make that is anothe r story. There is the law 
which has been passed by the Transvaal Legislature and sanctioned by the 
Imperial Government. All I have to do and all I can  do is to administer that law 
as it stands. 
Mr. Gandhi : I do not wish to give any evidence in extenuation and I know that 
legally I cannot give evidence at all. 
Mr. Jordan : All I have to deal with is legal evide nce. What you want to say, I 
suppose, is that you do not approve of the law and you conscientiously resist it. 
Mr. Gandhi : That is perfectly true. 
Mr. Jordan : I will take the evidence if you say yo u conscientiously object. 
Mr. Gandhi was proceeding to state when he came to the Transvaal and the 
fact that he was Secretary to the British Indian As sociation when Mr. Jordan 
said he did not see how that affected the case. 
Mr. Gandhi : I said that before and I simply asked the indulgence of the Court 
for five minutes. 
Mr. Jordan : I don't think this is a case in which the Court should grant any 
indulgence; you have defied the law. 
Mr. Gandhi : Very well, Sir, then I have nothing mo re to say. 
The Magistrate then ordered Mr. Gandhi to leave the  country in 48 hours. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi , 4th Ed., Natesan, Madras, pp. 49-51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90   
21. BEFORE THE COURT IN 1908 
[Editor's Note: On the 11th January 1908 Gandhiji a ppeared before the Court and pleaded 
guilty to the charge of disobeying the order of the  Court to leave the Colony within 48 
hours. 
The following account of the proceedings in Court i s taken from the  Indian Opinion. ] 
Mr. Gandhi asked leave to make a short statement an d having obtained it, he 
said he thought there should be distinction made be tween his case and those 
who were to follow. He had just received a message from Pretoria stating that 
his compatriots had been tried there and had been s entenced to three months' 
imprisonment with hard labour, and they had been fi ned a heavy amount in lieu 
of payment of which -they would receive a further p eriod of three months' hard 
labour. If these men had committed an offence, he h ad committed a greater 
offence, and he asked the Magistrate to impose upon  him the heaviest penalty. 
Mr. Jordan : You asked for the heaviest penalty whi ch the law authorized? mr. 
gandhi : Yes, Sir. 
Mr. Jordan : I must say I do not feel inclined to a ccede to your request of 
passing the heaviest sentence which is six months' hard labour with a fine of 
£500. That appears to me to be totally out of propo rtion to the offence which 
you have committed. The offence practically is Cont empt of Court in having 
disobeyed the order of December 28, 1907. This is m ore or less a political 
offence, and if it had not been for the political d efiance set to the law, I should 
have thought it my duty to pass the lowest sentence  which I am authorized by 
the Act. Under the circumstance, I think a fair sen tence to meet the case 
would be two months' imprisonment without hard labo ur. 
Mr. Gandhi was then removed in custody. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  4th Ed., Natesan, Madras, p. 52 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91   
22. BEFORE THE COURT IN 1913 
[Editor's Note: While Gandhiji was leading a deputa tion to England, another deputation led 
by Mr. Polak came to India to press the question of  the repeal of the £3 tax. Then followed 
an agitation in England and India in 1910-12 which compelled attention of the authorities. 
Mr. Gokhale subsequently visited South Africa and m ade special representation to the 
Union Ministers on this particular question and a d efinite undertaking was given to him 
that the tax would be repealed. For a time it appea red that settlement was possible. But 
General Smuts again evaded and the tension became m ore when in 1913 a measure was 
introduced into the Union Parliament exempting wome n only from its operation. Gandhiji 
wired to Mr. Gokhale asking whether the promise of repeal was limited to women only. 
Mr. Gokhale replied that it applied to all who were  affected by the tax. Gandhiji reminded 
the Union Government of the promise and asked for a  definite undertaking to repeal it in 
1914. The Union Government declined. It was then th at Gandhiji organized the great 
movement advising indentured Indians to suspend wor k till the tax was repealed. Under 
his lead the Indian labourers gathered in thousands  and they passed mine after mine 
adding to their numbers. Then commenced the histori c march into the Transvaal allowing 
themselves to be freely arrested. The Government ho ping to demoralize the Indians issued 
a warrant to arrest Gandhiji. The following account  of the proceedings in Court is taken 
from the  Indian Opinion. ] 
Mr. Gandhi was on the 11th November 1913 charged on  three counts before the 
Resident Magistrate, Mr. J. W. Cross, of Dundee, wi th inducing indentured 
immigrants to leave the Province. The Court was cro wded with Indians and 
Europeans. Mr. W. Daizell- Turnbell was specially i nstructed by the Attorney- 
General to appear for the prosecution and Mr. J. W.  Godfrey, Advocate 
appeared for Mr. Gandhi. Mr. Gandhi pleaded guilty to the charges. 
Mr. Turnbell read the section and left the matter i n the hands of the 
Magistrate. 
Mr. Godfrey stated that he was under an obligation to the defendant not to 
plead in mitigation in any way whatsoever. The circ umstances which had 
brought Mr. Gandhi before the Magistrate were well known to all persons, and 
he was only expressing the desire of the defendant when he stated that the 
Magistrate had a duty to perform and that he was ex pected to perform that The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  duty fearlessly and should therefore not hesitate t o impose the highest 
sentence upon the prisoner if he felt that the circ umstances in the case 
justified it. 
Mr. Gandhi obtained the permission of the Court and  made the following 
statement : 
"As a member of the profession and being an old res ident of Natal, he thought 
that, in justice to himself and the public, he shou ld state that the counts 
against him were of such a nature that he took the responsibility imposed upon 
him, for he believed that the demonstration for whi ch these people were taken 
out of the Colony was one for a worthy object. He f elt that he should say that 
he had nothing against the employers and regretted that in this campaign 
serious losses were being caused to them. He appeal ed to the employers also, 
and he felt that the tax was one which was heavily weighing down his 
countrymen and should be removed. He also felt that  he was in honour bound, 
in view of the position of things between Mr. Smuts  and Professor Gokhale, to 
produce a striking demonstration. He was aware of t he miseries caused to the 
women and babes in arms. On the whole he felt he ha d not gone beyond the 
principles and honour of the profession of which he  was a member. He felt that 
he had only done his duty in advising his countryme n and it was his duty to 
advise them again, that, until the tax was removed,  they should leave work and 
subsist upon rations obtained by charity. He was ce rtain that without suffering 
it was not possible for them to get their grievance  remedied." 
The Magistrate finally in pronouncing sentence said  : 
"It was a painful duty to pass a sentence upon the conduct of a gentleman like 
Mr. Gandhi, upon the deliberate contravention of th e law, but he had a duty to 
perform, and Mr. Godfrey, his counsel, had asked hi m fearlessly to perform 
that duty. The accused having pleaded guilty, he (t he Magistrate) accepted 
that plea and passed the following sentences : Coun t 1,  £20, or three months' 
imprisonment with hard labour; Count 2, £ 20, or three months' imprisonment 
with hard labour to take effect upon the expiration  of the sentence in respect The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  to Count 1; Count 3,  £20, or three month's imprisonment with hard labour, th is 
to take effect upon the expiration of the sentence imposed in Count 2." 
Mr. Gandhi, in a clear and calm voice, said : 
"I elect to go to goal." 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  4th Ed., Natesan, Madras, pp. 63-64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94   
23. WAS IT CONTEMPT OF COURT? 
I 
PROCEEDINGS AGAINST MR. GANDHI AND MR. MAHADEV H,  DESAI 
[Editor's Note: On 22nd April 1919, B. C. Kennedy, the District Judge of Ahmedabad, 
addressed a letter to the Registrar of the High Cou rt, Bombay, submitting for the 
determination of the High Court certain questions r egarding the conduct of two barristers 
and three pleaders who had taken Satyagraha pledge,  i.e., a pledge "to refuse civilly to 
obey the Rowlatt Act and such other laws as a commi ttee to be thereafter appointed may 
think fit". Gandhiji as the editor and Shri Mahadev  Desai as the publisher of  Young India, 
published the said letter with comments thereon in the issue of  Young India  dated 6-8-
1919, while proceedings against those barristers an d pleaders under the disciplinary 
jurisdiction of the High Court were pending. On 11- 12-1919, the Registrar of the High 
Court applied for a rule  Nisi calling upon the respondents, Mr. Gandhi and Mr. D esai, to 
show cause why they should not be committed or othe rwise dealt with according to law, 
for Contempt of Court in respect of the publication  of the said letter. The rule was 
granted by Justice Shah and Justice Crump. The rule  was heard by the Hon'ble Justices 
Marten, Hayward and Kajiji on 3-3-1920. Sir Thomas Strangman and Bahaduiji appeared for 
the applicant in support of the rule. The responden ts, Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Desai appeared 
in person. In its judgment delivered on 12-3-1920, the High Court observed that comments 
on or extracts from any pending proceedings before a Court cannot be published unless 
the leave of the Court was first obtained. Any act done or writing published calculated to 
obstruct or interfere with the due course of justic e or the lawful process of the Court or to 
bring a Court or a judge of the Court into contempt  or to lower his authority is a Contempt 
of Court. The Court held that the respondents were guilty of Contempt of Court in 
publishing the letter pending the hearing of the pr oceedings and that the comments made 
on the letter were of a particularly intemperate an d reprehensible character and 
constituted a serious Contempt of Court. The High C ourt severely reprimanded the 
respondents and cautioned them both as to their fut ure conduct. The case is reported in 
22 Bombay Law Reporter at p. 368 et. seq.] 
This rule was heard by the Hon'ble Justices Marten,  Hayward and Kajiji on the 
3rd inst. (3rd March 1920). The Editor Mr. Gandhi a nd the Publisher Mr. Desai of  
Young India  were to show cause why they should not be committe d for 
contempt having published with comments in the issu e of the 6th August 1919 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  of their paper, a letter addressed by Mr. Kennedy, District Judge of 
Ahmedabad, to the Registrar of the High Court compl aining of the conduct of 
certain Satyagrahi lawyers of Ahmedabad. 
The Hon'ble Sir Thomas Strangman, Advocate- General  with Messrs. Bahadurji 
and Pocock appeared for the applicant, Mr. Gandhi a nd Mr. Desai appeared in 
person. 
The Advocate-General, in opening the case, said tha t the proceedings wer,e in 
contempt against Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Desai, about wh ose being Editor and 
Publisher respectively there was no dispute. It app eared that Mr. Kennedy in 
April last, finding that certain lawyers in Ahmedab ad had- signed the 
Satyagraha pledge, asked them to explain why their Sanads  should not be 
cancelled for their having signed the pledge, and a s he did not consider their 
explanation satisfactory he addressed a letter to t he Registrar of the High Court 
on the 22nd April 1919. In consequence, two notices  were issued by the High 
Court to the lawyers concerned. A copy of Mr. Kenne dy's letter was given by the 
Registrar to Mr. Divetia, pleader for one of the la wyers, who handed the same 
to Mr. Kalidas J. Jhaveri, one of the Satyagrahi la wyers, who in turn handed it 
to Mr. Gandhi. On the 6th of August this letter was  published in his paper under 
the heading. "O'Dwyerism in Ahmedabad" along with a n article headed "Shaking 
Civil Resisters" commenting on the letter. (The Adv ocate-General at this stage 
read the letter and the article). It appeared from the article, said he, that by 
'O'Dwyer', was meant a disturber of peace. The arti cle said that the District 
Judge was prejudging the issue. His conduct was des cribed as not only 
ungentlemanly, but something worse, unpardonable. H e was said to be fanning 
the fire of Bolshevism. Those were shortly the char ges made against Mr. 
Kennedy. Then proceedings took place in the High Co urt. After the proceedings 
the Registrar addressed a letter to Mr. Gandhi requ esting him to attend the 
Chief Justice's Chamber to give an explanation as r egards the publication of the 
letter. Mr. Gandhi replied by telegram explaining h is inability to attend on the 
appointed date as he was going to the Punjab, and i nquiring if written 
explanation would be sufficient. The Registrar repl ied saying that the Chief The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  Justice did not wish to interfere with Mr. Gandhi's  appointment and that a 
written explanation would do. On the 22nd October M r. Gandhi sent a written 
explanation in which he stated that the letter was received by him in the 
ordinary course and that he published it as he beli eved it was of great public 
importance and that he thought that he was doing a public service in 
commenting on it. He, therefore, claimed that in pu blishing and commenting 
on the letter, he was within the rights of a journa list. In reply to this the 
Registrar wrote saying that the Chief Justice was n ot satisfied with the 
explanation, but that it would be considered suffic ient if an apology in the 
following terms were published in the next issue of  Young India. 
 
Form of Apology 
"Whereas on the 6th April 1919 we published in Young India  a 
private letter written by Mr. Kennedy, District Jud ge of 
Ahmedabad, to the Registrar of the High Court of Ju stice at 
Bombay and whereas on the same date we also publish ed certain 
comments on the said letter and whereas it has been  pointed out 
to us that pending certain proceedings in the said High Court in 
connection with the said letter we were not justifi ed in publishing 
the said letter or in commenting thereon, now we do  hereby 
express our regret and apologize to the Hon'ble the  Chief Justice 
and Judges of the said High Court for the publicati on of the said 
letter and the comments thereon." 
The Advocate-General said that he submitted with so me confidence that it was 
an apology which the opponent should have published . A milder form of 
apology, he thought, it was difficult to conceive. Mr. Gandhi, however, did not 
publish the apology and took counsel's opinion and addressed a letter to the 
Registrar expressing his inability to apologize. Be fore the receipt of this letter a 
notice was ordered by the High Court on the 11th of  December to be issued for 
contempt on which the proceedings were "based. The text of Mr. Gandhi's 
letter dated 11th December 1919, is as follows:  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  "With reference to your letter regarding the public ation of the letter of the 
District Judge of Ahmedabad in the matter of the Sa tyagrahi lawyers I beg to 
state that I have now consulted legal friends and g iven much anxious 
consideration to the apology suggested by His Lords hip the Chief Justice. But I 
regret to state that I find myself unable to publis h the suggested apology. The 
document in question came into my possession in the  ordinary course and being 
of great public importance I decided to publish and  comment upon it. In doing 
so I performed, in my humble opinion, a useful publ ic duty at a time when 
there was great tension and when even the Judiciary  was affected by the 
popular prejudice. I need hardly say that I had no desire whatsoever to 
prejudge the issues that Their Lordships had to dec ide. 
I am anxious to assure His Lordship the Chief Justi ce that at the time I decided 
to publish the document in question, I had fully in  mind the honour of 
journalism as also the fact that I was a member of the Bombay Bar and as such 
expected to be aware of the traditions thereof. But  thinking of my action in the 
light of what has happened I am unable to say that in similar circumstances I 
would act differently from what I did when I decide d to publish and comment 
upon Mr. Kennedy's letter. Much therefore as I woul d have liked to act upon His 
Lordship's suggestion, I feel that I could not cons cientiously offer any apology 
for my action. Should this explanation be not consi dered sufficient by His 
Lordship I shall respectfully suffer the penalty th at Their Lordships may be 
pleased to impose upon me. 
I beg to apologize for the delay caused in replying  to your letter. I have been 
touring continuously in the Punjab and am not likel y to be free before the 
beginning of the next month." 
A few days before the hearing of the rule Mr. Gandh i addressed a letter to the 
Registrar dated 27th February with which he enclose d copies of statements 
which he and Mr. Desai desired to submit before the  Court. The text of the two 
statements is given below: 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98   
Mr. Gandhi's Statement 
With reference to the Rule  Nisi issued against me I beg to state as follows: 
"Before the issue of the Rule certain correspondenc e passed between the 
Registrar of the Honourable Court and myself on the  11th December. I 
addressed to the Registrar a letter (reproduced abo ve) which sufficiently 
explains my conduct. I therefore attach a copy of t he said letter. I regret that I 
have not found it possible to accept the advice giv en by His Lordship the Chief 
Justice. 
Moreover, I have been unable to accept the advice b ecause I do not consider 
that I have committed either a legal or a moral bre ach by publishing Mr. 
Kennedy's letter or by commenting on the contents t hereof. 
I am sure that this Honourable Court would not want  me to tender an apology 
unless it be sincere and express regret for an acti on which I have held to be the 
privilege and duty of a journalist. I shall, theref ore, cheerfully and respectfully 
accept the punishment that this Honourable Court ma y be pleased to impose 
upon me for the vindication of the majesty of law. 
I wish to say with reference to the notice served o n Mr. Mahadev Desai, the 
Publisher, that he published it simply upon my requ est and advice." 
 
Mr. Desai's Statement 
"With reference to the Rule  Nisi served upon me I beg to state that I have read 
the statement made by the Editor of  Young India  and associate myself with the 
reasoning adopted by the Editor in justification of  his action. I shall therefore 
cheerfully and respectfully abide by any penalty th at this Honourable Court 
may be pleased to inflict on me." 
Continuing the Advocate-General proceeded to cite r ulings to show what 
constitutes Contempt of Court. (1900)2 Q.B. Page 36  showed that there were 
two kinds of contempt : (1) Any act or writing tend ing to scandalize the court; The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  (2) any act or writing calculated to obstruct or in terfere with the due course of 
justice or the lawful process of the court. The Adv ocate General submitted that 
the publication of the letter and the comments ther eon constitutes contempt in 
two respects: (1) in the language of Lord Hardwicke  it scandalized Mr. Kennedy; 
and (2) it was an attempt to interfere with the cou rse of justice. He further 
said that the High Court could punish for contempt of an inferior court. The 
District Court of Ahmedabad was under the superinte ndence of the High Court 
and it had no power to commit for contempt except f or what was done in the 
face of the court. 
Mr. Justice Marten asked if it was Contempt of Cour t in a civil action to publish 
the plaint or the written statement. 
The Advocate-General replied it was a contempt. The  pleadings did not become 
public documents until the case was heard. The Advo cate-General also referred 
to (1906) 1. KB. page 132, and (1903) 2. KB. He add ed that publication after 
trial was different from publication before it. In conclusion the Advocate- 
General drew the deduction that the gist of Mr. Gan dhi's article was that as Mr. 
Kennedy was fanning the fire of Bolshevism, the Hig h Court, if it acted on his 
letter, would likewise disturb the peace and fan th e fire of Bolshevism. 
Mr. Gandhi addressing the Court said that he did no t propose to say anything 
beyond what he had already said in his statement. E steemed friends had asked 
him to consider if he was not obstinate in not maki ng the required apology. He 
had considered the matter over and over again and w hatever view the Court 
"held, he asked them to believe him that nothing wa s farther from his thoughts 
than obstinacy. He wished to pay all respect to the  Honourable Court. On the 
other hand he did expect that the Honourable Court would not grudge his 
paying the same respect to his own sense of honour and to the dignity of 
journalism. He had heard the Advocate-General caref ully to see if anything, he 
said, could convince him that he had been in the wr ong. But he had remained 
entirely unconvinced. Had he been convinced he woul d readily have withdrawn 
his statements and tendered apology. He did not wis h to say anything more. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  Mr. Justice Marten said that the point of law was a gainst Mr. Gandhi. Mr. 
Gandhi had said that he was entitled as a journalis t to do what he had done. 
But the Advocate-General had cited authorities agai nst him. Had he any 
authorities to support his position? 
Mr. Gandhi said he differed from the Advocate- Gene ral on the point of law, 
but he did not rest his case such as it was on poin ts of law. He did not wish to 
argue legal points and go beyond the limits he had set to himself. The Court 
had before now done justice in many undefended case s and he wished himself 
to be considered as undefended. He would be entirel y content with Their 
Lordships' finding on points of law. 
Mr. Justice Marten reminded Mr. Gandhi that he was himself a member of the 
Bar and that he could argue out the case from the l egal standpoint. 
Mr. Gandhi said he was unprepared to do so and repe ated that he would be 
content to take ruling of the Court with regard to law. But since the Court had 
coaxed him to argue he would say that what he felt was that he had not 
prejudiced any party. The Hon. the Advocate-General  had said that his 
comments on the District Judge constituted contempt  of a Judge. Mr. Gandhi 
commented on the District Judge not as a Judge but as an individual. 
J. Marten: Take the case of a sensational murder tr ial. Supposing the press 
commented on the events while the case was going on , what would happen? 
Mr. Gandhi: I would respectfully draw distinction a s a layman between the two 
cases. The District Judge writes this letter as a c omplainant and not as a Judge. 
J. Marten: He was writing as a Judge exercising jur isdiction over certain 
lawyers. 
Mr. Gandhi: I agree. But he was not sitting in cour t to decide an action. I feel 
again that I am travelling beyond the limits I set to myself. The whole law of 
Contempt of Court is that one ought not to do anyth ing which might prejudice 
proceedings before a Court. But here the Judge does  something as an 
individual. I have not done anything to prejudice i n any shape or form the 
judgment of the Judges. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  J. Marten: Would it not be dangerous if the press m ade comments during 
pendency of proceedings? The Court would cease to b e the Tribunal and the 
press would be the Tribunal instead. 
Mr. Gandhi: I would again respectfully draw a disti nction. If a son wrongly 
brought a suit against his father then I would be j ustified in commenting on the 
son's conduct in bringing such a suit against his f ather, without in any way 
thereby prejudicing the decision of the Court. And do our courts prevent public 
men from inducing litigants to settle their claims outside? I submit I have 
committed no contempt. I have prejudiced no party a nd have made no 
comment on the action of Mr. Kennedy as a Judge. I am anxious to satisfy the 
Court that there is not an iota of disrespect shown  to the Court in commenting 
on Mr. Kennedy's letter. I may have erred, and in t he view of the Court, erred 
grievously but I have not done so dishonestly or di srespectfully. I need not add 
that all that I have said applies to the case of Mr . Desai, the publisher. 
J. Marten then drew Mr. Gandhi's attention to a dec ision in England reported in 
a recent issue of the London Times  whereby the editor, publisher and printer of 
a newspaper were fined for contempt. 
Mr. Gandhi: There also I submit it is possible for me to draw a distinction. While 
I was in England the famous Mrs. Maybrick's case wa s going on and the whole 
newspaper press divided itself into two parties, on e condemning Mrs. Maybrick 
and the other going for the Judge, Mr. Justice Step hen and even suggesting that 
he was unfit to try the case. 
J. Marten: But that was all after trial? 
mr. gandhi: No. It was while the case was going on.  I followed the proceedings 
in the case from day to day throughout the many mon ths that it was going on. 
J. Marten: It did not go on, Mr. Gandhi, for many m onths. It went on for some 
days. 
Mr. Gandhi:' Of course here I am speaking subject t o correction, but I am quite 
sure that while the case was going on, the newspape r press was so full with all The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  sorts of innuendoes, insinuations and aspersions, t hat I am sure I, as a 
journalist, would not even at this day be able to g o to the length they went. 
Mr. Desai stated that he entirely associated himsel f with the sentiment 
expressed by Mr. Gandhi. He was sure he was infinit ely more incapable of 
arguing the case than Mr. Gandhi and he would not p resume to do that. He was 
prepared to cheerfully and respectfully abide by wh atever decision Their 
Lordships were pleased to give. The judgement was r eserved. 
Young India,  10-3-1920, pp. 6-8
 
II 
CONTEMPT CASE JUDGMENT  
After stating the facts of the case which are subst antially as we have already 
given, His Lordship Justice Marten observes: 
 
Cases 'sub judice' 
As to the general principles of law to be applied t o this case, there can, I think, 
be no doubt. Speaking generally, it is not permissi ble to publish comments on 
or extracts from any pending proceedings in this Co urt unless the leave of the 
Court be first obtained. Many good reasons may be a dvanced for this, but the 
underlying principle is, I think, that of the due a dministration of justice for the 
public benefit, one incident of which demands that as a matter of common 
fairness, both parties shall be heard at the same t ime and in presence of each 
other on proper evidence by an independent and unpr ejudiced tribunal. 
The object would be frustrated if newspapers were f ree to comment on or to 
make extracts from proceedings which were still  sub judice.  It matters not 
whether those comments and extracts favour prosecut ors or accused, plaintiff 
or defendant. The vice is the interference with wha t are the Court's duty and 
not a newspaper's, viz. the decision of the pending  case. 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  Law as to Contempt 
After citing numerous English authorities with resp ect to Contempt of Court, 
His Lordship proceeds: One can easily see the evils  which would arise if it were 
permissible to publish a plaint containing (say) ch arges of fraud against some 
respectable man before he could even put in his ans wer, and long before the 
charges could be judicially determined. 
I may refer to one more case, not because it lays d own any new law, but 
because it brings the English authorities up-to-dat e and illustrates the 
restrictions imposed there on the liberty of the pr ess, which, as pointed out by 
Lord Russell in  Reg. vs. Gray  1900, 2 Q. B. 36 at p. 40, is on these matters "no  
greater and no less than the liberty of every subje ct of the king". The case is  
Reg. vs. Empire News Limited  as is reported in the  London Times  of 20th 
January 1920, and was heard by Lord Chief Justice o f England and Mr. Justice 
Avory and Mr. Justice Sankey. There the newspaper h ad commented on a 
pending murder case, but did not attempt to justify  its action in so doing, and 
the proprietors and editor expressed their deepest regret and contrition to the 
Court. In delivering judgment, the Earl of Reading said: 
"The Court could not permit the investigation of mu rder to be taken out of the 
hands of the proper authorities and to be carried o n by newspapers. The liberty 
of the individual even when he was suspected of cri me and indeed even more 
so when he was charged with crimes, must be protect ed, and it was the 
function of the Court to prevent the publication of  articles which were likely to 
cause prejudice. The only doubt in the case was whe ther the Court ought to 
commit the editor to prison. The Court had come to the conclusion that in the 
circumstances it must mark its sense of the offence  committed, which was an 
offence both by the proprietors and editor, by impo sing a fine of £ 1000." 
 
Application to Present Caw 
The principles of law then being clear, how ought t hey to be applied to the 
facts of this particular case? In my opinion, those  principles prohibited The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  Publication of the District judge's letter pending the hearing of the notices 
issued by the Bombay High Court. It was contended b y the respondent Gandhi 
that the letter was written by Mr. Kennedy in his p rivate capacity, and not as 
District Judge. I think that contention is erroneou s. The letter is an official 
letter written by the District Judge in the exercis e of his duties as such and 
submitting the case to the High Court for orders. A s my Brother Hayward has 
pointed out to me, the letter follows the procedure  laid down in the  Civil 
Circulars of this Court, in cases of alleged misconduct by a pleader (see p. 
259). It very properly sets out what the learned Ju dge considers to be the facts, 
both for and against the pleaders, and gives his re asons for bringing the matter 
before the High Court. Indeed, if he had not done s o, he would presumably 
have been asked by the High Court for further parti culars before they took any 
action. The letter is on lines quite familiar to th is Court in other cases, where 
the Sessions Judge, in the exercise of his duties a s such, brings some matter 
before this Court with a view to the exercise of it s exceptional powers. 
I may instance criminal references where the Sessio ns Judge for the reasons 
given in his special letter recommends the revision  of some illegal or 
inadequate sentence which has been passed by a subo rdinate Court and which 
the High Court alone can alter in certain contingen cies. If, in the present case, 
the District Judge's letter contained any statement s which the respondent 
pleaders or barristers contended were inaccurate, t hat would be a matter for 
decision at the hearing of the notices, when all th ey had to say would be fully 
considered. But even if the letter was written by M r. Kennedy in his private 
capacity, I do not think it would make any substant ial difference as regards 
mere publication. The letter would still form part and a most important part of 
the pending proceedings and the record thereon, and  I do not think that any 
substantial difference can be drawn between it and the other classes of 
documents mentioned in the authorities cited in Osw ald and in Halsbury to 
which I have already referred. In my judgment, ther efore, the publication of 
this letter was a Contempt of Court. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  That brings me to the comments made in the newspape r, including the heading 
"O'Dwyerism in Ahmedabad" under which the letter wa s published. These 
comments are not only comments on pending proceedin gs, but are of a 
particularly intemperate and reprehensible characte r. They prejudge the case 
and tend to undermine any decision which the High C ourt may come to at the 
trial. They also amount in my opinion to what Lord Russell describes as 
"scurrilous abuse of the Judge as such". In this la tter connection, the question 
whether the letter was written by Mr. Kennedy in hi s private or in his judicial 
capacity become immaterial, but as I have already s tated it was in my 
judgment written in his judicial capacity. 
Accordingly, on the authorities I have already refe rred to, these comments are 
clearly Contempt of Court and come within both the classes to which Lord 
Russell refers and in my judgment they constitute a  serious Contempt of Court. 
 
"No Public Duty" 
We have carefully considered the various statements  made by the respondents 
and invited them at hearing to give any intelligibl e explanation or excuse for 
their conduct. None such was forthcoming. In his le tter of the 11th December, 
1919, the respondent Gandhi contends that in publis hing and commenting on 
the letter he performed a useful public duty at a t ime when there was a great 
tension and when even the judiciary was being affec ted by the popular 
prejudice. Commonsense would answer that if that te nsion and popular 
prejudice existed, it would be increased rather tha n diminished by abuse of the 
Local Judge and that this could not be the public d uty of any good citizen. 
But there would seem to be some strange misconcepti on in the minds of the 
respondents as to the legitimate liberties of a jou rnalist. Otherwise the 
respondent Gandhi could hardly have contended befor e us, as he in fact did, 
that if a son brought a suit against a father and i f a journalist thought that the 
son's action was wrong, the journalist would be jus tified in holding the son up 
to public ridicule in the public press, notwithstan ding that the suit was still 
undecided. I need hardly say that this contention i s erroneous. It may however The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  be, that principles which are quite familiar in Eng land are imperfectly known or 
understood in India, and that the respondents have paid more attention to the 
liberty of the press than to the duties which accom pany that and every other 
liberty. This has much weighed with me in consideri ng what order the Court 
ought to pass in this case. 
We have large powers and in appropriate cases can c ommit offenders to prison 
for such period as we think fit and can impose fine s of such amount as we may 
judge right; but just as our powers are large so ou ght we, I think, to use them 
with discretion and with moderation, remembering th at the only object we 
have in view is to enforce the due administration o f justice for popular benefit. 
In the present case the Court has very seriously co nsidered whether it ought not 
to impose a substantial fine on one if not both of the respondents, but on the 
whole, I think it is sufficient for the Court to st ate the law in terms which I 
hope will leave no room for doubt in the future, an d to confine our order to 
severely reprimanding the respondents and warning t hem both as to their 
future conduct. 
 
The Order of the Court 
That accordingly is the order which I think we shou ld pass in the present case. 
The order of the Court will accordingly be: "The Co urt finds the charges proved. 
It severely reprimands the respondents and cautions  them both as to their 
future conduct." 
 
Mr. Haywad's Judgment 
Mr. Justice Hayward in a separate but concurrent ju dgment, after discussing 
the legal aspect of the case, made the following ob servations: 
"It is difficult to appreciate the position taken u p by the respondents. They 
have expressed their inability to apologize formall y but have at the same time 
represented their readiness to submit to any punish ment meted out to them. It 
is possible that the editor, the respondent Gandhi,  did not realize that he was The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107  breaking the law and there would be no doubt if tha t were so, that it was not 
realized by his publisher, the respondent Desai. Th e respondents seem to have 
posed not as law breakers but rather as passive res isters of the law. It would 
therefore be sufficient in my opinion to enunciate unmistakably for them the 
law in these matters, to severely reprimand them fo r their proceedings and to 
warn them of the penalties imposable by the Right C ourt." 
Mr. Justice Kajiji concurred. 
Young India,  24-3-1920, pp. 7-8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108   
24. CONTEMPT OF COURT 
The long expected hearing of the case against the e ditor and the publisher of  
Young India  in connection with the publication of a letter* of  the District Judge 
of Ahmedabad regarding Satyagrahi lawyers and my co mments thereon has 
been heard and judgment has been pronounced. Both t he editor and the 
publisher have been severely reprimanded. But the C ourt did not see its way to 
pass any sentence upon either of us. If I dwell upo n the judgment it is only 
because I am anxious as a Satyagrahi to draw a mora l from it. I wish to assure 
those friends who out of pure friendliness advised us to tender the required 
apology, that I refused to accept their advice, not  out of obstinacy but because 
there was a great principle at stake. I had to cons erve a journalist's 
independence and yet respect the law. My own readin g of the law was that 
there was no contempt committed by me. But my defen ce rested more upon 
the fact that I could not offer an apology if I was  not prepared not to repeat 
the offence on a similar occasion. Because I hold t hat an apology tendered to a 
Court to be true has to be as sincere as a private apology. At the same time I 
owed a duty to the Court. It was no light thing for  me to refuse to accept the 
advice of the Chief Justice especially when the Chi ef Justice was so very 
considerate in the correspondence with me. I was on  the horns of a dilemma. I 
therefore decided not to offer any defence but simp ly to make a statement 
frankly and fully defining my position, leaving it to the Court to pass any 
sentence if thought fit in the event of an adverse decision. In order to show 
that I meant no disrespect of the Court and that I did not desire to advertise 
the case, I took extraordinary precautions to preve nt publicity and I venture to 
think that I succeeded eminently in convincing the Court that behind my 
disobedience, if it was disobedience, there was no defiance but perfect 
resignation, there was no anger or ill-will but per fect restraint and respect; 
that if I did not apologize, I did not, because an insincere apology would have 
been contrary to my conscience. I hold that it was about as perfect an instance 
of civil disobedience as it ever has been my privil ege to offer. And I feel that The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  the Court reciprocated in a most handsome manner an d recognized the spirit of 
civility that lay behind my so- called disobedience . The luminous judgment of 
Justice Marten lays down the law, and decides again st me. But I feel thankful 
that it does not question the propriety of my actio n. Justice Hayward's 
judgment recognizes it as an instance of passive, i .e. civil resistance and 
practically makes it the reason for not awarding an y sentence. Here then we 
have an almost complete vindication of civil disobe dience ..Disobedience to be 
civil must be sincere, respectful, restrained, neve r defiant, must be based upon 
some well-understood principle, must not be caprici ous and above all, must 
have no ill-will or hatred behind it. I submit that  the disobedience offered by 
Mr. Desai and myself contained all these ingredient s. 
Young India,  24-3-1920, pp. 3-4 
 
1. The letter called upon lawyers who took the Saty agraha pledge, to explain why they 
should not be debarred from practice under the Lega l Practitioners' Act for their act in 
taking the pledges defying law. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110   
25. THE GREAT TRIAL 
[Editor's Note: Gandhiji was arrested at the Satyag raha Ashram, Sabarmati, Ahmedabad on 
Friday the 10th March, 1922 for certain articles pu blished in his  young India.  On the 11 th  
noon Gandhiji and Shri Shankarlal Banker, the publi sher, were placed before Mr. Brown, 
Assistant Magistrate, the Court being held in the D ivisional Commissioner's Office at 
Shahibagh. The prosecution was conducted by Rao Bah adur Girdharlal, Public Prosecutor. 
The Superintendent of Police, Ahmedabad, the first witness, produced the Bombay 
Government's authority to lodge a complaint for fou r articles published in  Young India,  
dated the 15th June 1921, entitled "Disaffection a Virtue"; dated the 29th September, 
"Tampering with Loyalty"; dated the 15th December, "The Puzzle and Its Solution" and 
dated the 23rd February 1922, "Shaking the Manes". He stated that the warrant was issued 
on the 6th instant by the District Magistrate, Ahme dabad and the case was transferred to 
the file of Mr. Brown. Meanwhile warrants were also  issued to the Superintendents of 
Police of Surat and Ajmer as Mr. Gandhi was expecte d to be at those places. The original 
signed articles and issues of the paper in which th ese appeared were also produced as 
evidence. Mr. Gharda, Registrar, Appellate Side, Bo mbay High Court. Second witness, 
produced correspondence between Mr. Gandhi as the E ditor of  Young India  and, Mr. 
Kennedy, District Judge, Ahmedabad. Mr. Chatiield, Magistrate of Ahmedabad was next 
witness. He testified to the security deposited by Mr. Gandhi and the declaration of Mr. S. 
Banker as printer of Young India.  Two formal police witnesses were then produced. Th e 
Accused Mr. Gandhi and Mr. Banker declined to cross -examine the witnesses and 
thereafter made the following statement. 
 
Gandhiji's Statement as Recorded in Court 
Mr. M. K. Gandhi, 53, Farmer and weaver by Professi on, 'residing at Satyagraha Ashram, 
Sabarmati, Ahmedabad said: "I simply wish to state that when the proper time comes, I 
shall plead guilty so far as disaffection towards t he Government is concerned. It is quite 
true that I am Editor of the  Young India  and that the articles read in my presence were 
written by me, and the proprietors and publishers h ad permitted me to control the whole 
policy of the paper." 
Mr. Shankarlal Banker, landed proprietor, Bombay, S econd Accused stated that at the 
proper time he would plead guilty to the charge of having published the articles 
complained of. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  Charges were then framed on three counts under Sect ion 124-A of the Indian Penal Code 
and the two Accused were committed to the Sessions.  
The case having been committed to the Sessions, Gan dhiji was taken to the Sabarmati Jail 
where he was detained till the hearing which was to  cosie off on March 18. 
At last the trial came off on Saturday the 18th Mar ch, 1922 before Mr. C. N. Broomfield 
I.C.S., District and Sessions Judge, Ahmedabad. See  Speeches and Writings of Mahatma 
Gandhi, 4th Ed., Natesan, Madras p. 693] 
At the Government Circuit House at Shahibagh, Ahmed abad, the trial of 
Mahatma Gandhi and Mr. Banker commenced at 12 noon on Saturday, the 18th 
of March, 1922 before C. N. Broomfield Esq., i.c.s. , District and Sessions Judge, 
Ahmedabad. 
Sir Thomas Strangman, Advocate-General, Bombay assi sted by A. C. Wild Esq., 
Legal Remembrancer to the Government of Bombay, and  Rao Bahadur 
Girdharlal, Public Prosecutor conducted the prosecu tion. The Accused were 
undefended. The Judge took his seat at 12 noon, and  said there was a slight 
mistake in the charges framed, which he corrected. The charges under S. 124-
A,* Indian Penal Code were then read out by the Reg istrar, the offence having 
been committed in three articles* published in the  Young India  on September 
29,  1921, December 15, 1921, and February 23, 1922. The offe nding articles 
were then read out: first of them was, "Tempering w ith Loyalty", the second, 
"The Puzzle and Its Solution", and the last was "Sh aking the Manes". [These 
three articles have been reproduced in Appendix I.]  
The Judge said the Law required that the charges sh ould not only be read out, 
but explained. In this case, it would not be necess ary for him to say much by 
way of explanation. The charge in each case was tha t of bringing or attempting 
to bring into hatred or contempt or exciting or att empting to excite 
disaffection towards His Majesty's Government, esta blished by law in British 
India. Both the accused were charged with the three  offences under Section 
124-A, contained in the articles read out, written by Mr. Gandhi and printed by 
Mr. Banker. The words 'hatred and contempt' were wo rds the meaning of which 
was sufficiently obvious. The word disaffection was  defined under the section, The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  where they were told that disaffection included dis loyalty and feelings of 
enmity, and the word used in the section had also b een interpreted by the High 
Court of Bombay in a reported case as meaning polit ical alienation or 
discontent, a spirit of disloyalty to Government or  existing authority. The 
charges having been read out, the Judge called upon  the Accused to plead to 
the charges. He asked Mr. Gandhi, whether he pleade d guilty or claimed to be 
tried. 
Mr. Gandhi: I plead guilty to all the charges. I  observe that the King's name has 
been omitted from the charges, and it has been prop erly omitted. 
The Judge : Mr. Banker, do you plead guilty, or do you claim to be tried ? 
Mr. Banker: I plead guilty. 
 
Advocate-General Urges Trial 
Sir Thomas Strangman then wanted the Judge to proce ed with the trial fully. 
He said that under Section 271, Criminal Procedure Code, it was open to the 
Judge to convict the accused on their pleas or to p roceed with the trial. The 
Section says: If the accused pleads guilty, the ple a shall be recorded and he  
may  be convicted thereon.' The words were  'may', not 'must'. He asked his 
honour to proceed with the trial. In the first inst ance the charges were of a 
serious character and in the second place it was hi ghly desirable in the public 
interest that those charges should be fully and tho roughly investigated. From a 
further and narrower point of view that was in rega rd to the sentence it was 
obvious that the Judge could not deal with the accu sed unless he had the full 
facts of the case before him. That was the view tak en by the Bombay High 
Court,  (19 Bombay Law Reports,  p. 356). That was an extreme case. (The 
advocate-general then read out the case to the cour t and it was in regard to a 
murder charge in which the accused was sentenced to  be hanged.) Those 
remarks applied to the present case, said Sir Stran gman, and he also quoted 23 
Madras 151. On these grounds the Advocate-General a sked the court to proceed The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113  with the trial. 
 
Court's Reply 
The Judge said that he did not agree with what had been said by the Advocate-
General. He had full discretion to convict on the p lea if he thought it proper to 
do so, and in this particular case nothing would be  gained by going once more 
into the evidence recorded by the committing Magist rate. As regards the 
question of the charges they would be fully investi gated and as far as he was 
aware nothing more was needed to establish the offe nce going to show that Mr. 
Gandhi was responsible for those particular article s. In the face of the plea it 
seemed to him that it would be futile to raise the point. As regards the 
question of sentence, it went without saying that f rom the time he knew that 
he was going to try the case, he had thought over t he question of sentence and 
he was prepared to hear anything that the Counsel m ight have to say, or Mr. 
Gandhi wished to say, on the sentence. He honestly did not believe that the 
mere recording of evidence in the trial which the A dvocate-General had called 
for would make a difference to them one way or the other. He, therefore, 
proposed to accept the pleas. 
Mr. Gandhi smiled at this decision. 
The Judge said nothing further remained but to pass  the sentence and before 
doing so, he liked to hear Sir Thomas Strangman. He  was entitled to base his 
general remarks on the charges against the accused and on their pleas. 
Sir Thomas Strangman : It will be difficult to do s o. I ask the Court that the 
whole matter may be properly considered. If I state d what has happened before 
the Committing Magistrate, then I can show that the re are many things which 
are material to the question of the sentence. 
The first point, he said, he wanted to make out was  that the matter which 
formed the subject of the present charges formed a part of the campaign to 
spread disaffection openly and systematically to re nder Government impossible 
and to overthrow it. The earliest article that was put in from  Young India  was The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  dated. 25th May, 1921, which stated that it was the  duty of a non-co-operator 
to create disaffection towards the Government. The counsel then read out 
portions of articles written by Mr. Gandhi in the  Young India.  
The Court said, nevertheless, it seemed to it that the Court could accept a 
plea, on the materials of which the sentence had to  be based. 
Sir Thomas Strangman said the question of sentence was entirely for the Court 
to decide. The Court was always entitled to deal in  a more general manner in 
regard to the question of the sentence, than the pa rticular matter resulting in 
the conviction. He asked leave to refer to articles  before the Court, and what 
result might have been produced, if the trial had p roceeded in order to 
ascertain what the facts were. He was not going int o any matter which involved 
dispute. 
The Judge said there was not the least objection to  his going into the charges 
in a general way. 
Sir Thomas Strangman said he wanted to show that th ese articles were not 
isolated. They formed part of an organized campaign , but so far as  Young India 
was concerned, they would show that from the year 1 921. The counsel then 
read out extracts from the paper, dated June 8, on the duty of a non-co-
operator, which was to preach disaffection towards the existing government 
and preparing the country for civil disobedience. T hen in the same number, 
there was an article on disobedience. Then in the s ame number there was an 
article on "Disaffection — a Virtue" or something t o that effect. Then there was 
an article on the 28th of July, 1921, in which it w as stated that "we have to 
destroy the system". Again, on September 30, 1921, there was an article 
headed "Punjab Prosecutions", where it was stated t hat a non-co- operator 
worth his name should preach disaffection. That was  all so far as  Young India  
was concerned. They were earlier in date than the a rticle, "Tampering with 
Loyalty", and it referred to the Governor of Bombay . Continuing, he said, the 
accused was a man of high educational qualification s and evidently from his 
writings a recognized leader. The harm that was lik ely to be caused was 
considerable. They were the writings of an educated  man, and not the writings The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  of an obscure man, and the Court must consider to w hat the results of a 
campaign of the nature disclosed in the writings mu st inevitably lead. They had 
examples before them in the last few months. He ref erred to the occurrences 
in Bombay last November and Chauri Chaura, leading to murder and destruction 
of property, involving many people in misery and mi sfortune. It was true that in 
the course of those articles they would find non-vi olence was insisted upon as 
an item of the campaign and as an item of the creed . But what was the use of 
preaching non-violence when he preached disaffectio n towards Government or 
openly instigated others to overthrow it ? The answ er to that question appeared 
to him to come from Chauri Chaura, Madras and Bomba y. These were 
circumstances which he asked the Court to take into  account in sentencing the 
accused, and it would be for the Court to consider those circumstances which 
must involve sentences of severity. 
As regards the second accused, his offence was less er. He did the publication 
and he did not write. His offence nevertheless was a serious one. His 
instructions were that he was a man of means and he  asked the Court to impose 
a substantial fine in addition to such term of impr isonment as might be inflicted 
upon. He quoted Section 10 of the Press Act as bear ing on the question of fine. 
When making a declaration, he said a deposit of Rs.  1,000 to Rs. 10,000 was 
asked in many cases. 
Court: Mr. Gandhi, do you wish to make a statement on the question of 
sentence? 
Mr. Gandhi: I would like to make a statement. 
Court: Could you give it to me in writing to put it  on record? 
Mr. Gandhi: I shall give it as soon as I finish rea ding it. 
 
Mr. Gandhi's Oral Statement 
Before reading his written statement, Mr. Gandhi sp oke a few words as 
introductory remarks to the whole statement. He sai d : The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  "Before I read this statement, I would .like to sta te that I entirely endorse the 
learned Advocate-General's remarks in connection wi th my humble self. I think 
that he was entirely fair to me in all the statemen ts that he has made, because 
it is very true, and I have, no desire whatsoever t o conceal from this Court the 
fact that to preach disaffection towards the existi ng system of Government has 
become almost a passion with me, and the learned Ad vocate-General is also 
entirely in the right when he says that my preachin g of disaffection did not 
commence with my connection with  Young India,  but that it commenced much 
earlier; and in the statement that I am about to re ad, it will be my painful duty 
to admit before this Court that it commenced much e arlier than the period 
stated by the Advocate- General. It is the most pai nful duty with me, but I have 
to discharge that duty knowing the responsibility t hat rests upon my shoulders, 
and I wish to endorse all the blame that the learne d Advocate-General has 
thrown on my shoulders in connection with the Bomba y occurrences, Madras 
occurrences and the Chauri Chaura occurrences. Thin king over these deeply 
and sleeping over them night after night, it is imp ossible for me to dissociate 
myself from the diabolical crimes of Chauri Chaura or the mad outrages of 
Bombay. He is quite right when he says that as a ma n of responsibility, a man 
having received a fair share of education, having h ad a fair share of experience 
of this world, I should have known the consequences  of every one of my acts. I 
knew that I was playing with fire. I ran the risk, and if I was set free, I would 
still do the same. I have felt it this morning that  I would have failed in my duty, 
if I did not say what I said here just now. 
I wanted to avoid violence, I want to avoid violenc e. Non-violence is the first 
article of my faith. It is also the last article of  my creed. But I had to make my 
choice. I had either to submit to a system which I considered had done an 
irreparable harm to my country, or incur the risk o f the mad fury of my people 
bursting forth when they understood the truth from my lips. I know that my 
people have sometimes gone mad. I am deeply sorry f or it and I am therefore 
here to submit not to a light penalty but to the hi ghest penalty. I do not ask for 
mercy. I do not plead any extenuating act. I am her e, therefore, to invite and 
cheerfully submit to the highest penalty that can b e inflicted upon me for what The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  in law is a deliberate crime and what appears to me  to be the highest duty of a 
citizen. The only course open to you, the judge, is  as I am just going to say in 
my statement, either to resign your post, or inflic t on me the severest penalty, 
if you believe that the system and law you are assi sting to administer are good 
for the people. I do not expect that kind of conver sion, but by the time I have 
finished with my statement, you will perhaps have a  glimpse of what is raging 
within my breast to run this maddest risk which a s ane man can run." 
The Statement was then read out. 
 
Mr. Gandhi's Written Statement 
"I owe it perhaps to the Indian public and to the p ublic in England, to placate 
which this prosecution is mainly taken up, that I s hould explain why from a 
staunch loyalist and co-operator I have become an u ncompromising dis-
affectionist and non-co-operator. To the Court too I should say why I plead 
guilty to the charge of promoting disaffection towa rds the Government 
established by law in India. 
My public life began in 1893 in South Africa in tro ubled weather. My first 
contact with British authority in that country was not of a happy character. I 
discovered that as a man and an Indian I had no rig hts. More correctly, I 
discovered that I had no rights as a man, because I  was an Indian. 
But I was not baffled. I thought that this treatmen t of Indians was an 
excrescence upon a system that was intrinsically an d mainly good. I gave the 
Government my voluntary and hearty co-operation, cr iticizing it freely where I 
felt it was faulty but never wishing its destructio n. 
Consequently when the existence of the Empire was t hreatened in 1899 by the 
Boer challenge, I offered my  services to it, raised a volunteer ambulance corps  
and served at several actions that took place for t he relief of Ladysmith. 
Similarly in 1906 at the time of the Zulu 'revolt' I raised a stretcher-bearer party 
and served till the end of the 'rebellion'. On both  these occasions I received 
medals and was even mentioned in despatches. For my  work in South Africa I The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  was given by Lord Hardinge a Kaiser-i-Hind Gold Med al. When the war broke out 
in 1914 between England and Germany, I raised a vol unteer ambulance corps in 
London consisting of the then resident Indians in L ondon, chiefly students. Its 
work was acknowledged by the authorities to be valu able. Lastly, in India, 
when a special appeal was made at the War Conferenc e in Delhi in 1918 by Lord 
Chelmsford for recruits, I struggled at the cost of  my health to raise a corps in 
Kheda and the response was being made when the host ilities ceased and orders 
were received that no more recruits were wanted. In  all these efforts at service 
I was actuated by the belief that it was possible b y such services to gain a 
status of full equality in the Empire for my countr ymen. 
The first shock came in the shape of the Rowlatt Ac t, a law designed to rob the 
people of all real freedom. I felt called upon to l ead an intensive agitation 
against it. Then followed the Punjab horrors beginn ing with the massacre of 
Jallianwala Bagh and culminating in crawling orders , public floggings and other 
indescribable humiliations. I discovered too that t he plighted word of the Prime 
Minister to the Musalmans of India regarding the in tegrity of Turkey and the 
holy places of Islam was not likely to be fulfilled . But in spite of the 
forebodings and the grave warnings of friends, at t he Amritsar Congress in 
1919, I fought for co-operation and working the Mon tagu- Chelmsford reforms, 
hoping that the Prime Minister would redeem his pro mise to the Indian 
Musalmans, that the Punjab wound would be healed an d that the reforms, 
inadequate and unsatisfactory though they were, mar ked a new era of hope in 
the life of India. 
But all that hope was shattered. The Khilafat promi se was not to be redeemed. 
The Punjab crime was white-washed and most culprits  went not only 
unpunished but remained in service and in some case s continued to draw 
pensions from the Indian revenue, and in some cases were even rewarded. I saw 
too that not only did the reforms not mark a change  of heart, but they were 
only a method of further draining India of her weal th and of prolonging her 
servitude. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  I came reluctantly to the conclusion that the Briti sh connection had made India 
more helpless than she ever was before, politically  and economically. A 
disarmed India has no power of resistance against a ny aggressor if she wanted 
to engage in an armed conflict with him. So much is  this the case that some of 
our best men consider that India must take generati ons before she can achieve 
Dominion Status. She has become so poor that she ha s little power of resisting 
famines. Before the British advent, India spun and wove in her millions of 
cottages, just the supplement she needed for adding  to her meagre agricultural 
resources. This cottage industry, so vital for Indi a's existence, has been ruined 
by incredibly heartless and inhuman processes as de scribed by English 
witnesses. Little do town-dwellers know how the sem i-starved masses of India 
are slowly sinking to lifelessness. Little do they know that their miserable 
comfort represents the brokerage they get for the w ork they do for the foreign 
exploiter, that the profit and the brokerage are su cked from the masses. Little 
do they realize that the Government established by law in British India is 
carried on for this exploitation of the masses. No sophistry, no jugglery in 
figures can explain away the evidence that the skel etons in many villages 
present to the naked eye. I have no doubt whatsoeve r that both England and 
the town-dwellers of India will have to answer, if there is a God above, for this 
crime against humanity which is perhaps unequalled in history. The law itself in 
this country has been used to serve the foreign exp loiter. My unbiased 
examination of the Punjab Martial Law cases has led  me to believe that at least 
ninety-five per cent of convictions were wholly bad . My experience of political 
cases in India leads me to the conclusion that in n ine out of ten the condemned 
men were totally innocent. Their crime consisted in  the love of their country. 
In ninety-nine cases out of hundred justice has bee n denied to Indians as 
against Europeans in the courts in India. This is n ot an exaggerated picture. It is 
the experience of almost every Indian who has had a nything to do with such 
cases. In my opinion, the administration of the law  is thus prostituted 
consciously or unconsciously for the benefit of the  exploiter. 
The greatest misfortune is that Englishmen and thei r Indian associates in the 
administration of the country do not know that they  are engaged in the crime I The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120  have attempted to describe. I am satisfied that man y Englishmen and Indian 
officials honestly believe that they are administer ing one of the best systems 
devised in the world and that India is making stead y though slow progress. They 
do not know that a subtle but effective system of t errorism and an organized 
display of force on the one hand, and the deprivati on of all powers of 
retaliation or self-defence on the other, have emas culated the people and 
induced in them the habit of simulation. This awful  habit has added to the 
ignorance and the self-deception of the administrat ors. Section 124A under 
which I am happily charged is perhaps the prince am ong the political sections 
of the Indian Penal Code designed to suppress the l iberty of the citizen. 
Affection cannot be manufactured or regulated by la w. If one has no affection 
for a person or system, one should be free to give the fullest expression to his 
disaffection, so long as he does not contemplate, p romote or incite to violence. 
But the section under which Mr. Banker and I are ch arged is one under which 
mere promotion of disaffection is a crime. I have s tudied some of the cases 
tried under it, and I know that some of the most lo ved of India's patriots have 
been convicted under it. I consider it a privilege,  therefore, to be charged 
under that section. I have endeavoured to give in t heir briefest outlines the 
reasons for my disaffection. I have no personal ill -will against any single 
administrator; much less can I have any disaffectio n towards the King's person. 
But I hold it to be a virtue to be disaffected towa rds a Government which in its 
totality has done more harm to India than any previ ous system. India is less 
manly under the British rule than she ever was befo re. Holding such a belief, I 
consider it to be a sin to have affection for the s ystem. And it has been a 
precious privilege for me to be able to write what I have in the various articles, 
tendered in evidence against me. 
In fact, I believe that I have rendered a service t o India and England by showing 
in non-co-operation the way out of the unnatural st ate in which both are living. 
In my humble opinion non-co-operation with evil is as much a duty as is co-
operation with good. But in the past, non-co-operat ion has been deliberately 
expressed in violence to the evil doer. I am endeav ouring to show to my 
countrymen that violent non-co-operation only multi plies evil and that as evil The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  can only be sustained by violence, withdrawal of su pport of evil requires 
complete abstention from violence. Non-violence imp lies voluntary submission 
to the penalty for non-cooperation with evil. I am here, therefore, to invite and 
submit cheerfully to the highest penalty that can b e inflicted upon me for what 
in law is a deliberate crime and what appears to me  to be the highest duty of a 
citizen. The only course open to you, the Judge, is  either to resign your post 
and thus dissociate yourself from evil, if you feel  that the law you are called 
upon to administer is an evil and that in reality I  am innocent; or to inflict on 
me the severest penalty if you believe that the sys tem and the law you are 
assisting to administer are good for the people of this country and that my 
activity is therefore injurious to the public weal. " 
Mr. Banker : I only want to say that I had the priv ilege of printing these articles 
and I plead guilty to the charge. I have got nothin g to say as regards the 
sentence. 
 
The Judgment  
The following is the full text of the judgment: 
"Mr. Gandhi, you have made my task easy in one way by pleading guilty to the 
charge. Nevertheless, what remains, namely the dete rmination of the just 
sentence, is perhaps as difficult a proposition as a judge in this country could 
have to face. The law is no respecter of persons. N evertheless, it will be 
impossible to ignore the fact that you are in a dif ferent category from any 
person I have ever tried or am likely to have to tr y. It would be impossible to 
ignore the fact that, in the eyes of millions of yo ur countrymen, you are a great 
patriot and a great leader. Even those who differ f rom you in politics look upon 
you as a man of high ideals and of noble and of eve n saintly life. I have to deal 
with you in one character only. It is not my duty a nd I do not presume to judge 
or criticize you in any other character. It is my d uty to judge you as a man 
subject to the law, who by his own admission has br oken the law and 
committed what to an ordinary man must appear to be  grave offence against 
the State. I do not forget that you have consistent ly preached against violence The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  and that you have on many occasions, as I am willin g to believe, done much to 
prevent violence. But having regard to the nature o f your political teaching and 
the nature of many of those to whom it was addresse d, how you could have 
continued to believe that violence would not be the  inevitable consequence, it 
passes my capacity to understand. 
There are probably few people in India, who do not sincerely regret that you 
should have made it impossible for any government t o leave you at liberty. But 
it is so. I am trying to balance what is due to you  against what appears to me to 
be necessary in the interest of the public, and I p ropose in passing sentence to 
follow the precedent of a case in many respects sim ilar to this case that was 
decided some twelve years ago, I mean the case agai nst Bal Gangadhar Tilak 
under the same section. The sentence that was passe d upon him as it finally 
stood was a sentence of simple imprisonment for six  years. You will not 
consider it unreasonable, I think, that you should be classed with Mr. Tilak, 
i.e., a sentence of two years' simple imprisonment on each count of the charge; 
six years in all, which I feel it my duty to pass u pon you, and I should like to say 
in doing so that, if the course of events in India should make it possible for the 
Government to reduce the period and release you, no  one will be better 
pleased than I." 
THE  JUDGE TO  MR. B ANKER : "I assume you have been to a large extent under t he 
influence of your chief. The sentence that I propos e to pass upon you is simple 
imprisonment for six months on each of the first tw o counts, that is to say, 
simple imprisonment for one year and a fine of a th ousand rupees on the third 
count, with six months' simple imprisonment in defa ult." 
 
Mr. Gandhi on the Judgment  
MR. G ANDHI: "I would say one word. Since you have done me the  honour of 
recalling the trial of the late Lokamanya Bal Ganga dhar Tilak, I just want to say 
that I consider it to be the proudest privilege and  honour to be associated with 
his name. So far as the sentence itself is concerne d, I certainly consider it is as The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123  light as any judge would inflict on me, and so far as the whole proceedings are 
concerned, I must say that I could not have expecte d greater courtesy." 
When the Judge left the court the friends of Mr. Ga ndhi crowded round him and 
fell at his feet. There was much sobbing on the par t of both men and women. 
But all the while, Mr. Gandhi was smiling and cool and giving encouragement to 
everybody who came to him. Mr. Banker also was smil ing and taking this in a 
light- hearted way. After all his friends had taken  leave of him, Mr. Gandhi was 
taken out of the court to the Sabarmati Jail. 
And thus the great trial finished. 
Young India,  23-3-1922, pp. 165  et. seq. 
 
1 Section 124-A of the Indian Penal Code was as und er: Whoever by words, either spoken 
or written, or by signs, or by visible representati on, or otherwise, brings or attempts to 
bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attemp ts to excite disaffection towards His 
Majesty or the Government established by law in Bri tish India, shall be punished with 
transportation for life or any shorter term, to whi ch fine may be added, or with 
imprisonment which may extend to three years, to wh ich fine may be added, or with fine. 
Explanation I. The expression disaffection includes  disloyalty and all feelings of enmity. 
Explanation II. Comments expressing disaffection of  the measures of the Government with 
a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means w ithout exciting or attempting to excite 
hatred, contempt or disaffection do not constitute an offence under this Section. 
Explanation III. Comments expressing disapprobation  of the administrative or other action 
of the Government without exciting or attempting to  excite hatred, contempt or 
disaffection do not constitute an offence under thi s Section. 
XThe complaint in respect of the earlier article "Di saffection — a Virtue", seems to have 
been dropped subsequently after enquiry, by the Mag istrate.  
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION IV 
LAWYERS AND SATYAGRAHA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125   
26. COURTS AND SCHOOLS 
The Non-co-operation Committee has included in the first stage, boycott of 
law-courts by lawyers and of Government schools and  colleges by parents or 
scholars as the case may be. I know that it is only  my reputation as a worker 
and fighter which has saved me from an open charge of lunacy for having given 
the advice about boycott of courts and schools. 
I venture however to claim some method about my mad ness. It dees not require 
much reflection to see that it is through courts th at a government establishes 
its authority and it is through schools that it man ufactures clerks and other 
employees. They are both healthy institutions when the government in charge 
of them is on the whole just. They are deathtraps w hen the government is 
unjust. 
 
First as to Lawyers  
No newspaper has combated my views on non-co- opera tion with so much 
pertinacity and ability as the Allahabad  Leader.  It has ridiculed my views on 
lawyers expressed in my booklet  Indian Home Rule,  written by me in 1908. I 
adhere to the views then expressed. And if I find t ime I hope to elaborate them 
in these columns. But I refrain from so doing for t he time being, as my special 
views have nothing to do with my advice on the nece ssity of lawyers suspending 
practice. I submit that national non-co-operation r equires suspension of their 
practice by lawyers. Perhaps no one co-operates wit h a government more than 
lawyers through its law-courts. Lawyers interpret l aws to the people and thus 
support authority. It is for that reason that they are styled officers of the court. 
They may be called honorary office-holders. It is s aid that it is the lawyers who 
have put up the most stubborn fight against the Gov ernment. This is no doubt 
partly true. But that does not undo the mischief th at is inherent in the 
profession. So when the nation wishes to paralyze t he Government, that 
profession, if it wishes to help the nation to bend  the Government to its will, 
must suspend practice. But, say the critics, the Go vernment will be too The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126  pleased, if the pleaders and barristers fell into t he trap laid by me. I do not 
believe it. What is true in ordinary times is not t rue in extraordinary times. In 
normal times the Government may resent fierce criti cism of their manners and 
methods by lawyers, but in the face of fierce actio n they would be loath to part 
with a single lawyer's support through his practice  in the courts. 
Moreover, in my scheme, suspension does not mean st agnation. The lawyers are 
not to suspend practice and enjoy rest. They will b e expected to induce their 
clients to boycott courts. They will improvise Arbi tration Boards in order to 
settle disputes. A nation, that is bent on forcing justice from an unwilling 
government, has little time for engaging in mutual quarrels. This truth the 
lawyers will be expected to bring home to their cli ents. The readers may not 
know that many of the most noted lawyers of England  suspended their work 
during the late war. The lawyers, then, upon tempor arily leaving their 
profession, became whole-time workers instead of be ing workers only during 
their recreation hours. Real politics are not a gam e. The late Mr. Gokhale used 
to deplore that we had not gone beyond treating pol itics as a pastime. We have 
no notion as to how much the country has lost by re ason of amateurs having 
managed its battles with a serious- minded, trained  and whole time-working 
bureaucracy. 
The critics then argue that the lawyers will starve , if they leave their 
profession. This cannot be said of the Sinhas of th e profession. They do at times 
suspend work for visiting Europe or otherwise. Of t hose who live from hand to 
mouth, if they are honest men, each local Khilafat Committee can pay them an 
honorarium against full-time service. 
Lastly, for Mohammedan lawyers, it has been suggest ed that if they stop their 
practice, Hindus will take it up. I am hoping Hindu s will at least show the 
negative courage of not touching their Muslim breth ren's clients, even if they 
do not suspend their own practice. But I am sure no  religious minded Musalman 
will be found to say that they can carry on the fig ht only if the Hindus stand 
side by side with them in sacrifice. If the Hindus do as they must, it will be to 
their honour and for the common good of both. But t he Musalmans must go The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127  forward whether the Hindus join them or not. If it is a matter of life and death 
with them, they must not count the cost. No cost is  too heavy for the 
preservation of one's honour, especially religious honour. Only they will 
sacrifice who cannot abstain. Forced sacrifice is n o sacrifice. It will not last. A 
movement lacks sincerity when it is supported by un willing workers under 
pressure. The Khilafat movement will become an irre sistible force when every 
Musalman treats the peace terms as an individual wr ong. No man waits for 
other's help or sacrifice in matters of private per sonal wrong. He seeks help no 
doubt, but his battle against the wrong goes on whe ther he gains help or not. If 
he has justice on his side, the divine law is that he does get help. God is the 
help of the helpless. When the Pandava brothers wer e unable to help Draupadi, 
God came to the rescue and saved her honour. The Pr ophet was helped by God 
when he seemed to be forsaken by men. 
Young India,  11-8-1920, pp. 4-5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128   
27. LAWYERS AND NON-CO-OPERATION 
[Extract from a speech on Non-co-operation delivere d by Gandhiji at Madras on 12-8-1920] 
I have suggested another difficult matter, viz. tha t the lawyers should suspend 
their practice. How should I do otherwise knowing s o well how the Government 
had always been able to retain this power through t he instrumentality of 
lawyers. It is perfectly true that it is the lawyer s of today who are leading us, 
who are fighting the country's battles, but when it  comes to a matter of action 
against the Government, when it comes to a matter o f paralyzing the activity 
of the Government, I know that the Government alway s looks to the lawyers, 
however fine fighters they may have been, to preser ve their dignity and their 
self-respect. I therefore suggest to my lawyer frie nds that it is their duty to 
suspend their practice and to show to the Governmen t that they will no longer 
retain their offices, because lawyers are considere d to be honorary officers of 
the courts and therefore subject to their disciplin ary jurisdiction. They must no 
longer retain these honorary offices if they want t o withdraw cooperation from 
Government. But what will happen to law and order? We shall evolve law and 
order through the instrumentality of these very law yers. We shall promote 
arbitration courts and dispense justice, pure, simp le, home-made justice, 
Swadeshi justice to our countrymen. That is what su spension of practice means. 
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi , 4th Ed., Natesan, Madras, pp. 528-29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129   
28. THE HALLUCINATION OF LAW COURTS 
If we were not under the spell of lawyers and law c ourts and if there were no 
touts to tempt us into the quagmire of the courts a nd to appeal to our basest 
passions, we would be leading a much happier life t han we do today. Let those 
who frequent the law courts — the best of them—bear  witness to the fact that 
the atmosphere about them is foetid. Perjured witne sses are ranged on either 
side, ready to sell their very souls for money or f or friendship's sake. But that is 
not the worst of these courts. The worst is that th ey support the authority of a 
government. They are supposed to dispense justice a nd are therefore called 
the palladile of a nation's liberty. But when they support the authority of an 
unrighteous Government they are no longer palladile  of liberty, they are 
crushing houses to crush a nation's spirit. Such we re the martial law tribunals 
and the summary courts in the Punjab. We had them i n their nakedness. Such 
they are even in normal times when it is a matter o f dispensing justice between 
a superior race and its helots. This is so all the world over. Look at a trial of an 
English officer and the farcical punishment he rece ived for having deliberately 
tortured inoffensive Negroes at Nairobi. Has a sing le Englishman suffered the 
extreme penalty of the law or anything like it for brutal murders in India ? Let 
no one suppose that these things would be changed w hen Indian judges and 
Indian prosecutors take the place of Englishmen. En glishmen are not by nature 
corrupt. Indians are not necessarily angels. Both s uccumb to their environment. 
There were Indian judges and Indian prosecutors dur ing the martial law regime, 
who were generally guilty of just as bad practices as the Englishmen. Those 
who tortured the innocent women in Amritsar were In dians, if it was a 
Bosworth Smith in Manianwala who insulted its women . What I am attacking is 
the system. I have no quarrel with the Englishmen a s such. I honour individuals 
among them today as I did before my discovery of th e unimprovableness of the 
existing system. If anything, Mr. Andrews and other  Englishmen I could name, 
are nearer to me today than before. But I could not  tender my homage even to 
him who is more than a brother to me, if he became the Viceroy of India. I The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  would distrust his ability to remain pure if he acc epted the office. He would 
have to administer a system that is inherently corr upt and based on the 
assumption of our inferiority. Satan mostly employs  comparatively moral 
instruments and the language of ethics, to give his  aims an air of respectability. 
I have digressed a little for the purpose of showin g that this Government, if it 
was wholly manned by Indians but worked as it now i s, would be as intolerable 
to us as it is now. Hence it is that the knowledge of Lord Sinha's appointment to 
a high office fails to fill me with a glow of satis faction. We must have absolute 
equality in theory and in practice, and ability to do away with the British 
connection if we so wish. 
But to revert to the lawyers and the law courts, we  cannot gain this desirable 
status, so long as we regard with superstitious awe  and wonder the so-called 
palaces of justice. Let not individuals who get sat isfaction of their greed or 
revenge for their just claims, be blind to the ulti mate aim of Government which 
they represent. Without its law courts the Governme nt must perish in a day. I 
admit that under my plan this power of subjugating the people through the 
courts will still remain even when every Indian law yer has withdrawn and there 
are no civil suits in the law courts. But then they  will cease to deceive us. They 
will have lost their moral prestige and therefore t he air of respectability. It is 
strange but it is true that so long as we believed in the gradual transference of 
the power of the English to the people, appointment s to high posts in the law 
courts were hailed as a blessing. Now that we belie ve that the system is 
incapable of being gradually mended, every such app ointment by reason of its 
deceptiveness must be regarded as an evil. Therefor e every lawyer suspending 
his practice to that extent undermines the prestige  of the law courts and to 
that extent every suspension is a gain for the indi vidual as for the nation. 
The economic drain that the law courts cause has at  no time been considered. 
And yet it is not a trifle. Every institution found ed under the present system is 
run on a most extravagant scale. Law courts are pro bably the most 
extravagantly run. I have some knowledge of the sca le in England, a fair 
knowledge of the Indian and an intimate knowledge o f the South African. I have The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131  no hesitation in saying that the Indian is comparat ively the most extravagant 
and bears no relation to the general economic condi tion of the people. The 
best South African lawyers — and they are lawyers o f great ability — dare not 
charge the fees the lawyers in India do. Fifteen gu ineas is almost a top fee for 
legal opinion. Several thousand rupees have been kn own to have been charged 
in India. There is something sinful in a system und er which it is possible for a 
lawyer to earn from fifty thousand to one lakh rupe es per month. Legal 
practice is not — ought not to be — a speculative b usiness. The best legal talent 
must be available to the poorest at reasonable rate s. But we have copied and 
improved upon the practice of the English lawyers. Englishmen find the climate 
of India trying. The habits imbued under a cold and  severe climate are retained 
in India, ample margin is kept for frequent migrati ons to the hills and to their 
island home and an equally ample margin is kept for  the education of an 
exclusive and aristocratic type for their children.  The scale of their fees is 
naturally therefore pitched very high. But India ca nnot bear the heavy drain. 
We fancy that, in order to feel the equals of these  English lawyers, we must 
charge the same killing fees that the English do. I t would be a sad day for India 
if it has to inherit the English scale and the Engl ish tastes so utterly unsuitable 
to the Indian environment. Any lawyer looking at th e law courts and the 
profession of law from the view-points I have ventu red to suggest cannot keep 
coming to the conclusion that if he wants to serve the nation to the best of his 
ability, the first condition of service is suspensi on of his practice. He can come 
to a different conclusion only if he successfully c hanges the statement of facts I 
have made. 
Young India,  6-10-1920, pp. 2-3 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132   
29. COBBLERS V. LAWYERS 
[From "Notes"] 
Babu Motilal Ghosh,* whose mind is fresh like that of a youth, though he is too 
frail even to move, summoned Maulana Mohomed Ali an d me chiefly to urge us 
to invite the lawyers to the Congress fold and in e ffect to restore them to their 
original status of unquestioned leadership of publi c opinion. Both the Maulana 
and I told him that we did want the lawyers to work  for the Congress, but that 
those who would not suspend practice could not and should not become 
leaders. Motibabu said that my mention of cobblers in the same breath as 
lawyers had offended some of them. I felt sorry to hear this. I remember the 
note in these pages, and it was certainly not writt en to offend. I have said 
many hard things about lawyers, but I have never co nsidered them to be guilty 
of caste prejudices. I am sure that the lawyers hav e appreciated the spirit of 
my remark. I hope I am never guilty of putting a st ing in any of my writings. But 
I certainly meant no offence in the paragraph refer red to by Motibabu. Having 
been myself a lawyer, I could not so far forget mys elf as wantonly to offend 
members of the same profession. Nor can I forget th e brilliant and unique 
services rendered to the country by lawyers such as  Pherozeshah Mehta, 
Ranade, Taiyabjee, Telang, Manamohan Ghose, Krishna -swami Iyer, not to 
speak of the living ones. 
When no one else had the courage to speak, they wer e the voice of the people 
and guardians of their country's liberty. And, if t oday the majority of them are 
no longer accepted as leaders of the people, it is because different qualities 
are required for leadership from what they have exh ibited hitherto. Courage, 
endurance, fearlessness and above all self-sacrific e are the qualities required 
of our leaders. A person belonging to the suppresse d classes exhibiting these 
qualities in their fullness would certainly be able  to lead the nation; whereas 
the most finished orator, if he have not these qual ities, must fail. 
And it has been a matter of keen satisfaction to me  to find the lawyers all over 
India, who have not been able to suspend practice, readily assenting to the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  proposition and being content to work as humble cam p- followers. A general 
will find his occupation gone, if there were no cam p-followers in his army. 
"But," said Motibabu, "there is a great deal of int olerance that has crept into 
our movement. Non-co- operators insult those lawyer s who have not suspended 
practice." I fear that the charge is true to a cert ain extent. Intolerance is itself 
a form of violence and an obstacle to the growth of  a true democratic spirit. 
Arrogant assumption of superiority on the part of a  non-co-operator who has 
undergone a little bit of sacrifice or put on Khadi  is the greatest danger to the 
movement. A non-co-operator is nothing if he is not  humble. When self-
satisfaction creeps over a man, he has ceased to gr ow and therefore has 
become unfit for freedom. He who offers a little sa crifice from a lowly and 
religious spirit quickly realizes the miserable lit tleness of it. Once on the path 
of sacrifice, we find out the measure of our selfis hness, and must continually 
wish to give more and not be satisfied till there i s a complete self-surrender. 
And this knowledge of so little attempted and still  less done must keep us 
humble and tolerant. It is our exclusiveness and th e easy self-satisfaction that 
have certainly kept many a waverer away from us. Ou r motto must ever be 
conversion by gentle persuasion and a constant appe al to the head and the 
heart. We must therefore be ever courteous and pati ent with those who do not 
see eye to eye with us. We must resolutely refuse t o consider our opponents as 
enemies of the country. 
Lawyers and others who believe in non-cooperation b ut have not, from any 
cause, been able to non-co-operate in matters appli cable to them, can 
certainly do silent work as lieutenants in the matt er of Swadeshi. It requires 
the largest number of earnest workers. There is no reason why a practising 
lawyer should not make Khadi fashionable by wearing  it even in courts. There is 
no reason why he and his family should not spin dur ing leisure hours. I have 
mentioned one out of a variety of things that can b e done by practising lawyers 
for the attainment of Swaraj. I hope, therefore, th at no practising lawyer and 
for that matter no co-operating student will keep h imself from serving the 
movement in every way open to him. All cannot becom e leaders, but all can be The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134  bearers. And non-co- operators, I hope, will always  make it easy for such 
countrymen to offer and render service. 
Young India,  29-9-1921, p. 305 at p. 306 
 
1 Well-known, old Indian Nationalist; ex-Editor of the Amrita Bazar Patrika  of Calcutta. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135   
30. HOW MANY LAWYERS AND STUDENTS HELP 
[From "Notes"] 
Everywhere I have been asked whether lawyers and st udents who do not carry 
out the Congress resolution affecting them can help  the movement in any other 
way. The question is rather strange for it assumes that if a lawyer or a student 
cannot non-co-operate as such, he cannot help at al l. There are undoubtedly 
hundreds of students and scores of lawyers who are not suspending their normal 
studies or their practice, as the case may be, only  out of weakness. A lawyer 
who cannot suspend practice can certainly help with  money, he can give his 
spare hours to public service, he can introduce hon esty and fair dealings in his 
profession, he can cease to consider clients as fit  prey for his pecuniary 
ambition, he can cease to have anything to do with touts, he can promote 
settlement of cases by private arbitration, he can at least do spinning himself 
for one or two hours per day, he can simplify the l ife of his family, he can 
induce the members of the family to do spinning rel igiously for a certain time 
daily, he can adopt for himself and his family the use of Khaddar. These are 
only some of the things that can be done by every l awyer. Because a man 
cannot or will not carry out a particular part of t he non-co-operation 
programme, he. need not be shy about the other item s. One thing a practising 
lawyer may not do; he may no longer figure as a lea der on public platforms. He 
must be content to be a silent worker. What I have said about practising 
lawyers applies to students also who cannot or will  not withdraw from schools. 
Most of our volunteers are drawn from the student w orld. Volunteering is a 
privilege and a student who has not been able to wi thdraw from Government 
schools cannot receive privileges from the nation. They too must be content to 
be unambitious servants of the nation. Even if we c annot completely boycott 
schools and colleges, we must destroy their prestig e. That prestige has almost 
gone and is daily decreasing. And we must do nothin g that would restore their 
prestige till they are nationalized and answer the requirements of the nation. 
Young India,  23-2-1921, p. 57 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136   
31. PRACTISING LAWYERS 
The  Patrika  devotes a leading article to an examination of the  position taken 
up by me regarding lawyers and strongly dissents fr om it. The  Patrika thinks 
that, practising lawyers may continue to lead publi c opinion on Congress 
platform. I respectfully suggest that any such devi ation from the non-co- 
operation resolution will be a serious mistake. I a m aware that the  Patrika  
thinks that the Congress has not called upon all la wyers to suspend practice. I 
venture to differ from the interpretation. The reso lution calls upon all lawyers 
to make greater effort to suspend practice. And, in  my opinion, those lawyers 
who have not yet succeeded in suspending their prac tice, cannot expect to hold 
office in any Congress organization or lead opinion  on Congress platforms. Will 
titled men be elected as office-bearers, although t hey may not have given up 
their titles? If we do not face the issues boldly, we stand in danger of 
corrupting the movement. We must exact corresponden ce between precept and 
practice. I hold that a lawyer president of Provinc ial Committee cannot lead his 
province to victory, if he does not suspend his pra ctice. He simply will not carry 
weight. I have noticed this again and again during my tours. Lawyers, who have 
hitherto led public opinion, have either renounced practice or public life. 
The  Patrika  errs in comparing practising lawyers to merchants.  Not many 
merchants have yet led public opinion, but where th ey have come forward, 
they have certainly renounced dealing in foreign cl oth. The public will not, I am 
glad to be able to say, tolerate divorce between pr ofession and practice. But 
not to seek, or give up public position is one thin g, and to help the movement 
as a weak but humble follower is another. Thousands  are unable to carry out 
the full advice of the Congress and are yet eagerly  helping as silent camp 
followers. That is the position that practising law yers should take up. It will be 
honourable, dignified and consistent. We may not, i n our progress towards 
Swaraj, consider the lead of any class or individua l as essential to success. 
The  Patrika  goes beyond the scope of the paragraph of  Young India  when it 
presents as an alternative to suspension, derision and insult. He would be an The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137  unworthy non-co-operator who would deride or insult  a lawyer, or anyone else 
who is too weak or otherwise unable to respond to t he Congress call. Because 
we may not elect such persons as officebearers, we may not be intolerant and 
insulting to them. On the contrary, those who are h onestly unable to follow the 
Congress resolution are in every way,- worthy of sy mpathy. 
Nor is the  Patrika  right in thinking that, before practising lawyers cease to be 
leaders, there should be a complete boycott of law courts; and as that is 
impossible without a rebel government, and as we do  not contemplate 
rebellion, practising lawyers may safely lead opini on as hitherto. There is an 
obvious fallacy underlying this suggestion. Carried  to its logical extent, it would 
mean that no leader need practise what he preaches.  The fact is that, although 
law courts may not be completely boycotted by the s acrifice of Messrs. Nehru 
and Das, and by our refusal to give any public stat us to practising lawyers and 
others who have not carried out the Congress resolu tion, we have successfully 
demolished the prestige of these institutions, and,  therefore to that extent, of 
the Government. If we restore titled men, lawyers a nd others to their status 
even though they have not responded, we commit nati onal suicide. Lastly, the 
Patrika  is wrong in arguing that the Congress has called f or suspension in order 
to secure the lawyers' services. The motive as the preamble of the original 
resolution clearly states, is to undermine the Gove rnment's prestige by the non-
co-operation of parties to the institutions on whic h the prestige is built. 
Young India , 30-3-1921, pp. 98-99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138   
32. A PROTEST 
"The Editor,  Young India , Ahmedabad 
Sir, 
The other day when you left Jubbulpore for Cuttack,  you had an interview with Gunada 
Babu at Calcutta. I have seen that interview in the  Independent of the 2nd instant, which 
appears to have borrowed it from the  Servant.  I refer you to a statement in that article 
attributed to you. 
It runs thus: 
'At Jubbulpore, from where he (Mahatma Gandhi) was coming, two young men (sons of rich 
merchants) were leading the movement very successfu lly against a whole host of lawyers. 
Being businessmen, they were carrying on the work o f organization most effectively.' 
This statement is incorrect. 
The facts are: 
These young men are not merchants. They are foundat ion-stones of the British 
Government in India. They are Malguzars. Their trad e is to realize Rs. 100 from the poor 
tenants, give the Government Rs. 55 and keep Rs. 45  with themselves as commission and 
guarantee to recover the money even in the worst ti mes. What a non-co-operation with 
the Government! If these Malguzars are not co-opera tors, no one else is a co- operator. 
The Malguzari system was an invention of Todarmal b y which means people could be 
systematically dominated by the rulers through thei r mercenaries. These mercenaries are 
the Malguzars, who, you have said, are leading the movement. 
If a lawyer who has not suspended his practice is n ot a proper person to be an office-
bearer, certainly a Malguzar too should not be an o ffice-bearer. A Malguzar is more 
attached to the Government than a lawyer. 
In Jubbulpore these young men, Malguzars, are not l eading the movement. 
The movement in Jubbulpore is being led by the lawy ers and the whole host of them are 
supporting it. 
You did not give sufficient time to Jubbulpore, els e the members of the Bar would have 
gladly seen you and discussed the matter with you. I fully believe that it will never be 
wealth which will lead the movement. It will always  be the intellect and I hope you will 
correct the wrong impression created by the intervi ew. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139  I suspended my practice in November last. 
I am, etc., 
G. C. Varma 
Bar-at-Law." 
Jubbulpore, 10-4-21 
I am glad of Mr. Varma's energetic protest. And I h ope that the lawyers of 
Jubbulpore are leading the N.C.O. Movement. I must however adhere to my 
statement that the lawyers were conspicuous by thei r absence on the day I 
visited Jubbulpore, and that the two young men refe rred to by me, were in 
charge of the whole management. That they are sons of land-holders is true 
enough. Theirs today is cooperation of necessity. T he Congress has not yet 
called upon land-holders to surrender their lands t o the Government nor is it 
ever likely to. These youngmen, like some land-hold ers' sons elsewhere are 
taking an honourable part in the national uplift an d they deserve every 
encouragement from lawyers. There are no two opinio ns about the fact that 
intellect rather than riches will lead. It might eq ually be admitted by the 
correspondent that the heart rather than the intell ect will eventually lead. 
Character, not brains, will count at the crucial mo ment. And I fancied that 
these young men showed character. I should be sorry  to find otherwise.  
Young India,  20-4-1921, pp. 127-28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140   
33. PRACTISING LAWYERS 
[From "Notes"] 
Letters continue to pour in regarding practising la wyers holding offices in 
Congress Committees. Ever since my arrival in Benga l, the question has been 
still more pressingly put to me. An ex-student from  Dhubri writes to ask 
whether I expect the movement to succeed under the leadership of practising 
lawyers. I cannot conceive the possibility of the m ovement, which is one of 
self-sacrifice, succeeding if it is led by lawyers who do not believe in self-
sacrifice. I have not hesitated to advise that elec tors rather than be ably led by 
such lawyers should be content to be more humbly gu ided. I can certainly 
imagine a brave and believing weaver or cobbler mor e effectively leading than 
a timid and sceptical "lawyer. Success depends upon  bravery, sacrifice, truth, 
love and faith; not on legal acumen, calculation, d iplomacy, hate and unbelief. 
Young India,  25-8-1921, p. 265 at p. 266 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141   
34. ABOUT LAWYERS 
[From "Notes"] 
The Jamnalal Bajaj Fund of one lakh of rupees that was given last year for the 
support of lawyers who had suspended practice as a result of the Nagpur 
resolution is nearly, as it was intended to be, exh austed. The lawyers cannot go 
back to practice with any show of decency, and I am  sure that many will not 
countenance even the idea of a return when the coun try is showing such 
wonderful example of self-sacrifice. 
But it would not be proper to leave the lawyers to their own resources. I would 
therefore certainly suggest to the Provincial Commi ttees that they should take 
up the burden subject to assistance from the Centra l Fund, if it was at all found 
necessary. The rearrangement should be quickly made  so as to avoid suspense 
and delay in the even tenor of national work. 
This, however, is the least among the difficulties that surround the lawyer class 
at the present moment. They are eager to take part in a national awakening. 
The spirit is willing, the flesh is weak. I still f eel that practising lawyers cannot 
lead. They cannot but weaken a movement which deman ds complete, almost 
reckless, sacrifice. The whole cause can be lost if  top men weaken at a 
supreme crisis. But the Congress has purposely open ed an honourable door for 
them. The original draft was perhaps uncertain as t o any but full non-co-
operators being entitled to sign the volunteer pled ge. The conditions for them 
are easy of fulfillment, being mostly matters of be lief. The use of Khadi may 
cause some little inconvenience at first, but I fee l sure that they will not mind 
it, if otherwise they believe in the requirements o f the pledge. And, as among 
non-co- operators' imprisonment covers a multitude of defects, practising 
lawyers who go through the fire of imprisonment wil l by that one fact come to 
occupy the position of honour which once was theirs . There is also the general 
resolution appealing to and inviting all including full co-operators to take up 
such activities as do not admit of any sacrifice or  any difference of opinion. I 
hope therefore that lawyers will, to the best of th eir ability and opportunity, The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  respond to the country's call in many of the variou s ways open to them. Where 
all are expected to help none should be found wanti ng or indifferent. Non-co-
operators on their part instead of priding themselv es upon their achievements, 
should be humble enough to receive all the aid that  might be rendered to the 
country's cause. The spirit of toleration should ta ke the place of intoleration 
and exclusiveness. It can do no credit to the movem ent or good to the cause if 
a man, who has nothing or little to sacrifice, clai ms, by reason of his putting on 
Khadi, the right of slighting practising lawyers or  others who may be honestly 
and according to their lights serving the country i n various ways. Whatever is 
offered upon the altar of service to the motherland  with a willing heart must 
be thankfully received. 
Young India,  12-1-1922, p. 9 at p. 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143   
35. THE SATYAGRAHI LAWYERS 
[Editor's Note: As a protest against the passing of  the Anarchical and Revolutionary Crimes 
Act (XI of 1919), known popularly as the Rowlatt Ac t, certain barristers and pleaders 
practising in the Courts of the Ahmedabad District joined a movement called the 
Satyagraha Sabha and signed a pledge whereby they u ndertook "to refuse civilly to obey 
these laws (viz., the Rowlatt Act) and such other l aws as a committee to be hereafter 
appointed may think fit". B. C. Kennedy, the Distri ct Judge of Ahmedabad, called upon 
these barristers and pleaders to explain their cond uct in signing the pledge. The 
respondents offered an explanation of their conduct  which the District Judge considered 
unsatisfactory. On a reference from the District Ju dge, the High Court of Bombay issued 
notice against the respondent barristers and pleade rs to show cause why they should not 
be dealt with under the disciplinary jurisdiction o f the High Court for taking the pledge. 
The notice came up for hearing before the Hon'ble C hief Justice Sir Norman Macleod and 
Mr. Justice Heaton and Mr. Justice Kajiji. On heari ng Bahadurji, acting Advocate-General 
who appeared in support of the notice and the Couns el for the respondent barristers and 
pleaders who appeared to show cause the High Court delivered judgment on 15-10-1919. It 
was held by the High Court that the barristers and pleaders had, by signing the pledge, 
rendered themselves amenable to the disciplinary ju risdiction of the High Court. The High 
Court further held that under the circumstances it was not necessary to take any 
disciplinary action against the respondents but a m ere warning to them was enough. The 
judgment of the High Court is reported in 22  Bombay Law Reporter  at page 13.] 
The judgment of the (Bombay) High Court in the case  of the Satyagrahi lawyers 
is, to say the least, highly unsatisfactory. It has  shirked the issue. The logical 
outcome of the judgment should have been punishment  and not a 
postponement of it. The lawyers in question had sho wn no repentance. So far 
as the public know, they will be ready to offer civ il disobedience should the 
occasion arise. The issue having been raised, the l awyers did not ask for mercy 
but a clear decision. As it is, they do not know wh ere they are. 
The learned Judges have laid down principles of leg al conduct which, in our 
humble opinion, are open to question. For instance,  what is the meaning of 
"those who live by the law must keep the law"? If i t means that no lawyer may 
ever commit a civil breach without incurring the di spleasure of the court, it The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144  means utter stagnation. Lawyers are the persons mos t able to appreciate the 
dangers of bad legislation and it must be with them  a sacred duty by 
committing civil breach to prevent a criminal breac h. Lawyers should be 
guardians of law and liberty and as such are intere sted in keeping the statute 
book of the country 'pure and undefiled'. But the J udges of the Bombay High 
Court have presented to them a mercenary view of th eir profession and have 
even confounded the functions of judges and lawyers . The only escape from the 
intolerable situation created by the judgment is fo r the respondents to have 
the case restored to the board, reargued and to ask  for a final decision. 
Fortunately the Judges have left the course open to  the Satyagrahi lawyers. 
Young India,  22-10-1919, p. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145   
36. MYSORE LAWYERS 
Several Mysore lawyers who had taken part in the My sore Satyagraha struggle 
have been disbarred by the Mysore Chief Court. The last victim is Shri H. C. 
Dasappa, a most respected Mysorean and a practition er of twenty years' 
standing. Serious as the disbarring of a member bel onging to a liberal 
profession must be, such cases have-happened before  now on insufficient or 
purely political grounds. Such injustices have to b e borne with resignation and 
fortitude. But the order of the Chief Judge in Shri  Dasappa's case as reported in  
The Hindu has made for me most painful reading. Shri Dasappa had the 
hardihood to defy a magistrate's order not to addre ss meetings in a part of 
Mysore, and had the equal hardihood under my instru ctions to advise Satyagrahi 
prisoners, to boycott the departmental inquiry by J ustice Nageswara Iyer. For 
these grave offences Shri Dasappa has been disbarre d forever. He will be 
reduced to penury, if the Judges could help it and if their verdict has any 
potency beyond the paper on which it is written. Sh ri Dasappa becomes a man 
without a character to be despised and shunned by s ociety. I happen to know 
Shri Dasappa personally. I hold him to be a man of spotless character and 
unimpeachable honesty. He has been manfully strivin g to practise non-violence 
to the best of his ability. He has done what many p atriot lawyers or no lawyers 
have done in British India. And nowadays the judges  take no notice of their 
conduct, and the public have made of them heroes. A dvocate Bhulabhai has 
been Advocate-General of the Bombay High Court. He has defied laws. So has 
Advocate Munshi, and so has Chakravarti Rajagopalac hari. They have not been 
disbarred. Two of them have been Ministers in their  Provinces. Public inquiries 
have been boycotted before now with impunity. Neith er the honour nor the 
character of those who have brought about such boyc otts have been impugned. 
In my opinion the Judges of the Mysore Court have f orgotten themselves in 
delivering their judgment. Shri Dasappa has not suf fered. He will rise in the 
estimation of the people of Mysore. But I make bold  to say the Mysore Judges 
have suffered by allowing themselves to be carried away by prejudice. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146  Such travesty of justice has happened before now. A  Durban Magistrate who 
was carried away by some stupid prejudice had conde mned an innocent man. 
His judgment was reversed, and the Supreme Court co ndemned it in such 
scathing terms that the Magistrate had to be remove d. The Judges of the 
martial law days in the Punjab were not removed, bu t many were thoroughly 
disgraced because they had pronounced judgments whi ch could not be 
supported by evidence before them. This Mysore judg ment is worse than the 
Punjab judgments. Then there was panic. Murders had  been committed by the 
mob, and eminent men were tried not by ordinary cou rts but by martial law 
tribunals. In Mysore nothing of the kind has happen ed. The Chief Judge's order 
is a cool and calculated attack on the honour of a man who could not defend 
himself against reckless statements from the Bench.  Judges sometimes forget, 
as these Mysore gentlemen have done, that there is the bar of public opinion 
which is no respecter of persons. 
My condolence and pity go out to the Judges who hav e delivered a judgment 
which, let me hope, in their cooler moments they wi ll regret. For Shri Dasappa 
and his colleagues who have been disbarred I have n othing but congratulations. 
I would ask them to turn the punishment into a bles sing. It is well that they 
cannot appear before judges who can be so grossly p rejudiced as the Mysore 
Judges have proved themselves to be. Let these lawy ers be proud of their 
poverty which will be probably their lot now. Let t hem remember Thoreau's 
saying that possession of riches is a crime and pov erty a virtue under an unjust 
administration. This is an eternal maxim for Satyag rahis. The disbarred lawyers 
have a rare opportunity of so remodelling their liv es that they can always be 
above want. Let them remember that practice of law ought not to mean more 
taking daily than, say, a village carpenter's wage.  Let them make redoubled 
efforts to produce such a state of affairs in Mysor e that the travesty of the 
nature I have described may become impossible. It i s no pleasure to me to have 
to write as strongly as I have done. But I could do  no less if I was to serve 
Truth. 
Harijan, 13-7-1940, p. 205 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147   
37. SHRI DASAPPA'S CASE 
(Originally appeared under the title “A Note” by M.  D.) 
Perhaps a brief note of facts is necessary to expla in Gandhiji's remarks on the 
extraordinary order of the Mysore Chief Judge direc ting Shri H. C. Dasappa to 
be struck off the rolls of the High Court. The firs t charge against Shri Dasappa 
was that he had disobeyed the Kolar District Magist rate's order prohibiting him 
from addressing meetings in a certain area. The oth er and, in the Judge's 
opinion more serious, charge was that Shri Dasappa as President of the Mysore 
Congress advised the Congressmen not to participate  in an inquiry appointed by 
Government. The inquiry was to be made into serious  allegations of torture 
made by the Congress against police officials. It w as entrusted to a Judge of 
the Mysore Court. The Mysore Congress, acting on Ga ndhiji's advice, decided 
not to participate in the inquiry, as it was not of  an impartial and independent 
character. This action on the part of Shri Dasappa as President of the Congress 
could by no stretch of imagination be described as having anything to do with 
his conduct as a lawyer, but it was regarded by the  Chief Justice as "a defect of 
character unfitting him to be an advocate of the Hi gh Court". 
He was asked by the High Court to explain his condu ct. He naturally questioned 
the procedure as irrelevant, but described in a sta tement the circumstances 
leading to the decision for non- participation in t he inquiry. This is what Shri 
Dasappa said in the course of his statement: 
"The Government appointed Justice A. R. Nageswara I yer to carry on 
what was admittedly a departmental inquiry, not ope n to the press 
or the public. Attempts made to have the inquiry po stponed with a 
view to arrive at an amicable settlement in the mat ter, were of no 
avail. It was then that the Mysore Congress was adv ised by Mahatma 
Gandhi to negotiate for a change in the personnel o f the inquiry... 
The opponent submits that the inquiry was only a de partmental one 
and there was no court constituted for the purpose.  There was no 
legal obligation whatever on the part of Congressme n to tender The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  evidence at the inquiry. The moral obligation would  only arise in 
case the tribunal was satisfactory." 
It is these words that provoked the ire of the Chie f Justice, and in criticizing 
them he has made certain statements of astounding a udacity: "To make a foul 
allegation against one's neighbour and to refuse ei ther to withdraw it or 
substantiate it, was a conduct to which no decent-m inded man who had not 
lost all sense of fairness would descend or advise others to descend." Again: "I 
understand from the respondent's statement that the  aim of his political 
association is to get responsible government establ ished in this State. This is a 
form of government which many of us would admire, a nd all of us, who are not 
judges, are at liberty to advocate. This is not an occasion on which it would be 
proper to discuss the advantages or disadvantages o f that form of government. 
But I think we shall agree that that form of govern ment can have no chance of 
success in any country in which there is not a gene ral spirit of fairness 
throughout the country. The respondent, in this mat ter of deterring his 
followers from withdrawing or substantiating their charges against their fellow-
subjects, has shown himself devoid of that spirit o f fairness. He has stated in 
one part of his statement that he did so at the dic tates of a person outside the 
State. No man fit to be an advocate of this Court c an submit his conscience to 
anyone else in that way. It is no excuse for such c onduct." Again, the Chief 
Justice, proceeding, observed, says  The Hindu  report, that, "it was surprising 
that the respondent, the professed votary of truth,  should have behaved in 
such a way. Perhaps it is because truth is so often  degraded in this country into 
nothing more than a political catchword that the re spondent has lost all 
appreciation of its meaning and value. It was a sad  thing indeed for anyone to 
have so degraded himself and to have lowered his mo ral standards. It would not 
be fair to require other members of this honourable  profession to associate in 
the work of the courts with a man who had allowed h is morals to be so 
debased, nor would it be safe to allow litigants to  allow their cases in his 
hands. In my opinion it is quite clear that the res pondent has become by defect 
of character unfit to remain an advocate of this co urt." 
Harijan, 13-7-1940, pp. 205-206 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149   
38. BABU KALINATH ROY 
By the courtesy of the  Young India  Syndicate, composed as it is largely of 
Satyagrahis, since the deportation of Mr. Horniman I have been permitted to 
supervise the editing of this journal. I asked for such supervision because I was 
anxious that nothing should appear in it that was i n any way inconsistent with 
the general principles of Satyagraha, i.e., of trut h and nonviolence to person or 
property. In pursuance of the plan I have hitherto also written some leading 
articles in the usual editorial style. But for this  issue I wish to take the sole 
responsibility, if there be any, of writings on the  case of Babu Kalinath Roy, the 
editor of the now defunct  Tribune.  Personally, I consider that even from the 
point of view of the authorities, there is nothing wrong or out of the way in 
what I am about to say. But lest they may think oth erwise, it is due to the 
public and to the  Young India  Syndicate that the authorship of this writing 
should be known. 
With reference to the Punjab disturbances, by my co mplete silence over them I 
have allowed myself to be misunderstood by many fri ends and, as is now well 
known, I have been deprived of the co-operation, th ough never the friendship, 
of so respected and renowned a leader and co-worker  as Sannyasi Swami Shri 
Shraddhanandaji. But I still believe that I have do ne well in persisting in my 
silence, for I had no conclusive data to go upon. N o public declaration of mine 
could have in any way affected for the better the a ction of the authorities. But 
Babu Kalinath Roy's case materially alters the situ ation. In my humble opinion 
the case represents a manifest and cruel wrong. I h ave not the honour of 
knowing him personally. When I took up the judgment  in the case, I approached 
it with a feeling that there would be at least a  prima facie  case made out 
against the accused on some isolated passages in hi s writings. But as I 
proceeded with it, the impression grew on me that i t was a kind of special 
pleading in order to justify a conviction and heavy  sentence. In order to check 
myself I took up the numbers of the Tribune  referred to in the judgment and on 
which the serious charge against Babu Kalinath Roy under Sec. 124 A of the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150  Indian Penal Code was based, and a careful reading of everyone of the writings 
in the Tribune  more than confirmed the impression produced by a p erusal of 
the judgment and led me to think that the martial l aw court had allowed its 
judgment to be warped and clouded by the atmosphere  of suspicion and 
distrust surrounding it. The best proof of my state ment must be the judgment 
and the writings on which it is based. They are the refore reproduced in this 
issue in full. I have prefaced the judgment and the  offending articles in the  
Tribune  with extracts from the other numbers, showing the whole tendency 
and tone of the writings, from the beginning of Apr il just after the Delhi affairs. 
They are not extracts torn from their context, but they are representative of 
the issues of the  Tribune published after the 30th March last. The dominant 
note pervading all the issues is that the agitation  against the Rowlatt 
Legislation should be conducted with sobriety, trut h and non-violence. I could 
nowhere trace in them ill-will, either against Engl ishmen in general, or against 
the English Government in particular. Indeed, it wo uld be difficult to surpass 
the  Tribune  in calmness and self- restraint in the face of cir cumstances brought 
about by the Delhi affairs. 
This is the test that the Special Tribunal put befo re itself for its guidance: 
"You will have to consider whether this publication  was or was not a calm and temperate 
discussion of the events that had occurred. The peo ple have a right to discuss any 
grievances that they may have to complain of, but t hey must not do it in a way to excite 
tumult. . . . You may point out to the Government t heir errors. . . . The question is always 
as to the manner. A question is made whether they ( writings) show an intention to instruct 
by appealing to the judgment or to irritate and exc ite to sedition. In other words, whether 
they appeal to the sense of the passions." 
Judged by the standard set before the court the art icles complained against do 
not warrant a conviction. They cannot excite tumult , when daily during a 
period of exceeding stress, the writer asks his rea ders to refrain from all 
violence telling them in unmistakable terms that di sturbance can only damage 
their cause. The editor has continuously appealed t o the judgment of the 
readers by asking them not to prejudge, but to awai t the results of an inquiry 
which he persistently asked for. The court's discus sion of the passages and The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  articles fails to convince one of the propriety of its decision. The court has 
resented the use of the term "Delhi Martyrs" in the  issues of the 6th and the 8th 
April. When you read the contents under the heading s, the one has reference to 
prayers at the Jumma Masjid and the other to a reli ef and Memorial Fund. The 
crime in the language of the court was that "the ac cused chose to emphasize 
the memorial for martyrs and not the relief," and t he court proceeds, "the 
inference from this is plain." The plain inference from this is that whoever put 
the heading felt that those who were shot down at D elhi were so dealt with, 
without sufficient cause. Why this should be consid ered seditious passes 
comprehension. And if such inference shows, as it u ndoubtedly does, that the 
action of the Magistrate who gave the order for fir ing was wrong, is the drawing 
of such a deduction to be punished? We are told by the court that one may 
point out to Government their errors. I submit that  Mr. Roy justly points out the 
error of one of the local authorities. (Incidentall y I may mention that there is 
not such editorial headings as "Memorial to Delhi M artyrs" referred to in the 
judgment.) 
The next indictment consists in the editor having u sed the word "dupe" in 
connection with the action of some Honorary Magistr ates and Municipal 
Commissioners who tried to dissuade shopkeepers fro m closing their shops. This 
is what the article describing the demonstration of  the 6th April says: 
"The masses of India are no fools... That they cann ot be successfully duped ought to be 
clear from the very ignominious failure in this ver y case of certain Municipal 
Commissioners and Honorary Magistrates and several others who went round the city 
trying to persuade shopkeepers to keep their shops open."   
This is a bare statement of fact as the accused kne w it. Then follows an 
examination of the other articles as to which the g ravamen of the charge is the 
assertion of the editor that the action of the Punj ab Government was both 
"unjust and unwarranted", and that it had "exposed itself to the severest 
criticisms at the bar of public opinion". Here, too , the editor has, after having 
reasoned to the reader, led him to the conclusion t o which he himself has 
arrived, — a procedure held to be entirely justifia ble under the test accepted 
by the court itself. The wrong would undoubtedly be  if the editor had misstated The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  facts. But in every case, as would appear from the articles reproduced 
herewith, the writer has fortified himself with wha t he believed to be facts, 
and which, so far as the judgment allows us to see,  have not been 
controverted. 
The other two articles referred to by the court are  "Delhi Tragedy" in the issue 
of the 9th, and "Blazing Indiscretion" in the issue  of the 10th April. The "Delhi 
Tragedy" is a dispassionate review of the tragedy o f the 30th March, and ends 
with an exhortation to the Government of India to a ppoint a public inquiry. 
"Blazing Indiscretion" is undoubtedly an indictment  against Sir Michael O'Dwyer 
about his speech before the Punjab Legislative Coun cil. The speech, analysed in 
the article in question, certainly contains more th an one "blazing indiscretion". 
The truth of the matter is that the wrong man was i n the wrong box; the right 
man to have been in the box of the accused should c ertainly have been Sir 
Michael O'Dwyer. Had he not made inflammatory and i rritative speeches, had 
he not belittled leaders, had he not in a most crue l manner flouted public 
opinion and had he not arrested Drs. Kitchlew and S atyapal, the history of the 
last two months would have been differently written . My purpose, now is not to 
prove Sir Michael O'Dwyer's guilt, but it is to pro ve Babu Kalinath Roy's 
complete innocence, and to show that he has suffere d a grievous wrong in the 
name of British justice, and I do not hesitate to a sk Englishman as I ask my 
countrymen to join me in the prayer for Babu Kalina th Roy's immediate release. 
As Mr. Norton had shown, and quite recently Sir P. S. Shivaswamy Aiyer, a 
Martial Law Tribunal was never contemplated to be o ne for the trial of cases 
involving delicate interpretations of difficult sec tions of ordinary enactments. 
Such tribunals are properly designed only for summa ry justice being meted out 
to men who are caught red-handed in acts of rebelli on or crimes which mean, if 
left unchecked, complete disruption of society. 
One thing more remains to be considered. Why should  this case be singled out 
for special treatment when it is highly likely that  an independent and impartial 
committee is likely to be appointed to overhaul the  Martial Law administration 
in the Punjab and so revise the sentences passed by  the Martial Law Court? My The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  answer is that Mr. Roy's case does not admit of any  doubt about it. It is capable 
of being immediately considered by the Government a nd if the articles on 
which the charge against Mr. Roy was based do not a mount to sedition — as I 
hold they do not — he should be immediately set fre e. Moreover time is an 
important consideration in this case, for Mr, Roy, as Mr. Andrews has pointed 
out, has a very delicate constitution. 
Young India,  11-6-1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154   
39. LALA RADHA KRISHNA'S CASE 
When Babu Kalinath Roy's case was taken up in these  columns, I was asked by 
several Punjabi friends why I had not taken up Lala  Radha Krishna's case which 
was equally strong, if not stronger than Babu Kalin ath Roy's. I respectfully told 
the friends that I did not know Lala Radha Krishna' s case and that I would be 
glad to study it if the papers were sent to me. I h ave now received the papers, 
namely, the charge, the defence statement, the judg ment, Lala Radha Krishna's 
petitions and the translations of portions of the  Pratap from which the 
statements in the charge-sheet were taken. These ar e all published in this 
issue.* The reader, therefore, has complete data fo r coming to a definite 
conclusion. 
In my humble opinion the judgment is a travesty of justice. The case is in some 
respects worse even than Babu Kalinath Roy's. There  are no startling headlines 
as in the  Tribune  case. The accused has been sentenced not on a sect ion of the 
Indian Penal Code but on a rule temporarily framed as a war measure. My 
meaning will be clear when the reader has the rule itself before him. Let me 
remind him that it is not a rule passed by the Legi slative Council. It is a rule 
promulgated by the Government under the powers gran ted to it by the Defence 
of India Act. Here is the whole of it: 
"(1) Whoever by words, either spoken or written or by signs, or by visible 
representations, or otherwise publishes or circulat es any statement, rumour or 
report— 
a) which is false and which he has no reasonable groun d to believe to be 
true, with intent to cause, or which is likely to c ause, fear or alarm to 
the public or to any section of the public; or 
b) with intent to jeopardize, or which is likely to je opardize, the success of 
His Majesty's forces by land or sea, or the success  of the forces of any 
power in alliance with His Majesty; or The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155  c) with intent to prejudice, or which is likely to pre judice, His Majesty's 
relations with Foreign Powers; or 
d) with intent to promote, or which is likely to promo te, feelings of enmity 
and hatred between different classes of His Majesty 's subjects: 
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either des cription for a term which 
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable  to fine, or if it is proved 
that he did so with intent to assist the King's ene mies, with death, 
transportation for life or imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years. 
(2) No court shall take cognisance of any offence a gainst this rule save upon 
complaint made by order of, or under authority from , the Governor-General in 
Council, the Local Government or some officer empow ered by the Governor-
General in Council in this behalf." 
It will be noticed that the rule is so drastic that  an offence against it could not 
be taken cognisance of except under special orders of the Government or some 
officers appointed in this behalf. 
Let us turn to the indictment. Now a charge-sheet s hould contain no avoidable 
inaccuracies and no innuendoes. But we find that th is indictment contains 
material inaccuracies. One of the three statements claimed by the Prosecution 
to be false is that the accused said in his paper t hat "they (the crowd) were 
fired at in Delhi without any cause". Now this is a  dangerous inaccuracy. The 
passage in question reads, "they were,  at least from their point of view,  fired 
at without any cause." The words italicized have be en omitted from the charge 
thus giving a different meaning to the writing from  the one intended by the 
writer. From the third item too the relevant portio n which alters the accused's 
meaning in his favour has been omitted. The third c ount concludes, "the people 
threw stones and brickbats at the time when the aut horities had already taken 
the initiative." The relevant and qualifying senten ces in the article from which 
the above is extracted are- The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156  "But it is possible that somebody among this huge c rowd might have thrown stones on the 
police officers (before they resorted to firing).  Even admitting this to be true, we say that 
the wisdom and prudence of the authorities demanded  that some other method than firing 
guns should have been adopted with a view to suppre ss this disturbance." 
This sentence with the portion italicized again alt ers the whole meaning. If 
such an omission was made by a defendant, it would amount to  suppressio veri  
and he would rightly put himself out of court. Done  by the prosecution, the 
omission has passed muster, but in reality it is fa r more dangerous than  
suppressio veri on the part of a defendant. The Crown by a material  omission, 
intended or otherwise, may succeed in bringing abou t an unjust conviction, as 
it appears to have done in this case. 
The last paragraph of the charge contains an unpard onable innuendo. "The 
accused has published a number of seditious and inf lammatory articles, but the 
Crown prefers to proceed under Rule 25." The sugges tion that the accused has 
written "seditious and inflammatory articles" could  only be calculated to 
prejudice the defence. I have never seen an indictm ent so loosely drawn up and 
so argumentative as this. In a properly constituted  court of law, I venture to 
think, that it would have been ruled out of order, and the accused set free 
without having to enter upon any defence. 
The judgment, too, I am sorry to say, leaves the sa me impression on one's mind 
that the charge does an impression of prejudice and  haste. It says, "The 
prosecution have also established that each of thes e statements is false." Now I 
have, I hope, already demonstrated that two of the statements in the 
indictment would not be proved to be false for they  are statements  torn from 
their context  and  incomplete.  No amount of evidence to prove the falsity of 
such incomplete statements could possibly be permit ted to injure the accused. 
There remain only two statements to be examined. Th e first statement is: "By 
the evening of the 31st March forty Hindus and Musa lmans had been killed." 
Now it would be quite clear to anybody pursuing the  judgment that even now it 
is not known how many persons were killed. I sugges t that the deciding factor 
in examining the falseness or otherwise of the abov e statement is not the 
number killed, but whether any people were killed a t all. If anything could then The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  alarm the people, it was the fact of firing, not ne cessarily the number killed. 
And the fact of firing is not denied. As to the num ber, the newspapers including 
the Anglo-Indian press had different versions. The learned Judge dismisses the 
plea that other respectable papers contained about the same statements that 
the Pratap  did. I submit that it was a relevant plea in order  to establish the 
defendant's  bona fides  with a view to show that he had reasonable grounds  for 
believing the statements he published. The second s tatement made by the 
accused is: "It cannot be denied that most who were  killed or wounded were 
innocent." Lala Radha Krishna in his petition perti nently observed that 'the 
Delhi authorities themselves took this view and in order to provide for the 
innocent sufferers in the riots opened a public fun d'. Let me add to this that no 
attempt was made by the Crown to show that even one  man killed or wounded 
among the crowd was guilty of any act of violence h imself. The court seems 
merely to have relied upon the fact that those who were killed were 'members 
of a violent and dangerous mob'. That fact does not  necessarily prove that 
those actually killed were guilty of violence nor h as the accused in his articles 
complained that the innocent suffered with the guil ty. His complaint naturally 
was that the firing was at all resorted to. 
It is now necessary to examine the rule under which  the accused was charged. 
Lala Radha Krishna was charged under sub-clause (a)  of sub-section 1 of rule 
25. In order to establish the guilt of the accused it is necessary to prove 
a) That the statement is false; 
b) That the accused 'has no reasonable ground to belie ve it to be true'; 
c) That it is published 'with intent to cause' or it ' is likely to cause tear or 
alarm to the public'. 
It has been made abundantly clear in the foregoing that the statements have 
not been proved to be false, and that even if they were, it has not been proved 
thai the accused 'had no reasonable ground for beli eving them to be true'. On 
the contrary the defence statement gives clearly th e grounds of his belief and 
lastly the Prosecution never proved that there was any 'intent to cause fear or 
alarm', or that 'there was likely to be any fear or  alarm caused'. The judgment The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  however says, "Without going into the question whet her he intended to cause 
fear or alarm to the public, we are satisfied that the publishing and circulating 
of these false statements did actually cause fear a nd alarm to the public." L. 
Radha Krishna observes on this point, "The prosecut ion witnesses were unable 
to cite any specific instances of such alarm having  been caused by the articles 
in question." 
The judgment takes no note of the antecedents of La la Radha Krishna, of the 
fact that although there was not the slightest reas on for expressing regret for 
anything he had written, he expressed it in his sta tement to the court for any 
unconscious exaggerations and of the very material fact that the error, if error 
it was, regarding the number of the dead was correc ted by him as soon as the 
official Communique  was published and that he published too the  Civil and 
Military Gazette  version. This seems to be a question of manifest i njustice. We 
understand that Lala Radha Krishna's petition for r elease is still engaging the 
attention of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab. We hope that 
the public and the Press throughout India will supp ort the prayer for justice and 
that it will not go in vain.  
Young India,  12-7-1919 
 
1. These articles are not included in this book. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159   
40. THE LAHORE JUDGMENT 
"Whoever wages war against the Queen, or attempts t o wage war, or abets the waging of 
such war, shall be punished with death or transport ation for life, and shall forfeit all his 
property." Section 121, Indian Penal Code. 
Lala Harkishan Lai, Bar-at-Law, Chaudhary Rambhaj D utt, Vakil, and Mr. Duni 
Chand Bar-at-Law and Messrs. Allah Din and Motasing h have been convicted by 
one of the Special Tribunals, under sections 121 an d 121 A of the Indian Penal 
Code and have been sentenced to transportation for life and forfeiture. The 
reader may dismiss from his mind section 121 A for the time being. Having 
convicted the accused under Section 121, the Tribun al had no option but to 
pronounce the sentence of transportation for life a nd forfeiture. That, it will 
be seen, is the lowest penalty the court could infl ict, the highest being the 
penalty of death by hanging. The Judges felt the se verity to be so great in the 
last two cases that they were constrained to remark , "Allah Din and Motasingh 
are minor offenders, and had it been in our power, we should in their cases, 
have awarded much lighter sentences." The learned J udges had in their powers 
not to convict any of the accused at all or to conv ict them on other charges. 
But they have said, "We do not consider it necessar y to record findings on other 
charges." 
Though the judgment covers twenty-seven sides of th e foolscap size, it is being 
presented to the readers of  Young India,  and I would urge every reader to go 
through it word by word. For the judges have made i t the  cause celebre  of all 
the cases and shown to the world what the Punjab, a nd incidentally the whole 
of India, is in their estimation. 
This judgment, read together with the Amritsar one,  forms the saddest 
commentary on British justice, when the judges are ruled by passion and 
prejudice and not by a sense of justice. To me the judgments are a proof of the 
contention I have ventured to urge that we need not  be enamoured of British 
justice and that it, in its essence, is no better t han any other justice. We 
deceive ourselves into a false belief when we think  that British courts are the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  palladia of liberty. Justice in British courts is a n expensive luxury. It is often 
'the longest purse that wins'. It is the crucial mo ments which provide the surest 
test. The judges' business is to rise superior to t heir surroundings. The Punjab 
Tribunal, in my opinion, has signally failed to do so. Mr. Winston Churchill at 
the time of the education crusade permitted himself  to admit that even the 
judges were not free from political bias. It is pos sible, though highly 
improbable, in this case, that the Privy Council wi ll or can set the matter right, 
but if it does, what then? At what cost will it hav e been done? How many of 
tens of thousands feeling, and having cause to feel , aggrieved by decisions of 
lower courts can afford to go to appellate courts a nd finally to the Privy 
Council? It is much to be wished that people would avoid litigation. 'Agree with 
thine adversary quickly' is the soundest legal maxi m ever uttered. The author 
knew what he was saying. But it will be asked, what  when we are dragged, as 
we often are, to the courts? I would say, 'Do not d efend.' If you are in the 
wrong, you will deserve the sentence whatever it ma y be. If you are wrongly 
brought to the court and yet penalized, let your in nocence soothe you in your 
unmerited suffering. Undefended, you will in every case suffer the least and 
what is more, you will have the satisfaction of sha ring the fate of the majority 
of your fellow-beings who  cannot get themselves defended. 
But I have digressed. I do not wish to inflict on t he reader my special views on 
law courts, though I hold them to be thoroughly sou nd. This Lahore judgment 
shows clearly what our duty is as to the Rowlatt Ac t and as to the sentences. 
The judgment is designed to condemn the Rowlatt Leg islation agitation. 
The opening paragraphs of the judgment set forth in  some detail the "public 
agitation against the Rowlatt Bills" which "began w ith a protest meeting held at 
the Bradlaugh Hall on the 4th February, 1919". They  refer to my letter of the 
1st March including the Satyagraha Vow and bring up  the events to the 15th 
April, including the firing at Delhi, the disturban ces at Amritsar, and the 
meetings at the Badshahi Mosque and say, "Such are the main facts and the 
Prosecution sets out to combine and connect these f acts with  the  accused in 
such a way as to show that there was a conspiracy t o secure the repeal of the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161  Rowlatt Act by criminal means." The court indicates  the criminal means in the 
very next sentence. "The defence has asked us to be lieve that there was no sort 
of organization of the  hartal and that every individual shopkeeper in Lahore, 
Muzang, and Bhagwanpura decided of his own accord t hat he must close his 
shop as a protest." It then describes what it calls  two violent posters in order to 
show that the  hartal was organized. I can see no violence in any of the m, but I 
can detect in them the agony of an embittered soul.  The criminality consists in 
the  hartal having been organized and continued,  langarkhanas  having been 
opened during its continuance and meetings having b een held during the time. I 
venture to think that  hartal is the inherent right of the people when they are 
deeply grieved by any action of the authorities. Fr om time immemorial it has 
been held to be meritorious to organize  hartal without using force as a means 
of protest against acts of the governing authority.  And when merit becomes a 
crime, it is a sacred duty to commit that crime, an d imprisonment for it, 
instead of being a disgrace, becomes an honour that  every good citizen should 
cherish. And the least that he can do is to continu e the agitation against the 
Rowlatt Legislation so intense and formidable that Government must withdraw 
the liberty of the agitators. And were I not afraid  of an outbreak of violence in 
the present state of tension, I would certainly adv ise  hartals  again. 
The tension was no doubt brought about, not by the advent of Satyagraha, but 
by the folly of the Government in precipitating and  almost inviting violence by 
arresting me whilst I was proceeding to Delhi, and if necessary to Lahore and 
Amritsar, with the deliberate intention of calming the atmosphere and bringing 
about peace. The Government invited violence by the  mad act of arresting Drs. 
Kitchlew and Satyapal, who were leaders of the peop le but who, whilst they 
were no doubt carrying on a stubborn agitation agai nst the Rowlatt Legislation, 
were able to curb the temper of the people and were  entirely on the side of 
law and order. The tension must someday go. And if the Government persist in 
the folly of retaining the Rowlatt Legislation they  must prepare for a repetition 
of  hartals,  well organized but without any force being used an d without a drop 
of blood being shed by the people. When the masses have imbibed the message 
of Satyagraha, we shall repeat from a thousand plat forms Chaudhary Rambhaj The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  Dutt's formula which has been interpreted into thre at by the Tribunal in order 
to prove the existence of criminal conspiracy. The formula is "Remove our 
sufferings or we close our shops, suspend our busin ess and we ourselves shall 
starve." There is no doubt that a great and effecti ve demonstration was 
degraded by the cries such as  "Hai Hai Rowlatt Bill", "Hai Hai George mar gaya",  
or by an inspector of the C. I. D. having been beat en and driven out, or by 
disgraceful sheets like the  Danda Akhbar,  or by the destruction of pictures of 
their Majesties. The accused could not be held resp onsible for them any more 
than Mr. Shafi and others who were endeavouring to bring about the peace. 
What right had the Government to launch out a prose cution for criminal 
conspiracy or, what is worse, for waging war agains t the King in respect of men 
who are not proved to have brought about any of the se excesses, whose whole 
character and status make them almost proof against  any such incitements? 
Whatever may be the technical view of the expressio n "waging war", to dub a 
powerful agitation against an odious law an act of war is a descent to the 
ludicrous. One might as well incriminate a Governme nt for the unauthorized 
crimes of its servants. If the acts of Lala Dunicha nd, Lala Harkishanlal and his 
co-accused were acts of war, no organized agitation  is possible in the country. 
And as organized agitation must be the breath of pu blic life when there is 
stagnation in the body politic, whether of a social , economic, or political 
character, it must be counted as a 'merit' to wage war after the style of the 
Lahore accused. 
The whole of the judgment is tinged with a politica l bias. This is how the 
Judges dismiss from their consideration the previou s record of the accused: 
"Before proceeding to consider the case of each acc used it is necessary to remark that 
each of them according to their station in life hav e been able to produce testimonials 
from more or less eminent members of society to the ir moderation and loyalty, These 
could doubtless have been multiplied as often as th ey wished. Some of them again have 
been able to show that in recent times they have no t merely prayed for the success of the 
British arms but have advocated War Loans, helped i n recruiting and have even given 
relatives to the Indian Defence Force or clerks for  Mesopotamia. Perhaps all of these 
efforts were not very valuable, and it has to be re membered that some of the accused are The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  men who are always in the lime-light; but we have n o doubt that everyone of them, 
however much he may dislike the existing Government , at least preferred it to the 
prospect of German rule. None of these things, howe ver, really affect the matter before 
us." 
When one's judgment is so warped, as is evident was  the Judges', from the 
passages above quoted, it is impossible to expect a n impartial decision. 
The issue raised by the case is abundantly clear, t hough not stated. Can we or 
can we not, legally cany on a sustained powerful ag itation involving 
processions, hartals, fasting etc. but eschewing, always and invariably,  
violence in any shape or form? The implication in t he judgment is that we may 
not do so. If the sentences are allowed by the Gove rnment to stand, it is quite 
clear that they are of the same opinion as the Judg es. I, for one, would not 
welcome the release of the accused on any side-issu e or as an act of clemency. 
There is nothing in the judgment to show that any o f the accused either 
directly or indirectly encouraged violence. And whe re there is absence of 
intention to do violence, it is absurd to call a pe aceful combination a criminal 
conspiracy, even though uncontrollable spirits may find their way into that 
combination and do mischief. The happening of untow ard incidents may be 
used as a warning to leaders. They may be used for justifying the declaration of 
Martial Law, but they ought not to be used for the purpose of making out 
peaceful, law-abiding citizens as criminals and lia rs. The duty of the Indian 
public is clear: By a quiet, persistent and powerfu l agitation, but without 
violence and irritation, to secure repeal of the Ro wlatt Legislation and the 
reversal of the sentences. 
Young India,  23-7-1919 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164   
41. JAGANNATH’S CASE 
It is not without extreme sorrow that I have to inv ite public attention to a third 
miscarriage of justice in the Punjab. This time it is not a case of a celebrity like 
Babu Kalinath Roy or a lesser light like Lala Radha  Krishna, the Editor of the 
Pratap . The case of which the papers have been furnished me relates to one 
Mr. Jagannath, unknown to fame and unconnected with  any public activity. He 
has been sentenced by one of the Martial Law Tribun als to transportation for 
life, with forfeiture of property under section 121  of the Indian Penal Code, 
i.e., for waging war against His Majesty. The facts  of the case are lucidly set 
forth in his petition to be found elsewhere*. It is  addressed to the Hon. Sir 
Edward Maclagan, the Lieut. Governor of the Punjab.  The reader will find also 
the judgment in the Gujaran-walla case in respect o f fifteen accused of whom 
Mr. Jagannath was one. The following is the text in  the judgment dealing with 
the case: 
"Jagannath, accused 10, had the notices convening t he meeting of the 5th, printed in 
Lahore and was present at the meeting. He denies hi s presence at the meetings of the 
12th and the 13th. But we have no hesitation in hol ding that he was present at both and 
that his defence is worthless. There is ample evide nce to show that on the 14th April, he 
took a very active part in having the shops closed.  We are satisfied of his guilt and convict 
him under sec. 121, I. P. C." 
I submit that it was no crime on the accused's part  to have the notice convening 
the meeting of the 5th printed, nor to have been pr esent at the meeting, 
unless the notices or the meetings were of an incri minating character. This is 
what the court has to say about the meeting of the 5th April: 
"It is alleged that the people of Gujaranwalla knew  little and cared less about the Rowlatt 
Act and that on the 4th April certain of the accuse d decided to start an agitation against 
this Act on the same lines as had been adopted in o ther parts of the country at the 
instance of Gandhi. A mass meeting was accordingly convened and held on the evening of 
the 5th April when the Rowlatt Act was condemned." 
Under no Statute known could these facts be held to  involve any crime. The 
Judges themselves have stated as much: The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  "We are not however satisfied in this case, that pr ior to the 12th April any indictable 
conspiracy had come into existence. We therefore fe el constrained to acquit those of the 
accused who are shown only to have taken part in th e proceedings prior to that date." 
It is difficult therefore to understand the referen ce of the court to the 
accused's presence at the meeting of the 5th or his  having been an agent for 
getting the notices printed. The court proceeds, "O n the evening of the 12th 
and during the day of the 13th certain of the accus ed in consultation with 
Bhagat agreed that they should follow the example s et at Amritsar of burning 
bridges and cutting telegraph wires." Now these fac ts, it is plain, undoubtedly 
prove a criminal conspiracy but the court is silent  as to which accused agreed 
upon the crimes recited in the paragraph. It should  be remembered that there 
was a meeting on the 12th, of the District Congress  Committee held prior to the 
evening meeting of the 12th referred to in the sent ence quoted above. I submit 
that it was necessary for the court definitely to f ind that the accused was 
present at the agreement alleged to have been arriv ed at, for burning bridges 
and cutting telegraph wires. But there is nothing i n the finding of the court 
beyond a vague general statement about the accused' s presence at the 
meetings of the 12th and 13th. I would suggest that  even if the accused was in 
Gujaranwalla on the 14th April and took a very acti ve part in having the shops 
closed, it would be no offence, unless he could be proved to have been party to 
the criminal agreement referred to. 
Whilst, therefore, the judgment seems to afford no evidence of the accused's 
crime, statements, most damaging to the court and c onclusive in favour of the 
accused, have yet to follow. The accused's defence rested upon an  alibi. He 
stated that he left Gujaran walla on the 12th April  by the 5 p.m. train  enroute  
for Kathiawad where he had a case. Now I admit that  it is as easy to set up an  
alibi as it is difficult to prove it. But anyone reading  the petition can only come 
to one conclusion, viz., that the defence of  alibi was completely established. 
Mr. Jagannath produced local respectable witnesses to show that he had left 
Gujaranwalla on the 12th. He applied for subpoena t o summon witnesses from 
Kathiawad to show that he was in Dhoraji on the 16t h April. The court rejected 
the application, but granted interrogatories, put t he accused, a poor man, to The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  the expense of Rs. 250 for the expenses of the Comm ission, and yet strange as 
it may appear, pronounced judgment against the accu sed without waiting for 
the return of the Commission. He made an applicatio n for the stay of 
argument, till after the receipt of replies to inte rrogatories. The application 
was rejected. In a second application he urged that  the court should ascertain 
by telegram the result of the interrogatories. Even  that application was proved 
unavailing. The accused has rightly contended in th e petition that on this 
ground alone the conviction was illegal and ought t o be set aside. The petition 
refers to the register of the  Foujdar  of Dhoraji saying that he reached Dhoraji 
on the 16th April. The accused shows also by the ex amination of 10 
independent witnesses that he was in Dhoraji on tha t date. He shows further by 
extracts from Railway Time Tables, that it takes 44  hours to reach Dhoraji from 
Delhi by the fastest train, and shows conclusively that it was physically 
impossible for him to be in Gujaranwalla after 6 p. m. on the 13th; though as a 
matter of fact he shows by other conclusive evidenc e that he left Gujaranwalla 
on the 12th. He produces proceedings of Jetpur Cour t where he had his case in 
Kathiawad. There is, therefore, no ground whatsoeve r for keeping the accused 
in jail for a single moment. 
The accused on his own showing is "a petty shopkeep er at Gujaranwalla, paying 
no income tax, being ignorant of Urdu as well as En glish and not possessed of 
any influence in a big town like Gujaranwalla with a population of 30,000 
persons. He, being a man of humble position and sta tus in life, with no 
education, has never taken part in politics, nor wa s he a member of the local 
District Congress Committee or any other political body or association." The 
humbleness of his position makes the injustice all the more galling and makes it 
doubly incumbent on the public to see that the mean est of the subjects of the 
King suffers no wrong. The decision of His Honour t he Lieut. Governor in the 
case of Lala Radha Krishna raises the hope that spe edy justice will be done in 
this case. Bad as Babu Kalinath Roy's and Lala Radh a Krishna's cases were, this, 
if possible, is worse in that Martial Law Judges in  their impatience, shall I say, 
to convict, declined to wait for a return of the Co mmission they themselves had The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167  granted—a Commission on whose return hung the liber ty, and might have been, 
even the life of the accused. 
Young India,  30-7-1919 
 
* This petition is not included in this book. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168   
42. ANOTHER SCANDAL 
It is my unpleasant duty to present another batch o f cases to the reader from 
the Punjab which reveal a state of things that is u tterly unbearable. It is to be 
wished that H. E. the Viceroy will end the growing anxiety by appointing the 
promised Committee of Inquiry without delay. Mr. Mo ntagu has said from his 
place in the House of Commons that at least two out  of the three Judges of the 
Punjab Special Tribunals were Judges of the High Co urt of three years standing. 
The public have been recently informed that where t he members were not High 
Court Judges, they were eligible for that high post . The poignancy of the 
sorrow that the atrocious injustices such as I have  had the painful duty of 
exposing have caused, is increased by the knowledge  that perpetrators of these 
injustices are judges in whose judgments the people  have been accustomed to 
put the utmost faith. This unevenness of temperamen t can only be accounted 
for by the supposition that the trained judicial in tellect of the Judges must 
have suffered temporary aberration by the events of  the Punjab. The desire to 
secure for Englishmen almost absolute immunity from  physical harm from the 
'natives', by inflicting exemplary punishments on s omeone or other, appears to 
have been the master passion overruling discretion,  wisdom and justice. It is 
not possible for me to understand the judgments tha t have come under my 
notice on any other hypothesis. These reflections a re caused by a perusal of the 
judgment and the evidence in the Hafizabad case. Th e full text of the 
judgment and the evidence material to the case to b e examined, will be found 
printed elsewhere in this issue.* During the whole course of my practice of law, 
by no means inconsiderable, extending over an unbro ken period of nearly 
twenty years, I have never come across cases in whi ch capital punishment has 
been so lightly pronounced, on the flimsiest eviden ce taken down in a most 
perfunctory manner, as appears to me to have been d one in the Hafizabad 
case. 
The case has been sent to me in regard to only one of the nineteen accused 
tried viz. Karamchand, the nineteenth accused—a stu dent of the Dayanand The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  Anglo- Vedic College. But I have no hesitation in s aying that there was no 
evidence before the court to warrant a conviction a gainst any of the accused 
for waging war. The Judges had a choice of offences  for conviction. The 
accused were charged under Sections 121, 147, 307, 486(?), and 149 of the 
Indian Penal Code. Section 147 relates to rioting, carrying with it a maximum 
penalty of two years' imprisonment. Section 149 ren ders members of an 
unlawful assembly liable to the same penalty as any  other member thereof. 
Section 307 relates to attempts to murder carrying the maximum penalty of ten 
years. Section 486 appears to be an erroneous copy,  it has no relevance to the 
evidence led before the court. It was thus easy eno ugh to convict on any of the 
milder sections if the Judges had so chosen. They h owever 'scented' war in 
every act of the crowd during those three or four d ays of April. 
Whilst therefore it is clear to me, as I hope it wi ll be clear to every impartial 
student of the case, that the charge of 'waging war  against the King' is 
unsustainable, in the absence of the specific evide nce against the other 
accused, it is difficult to form a conclusive opini on as to their cases on the 
minor charges. I cannot however conceal from myself  or the reader the very 
strong suspicion that the full text of the evidence  will not disclose any ground 
for the statement of the Judges to the effect that "the orators had incited the 
crowd to take immediate and vigorous steps to overt hrow the Government by 
raising as much opposition to it as possible.".Nowh ere have I seen any attempt 
during those days of April to 'overthrow the Govern ment'. 
But I must confine myself to the case of Karamchand . These are the full 
remarks in the judgment about him: 
"Karamchand, No. 19, was peculiarly guilty. He brou ght down the news of the Lahore riots. 
He gave a most garbled account of it. And by repres enting that the Lahore crowd had 
succeeded in beating the military, he gave the Hafi zabad crowd reason to believe that 
their insurrection would be successful." 
"We think," the Judges proceed, "that these four me n deserve the extreme 
penalty." The three men who are bracketed together with him for capital 
punishment are supposed to have been among the acti ve assailants of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170  Lieutenant Tatam. Not so Karamchand, as is clear fr om the passage from the 
judgment just quoted. 
Let us look at the evidence against the accused. Tw o of the prosecution 
witnesses who were on the train that carried Lieute nant Tatam have given only 
identifying evidence. They are unable to say that K aramchand himself did 
anything at all. Prosecution witness No. 5 first id entified Karamchand 18 or 20 
days after the 14th April. Witness No. 6 identified  him 10 or 12 days after the 
said date. Both the witnesses, it is admitted, were  utter strangers to 
Karamchand. The gravamen of the charge against Kara mchand is, not that he 
did anything on the 14th, but that he brought some news from Lahore on the 
11th. This is the exclusive evidence about Karamcha nd given by the Head 
Master of the D. B. School: 
"Karamchand is a student of the D. A. V. College, L ahore. I saw him on the 11th evening. 
He was talking about the riots of Lahore that the p eople are being fired upon with a 
machine-gun at Lahori Gate are not retreating." (I have taken the sentence exactly as it 
occurs in the original copy before me—M. K. Gandhi. ). "He was going to say more but I 
stopped him. I advised him that it is not good to s ay such things at Hafisabad. 
He was my old pupil. 6 or 7 people were present. Th is was outside the town on a footpath. 
He was excited. I left on the 12th." 
Cross Examination: Accused does not belong to Hafiz abad. He went away when I warned 
him. I had not asked him what had happened at Lahor e." 
Prosecution witness 27 gave evidence corroborating that of the Head Master. 
This is all the evidence against Karamchand. It sta nds out clear as daylight that 
Karamchand's alleged talk about the Lahore riots to ok place on the 11th, that 
he spoke outside the town on a footpath in the pres ence of 6 or 7 people and 
that he stopped as soon as his old school master ad vised him to do so and went 
away; and that he does not belong to Hafizabad. I h old that the Judges' 
paraphrase of the above evidence is totally unwarra nted. There is nothing in all 
the evidence about Karamchand to show that the crow d near the Railway 
station on the 14th was the same as the 6 or 7 peop le before whom he talked 
outside the town on the 11th about the Lahore riots . One fails to see what 
peculiarity the Judges found in Karamchand's case. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171  Let me note here that the Head Master and the corro borating witness give us no 
information regarding Karamchand's doings or wherea bouts on the 14th April. 
Even if, therefore, Karamchand was present on the 1 4th April at the station, so 
far as the evidence enables one to see, he was a si lent spectator of the 
cowardly conduct of the mob. But Karamchand says he  was not there. He says 
he went to his village on the 12th. He produced fou r witnesses to prove that he 
was in his village Udhoki on the 14th April. I vent ure to suggest that there is 
just as much probability of Karamchand and his witn esses having told the truth 
as there is of the two witnesses for the prosecutio n being mistaken about the 
identity of Karamchand, regard being had to the fac t that they had never seen 
him before, that they were taken to the jail to ide ntify him 10 or 18 days after 
the event and specially when they never saw Karamch and doing anything 
active. Add to this the fact that the prosecution w itnesses were only for a few 
minutes in the midst of the crowd and whilst, accor ding to the evidence of the 
Grown, stones were being thrown at the first class compartment. It is not 
justice to sentence a man to be hanged on the very inconclusive testimony as 
to identify. Karamchand's father gives me further d etails to prove that the 
former was at his village on the 14th April. Natura lly I am unable to make use 
of this - extraneous, though important— evidence to  prove his innocence. The 
father says in his letter that Karamchand's sentenc e has been commuted to 10 
years' rigorous imprisonment. He is naturally not s atisfied with it. I hope that 
His Honour the Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab wi ll study the case 
personally, and if he does, I doubt not that Karamc hand will be discharged. I 
hope too, that his co-accused who were sentenced to  be hanged are at least 
alive so that their cases may be reviewed by the fo rthcoming Committee of 
Enquiry. 
We, who are living in the Presidency, cannot but co ntrast the Punjab 
proceedings with those at present going on in Ahmed abad. Nothing that was 
done in Hafizabad could surpass the wicked and want on cruelty of the mad mob 
at Viramgam. And yet this Tribunal, I am thankful t o be able to note, has 
carried on the enquiry with judicial calmness, givi ng every opportunity to the 
counsel for the defence to bring every fact to ligh t and have not found it in The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  their hearts to impose the capital punishment on a single person in that case. 
So far as I know, its judgments have not provoked m uch hostile criticism, 
whereas almost every judgment of the Punjab Tribuna ls that has come to light 
has been subjected to the severest comment. Only th e promised Committee of 
Inquiry can solve the discrepancy. Meanwhile I hope  the public will demand full 
and unconditional discharge in cases of palpable in justice like that of poor 
Karamchand. 
Young India , 20-8-1919 
 
The judgment and notes of evidence are not included  in this book. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173   
43. VICTIMS, NOT GUILTY 
The readers will recall our Lahore correspondent's remarks about the Ramnagar 
cases. I have a file of papers in these cases but I  was unprepared to discuss 
them until I got at least the text of the judgment.  This is now before the 
readers. The able petition on behalf of Lala Karamc hand — not the same as the 
lad Karamchand who was sentenced to be hanged— pres ented by his old mother 
Gangadevi shows the graphic language of his son Dev idas's letter that the 
accused in the case are, 'victims, not guilty'. If the simple narrative of Lala 
Karamchand's son be true, and I think there is no r eason to doubt its accuracy, 
the whole proceedings were a farce. They constitute d not a legal trial but a 
mockery of it. The accused, twenty- eight in number , were all tried together, 
the trial was finished in one day during which alto gether 150 defence witnesses 
were examined, the accused were not informed of the  charge against them 
except through the mouths of the prosecution witnes ses. How the Judge could 
examine so many witnesses in a day passes comprehen sion. In spite of repeated 
applications, copy of notes of evidence or the stat ements of the accused is not 
furnished. The only inference is that no notes were  kept. 
Why were these cases rushed so? The accused were ar rested eight days after 
the alleged offence. Order was completely restored throughout the Punjab by 
that time. The trial took place on the 22nd May, fi ve weeks after the alleged 
offence. There was no occasion then for indecently rushing through the trial. 
On the 17th April a police officer notes in his dia ry that all was quiet, save that 
there was a partial  hartal. It is rightly suggested in the papers that mention 
would surely have been made in the diary of any ser ious offence. The offence 
alleged is not such as could be committed in secret . It is stated to have been 
openly committed. Here at least there is enough to throw doubt on the 
prosecution story. But the judge had no doubt about  it! 
The story of the prosecution is varied from time to time. Five maunds of fuel 
said to have been required for burning His Majesty' s effigy became reduced to a 
few straws! The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174  At best all but one of the accused appear to have b een mere spectators. 
These facts are common to all the accused. I have b een supplied also with the 
papers regarding Lala Daulatram. The facts therein set forth tally with those 
furnished in Lala Karamchand's case. I am convinced  that twenty-eight innocent 
men have been ignorantly condemned. They should be set free. 
Lala Karamchand is an old retired servant. He has n ever taken part in politics. 
For years past, he has been passing his time betwee n Ramnagar and Hardwar, 
devoting it to religious pursuits. Lala Daulatram i s the son of one who has 
rendered meritorious service to the Government for a long period. In fact the 
whole family seems to belong to the official class.  It is cruel to think that such 
men should have been so shamelessly punished. 
The judgment is self-condemned. It breathes vindict iveness and anger. The 
rejection of the defence evidence, the explaining a way of the weak points in 
the prosecution, the punishment of solitary confine ment, the heavy fines point 
unmistakably to loss of balance and unfitness to ju dge. The cases are now 
before His Excellency the Viceroy. Let him do unto these humble men even as 
he would wish to be done unto himself, if he were i n their place. 
Young India,  3-9-1919 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175   
44. DR. SATYAPAL'S CASE 
Dr. Satyapal's statement, which is published in ano ther column*, shows what a 
gross injustice has been done in his case as in tha t of Dr. Kitchlew. They had to 
be absolved from any participation in the violence that occurred after their 
arrest. What violence there ever was in Amritsar to ok place after they were 
arrested. 'They were, therefore, accused of all sor ts of things which they had 
never done, of speeches they had never made. Dr. Sa tyapal's clear, emphatic 
and courageous statement is a categorical denial of  the whole string of charges 
against him. He shows clearly that the speeches he made were incorrectly 
reported by the C.I.D. officials, and that every ti me he spoke he preached the 
gospel of truth and non-violence, and unceasingly w arned the people against 
losing their temper and going in for any excesses. 
I have purposely refrained from printing a spirited  letter addressed to me by 
Dr. Satyapal's father in which he gives his own imp ressions of the case. I 
cannot, however, resist the temptation of quoting s ome of the facts stated in 
it. For instance, he says: 
"At first time it was not the intention of the Gove rnment to prosecute Drs. Kitchlew and 
Satyapal who had been deported on the 10th April an d therefore his (the approver's) 
confessional statement before the Magistrate of Amr itsar did not incriminate them. But as 
soon as there was a change in the intention of the Government, an additional statement 
by way of an 'improvement' was obtained which impli cated both of these gentlemen." 
If this allegation is true, it is a severe reflecti on on the methods of prosecution 
and it vitiates the whole of the proceedings. Again  this letter says: 
"Dr. Satyapal was restricted from public speaking e tc. on the 29th March. The 
Commissioners have sentenced him to transportation for life on the ground that he was a 
member of a conspiracy formed for disseminating sed ition. But it is curious to the highest 
degree that he did not even attend the meeting of t he 30th March—not to say of his having 
addressed the meeting —as held by the judges, and i t is the meeting in which sedition has 
been said to have been disseminated in pursuance of  the conspiracy." The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176  It is true that Dr. Satyapal signed the handbill co nvening the meeting that was 
held on 30th March.  
That was on the 28th March. But if there was any co nspiracy, it became one not 
on the 28th but on the 30th. A platform ticket agit ation carried on by Dr. 
Satyapal in January and February last was shameless ly brought into the trial to 
prejudice him, an agitation that was entirely harml ess and successful, and 
about which Dr. Satyapal even received thanks from the station authorities. 
The letter concludes:  
“For your information I may mention that Dr. Satyap al offered himself for military service 
in 1915 and was granted a temporary commission as a  lieutenant I.M.S. He was posted at 
Aden where under very trying of his superior office rs who gave him eulogizing testimonials 
at the time of his departure. In 1918 he again volu nteered for service but the arrangement 
fell through. During the influenza and malaria epid emics he did his level best in his 
humble way to mitigate the official sanads . It is indeed a befitting sequel to be convicted 
under section 124A after such a record of services to the Government and public both.” 
As I have already observed, the Lahore and Amritsar  cases are not cases in 
which a commutation can carry any merit or give sat isfaction. It is not mercy 
that the distinguished accused ask for. It is justi ce that they seek and on which 
public must insist. Reduction in the sentences is a  blind, however unintended it 
may be. It must not be allowed to lull the public t o sleep. There can be no 
contentment unless there is a complete and honourab le discharge, for the 
leaders of Lahore and Amritsar. 
Young India,  3-9-1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177   
45. LALA LABHU RAM 
Bad as are the cases from the Punjab which it has b een my misfortune to 
examine from time to time, that of Lala Labhu Ram i s no better. Isolated cases 
of injustice will happen in the best regulated soci ety and under a model 
Government. But when injustice becomes the order of  the day, it is time for 
honest men not merely to protest against it but to withdraw their support from 
a system of Government under which such organized i njustice is possible, 
unless that system is changing and systematic injus tice becomes an 
impossibility. I have no desire to exaggerate the p icture. Nothing can be further 
from my intention than to exacerbate the relations between the two races. And 
if I could prevent exacerbation by remaining silent , I should do so with the 
greatest gladness. But I should fail in my duty if I did not draw the attention of 
the Government to injustices as they come under my notice. They are like 
poison corrupting the whole system. The poison must  be expelled or the body 
perishes. 
What is this case of Lala Labhu Ram then? The evide nce for the defence does 
not appear to be complete and yet it seems to be th e whole of the evidence 
received by Lala Labhu Ram's solicitors. It is quit e possible that that evidence 
was not recorded; for does not the judgment of the court commence with the 
pregnant sentence: "The evidence for the defence is  worthless" ? In one place 
the notes of evidence contain the remark, "Cross-ex amination for accused No. 
9. Nothing relevant"! The Judges might have conside red the defence evidence 
too as irrelevant. Fortunately one has the exhausti ve petition of Mrs. Labhu 
Ram to fall back upon. It must be accepted as a cor rect statement of the 
evidence in the absence of contradiction. 
Mr. Labhu Ram is not a poor student lad like Karamc hand or a petty trader like 
Jagannath. He is a Civil Engineer, he belongs, says  Malandevi, "to  a. very 
respectable and loyal family of Lahore. Several rel ations of his occupy 
responsible position in the service of Government."  He finished his studies in 
Glasgow. He returned from England in 1912. He was f or some time State The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  Engineer in the Poonch State, "where he not only di scharged his professional 
duties to the entire satisfaction of his superiors but materially helped the 
authorities in recruiting work. He was not a member  of any political society or 
of any Samaj or Sabha nor did he even take part in any propaganda of any kind 
whatsoever. He was not in the habit of attending an y lectures even. He took no 
part whatever in the recent  hartal."  I have dealt with Mr. Labhu Ram's position 
in society somewhat fully, because the case at the worst turns upon the 
credibility of witnesses. Several of the accused, o f whom Lala Labhu Ram was 
one, pleaded an  alibi and, as I have had to remark in connection with on e case, 
courts always look upon the defence of  alibi with considerable distrust. It is 
therefore necessary to dispose of the case at its w orst and give the court credit 
for fairness in weighing evidence. I submit then th at unless the court has 
overwhelming and unimpeachable testimony against th at of Lala Labhu Ram, 
who said he was not present at the Badshahi Mosque meeting and who was 
respectably supported, the court was bound to accep t his evidence and grant 
him an honourable discharge. In such cases the stat us of the accused is a 
material consideration in coming to a decision and I claim that Lala Labhu Ram 
enjoyed a status in society which should have stood  him in good stead. 
But the reader may dismiss the plea of respectabili ty from his mind. It would 
not be perhaps an unfair reasoning on the part of t he opponents—the up-
holders of the Punjab proceedings—to say that when the very best of men in 
the Punjab were under severe suspicion and were dra wn into the turmoil of 
April last, the question of respectability should b e ruled out of account. But the 
Punjab Commissions have gone infinitely further and  in many cases, as the 
readers of these pages have by this time seen, rule d out practically the whole 
of the defence. Mr. Labhu Ram was arrested on the 2 0th April, i.e. eight days 
after the day of the alleged offence. He is suppose d to have been one of the 
hundred men who were charged with a simultaneous as sault on one of the 
police officers. He was not known to this officer b efore, nor was there a single 
prosecution witness who had known the accused at al l intimately before. 
Identification is difficult at best of times. It is  most difficult, if not almost 
impossible, when it is a matter of picking out men from an excited crowd of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179  several thousands. Mr. Labhu Ram's name does not oc cur in the police diary in 
which the names of the assaulters were noted down. Out of 11 prosecution 
witnesses 6 had nothing to say about the accused Mr . Labhu Ram. "Witnesses," 
says Mrs. Labhu Ram, "who identified the petitioner 's husband are police 
employees or interested in them. Most of them have appeared as prosecution 
witnesses in other Martial Law cases also." This is  a most damaging statement, 
if it is true. It means that they were professional  witnesses. One would think 
that as the accused was arrested eight days after t he event, there would be 
some explanation given by the prosecution of the de lay. This is what the 
petitioner says about it : "The name of the petitio ner's husband not having been 
entered in the diary of the complainant, it is not stated how and when the 
police came to know of his complicity." This is a s ample of the case for the 
prosecution. The case for the defence is overwhelmi ng. "Dr. Bodhraj, a well- 
known physician of Lahore, Dr. Bholaram and his com pounder gave evidence 
that Labhu Ram was busy with them in connection wit h the treatment of his 
ailing son at the time of the alleged assault." 
The reader will be shocked to know that Mr. Labhu R am's sentence of 
transportation, with forfeiture of property has bee n commuted to fourteen 
years. Though I can appreciate and fully share a wi fe's sorrow and agony over 
an unmerited separation from her husband and theref ore while I understand Mr. 
Labhu Ram's position in asking for a commutation, i f a complete discharge 
might not be possible, I am unable to derive the sl ightest satisfaction from the 
fact of the commutation. Mr. Labhu Ram is not a chi ld. He is a man of the 
world, of culture and fully aware of his responsibi lity. If he took part in a 
cowardly assault on an inoffensive man who was but doing his duty he deserves 
stern justice and no mercy. For to the crime of an assault he had added that of 
deliberate perjury. If therefore his case is not tr ue, it is not one for mercy, and 
if it is true, justice would be hardly satisfied wh en he is discharged. 
I do not deal with the monstrous method of the cour t in taking judicial notice 
of a "state of rebellion". It is really an abuse of  legal terms to consider the state 
of Lahore on the 12th of April as one of rebellion and a martial proclamation of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  the Government to be a document for judicial notice  in the manner it has been. 
The evidence before the court does not sustain a ch arge of waging war against 
the King. Only recently the people of Liverpool wen t much further than the 
Badshahi Mosque meeting. But the long expected Comm ission has now been 
appointed, and if the reference includes the power to revise the sentences, the 
members of the Commission will have an opportunity of pronouncing upon cases 
like Mr. Labhu Ram's. But I submit to the Punjab Go vernment as also to the 
Government of India that in cases where the recorde d evidence itself shows a 
patent miscarriage of justice, they are bound in ho nour to discharge the 
accused without hiding themselves behind the Commis sion. 
Young India,  10-9-1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181   
46. GUJARATIMAL'S CASE 
Gujaratimal is a lad eighteen years old, having rec eived no more than middle 
school education. At the age of sixteen he got hims elf appointed as a dresser in 
the Military Department. After working for about a year in Multan Cantonment, 
he went to Egypt and spent one year there, also on service. He subsequently 
returned to the Punjab taking one month's leave. He  reached Madhranwala, his 
native village, five miles from Hafizabad, on the 8 th April. He remained at his 
village getting his shop repaired. But "to our asto nishment some policemen 
came there on the 16th with warrants issued against  him, and prosecuted him 
accordingly, leaving us in utter amazement, for we could not understand what 
the matter was." Thus writes the seventy years old father of Gujaratimal, This 
is not one of those cases in which a stranger can a rrive at a firm decision 
merely on reading the evidence, which was reproduce d in the last issue of 
Young India.  It will be remembered that the case of Gujaratimal  is one out of 
nineteen tried together. I had occasion to analyse the judgment in the case in 
connection with that of Karamchand, and all I have said about that judgment 
naturally applies in this case, as in that of the l ad Karamchand. But upon 
reading the evidence it is not possible to come to a positive conclusion that the 
defence of  alibi was completely established. The whole of the evide nce, as the 
reader must have observed, has been taken in such a  scrappy manner that one 
is unable to know what has been omitted. It is also  clear from the evidence 
that the prosecution witnesses are mostly policemen  or connected with the 
police, and that the accused were not arrested red- handed, but" most of them 
were arrested some time after the affair. Certainly  Gujaratimal, who is said to 
have been the principal speaker and one of the assa ilants, was not arrested 
red- handed, but two days after the date of the all eged assault. Gujaratimal 
was sentenced to be hanged. His sentence was subseq uently commuted to 
transportation, and still more subsequently, accord ing to what his father has 
heard, to seven years' rigorous imprisonment. It is  a serious matter to sentence 
a lad of eighteen years, who denies his guilt, who denies having been present The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  at the scene itself and who has only lately rendere d service to the Crown, to be 
hanged on the strength of the very questionable evi dence of identification by 
witnesses of no standing. 
To these observations I would add a summary of the facts supplied by the 
father of Gujaratimal, and respectfully submit that  if the facts supplied by the 
father be true he is entitled to complete discharge  without further 
investigation. And even without those the whole cas e requires a thorough 
investigation. The father says, "On the 23rd May, i .e. five weeks after the 
event, the Deputy Commissioner of the District orde red all the residents to 
assemble in one place to be identified by the prose cution witnesses, and 
Lieutenant Tatam." Gujaratimal was also among the c rowd. Now comes the 
most material part of the father's statement. "At t his occasion none of the 
prosecution witnesses Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 1 8, 19, who afterwards gave 
evidence against him could identify him, nor even L ieutenant Tatam." If this is 
true, Gujaratimal has certainly been wrongly convic ted. And what shall we say 
of the value of the identification evidence when we  read such a shocking 
deposition as this of prosecution witness No. 13: " Mr. Tatam identified Karam 
Sing, Jiwan Kishen, Mulchand. Mr. Tatam even pointe d me out as one of the 
assailants, and when the Deputy Commissioner said t hat I was Tehsildar, Mr. 
Tatam said that the man he remembered was fatter th an I." If this is true —and 
the prosecution surely cannot question its truth—th is is a circumstance which 
must raise gravest doubts about the value of the id entification evidence led by 
the prosecution. The father adds that the prosecuti on witness No. 3 says that 
Gujaratimal delivered an oration at the station, wh ereas P.W. No. 16 says that 
it was Gian Singh who delivered it. This discrepanc y can be proved from the 
recorded evidence. Again the father says, prosecuti on witness No. 15 who could 
not identify Gujaratimal on the 3rd May says at the  trial that Gujaratimal 
carried a flag, etc. The father has submitted alrea dy several petitions to the 
authorities. He is a man of poor circumstances. The  accused is an insignificant 
lad. In my opinion, therefore, the case becomes all  the stronger for a searching 
inquiry. His Excellency the Viceroy was pleased to say in his speech "for those 
cases which have come before the Government of Indi a, I have no hesitation in The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183  claiming that they received the most careful consid eration, and that orders 
were passed with the greatest possible despatch." T he letter before me says 
that the father has petitioned His Excellency also.  It is not impertinent to 
inquire what was the result of the "most careful co nsideration" given to the 
most damaging statements made in the father's petit ion. If his statements were 
considered to be worthless, he was and still is ent itled to know on what ground 
the decision was based. 
Young India , 13-9-1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184   
47. LABH SINGH,  M.A, LL .B.,  (CANTAB ), 
Bar-at-Law 
"No mere reduction of sentence, it is most humbly s ubmitted, can be a consolation to Your 
Excellency's memorialist or in an adequate measure will right the wrong that has been 
done him or meet the ends of justice." 
This is an extract from the latest petition of Mr. Labh Singh, Bar-at-Law. I am 
sure this petition will not fail to evoke from the reader both sympathy and 
admiration; sympathy because of the wrong that has been done him and 
admiration because the jail has not broken the spir it of the young Barrister. He 
asks for no mercy, he pleads for justice, if be can  secure it. But In spite of H.E, 
The Viceroy s remarks to the contrary, the spirit o f justice is moving so slow 
and there seems to be such a disinclination even in  the high quarters to do real 
justice that one almost despairs of getting it. Loo k at Sir Edward Maclagan's 
speech in reply to the Hon. Pandit Malaviyaji's res olution for the appointment 
of a Commission. He recalls the warning of the Vice roy against the temptation 
"to minimize the events of last April". "I do not t hink," His Honour proceeds, 
"that even while the disorders were in progress, pe ople outside the Punjab fully 
realized the extreme gravity of the situation." He adds, "Had it not been for the 
rapidity with which the disturbances were made, had  they been allowed to 
proceed but a little further than they did, the liv es and property of all classes 
of people would have been in the most imminent dang er." This is merely 
begging the question and anticipating the verdict o f the Committee of Enquiry. 
Regarding the sentences, His Honour again begs the question by saying that the 
findings of the Special Courts should be accepted, because "they represent the 
unanimous conclusions, in each case, of three exper ienced officers". But the 
unanimity and experience are beside the point when behind them lies a 
temporary aberration of the intellect. His Honour, however, attempts to 
silence his critics by saying, "Although I have exa mined many cases, I have not 
found one in which I felt justified in impugning th e substantial correctness of 
the findings of the court." In the face of this emp hatic opinion I despair of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185  securing or expecting justice either for Mr. Labh S ingh or for any of the great 
Punjab leaders, who are at present adorning the Pun jab jails. I do however feel 
tempted to say with due deference to the Lieut. Gov ernor of the Punjab that if 
he has not found a single case for challenging the correctness of the findings of 
the Special Courts, of all the many cases that have  come before the public, it 
has not been my good fortune to find many judgments  to inspire confidence in 
their correctness. Let me illustrate my point by ta king this very case of Mr. 
Labh Singh. He is not a man of straw. This is the f ull text of the Jyidges' 
remarks in his case : 
"Labh Singh, accused 4, took an active part in the inception of the agitation against the 
Rowlatt Act and was present at meeting of the 12th and 13th. On the latter date, he is 
said to have at first opposed the commission of act s of violence, but finally agreed. He 
was seen in several places with the mob on the 14th  but appear to have rendered 
assistance to the authorities on that date. We find  him guilty under Section 121, I. P. C." 
The whole of this judgment, the reader will find re produced in the issue of  
Young India  of July 30th. I ask where is, in the above remarks , anything but 
good, said even by the Judges about Mr. Labh Singh,  except the expression "but 
finally agreed"? On the Judges' own showing there w as nothing indictable in the 
acts prior to the 12th April. The whole of the conv iction is based upon the 
uncorroborated testimony of an approver, notwithsta nding the fact that there 
was incontestible evidence to show that he "endeavo ured to render assistance 
to the authorities" (I am quoting the Judges' words ) after the supposed approval 
by him of acts of violence. But in order to accept the approvers' testimony the 
court says at the end of the judgment, "Labh Singh evidently repented of his 
action." Let the reader remember that this is the s ame judgment in which poor 
Jagannath was sentenced in the face of a clearly es tablished  alibi, and even 
before replies to the interrogatories issued by the  Commissioner had been 
received. No wonder Mr. Labh Singh says, "the order  of the Lieut. Governor, it 
is humbly submitted, goes only to confirm and perpe tuate what is a great and 
serious miscarriage of justice." It is admitted tha t beyond signing the notice for 
the 5th April. Mr. Labh Singh neither convened nor addressed a public meeting 
"at Gujaranwalla or elsewhere at any time within 12  to 15 months preceding The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  the occurrence of the 14 th  April." Mr. Labh Singh further says, "The court 
proceeded to the judgment with inordinate haste and  without waiting for the 
answers to the interrogatories issued to some of th e witnesses for the defence." 
I do not wish to burden these notes with more quota tions from the very able an 
convincing statements of Mr. Labh Singh and his two  petitions, but I would ask 
every lover of India and every public man to carefu lly study these documents 
together with the judgment in the case. I think tha t we owe a very plain duty 
to Mr. Labh Singh and his co-prisoners. According t o Sir Edward Maclagan they 
are all clearly guilty. According to the evidence b efore the public, they are all 
clearly innocent. We may not allow young men of bri lliant ability and moral 
worth to have their careers blasted for life by our  indifference. Posterity will 
judge us by our ability to secure justice in the ca ses such as I have had the 
painful duty of placing before the public. For me, justice for the individual, be 
he the humblest, is everything. All else comes afte r. And I hope that the public 
will take the same view. If the convictions stand, it will not be because we are 
unable to secure justice but because we are unwilli ng and incompetent, for I 
feel that even the Government of India and the Punj ab Government will find it 
hard to withstand a unanimously expressed public op inion based on facts and 
couched in the language of moderation. 
Young India , 18-9-1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187   
48. MORE PUNJAB TRAGEDIES 
It is my misfortune to have to present two more cas es from the land of sorrow 
to the readers of  Young India.  I call Punjab the land of sorrow, because I find 
on the one hand a series of cases in which, if the records of cases are to be 
believed, a manifest injustice has been done, and o n the other, an apparent 
determination on the part of the Punjab Government not to undo the wrong. 
For as I have already said in these columns, a mere  reduction of sentences 
without admission of at least an error of judgment is no comfort to the men 
who protest their innocence or to the people at lar ge who believe in their 
innocence and wish to see justice done. I must conf ess that I am uninterested 
in reduction of sentences if the prisoners are guil ty and it is a crime to keep 
them in duress if they are innocent. The reader wil l see the petitions* on behalf 
of Mr. Gurudayal Singh and Dr. Mahomed Bashir. Both  are high-spirited men — 
one a Sikh of culture, and other a Mohamedan doctor  having before him a life 
full of promise. If they have waged war, if they ha ve incited to murder, there 
can be no question of remission of the sentences pa ssed against them. 
Therefore, the fact that Dr. Bashir's sentence of d eath has been commuted, 
whilst it must be a matter of some feeble consolati on to Mrs. Bashir, can be 
none to Dr. Bashir or to the public. 
Let us glance at Mr. Gurudayal Singh's case. His br other has sent me a long 
letter asking me even to publish it. As the main fa cts are contained in the 
petition, I refrain from publishing the letter for fear of tiring the reader, but I 
will make use of such statements from it as may be necessary to demonstrate 
the enormity of the injustice done in the case. "He  only attended," says the 
brother, "the constitutional and the orderly meetin g of the 6th April. He was on 
the 14 th  and 15 th  confined to bed. The local sub-assistant surgeon ( Government 
employee) attended on him, gave his prescription, w hich I am sending to you in 
original along with the papers." I have seen this p rescription. "Seriously sick 
with appendicitis, my brother could not join the so -called unruly mob in 
breaking the glass panes of the Tahsil windows." As  regards prosecution 
witnesses against my brother I have only to add tha t my brother was not The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  informed of the names of such persons. He knew them  by seeing them in the 
court.... My brother was, as a matter of fact, not informed of the charge 
against him except through the mouth of the prosecu tion witnesses." 
I hold that if this statement is correct, it is eno ugh to ensure Mr. Gurudayal 
Singh's discharge. No accused could thus be taken b y surprise and expected 
where and when to plead. Surely he was entitled to see the charge, and not 
gather it through the prosecution witnesses. The le tter in my possession then 
analyses the antecedents of the witnesses for the p rosecution and shows the 
animus they had against the accused. Naturally the public cannot be expected 
to judge the credibility of witnesses upon  ex parte  statements made by or on 
behalf of the accused, but these statements show, i f they are true, that an 
immense amount of perjury must have taken place on the part of the 
prosecution witnesses.' I admit that this case is n ot as clearly established on 
behalf of the prisoners as many others I have exami ned, for I have not the 
whole of the papers for presentation to the public.  Bat assuming the truth of 
the statements made authentically on behalf of the prisoner, it is clear that the 
case required looking into. 
Dr. Mahomed Bashir's is another such case. The path etic petition by his wife 
and Dr. Bashir's statement itself before the court,  which sentenced him to 
death, if true, show that the court's judgment had been completely warped. 
Dr. Bashir may or may not have lied, but the court had most decidedly nothing 
before it to warrant the remark that the defence ev idence was worthless; for, 
Dr. Bashir, as will be seen from the statement publ ished in another column,* 
categorically denied many of the statements and fac ts imputed to him. I do not 
intend to burden this criticism with any extracts f rom the very brief and 
business-like statement presented to the court by D r. Bashir, but I would 
commend it to the careful attention of the reader. He cannot help the 
conclusion that the statement deserved a better fat e than a contemptuous 
dismissal from the court. 
Young India,  24-9-1919 
 
 
*These petitions are not included in this book. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189   
49. HOW NOT TO DO IT? 
At the very earnest request of Mayadevi, 16 years o ld wife of Kesar Mai, I 
reproduce elsewhere her picturesque petition** pray ing for the release of her 
young husband, 21 years old. The case presented see ms to me to be 
unanswerable but a good cause has been spoiled by a  bad advocate. Though the 
petition is that of Mayadevi, it is quite clear tha t it is the handiwork of a 
draftsman who has written in a fit of rage against what he has, undoubtedly 
and with good cause, believed to be a monstrous inj ustice. But anger is short 
madness and noblest causes have been damaged by adv ocates affected with 
temporary lunacy. The petition is overlaid with use less adjectives and 
declamations. Whilst it has been a pleasure to me t o dissect the many 
businesslike petitions that have come from that lan d of sorrow, in the present 
instance I have been obliged to labour through viol ent language to what I 
consider to be a right conclusion. I do not happen to know the draftsman of the 
petition. Mayadevi, who has sent a covering letter equally violently worded, 
gives me no information about the draftsman. But I do wish as a practised 
draftsman to warn writers of petition, whether they  be pleaders or otherwise, 
to think of the cause they may be espousing for the  time being. I assure them 
that a bare statement of facts embellished with adj ectives is far more eloquent 
and effective than a narrative glowing with exubera nt language. 
Petition writers must understand that they address busy men, not necessarily 
sympathetic, sometimes prejudiced, and almost invar iably prone to sustain the 
decisions of their subordinates. In the case of the  Punjab they approach a 
Viceroy and a Lieutenant-Governor who have preconce ived ideas. Petitions 
have to be read and analysed by public workers and journalists who have none 
too much time at their disposal. I know to my cost how difficult it is for me to 
do full justice to the value of the papers that pou r in upon me week to week 
from the Punjab. I make a present of my valuable ex perience to young patriots 
who wish to try the art of advocating public cause by writing petitions or 
otherwise. I had the privilege of serving under the  late Mr. Gokhale and for a The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190  time under the G. O. M.* of India. Both told me tha t if I wanted to be heard I 
must be brief, I must write to the point and adhere  to facts, and never travel 
beyond the cause under notice, and I must be most s paring in my adjectives. 
And if some success has attended my effort it is du e to my acceptance of the 
golden advice given to me by the two illustrious de ceased. With this preface 
and warning I proceed to the analysis of the case o f young Kesar Mai. 
I am anxious that the excellent case of young Kesar  Mai might not be 
overlooked by reason of bad draftsmanship of the pe tition. The wonder to me is 
that so many petitions have been written with marke d ability and amazing self-
restraint. But when a badly drawn document comes th eir way it is the business 
of public workers to sift the grain from the chaff and present the former to the 
public. 
Let it be remembered that this is one of the Hafiza bad cases arising out of the 
tumult that took place at Hafizabad station during which Lieut. Tatam is 
alleged to have been the object of the mischievous attention of the crowd that 
had gathered at that station. Kesar Mai was sentenc ed to be hanged, the 
sentence being subsequently commuted to ten years' imprisonment. The wife's 
petition says, "It is justice which Your Excellency 's petitioner most humbly seeks 
and on justice Your Excellency's petitioner insists ." And on that account she 
asks for the release of her young husband. The grou nds as can be collected 
from the petition are: 
1. The prosecution evidence is inconsistent with itsel f. 
2. The charge against Kesar Mai is that he was trying to snatch Lieut. Tatam's 
child from him, but according to the petition, the police produced Kesar 
Mai a dozen times before the Lieutenant, but Mr. Ta tam would as many 
times nod his head meaning positive and complete na y and added each 
time, "none tried to snatch the child from me!" 
3. Lieut. Tatam did not identify Kesar Mai even as one  of the men concerned 
in assaulting him. 
4. Identification parade was held sometime after the o ccurrence. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191  5. Lieut. Tatam is reported to have said, "Your Deputy  Commissioner Lieut. 
Col. O'Brien is a very strong man and he has unnece ssarily compelled me to 
make too much of the case." 
6. The petition charges the police with having given c olour to the 
proceedings which they did not deserve. 
7. The prosecution witnesses were nearly all Governmen t servants, i.e.,  
chaprasis, moharrirs, railway staff, police staff, and also pedlars, 
confectioners etc. who are alleged to have been mad e to give evidence. 
8. Prosecution witnesses against Kesar Mai were either  prejudiced or 
themselves feared "implications" or expected favour s. 
9. Lieut. Tatam himself had nothing against Kesar Mai.  Bashir Haiyat stated, 
"Only Kesar Mai was wounded by the glass of the win dow." Haveli Ram 
identified Kesar Mai, but the Commission remarked a bout him, "demeanour 
bad — not to he trusted". Similar was the case with  Wadhawa Mai. Kishan 
Dayal was another prosecution witness who is stated  to have perjured 
himself and given evidence flatly in contradiction of Lieut. Tatam's. Kishan 
Dayal appears to have been a boon companion of Kesa r Mai and yet is said 
to have stated to the court that he did not know Ke sar Mai before. Chapter 
and verse are given in the petition to prove Kishan  Dayal's intimacy with 
Kesar Mai. Kisan Dayal is stated to have yielded to  police influence and, it 
is said, he is now sorry "for his wrong and cruel s tatement". 
10. The defence evidence was entirely ignored although the defence witnesses 
were impartial men of position. 
11. Young Kesar Mai belongs to a family which rendered services to the 
Government. 
If these allegations are true, it is clear that Kes ar Mai has been wrongly 
convicted and is entitled to be discharged. Cases l ike this prove the great need 
there is for an impartial Commission to investigate  them. Sir William Vincent 
has sprung a surprise upon the community by stating  that two judges would be 
appointed to investigate such cases and report upon  them to the Government. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  One would have thought that Lord Hunter's Committee  would be able to do this 
work. But I take it that the public would be satisf ied with this separate 
committee, provided that the judges to be appointed  are strong, independent 
and able men. Sir William Vincent might have been m ore communicative than 
he was. He evidently does not realize the pain and the torture under which the 
relatives of men who, in their opinion, are wrongly  convicted, are passing their 
days.  
 
An Unworthy Defence  
One almost despairs of getting justice when one rea ds the debates that have 
taken place in the Viceregal Council and the defenc e put forth for every vile 
and vindictive act done in the Punjab in the name o f prestige, law and order. 
Even the 'hands and knees' order has been sought to  be justified by Lieut. 
General Sir Havelock Hudson. The action of the crow d against an innocent lady 
doctor cannot be condemned too strongly or too vehe mently. I do not know 
whether all the facts stated by the gallant General  are true, but for the 
purpose of my argument, I shall assume them to be t rue. I venture to submit, 
however, that no act on the part of an infuriated m ob can possibly be held to 
justify the issuing of a barbarous order in cold bl ood requiring that "those who 
wished to pass the scene of the assault on Miss She rwood should be made to 
crawl on their hands and knees." The scene of assau lt was not an out-of-the-
way corner which nobody need visit or which people could avoid if they chose. 
There was, therefore, no question of people's wishi ng to pass the scene of the 
assault. It was one of  being obliged  to pass the scene. Why should people who 
had no hand in the act of violence have 'to crawl o n their hands and knees' in 
passing the scene of the assault? The General proce eds thus to justify the 
order: 
"I think that the Council will agree that it is not  surprising that the officer in command at 
Amritsar took the view that some unusual measures w ere necessary to bring home to the 
mob that such acts of violence directed against def enceless women could not be 
tolerated. Something was required to strike the ima gination and impress on all the 
determination of the military authorities to protec t European women."' The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193  The whole of the speech is worth reading as an exam ple of bad taste. It is 
speeches such as Sir Havelock Hudson's which create  bad blood and give 
unbridled licence to the soldiery. I was totally un prepared for this defence from 
high quarters of acts of vengeance, unworthy of tru e soldiers. Surely there are 
nobler methods of ensuring protection for European women. Have their lives 
been in such danger in India as to require any spec ial protection? Why should 
the life of a European woman be held more sacred th an that of an Indian 
woman? Has she not the same sense of honour, the sa me feelings? What is the 
British flag worth if a British soldier wearing the  King's uniform rises from his 
seat in the Viceregal Council and insults the peopl e of India by language such as 
Lieut. General Sir Havelock Hudson has used ? I sti ll do not approve of the cry 
against the Indemnity Bill. I think, with due defer ence to the great experienced 
leaders of opinion in India, that to put it at its worst it was bad tactics to have 
opposed the Indemnity Bill but the speech of Genera l Hudson, if it reflects, as I 
fear it does, the sentiments of the English members  of the Council, must cause 
the gravest misgivings as to the ultimate result of  Lord Hunter's Committee and 
its off shoot. 
Young India,  27-9-1919 
 
**This petition is not included in this book. 
* Grand Old Man, i.e. Dadabhai Naoroji. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194   
50. FINING THE LABOURERS 
Ahmedabad, the Government has decided, has to pay a  fine of nearly nine lakhs 
of rupees in connection with the April disturbances . This is under the same 
section of the British Police Act as Nadiad has bee n dealt with. A law that 
allows a Government thus arbitrarily to impose a pe nalty is a bad law. All laws 
that place a Government above law and enable them t o impose their will upon 
people without consultation with them or without th e authority of a properly 
constituted judicial tribunal are bad, and should n ot be tolerated where there 
is an enlightened and liberal Government or where t he people are jealous of 
their freedom. But it is not my purpose to discuss the badness of the law. My 
object at the present moment is to bring to public notice an unwise and 
untimely and an almost despotic application of that  bad law. The principle that 
the wanton damage done to life and property by crow ds of people should be 
made good by them is beyond dispute. But acceptance  of that principle cannot 
and does not involve acceptance of arbitrary powers . In the case of the 
Ahmedabad mill-hands a fine of 176 thousand rupees has been fixed. Recovery 
is to be made from all mill-hands employed during S eptember 1919, within the 
municipal limits. Now the disturbances took place i n April last. It is a notorious 
fact that mill-hands have changed somewhat and newc omers constantly come 
in. Why should those who joined after the disturban ces and have no connection 
with them be made to pay anything whatsoever? Why s hould women and 
children of whom there is a considerable number in the mills have to pay? 
There are probably sixty thousand labourers in the mills. Is it right to fine them 
nearly two lakhs of rupees? 
The manner of collection and the time chosen are st ill more unfortunate. The 
order is dated 26th September, 1919 and on the same  day the following was 
served upon the mill-owners: 
"The Collector of Ahmedabad hereby calls upon the A gents of the ... mill to pay to the 
Huzur Deputy Collector, Ahmedabad, on Monday, Septe mber 29th before 3-00 p.m. an The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195  amount equal to one week's wages of the manual labo urers employed during September, 
1919 in the mill out of the amount held by him as c aution money on their account." 
The law contemplates the possibility of an appeal t o the Government against 
such orders by the parties aggrieved. The order has  not been served upon the 
mill-hands. They have not been given the chance of appeal nor have they been 
given the option of paying the fine themselves. The  caution money, that is, the 
money retained by the mill-owners out of the wages due to the mill-hands, has 
been summarily attached without notice to or consen t of the labourers 
concerned. Such treatment of labourers debases them , needlessly irritates 
them and keeps them in a helpless condition. This m anner of dealing with the 
labourers shows that they are not considered respon sible human beings. 
It is almost like collecting fine from owners of ca ttle for trespass without 
reference to the latter, the difference being that the labourers are not dumb 
like cattle and unlike cattle the burden ultimately  falls on their shoulders. It is 
surprising that the mill-owners have, as I understa nd they have, become willing 
parties to such a monstrous procedure. 
Information in my possession goes to show that the mill-owners are to recoup 
themselves for the above payment out of the wages i mmediately to fall due. 
This means that the enormous sum of one hundred and  seventy-six thousand 
rupees (Rs. 1,76,000) is to be collected during a f estival season common to 
both the Hindus and Mohamedans. The impropriety of such a step can hardly be 
questioned. The coincidence is no doubt unintended but the unsophisticated 
labourers will conclude that the festival season ha s been intentionally chosen 
to wound their feelings. 
The Collector of Ahmedabad is a gentleman. He has g iven every satisfaction to 
the inhabitants of the district. At a time of inten se excitement, he acted with 
remarkable coolness. He is a man full of broad huma nity. It is a matter, 
therefore, of special regret to me to have to criti cize his actions and I cannot 
help saying that if he was not a slave to a system which makes arbitrary 
procedure possible at almost every step of national  life, he could not have 
helped seeing the absurdity and the injustice of th e action taken by him. The The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196  matter is now before His Excellency the Governor an d I venture to express the 
hope that the wrong done to the labourers of Ahmeda bad will be redressed. 
The sum apportioned for the labourers is too much f or them. It should be 
reduced. Women and boys should be exempted and the payment received by 
easy stages. I admit the difficulty of collection b y instalment from a large 
number of labourers but that difficulty is nothing compared to the infliction of 
a serious injustice upon a large number of human be ings. Terrorizing 
punishment is hardly the best method of weaning off enders from wrong-doing, 
and in the present instance the punishment will fal l upon many innocent 
shoulders. 
The authorities have recognized the delicacy of the  situation in that they have 
drafted special police to Ahmedabad and taken extra ordinary precautions in 
order to avoid unruliness on the part of the labour ers and to cow them down 
into submission. 
Young India,  4-10-1919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197   
51. THE AMRITSAR APPEALS 
[Editor's Note: On July 24, 1919, the Privy Council  had granted leave of appeal to 21 
citizens of Amritsar convicted by the Court Martial  at Lahore in connection with the 
Amritsar riots of April 1919. They appealed on the ground that the Viceroy had no power 
to issue the Martial Law ordinances and that the pr ocedure followed by the Summary 
Courts was irregular.] 
So these appeals have been dismissed in spite of th e advocacy of the best 
counsel that was obtainable. The Privy Council has confirmed lawless 
procedure. I must confess that the judgment does no t come upon me quite as 
surprise, though the remarks of the judges, as Sir Simon was developing his 
argument on behalf of the appellants, led one to ex pect a favourable verdict. 
My opinion, based upon a study of political cases, is that the judgments even of 
the highest tribunals are not unaffected by subtle political considerations. The 
most elaborate precautions taken to procure a purel y judicial mind must break 
down at critical moments. The Privy Council cannot be free from the 
limitations of all human institutions which are goo d enough, only for normal 
conditions. The consequences of a decision favourab le to the people would 
have exposed the Indian Government to indescribable  discredit from which it 
would have been difficult [for it] to free itself f or a generation. 
Its political significance can be gauged from the f act that as soon as the news 
was received in Lahore all the preparations that we re made to accord a fitting 
welcome to Lala Lajpat Rai were immediately cancell ed and the capital of the 
Punjab was reported to be in deep mourning. Deeper discredit, therefore, now 
attaches to the Government by reason of the judgmen t, because rightly or 
wrongly the popular opinion will be that there is n o justice under the British 
Constitution when large political or racial conside rations are involved. 
There is only one way to avoid the catastrophe. The  human and especially the 
Indian mind quickly responds to generosity. I hope that without the necessity of 
an agitation or petitions the Punjab Government or the Central Government The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198  will immediately cancel the death sentences and, if  at all possible, 
simultaneously set the appellants free. 
This is required by two considerations, each equall y important. The first is that 
of restoring, public confidence which I have alread y mentioned. The second is 
fulfillment of the Royal Proclamation (of December 1919) to the letter. That 
great political document orders the release of all the political offenders who 
may not by their release prove a danger to society.  No one can possibly suggest 
that the twenty-one appellants will, if they are se t free, in any shape or form 
constitute a danger to society. They never had comm itted any crimes before. 
Most of them were regarded as respectable and order ly citizens. They were not 
known to belong to any revolutionary society. If th ey committed any crimes at 
all, they were committed only under the impulse of the moment and under 
what to them was grave provocation. Moreover, the p ublic believe that the 
majority of the convictions by the Martial Law Trib unals were unsupported by 
any good evidence. I, therefore, hope that the Gove rnment, which have so far 
been doing well in discharging political offenders even when they were caught 
in the act, will not hesitate to release these appe llants and thus earn the 
goodwill of the whole of India. It is an act of gen erosity done in the hour of 
triumph which is the most effective. And in the pop ular opinion this dismissal of 
the appeal has been regarded as a triumph for the G overnment. 
I would respectfully plead with the Punjab friends not to lose heart. We must 
calmly prepare ourselves for the worst. If the conv ictions are good, if men 
convicted have been guilty of murders or incitement s to murder, why should 
they escape punishment? If they have not committed these crimes as we 
believe most at least have not, why should we escap e the usual fate of all who 
are trying to rise a step higher? Why should we fea r the sacrifice if we would 
rise? No nations have ever risen without sacrifice and sacrifice can only be 
spoken of in connection with innocence and not with  crime. 
Young India,  3-3-1920 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199   
52. THE PUNJAB SENTENCES 
The Commissioners appointed by the Congress Punjab Sub-committee have in 
their report accused His Excellency the Viceroy of criminal want of imagination. 
His Excellency's refusal to commute two death sente nces out of five is a fine 
illustration of the accusation. The rejection of th e appeal (See "The Amritsar 
Appeals",  Young India,  3-3-1920) no more proves the guilt of the condemne d 
than their innocence could have been proved by quas hing the proceedings 
before the Martial Law Tribunal. Moreover, these ca ses clearly come under the 
Royal Proclamation (of December 1919) in accordance  with its interpretation by 
the Punjab Government. The murders in Amritsar were  not due to any private 
quarrel between the murderers and their victims. Th e offence, grave though it 
was, was purely political and committed under excit ement. More than full 
reparation has been taken for the murders and arson . In the circumstances 
common sense dictates reduction of the death senten ces. The popular belief 
favours the view that the condemned men are innocen t and have not had a fair 
trial. The execution has been so long delayed that hanging at this stage would 
give a rude shock to Indian society. Any Viceroy wi th imagination would have at 
once announced commutation of the death sentences —  not so Lord 
Chelmsford. In his estimation, evidently, the deman ds of justice will not be 
satisfied if at least some of the condemned men are  not hanged. Public feeling 
with him counts for nothing. We shall still hope th at either the Viceroy or Mr. - 
Montagu will commute the death sentences. 
But if the Government will grievously err, if they carry out the sentences, the 
people will equally err if they give way to anger o r grief over the hanging if it 
has unfortunately to take place. Before we become a  nation possessing an 
effective voice in the councils of nations, we must  be prepared to contemplate 
with equanimity, not a thousand murders of innocent  men and women but 
many thousands before we attain a status in the wor ld that shall not be 
surpassed by any nation. We hope therefore that all  concerned will take rather 
than lose heart and treat hanging as an ordinary af fair of life. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  (Since the above was in type, we have received the cruel news. At last H. E. 
the Viceroy has mercilessly given the rude shock to  Indian society. It is now for 
the latter to take heart in spite of the unkindcst cut. —Editor,  Young India.)  
Young India,  7-4-1920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201   
53. A HARD CASE 
I have received the following telegram from the fam ilies of Messrs Bugga and 
Ratanchand: 
Bugga and Ratto under orders transfer Andamans. Bug ga, suffering hernia and piles since 
ten years. Was operated upon. Ratto aged over forty  and therefore should not be sent 
Andamans under Jail Manual Rule 721. 
The readers will remember that these were the accus ed on whose behalf 
appeals were made to the Privy Council in common wi th others and whose 
appeals were rejected on technical grounds. (See "T he Amritsar Appeals", 
Young India, 3-3-1920) 
The Hon'ble Pandit Motilal Nehru has analysed the c ases and shown that they 
are no more guilty than the others who have been di scharged. But several who 
were originally sentenced to death had their senten ces commuted to 
imprisonment and arc now set free. What is it that distinguishes these two 
cases from the others? Is it the fact of the appeal  itself? If they had not 
appealed, or rather, if a philanthropic lawyer out of pity had not taken up their 
case, fought for them against tremendous odds, they  would not have escaped 
the hangman's noose. H. H. the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab has been 
showing a generous discretion in releasing many who  suffered between April 
and June last year. Although he had the opportunity , after the dismissal of the 
appeal, to hang Messrs Bugga and Ratanchand, H. E. the Viceroy, it is equally 
true, has commuted the sentence of death to one of transportation. But I 
venture to submit that if the Royal Proclamation is  to be given effect to in the 
fullest measure, Messrs Bugga and Ratanchand are en titled to their liberty. 
They are no more a danger to the State than Lala Ha rkishen Lai, Pandit 
Rambhuj Dutt Chowdhari and others of that distingui shed company. But for the 
time being, strong as the case is for their dischar ge, I am pleading not for a 
complete release but for keeping them in the Punjab  and if they have been 
sent away already, for bringing them back, if for n othing else, out of 
consideration for the wives of these poor men. Let not the public think that the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202  acts of the Government of the day are dictated only  by fear and expedience, 
not by logic and high principles of justice. 
Young India,  26-5-1920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203   
54. LAWYERS' DUTY 
I have never minced words in criticizing lawyers. M ahadev, during his short 
reign, castigated them to his heart's content. But the lawyers did not 
misunderstand him. They saw that the shafts he aime d at them were shafts of 
love. Though the lawyers deserve criticism, their c ontribution to the fight for 
freedom is no mean one. Pherozeshah Mehta, the uncr owned king of Bombay, 
was an eminent lawyer. The Lokamanya was a lawyer. Manmohan Ghosh, 
Lalmohan Ghosh and Lalaji, the Lion of the Punjab, all of them were lawyers. 
Deshbandhu, who sacrificed lakhs in the service of the country, was also a 
lawyer. Motilalji, Malaviyaji, Vithalbhai Patel, Sa rdar, Jairamdas, 
Rajagopalachari, Prakasam, Venkatapayya, Santhanam,  Munshi, Kamdar, 
Purushottamdas Trikumdas and Broker, all these are lawyers, and the President 
of the Congress himself is a lawyer. This list is n ot exhaustive. I have mentioned 
only the names which occur to me at the moment, but  many others can be 
mentioned. 
The lawyers have, therefore, no reason to feel asha med of their contribution, 
but there is none to feel elated either. If despite  the sacrifices of all these 
lawyers people speak ill of lawyers—even I have don e so—there is reason for 
that. 
People expect every lawyer to be a patriot, as they  expect every Brahmin to 
possess spiritual knowledge. A lawyer, by his very profession, is an advocate of 
people's rights, an expert in law and politics and one who saves the victims of 
oppression by the State. When, therefore, a class o f people who should regard 
service of the country as their profession give the mselves up to the pursuit of 
self-interest, lead a life of self-indulgence or ha ve no other aim than making 
money by encouraging litigation, people naturally s peak ill of them. Though, 
taken absolutely, the number of patriotic lawyers n amed above will not appear 
insignificant, if we have regard to the total numbe r of lawyers and the 
magnitude of their task, it will appear small indee d. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204  Lawyers have not remained untouched by the present awakening. The sacrifices 
of Shri Munshi and other lawyers stem from the pres ent struggle. I see that 
lawyers who dare not or cannot give up practice, st ill wish to do some service. I 
hear that many lawyers in Bombay have stopped weari ng hats and foreign 
clothes. Some lawyers in Gujarat have come forward to investigate the cases of 
those against whom atrocities are being committed. All this is welcome indeed. 
But, leaving aside the question of their giving up practice, the important thing 
is that they should come forward in large numbers t o offer civil disobedience 
and remain undeterred if the courts cancel their  sanads.  They cannot betray 
the country for the sake of their  sanads. If in consequence of their doing 
national work they lose their  sanads, they should welcome this as if they had 
been cleansed of dirt. If lawyers thus become fearl ess, they can help the 
people of their districts in many ways. If they she d fear, lawyers can 
1. keep accounts of public funds; 
2. explain legal intricacies to the people; 
3. enquire into civil disobedience cases which have be en arbitrarily dealt 
with and bring them to light; 
4. be present at places where there is fear of violenc e; 
5. explain to the people all cases of arbitrary use of  authority; 
6. enquire into injustices being perpetrated at presen t and point out to the 
public the Government's misdeeds; 
7. help in manufacturing khadi; 
8. help the women in bringing about boycott of foreign  cloth; 
9. since in every province almost all the prominent le aders have been 
arrested, lawyers can lead the people and encourage  the present spirit of 
fearlessness. 
I have suggested these items only by way of illustr ation. Those who are keen on 
doing service will think up many fields in which th ey may do it. 
[From Gujarati]  Navajivan,  4-5-1930  The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. XLIII 
pp. 383-384 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206   
55. HOW TO SPIRITUALIZE THE PROFESSION 
[From "In Ceylon" by M. D.] 
While in Colombo we had a pretty little encounter w ith the law students. They 
had promised to go to Gandhiji's residence to prese nt their purse to him. Later 
it seems they got jealous of the smaller institutio ns that Gandhiji was visiting, 
changed their mind, and gave a sort of notice to th e Reception Committee that 
they should either bring Gandhiji to their college or sacrifice a 'substantial 
purse'! The threat however was lost on the Committe e, and the students 
thought it discreet to keep their previous promise.  So they came, but lodged 
their complaint against the Reception Committee for  taking Gandhiji to private 
houses and to minor educational institutions and ig noring the Law College! But 
they had counted without their host. Gandhiji twitt ed them first with 
inaccuracy about facts, in that they had stated tha t Gandhiji had visited private 
houses, whereas he had called only on Mrs. DeSilva and that as a hawker, and 
with their inability to understand that Gandhiji sh ould naturally give preference 
to those who were yet children and fathers of tomor row over those who in all 
probability were fathers of today. The joke was eno ugh to put them in proper 
humour, and they made amends by recognizing the dif ficulty of the Reception 
Committee, and proceeded to turn the little time th ey had with Gandhiji to 
good account. 'How to spiritualize the legal profes sion' was the point on which 
they sought advice which Gandhiji readily gave them : 
"I am glad you have put this question. For I may sa y that if I cannot speak on 
this subject with authority, no one else can. For t hroughout my career at the 
bar, I never once, departed from the strictest trut h and honesty. Well, then the 
first thing which you must always bear in mind, if you would spiritualize the 
practice of law, is not to make your profession sub servient to the interests of 
your purse, as is unfortunately but too often the c ase at present, but to use 
your profession for the service of your country. Th ere are instances of eminent 
lawyers in all countries who led a life of self-sac rifice, who devoted their 
brilliant legal talents entirely to the service of their country, although it spelt The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207  almost pauperism to them. In India you have the ins tance of the late Man 
Mohan Ghose. He took up the fight against the indig o planters and served his 
poor clients at the cost of his health, even at the  risk of his life, without 
charging them a single pie for his labours. He was a most brilliant lawyer, yet 
he was a great philanthropist. That is an example t hat you should have before 
you. Or better still you can follow Ruskin's precep t given in his book  Unto This 
Last. 'Why should a lawyer charge fifteen pounds for his  work' he asks, 'whilst a 
carpenter, for instance, hardly gets as many shilli ngs for his work?' The fees 
charged by lawyers are unconscionable everywhere. I  confess, I myself have 
charged what I would now call high fees. But even w hilst I was engaged in my 
practice, let me tell you, I never let my professio n stand in the way of my 
public service. 
"And there is another thing which I would like to w arn you against. In England, 
in South Africa, almost everywhere I have found tha t in the practice of their 
profession lawyers are consciously or unconsciously  led into untruth for the 
sake of their clients. An eminent English lawyer ha s gone so far as to say that it 
may even be the duty of a lawyer to defend a client  whom he knows to be 
guilty. There I disagree. The duty of a lawyer is a lways to place before the 
judges, and to help them to arrive at, the truth, n ever to prove the guilty as 
innocent. It is up to  you  to maintain the dignity of your profession. If you  fail in 
your duty what shall become of the other profession s? You, young men, 
claiming as you have just done to be the fathers of  tomorrow, should be the 
salt of the nation. If the salt loses its savour wh erewith shall it be salted?" 
Young India,  22-12-1927, pp. 427-28 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208   
56. BIRDS OF A FEATHER (?) 
[From: "In the Frontier Province—VI" by Pyarelal] 
The Bar Association of Peshawar utilized Gandhiji's  presence in the City by 
presenting him with an address at the Premier's res idence in which they proudly 
claimed him as one of their confraternity and incid entally also managed to do a 
little trumpet blowing for themselves by adverting to the splendid services in 
the political field rendered by leading lights of t he profession. Gandhiji, in a 
witty little speech, while thanking them for the ho nour that they had done him, 
observed that he was hardly entitled to that privil ege, in the first place 
because, as they all knew, he had been disbarred by  his own Inn, and secondly 
because he had long forgotten his law. Of late he h ad more often been engaged 
in breaking laws than in expounding or interpreting  them in the courts of the 
land. Still another and perhaps, his most vital rea son was his peculiar views 
about lawyers and doctors which he had recorded in his booklet,  The Indian 
Home Rule. A true lawyer, he told them* was one who placed tru th and service 
in the first place and the emoluments of the profes sion in the next place only. 
He did not know whether they had all adopted that i deal but if they pledged 
themselves to render service through their legal ac umen in an altruistic spirit 
he would be the first to pay them his homage. 
Harijan, 26-11-1938, p. 351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209   
57. A JUDGE'S INDICTMENT 
I condense the following from a newspaper report: 
"It is extremely common for advocates for the defen ce in criminal cases to argue that the 
prosecution story is an entire concoction by the po lice, and in the vast majority of cases 
no evidence whatever, whether elucidated in cross-e xamination or offered in examination-
in-chief, is ever produced in support of this argum ent. Now either the contention is raised 
on direct instructions of the client, or it is deli berately raised by counsel without any 
instructions from the client. In the former case th e accused has aggravated the 
heinousness of the offence with which he is charged . In a clear case of this kind the 
tribunal trying the case should take this into acco unt as a circumstance warranting an 
increase in the sentence. In the latter case where the legal practitioner has acted without 
reasonable cause he is guilty of the grossest profe ssional misconduct. Cross-examination 
on these lines is often grossly abused, and it is t he duty of the trying judge, if he has any 
suspicion when an advocate begins an attack upon th e prosecutor or a witness, to demand 
from the advocate an assurance that he has good gro unds for making the suggestion. If 
such is not forthcoming, cross-examination on these  lines should be promptly stopped. If 
an assurance is given, but if it appears on the ter mination of the trial that no such grounds 
has existed, the tribunal should bring the conduct of the advocate to the notice of the 
High Court, I make these observations in order that  a check may be placed on a growing 
and serious evil.” 
These are the remarks of the Chief Justice of the P atna High Court. 
I have said enough in these columns to show that ju stice is practically 
unobtainable in the so-called courts of. justice in  India. But I was unprepared 
for a Chief Justice (assuming that' he is correctly  reported) becoming the 
framer of a gratuitous indictment against lawyers a nd their clients. These 
remarks of the Chief Justice of the Patna High Cour t, in my opinion, amount to 
a threat to the accused persons and their counsel. If the fear of an increase in 
sentence or being disbarred hangs like Damocles' Sw ord on the accused person 
or his counsel as the case may be, it would be impo ssible for either to impugn 
the conduct of the police. Whatever the learned Chi ef Justice's experience may 
be, the experience of the man in the street is, tha t in a vast number of cases 
the police story  is  manufactured, and the growing evil is  not  in the accused or The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  his counsel, but it is in the police who therefore need to be checked in their 
excessive zeal to fasten a particular crime upon so meone. The ordinary 
policeman is in mortal fear of degradation or dismi ssal, if he cannot secure 
convictions. It becomes therefore his interest to m anufacture a case in the 
absence of reliable evidence. The judge, therefore,  whose duty is to presume 
the innocence of every accused person coming before  him, would think twenty 
times before he puts a single obstacle in his way. Where is the lawyer who has 
not often felt the truth of the statement which he makes but which he is 
unable to prove? And even a Charles Russell will be  hard to put to it to 
demonstrate the truth that he feels within himself if, for fear of being 
disbarred in case he fails to prove his charge, he is hampered in the course of 
his cross- examination or examination-in-chief. The  Piggot forgeries would 
never have been proved but for his fiery cross-exam ination. A lawyer who 
believes in the innocence of his client, whether he  is prompted by him or no, is 
bound, in order to discover the truth, to impugn by  way of cross-examination or 
otherwise the prosecution story. This however is co mmonsense and common 
law, but both are at a discount in India's courts o f justice. When it is a question 
of the prestige of the Government which, in its tur n, depends upon the prestige 
of the police, the judges consider it their duty to  protect that prestige by 
turning prosecutors themselves. It is sad, but it i s true. The Chief Justice of the 
Patna High Court is to be congratulated upon his bo ldness in emphasizing the 
fact. 
Young India,  19-9-1929, p. 308 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211   
58. AN UNJUDICIAL DICTUM 
A correspondent sends me a press cutting containing  a report of an Allahabad 
judgment of two English Judges sitting as appellate  court. In delivering their 
judgment allowing the appeal Their Lordships are re ported to have said: 
"The case is unsatisfactory because we have no less  than five persons who were 
in effect, if their evidence can be relied upon, ey e-witnesses, and yet, having 
regard to the slight value placed upon truth in thi s country, we have seriously 
to apply our minds as to whether they can be believ ed." 
This is an extraordinary pronouncement from a bench  of Judges. What legal 
basis had these two Judges for the sweeping stateme nt made by them as to the 
character of a whole nation? The inference is that in other countries a higher 
value is placed upon truth. Now if this was a unive rsally accepted proposition, 
perhaps the Judges would have been justified in tak ing legal notice of it. There 
is, however, not only no such acceptance but experi enced observers have 
testified that on the whole, greater value is put u pon truth in India than 
elsewhere. But no judge should be influenced one wa y or the other by such 
observations as have no judicial value. I would go further and say that such 
observations ought not to be made by any responsibl e person, even on political 
platforms. They can never be proved. But when they are made by Judges they 
vitiate their Judgments and may lead to miscarriage  of justice. Be it noted that 
the Allahabad Judges have made use of their bias in  coming to their decision 
and have thus proved their incapacity to hold respo nsible posts. The case in 
which the observation was made affected poor people . But the fact that only 
poor persons were involved makes it all the more ne cessary to take public 
notice of the judges' strictures. Who knows in how many cases this bias of theirs 
has resulted in defeating justice? 
Harijan, 2-4-1940, p. 116 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212   
59. UNTRUTH IN LAW COURTS 
[From "The Question Box"] 
Q. I have followed with interest the controversy that  has grown round your 
article in  Harijan  "Fourfold Ruin". Whatever one may say about the ar guments 
used on either side in this controversy, one thing I am in a position to assert 
without fear of contradiction, from my experience a s a judicial officer of the 
present system of our law. Courts and the instituti on of lawyers are mainly 
responsible for the moral and spiritual degradation  of our village peasantry in 
particular and the public in general. Even 'respect able' people, whom one has 
learnt to regard as the soul of honour in their ord inary every-day life, will tell 
barefaced lies for a trifle in a law court and thin k nothing of it. The canker is 
eating into the vitals of our village life. Would y ou suggest as to what a person 
in my position (viz. a judge), who has to record ev idence and give judicial 
decisions, can do to check this evil? 
A. What you say is too true. The atmosphere round la w courts is debasing as 
any visitor passing through them can see. I hold ra dical views about the 
administration of justice. But mine, I know, is a v oice in the wilderness. Vested 
interests will not allow radical reform, unless Ind ia comes into her own through 
truthful and non-violent means. If that glorious ev ent happens, the 
administration of law and medicine will be as cheap  and healthy as it is today 
dear and unhealthy. The heroic advice will be for y ou to descend from the 
bench, embrace poverty and serve the poor. The pros aic will be for you to do 
the best you can in the very difficult circumstance s in which you find yourself, 
reduce life to its simplest terms and devote your s avings for the service of the 
poor.  
Harijan, 17-2-1940, pp. 7-8 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213   
60. HINDU LAW AND MYSORE 
Sjt. Bhashyam Aiyengar of Bangalore writes: 
"The principles of Hindu Law as at present administ ered are antiquated and opposed to our 
sense of equity and justice. I shall give a few ins tances: 
1. Near and dear relations like the sister's daughter,  the daughter-in-law, the brother's 
widow and the stepmother are altogether denied the right of inheritance. If a man 
were to leave a widowed daughter- in-law as his onl y surviving relation, his 
properties escheat to the Government, and the poor girl who staked all her life and 
fortune on the family of her husband gets out into the street 
2. Even such near relations as are included in the lis t of heirs do not get a chance 
because of the priorities of distant agnates. The s ister is an heir; but if only the 
deceased has left a fifth descendant of a great-gre at- grand-father of his, the latter 
takes the property and the sister gets nothing. So too the son's daughter, the sister's 
son and the brother's daughter. 
3. Women are not allowed to exercise full rights of ow nership in properties inherited by 
or gifted to them. A widow should carefully handle her husband's property and if only 
she spends more or incurs a debt on the security of  the property, may be for her own 
livelihood, a distant  dayada  can drag her to the court and coerce her into givi ng up 
her rights.  Mitakshara  which is the prevailing authority here clearly and  definitely 
says that all properties which a woman may get in a ny manner whatsoever are her  
stridhana  and she can dispose of them at her will. The Privy  Council refused to 
follow it stating that Indians always treated women  as incapable and the author of  
Mitakshara  is a fire-eater, 
4. The deaf and the dumb are excluded from inheritance . In this we are beating the 
lame man with his own crutches. 
5. The legality of widow-remarriage is not recognized in Mysore, as in British India. 
6. It is doubtful whether post-puberty marriage is leg al. The age of consent should be 
raised to 14 in the case of girls. 
7. Divorce may be provided for if people agree. We. ha d it in India formerly. We find 
Parashara mentioning the circumstances under which a wife may marry a second 
husband during the lifetime of the first. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214  8. Inter-caste marriages are not allowed under the pre sent law. They must be 
legalized. It was an institution freely recognized by our ancients. Many of our sages 
such as Vasishtha; Vyasa, Narada and Parashara were  the offspring of inter-caste 
marriages. If I may marry a Christian wife lawfully  why may not I be permitted to 
marry a Hindu wife though of another caste? 
9. An orphan is declared ineligible for adoption. If e ver a boy be fit for adoption it is 
the orphan, and yet we have the prohibition. 
10. Widows are not allowed to adopt unless they have be en authorized by the husband or 
the consent of sapindas  is taken. Authority should be presumed and the wid ow 
allowed to adopt unless directed by the husband not  to do so. This is the law in 
Bombay. 
There are many more such instances. I have chosen o nly a few. 
Thinking people feel the oppressiveness and desire "reform. The only way of changing the 
law is by legislation. The legislature is unable to  pass any law without consulting public 
opinion. And public opinion can only be consulted b y a committee appointed for the 
purpose. Hence I moved a resolution in the last Bud get session of our Assembly asking for 
the appointment of a committee to go into the quest ion, take evidence and report 
thereon formulating suggestions for legislative act ion. It was unanimously passed by the 
House. 
The committee has not yet been appointed though peo ple all over the State desire it. The 
fear seems to be that British India not having move d in the matter yet, it may be that any 
attempt by Mysore might be laughed at. This is absu rd as you said. Mysore is peculiarly 
fitted to undertake the work, whereas there are rea l difficulties with British India. Mysore 
has peculiar advantages which it would be unwise on  our part to ignore. We have now a 
most enlightened ruler and an equally earnest and p rogressive Dewan. If we cannot effect 
the desired reforms now we never can hope to do it.  
Can you not take up this matter in  Young India?" The prominence I have given 
to the foregoing need not imply that I endorse ever y one of the reforms 
suggested by the writer. That some of them require immediate attention I have 
no doubt. Nor have I any doubt that all of them dem and serious consideration 
from those who would rid Hindu society of its anach ronisms. 
In pre-British days there was no such thing as rigi d Hindu Law governing the 
lives of millions. The body of regulations known as  Smritis were indicative The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  rather than inflexible codes of conduct. They never  had the validity of law such 
as is known to modern lawyers. The observance of th e restraints of the Smiritis 
was enforced more by social than legal sanctions. T he Smritis were, as is 
evident from the self-contradictory verses to be fo und in them, continually 
passing, like ourselves, through evolutionary chang es, and were adapted to the 
new discoveries that were being made in social scie nce. Wise kings were free to 
procure new interpretations to suit new conditions.  Hindu religion or Hindu 
Shastras never had the changeless and unchanging ch aracter that is now being 
sought to be given to them. No doubt in those days there were kings and their 
councillors who had the wisdom and the authority re quired to command the 
respect and allegiance of society. But now the cust om has grown up of thinking 
that Smritis and everything that goes by the name o f Shastras is absolutely 
unchangeable. The verses which we find to be unwork able or altogether 
repugnant to our moral sense we conveniently ignore . This very unsatisfactory 
state of things has to be, some day or other and so mehow, changed if Hindu 
society is to become a progressive unit in human ev olution. The British rulers 
cannot make these changes because of their differen t religion and their 
different ideal. Their ideal is to sustain their co mmercial supremacy and to 
sacrifice every other interest, moral or otherwise,  for the attainment of that 
ideal. Unless therefore Hindu public opinion clearl y demands it, and it can be 
made without any injury to their ideal, no drastic change in our customs or so-
called laws will be attempted or countenanced by th em. And it is difficult to 
focus Hindu public opinion on identical points in a  vast territory like British 
India covering many schools of thought and law. And  such public opinion as 
there is naturally and necessarily preoccupied with  the struggle for political 
freedom. A State like Mysore however has no such li mitations or 
preoccupations. In my humble opinion, it is its dut y to anticipate British India in 
the matter of removing the anachronisms in the Hind u Law and the like. Mysore 
State is large and important enough to attempt such  changes. It has become a 
progressively constitutional monarchy. It has a Leg islative Assembly 
representative enough to initiate social changes. I t seems already to have 
passed a resolution asking for the appointment of a  committee to consider what The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216  changes, if any, are necessary in the Hindu Law. An d if a strong committee 
representing orthodox as well as progressive Hindu opinion is appointed, its 
recommendations must prove useful and pave the way towards making the 
necessary changes. I do not know the rules of the M ysore Assembly governing 
the constitution of such committees, but there is l ittle doubt that they are 
elastic enough to admit of appointing or co-opting members from outside the 
Mysore State. Anyway Sjt. Bhashyam Aiyengar has sho wn that a revision of the 
Hindu Law is absolutely necessary in several cases.  No State is better fitted 
than Mysore for initiating the belated reform. 
Young India , 13-10-1927, p. 344 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217   
61. THE FEDERAL COURT 
[Speech delivered by Gandhiji at the Federal Struct ure Committee on 23-10-1931 in the 
course of a discussion on 'Federal Court of India'. ] 
Lord Chancellor and Fellow Delegates, I feel consid erable hesitation in speaking 
on this subject which has been rendered so highly t echnical by the course that 
the discussion has taken; but I feel that I owe a d uty to you and a duty to the 
Congress which I represent. I know that the Congres s holds some decided views 
on the question of the Federal Court, views which, I am afraid, may be very 
distasteful to a large number of the Delegates here . Whatever they are, seeing 
that they are held by a responsible body, it is, I suppose, necessary that I 
should at least present them to you. 
I see that the discussions proceed, if not upon utt er distrust, upon considerable 
distrust of ourselves. It is assumed that the Natio nal Government will not be 
able to conduct its affairs in an impartial manner.  The communal tangle also is 
colouring the discussion. The Congress, on the othe r hand, bases the whole of 
its policy on trust and on the confidence that when  we shall have come into 
power we shall also come to a sense of our responsi bility, and all the communal 
bias will drop out. But should it prove otherwise, then too the Congress would 
run the boldest risks, because, without running ris ks we shall not be able to 
come to exercise real responsibility. So long as we  have the mental reservation 
that we have to rest upon some foreign power for ou r guidance and for 
conducting our affairs at a critical juncture, so l ong, in my opinion, there is no 
responsibility. 
One feels also embarrassed by the fact that we real ly are trying to discuss this 
thing without knowing where we shall be. I should g ive one opinion if Defence 
was not under the control of the responsible Govern ment, and another opinion 
if Defence was under our own control. I proceed upo n the assumption that if we 
are to enjoy responsibility in the real sense of th e term, Defence will be under 
our control, under National control in every sense of the term. I entirely 
sympathize with Dr. Ambedkar in the difficulty that  he raised. It is all very well The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218  to have a judgment of the highest tribunal, but if the writ of that tribunal does 
not run beyond the confines of its own court, that tribunal will be a laughing-
stock of the nation and of the whole world. What is  then to be done in 
connection with that writ? What Mr. Jinnah said, of  course, came home—that 
the military would be there—but it will be the Crow n that will run the writ. 
Then I would say, let the High Court also, or the F ederal Court, be under the 
Crown. In my opinion the Supreme Court has to be, i f we are responsible, under 
the responsible Government, and therefore, the proc ess of carrying out the 
writ has also to be made good by the responsible Go vernment. Personally, I do 
not share the fears that actuate Dr. Ambedkar, but I think that his objection is 
a very reasonable objection, and that a Court which  gives judgments should 
also have perfect confidence that its judgments wil l be respected by those who 
are affected by its judgments, and hence, I would s uggest that the judges 
should have the power of framing rules in order to regulate matters in 
connection with those judgments. Naturally the enfo rcement will not rest with 
the Courts; the enforcement will rest with the exec utive authority, but the 
executive authority would have to conform to the ru les that might be framed 
by the Court. 
We fancy that this constitution is going to give us  every detail in connection 
with the composition of this Court. I respectfully differ from that view in its 
entirety. I think that this constitution will give us the framework of the federal 
Court, will define the jurisdiction of the Federal Court, but the rest will be left 
to the Federal Government to evolve. I cannot possi bly understand that the 
Constitution is also going to tell us how many year s the judges are to serve,' or 
whether they are to resign or retire at the age of 70, or 95, or 90, or 65. I think 
that these will be matters to be taken up by the Fe deral Government. Of 
course, we bring in the Crown at the end of almost every sentence. I must 
confess that, according to the conception of the Co ngress, there is no question 
of the Crown. India is to enjoy complete independen ce, and if India enjoys 
complete independence, whoever may be the supreme a uthority there, that 
supreme authority will be responsible for the appoi ntment of judges and 
several other matters which today belong to the Cro wn. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  It is a fundamental belief with the Congress that, whatever course the 
Constitution takes, there should be our own Privy C ouncil in India. The Privy 
Council's portals, if it is really to give relief t o the poor people in matters of the 
highest importance, should be open to the poorest p eople in the land and 1 
think that is impossible if the Privy Council in En gland is to decide our fate in 
matters of the greatest importance. There, too, I w ould guide ourselves by 
implicit trust in the ability of our judges to pron ounce wise and absolutely 
impartial decisions. I know that we run very great risks. The Privy Council here 
is an ancient institution, and an institution which  justly commands very great 
regard and respect; but in spite of all the respect  that I have for the Privy 
Council I cannot bring myself to believe that we al so will not be able to have a 
Privy Council of our own which will command univers al esteem. Because 
England can boast of very fine institutions, I do n ot think that therefore we 
must be tied down to those institutions. If we lear n anything whatsoever from 
England, we should learn to erect those institution s ourselves; otherwise there 
is poor chance for this nation whose representative s we claim to be. Therefore, 
I would ask us all to have sufficient trust and con fidence in ourselves at the 
present moment. Our beginning may be very small, bu t, if we have strong, true 
and honest hearts to give decisions, it does not ma tter in the slightest degree 
that we have not got the legal traditions which the  judges in England claim and 
very properly boast of in the face of the whole wor ld. 
 
Widest Jurisdiction 
That being my view, I feel that this Federal Court should be a court of the 
widest jurisdiction possible, and not decide only c ases that arise from the 
administration of Federal Laws. Federal Laws of cou rse will be there, but it 
should have the amplest jurisdiction to try all the  cases that may come from 
the four corners of India. 
It is, then, a question where the subjects of the P rinces will be and where they 
will come in. Subject to what the Princes may have to say, I would suggest, 
with the greatest deference and with equal hesitati on, that there will be, I The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220  hope at the end of it, if we are going to make some thing out of this 
Conference, something which will be common to all I ndia, to all the inhabitants 
of India, whether they come from the States or whet her they come from the 
rest of India. If there is something in common betw een all of us, naturally the 
Supreme Court will be the guardian of the rights th at we may consider to be 
common to all. What those rights should be, I am to tally unable to say. It is 
entirely for the Princes to say what they can be an d what they cannot be. In 
view of the fact that they represent here not only their own Houses but have 
taken on themselves the tremendous responsibility o f representing their 
subjects also at this Conference, I would certainly  make a humble but fervent 
appeal to them that they would of their own accord come forth with some 
scheme whereby their subjects also may feel that th ough they are not directly 
represented at this table, their voices find adequa te expression through these 
noble Princes themselves.  
 
Salaries  
So far as the salary is concerned, you will laugh, naturally, but the Congress 
believes that it is an impossible thing for us who,  in terms of wealth, are a 
nation of dwarfs, to vie with the British Governmen t, which represent today 
giants in wealth. India, whose average income is 3 d. per day, can ill afford to 
pay the high salaries that are commanded here. I fe el that it is a thing which 
we will have to unlearn if we are going to have vol untary rule in India. It is all 
very well so long as the British bayonet is there t o squeeze out of these poor 
people taxes to pay these salaries of Rs. 10,000 a month, Rs. 5,000 a month, 
and Rs. 20,000 a month. I do not consider that my c ountry has sunk so low that 
it will not be able to produce sufficient men who w ill live somewhat in 
correspondence with the lives of the millions and s till serve India nobly, truly 
and well. I do not believe for one moment that lega l talent has to be bought if 
it is to remain honest. 
I recall the names of Motilal Nehru, C. R. Das, Man omohan Ghose, Badrudin 
Tyebji and a host of others, who gave their legal t alent absolutely free of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221  charge and served their country faithfully and well . The taunt may be flung in 
my face that they did so because they were able to charge princely fees in 
their own professional work. I reject that argument  for the simple reason that I 
have known every one of them with the exception of Manomohan Ghose. It was 
not that they had plenty of money and therefore gav e freely of their talent 
when India required it. I have seen them living the  life of poor people and in 
perfect contentment. Whatever may be the position a t the present moment, I 
can point out to you several lawyers of distinction  who, if they had not come to 
the national cause, would today be occupying seats of the High Court benches 
in all parts of India. I have, therefore, absolute confidence that when we come 
to frame our own rules and so on we will do so in a  patriotic spirit and taking 
account of the miserable state that the millions of  India occupy. 
One word more and I have finished. Seeing that the Congress holds the view 
that this Federal Court or Supreme Court—whichever you call it—will occupy the 
position of the highest tribunal beyond which no ma n who is an inhabitant of 
India can go, its jurisdiction, in my opinion, will  be limitless. It will have 
jurisdiction, so far as Federal matters are concern ed, to the extent that the 
Princes are also willing, but I cannot possibly ima gine that we shall have two 
supreme Courts, one in order to deal with merely Fe deral law and another to 
deal with all the other matters that are not covere d by the Federal 
administration or the Federal Government. 
As things go, the Federal Government may concern it self with the minimum of 
subjects; and therefore matters of the highest mome nt will be extra-Federal. 
Who is to adjudicate upon these extra-Federal matte rs if not this very Supreme 
Court? Therefore this Supreme Court or Federal Cour t will exercise double 
jurisdiction, if necessary, treble jurisdiction. Th e greater the power that we 
give to this Federal Court, I think the greater the  confidence we shall be able 
to inspire in the world and also in the nation itse lf, I am sorry to have taken up 
these precious minutes of the time of the Conferenc e, but I felt that, in spite 
of my great reluctance to speak to you on this ques tion of a Federal Court, I 
must give you the views that many of us in the Cong ress have been holding for a The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222  long time and which, we should, if we could, spread  throughout the length and 
breadth of India. I know the terrible handicap unde r which I am labouring. All 
the most distinguished lawyers are arrayed against me; the Princes also are 
probably arrayed against me so far as the salaries and jurisdiction of this Court 
are concerned. But I would be guilty of neglect of duty to the Congress and to 
you if I did not give you the views that the Congre ss and I hold so strongly on 
the matter of the Federal Court. 
Young India,  5-11-1931, pp. 337-38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223   
62. THE FEDERAL COURT 
[Speech delivered by Gandhiji at the Federal Struct ure Committee on 19-11-1931] 
I have expressed my own hope in connection with the  Federal and Supreme 
Court. To me the Federal Court is the Supreme Court ; it is the final Court of 
Appeal beyond which there would be no appeal whatso ever; it is my Privy 
Council and it is the palladium of liberty. It is t he Court to which every person 
who is at all aggrieved can go. A great Jurist in t he Transvaal—and the 
Transvaal and South Africa generally have undoubted ly produced very great 
Jurists—once said to me, in regard to a very diffic ult case, "Though there may 
be no hope just now, I tell you that I have guided myself by one thing, or else I 
should not be a lawyer: the law teaches us lawyers that there is absolutely no 
wrong for which there is no remedy to be found in a  court of law; and if judges 
say there is no remedy, then those judges should be  immediately unseated." I 
say that with all deference to you, Lord Chancellor . 
I, therefore, think that our European friends may r est assured that the future 
Federal Court will not send them away empty-handed,  as we expect to go away 
empty-handed, if we do not have the favour of the M inisters, who are the 
present advisers of His Majesty. I am still hoping that we shall have their ear 
and get round their better side and then we may hop e to go away with 
something substantial in our pockets; but whether w e go away with anything 
substantial in our pockets or not, I hope that if t he Federal Court of my dreams 
comes into being, then the Europeans and everybody— all the minorities—may 
rest assured that that Court will not fail them, th ough a puny individual like 
myself may fail them. 
Young India , 17-12-1931, p. 395 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224   
63. THE PLACE OF THE LAWYERS IN A NON-VIOLENT SOCIE TY 
Reader: Y OU  tell me that when two men quarrel they should not go to a law 
court. This is astonishing. 
Editor: Whether you call it astonishing or not, it is the truth. And your question 
introduces us to the lawyers and the doctors. My fi rm opinion is that the 
lawyers have enslaved India, have accentuated Hindu - Mohamedan dissensions 
and have confirmed English authority. 
Reader: It is easy enough to bring these charges, b ut it will be difficult for you 
to prove them. But for the lawyers, who would have shown us the road to 
independence? Who would have protected the poor? Wh o would have secured 
justice? For instance, the late Manomohan Ghose def ended many a poor man 
free of charge. The Congress, which you have praise d so much, is dependent for 
its existence and activity upon the work of the law yers. To denounce such an 
estimable class of men, is to spell injustice, and you are abusing the liberty of 
the press by decrying lawyers. 
Editor: At one time I used to think exactly like yo u. I have no desire to convince 
you that they have never done a single good thing. I honour Mr. Ghose's 
memory. It is quite true that he helped the poor. T hat the Congress owes the 
lawyers something is believable. Lawyers are also m en, and there is something 
good in every man. Whenever instances of lawyers ha ving done good can be 
brought forward, it will be found that the good is due to them as men rather 
than as lawyers. All I am concerned with is to show  you that the profession 
teaches immorality; it is exposed to temptation fro m which few are saved. 
The Hindus and the Mahomedans have quarrelled. An o rdinary man will ask 
them to forget all about it; he will tell them that  both must be more or less at 
fault, and will advise them no longer to quarrel. B ut they go to lawyers. The 
latter's duty is to side with their clients and to find out ways and arguments in 
favour of the clients to which they (the clients) a re often strangers. If they do 
not do so they will be considered to have degraded their profession. The The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225  lawyers, therefore, will, as a rule, advance quarre ls instead of repressing them. 
Moreover, men take up that profession not in order to help others out of their 
miseries, but to enrich themselves. It is one of th e avenues of becoming 
wealthy and their interest exists in multiplying di sputes. It is within my 
knowledge that they are glad when men have disputes . Petty pleaders actually 
manufacture them. Their touts, like so many leeches , suck the blood of the 
poor people. Lawyers are men who have little to do.  Lazy people, in order to 
indulge in luxuries, take up such professions. This  is a true statement. Any 
other argument is a mere pretension. It is the lawy ers who have discovered 
that theirs is an honourable profession. They frame  laws as they frame their 
own praises. They decide what fees they will charge  and they put on so much 
side that poor people almost consider them to be he aven-born. 
Why do they want more fees than common labourers? W hy are their 
requirements greater? In what way are they more pro fitable to the country than 
the labourers? Are those who do good entitled to gr eater payment? And, if they 
have done anything for the country for the sake of money, how shall it be 
counted as good? 
Those who know anything of the Hindu-Maho- medan qu arrels know that they 
have been often due to the intervention of lawyers.  Some families have been 
ruined through them; they have made brothers enemie s. Principalities, having 
come under the lawyers' power have become loaded wi th debt. Many have been 
robbed of their all. Such instances can be multipli ed. 
But the greatest injury they have done to the count ry is that they have 
tightened the English grip. Do you think that it wo uld be possible for the English 
to carry on their Government without law-courts? It  is wrong to consider that 
courts are established for the benefit of the peopl e. Those who want to 
perpetuate their power do so through the courts. If  people were to settle their 
own quarrels, a third party would not be able to ex ercise any authority over 
them. Truly, men were less unmanly when they settle d their disputes either by 
fighting or by asking their relatives to decide for  them. They became more 
unmanly and cowardly when they resorted to the cour ts of law. It was certainly The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226  a sign of savagery when they settled their disputes  by fighting. Is it any the less 
so, if I ask a third party to decide, between you a nd me? Surely, the decision of 
a third party is not always right. The parlies alon e know who is right. We, in our 
simplicity and ignorance, imagine that a stranger, by taking our money, gives us 
justice. 
The chief thing, however, to be remembered is that without lawyers courts 
could not have been established or conducted and wi thout the latter the 
English could not rule. Supposing that there were o nly English judges, English 
pleaders and English police, they could only rule o ver the English. The English 
could not do without Indian judges and Indian plead ers. How the pleaders were 
made in the first instance and how they were favour ed you should understand 
well. Then you will have the same abhorrence for th e profession that I have. If 
pleaders were to abandon their profession, and cons ider it just as degrading as 
prostitution, English rule would break up in a day.  They have been instrumental 
in having the charge laid against us that we love q uarrels and courts as fish love 
water. What I have said with reference to the plead ers necessarily applies to 
the judges; they are first cousins; and the one giv es strength to the other. 
Indian Home Rule,  1958, pp. 54-57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227   
64.  AN ADVOCATE'S DILEMMA 
The following from an advocate has been passed on t o me for reply: 
"The resolution of Independence means the negation of the King. But by 
practising in the courts I express my allegiance to  the King. It is impossible for 
me to undergo the sacrifice of giving up my practic e, as I have no other source 
of income, and it would be quite dishonest for me t o remain in the Congress 
after this resolution and continue my practice. My friends in the Congress say 
that the Congress has not banned the courts. But th e question is, that by 
declaring Independence I am infringing my professio nal allegiance and conduct. 
My practice does not of course affect my being a me mber of the Congress. But I 
think it is impossible for a practising lawyer to r emain in both camps. It may be 
said, that the Congress has only declared Independe nce as its immediate 
objective, but it is not a declaration of Independe nt Government. It is only 
intellectual jugglery, I do not see any difference.  Please let me know if my 
view is correct, and if not, why not?" 
The dilemma is there. My sympathies and my opinion are with the advocate. 
But the argument goes deeper than the advocate has carried it. When I use a 
postage stamp or a coin bearing the King's portrait , I seem to belie my 
profession of Independence. When I obey a policeman 's instructions or pay 
taxes, I acknowledge the King's authority. And some  of these things I should be 
doing even if we declared an independent parallel G overnment which we have 
not as yet. How am I to solve the puzzle? Must I, b ecause I do not or cannot go 
the 'whole hog', continue to bear allegiance to the  King? One escape from the 
dilemma is to withdraw all such voluntary co-operat ion as it is possible for me 
to withdraw and as is calculated to diminish the pr estige and the authority of 
that rule. The Congress could not go further than i t did without weaning from it 
a large number of useful and able workers. Experien ce has shown that the 
Congress organisation breaks down where lawyers wit hdraw their assistance. 
They have from the very commencement taken the most  active and effective 
part in the Congress. It is unfortunate, that the o ther classes still feel The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228  powerless to run Congress Committees without the as sistance of lawyers. They 
are called officers of the Court. They know what fo reign rule means. By 
training they are the fittest to carry on political  agitation when they are 
honestly and patriotically moved. They have undoubt edly done much for the 
national movement, but much more is expected from t hem. And I have no 
doubt, that when the movement demands from them the  last sacrifice, many if 
not all of them will prove equal to it. Meanwhile s ince the Congress has not 
declared boycott of law courts, the matter rests wi th individual conscience. 
Where consistently with it, a lawyer cannot both pr actise and remain in the 
Congress and cannot give up practice, he may give u p Congress, and still help it 
as effectively as if he was in it, provided of cour se that he believes in 
Independence being the right and the duty of every Indian to work for and 
achieve. I may mention incidentally that many lawye rs think that they have a 
lien on the Congress, and they resent as intrusion the advent of laymen to 
office; whereas they should deem it a privilege to prepare laymen to take 
office and make them feel, that if they the laymen have bravery and sacrifice, 
they can run Congress organisations just as well as  lawyers. Indeed there are 
today several committees that are being efficiently  and ably managed by non-
professional men. The movement in that direction ho wever needs to receive a 
much greater impetus. We want a Committee in every one of the seven 
hundred thousand villages. Thank God we have not go t in all India even seventy 
thousand lawyers. Cobblers, scavengers, tanners, ta ilors, bricklayers and the 
like should be found willing and able to work Congr ess Committees. The 
educated few can hasten the event, if they will. 
Young India,  13-2-1930, p. 49 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229   
65. 5,000 MILES AWAY 
The recent debate in the Assembly over the proposal  to appoint two additional 
judges to the Privy Council for the purpose of hear ing Indian appeals has 
revived the controversy about the location of this final court of appeal. If it 
were not for the hypnotism under which we are labou ring, we would see 
without effort the futility, the sinfulness, of goi ng five thousand miles away to 
get (or buy?) justice. It is said that at that deli ghtful distance the judges are 
able to decide cases with greater detachment and im partiality than they would 
if they had to hear appeals, say in Delhi. The mome nt the argument is 
examined it breaks down. Must the poor Londoners ha ve their Privy Council in 
Delhi? And what should the French and the Americans  do? Must the French by 
arrangement have their final Court of appeal in Ame rica and the Americans in 
France? What should we do if India was an independe nt Country? Or is India an 
exceptional 'case' requiring special favoured treat ment giving the right of 
appeal in far off London? Let no one quote in suppo rt of the seat of the Privy 
Council in London the case of the Great Colonies. T hey retain the anachronism 
out of sentiment. And the movement is on foot in se veral colonies to have their 
final Courts of appeal in their own homes. The sent iment in India is the other 
way. A self-respecting India would never tolerate t he location of her final Court 
of appeal anywhere else but in India. 
Young India,  18-2-1926, p. 67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230   
66. JUSTICE FROM SIX THOUSAND MILES 
No conquest by force of arms is worth treasuring, i f it is not followed by 
cultural conquest, if the conquered do not hug thei r chains and regard the 
conqueror as their benefactor. The different forts of India are no doubt a 
continuous reminder of the British might. But the s ilent conquest of the mind of 
educated India is a surer guarantee of British stab ility than the formidable forts 
i.e., if the opinion expressed by the distinguished  lawyers in  Indian Daily Mail  
on the very modest proposal of Sir Hari Singh Gour for the establishment of a 
Supreme Court at Delhi is an index of that mind. Fo r, these eminent lawyers 
regard the proposal as premature, in that judgments  of the Privy Council sitting 
six thousand miles away from India would command, i n their opinion, greater 
respect and ensure greater impartiality. This amazi ng opinion I venture to say 
has no foundation in fact. But distance lends encha ntment to the scene. 
Members of the Privy Council are after all human be ings. They have been found 
to betray political bias. Their decisions in cases involving questions of custom 
are often distortions of the reality, not because t hey are perverse, but because 
it is not possible for mortals to know everything. A less trained lawyer having a 
direct knowledge of a local custom is better able t o appraise evidence on it 
than those who, no matter what their attainments ar e, know nothing of local 
conditions. 
The distinguished lawyers moreover state that expen ses will not be less 
because the final court of appeal is brought down t o Delhi. It does not say much 
for the patriotism of these eminent gentlemen, if t hey mean that the fees 
should be on the same scale in poor India as in ric h England. A Scotch friend 
once told me that Englishmen were probably the most  extravagant in the world 
in their tastes and requirements. He told me that h ospitals in Scotland were far 
less expensively fitted than in England though they  were in no way inferior in 
usefulness to those in England. Or does a legal arg ument increase in weight 
with an increase in the fees charged ? 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  The third argument pressed into service in order to  oppose the proposed 
change is that Indian judges will not command the s ame weight as the wigged 
ones in White Hall. If this was not an argument adv anced by the distinguished 
lawyers, it would be laughed out. Is respect for ju dgments commanded by their 
impartiality, or the location, or the birth, or the  colour of the skin, of judges? 
And if it is the seat or the birth or the pigment t hat determines the weight to 
be attached to judges' decisions, is it not high ti me that the superstition was 
removed by removing the seat and appointing judges of Indian birth? Or does 
the argument presuppose partiality on the part of j udges of Indian birth? One 
does sometimes hear of poor people under stress of ignorance desiring an 
English Collector in the place of an Indian. But gr eater fearlessness and sanity 
are surely to be expected of experienced lawyers. 
But while in my humble opinion none of the three ar guments advanced against 
the proposal has any force, the deciding reason for  having our Supreme Court in 
India is that our self-respect demands it. Just as we cannot breathe with other 
lungs, be they ever so much more powerful, so may w e not borrow or buy 
justice from England. We must take pride in being s atisfied with the work our 
own judges may give us. Trials by jury often result , all over the world, in 
defeating justice. But people everywhere gladly sub mit to the drawback for the 
sake of the more important result of the cultivatio n of an independent spirit 
among people and the justifiable sentiment of being  judged by one's own peers. 
But sentiment is at a discount in legal circles. An d yet it is sentiment that rules 
the world. Economics and every other consideration is often flung to the winds 
when sentiment predominates. Sentiment can be and m ust be regulated. It 
cannot be, ought never to be, eradicated. If it is not wrong to cherish patriotic 
feeling, it is surely not wrong to remove the final  Court of appeal to Delhi. Just 
as good government is no substitute for self-govern ment, good justice, if 
foreign is no substitute for home-made justice. 
Young India. , 12-8-1926, p.281 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232   
67. NAVAKAL PROSECUTION 
(From "Notes") 
The case against Sjt. Khadilkar of  Navakal  I have headed prosecution. In truth it 
is persecution. But under a Government run in the t eeth of popular opposition, 
especially when as in our case much of it is suppre ssed, persecution must be as 
it is the lot cf every plain-spoken journalist. Sjt . Khadilkar has always believed 
in calling a spade a spade. And he is an effective popular writer. He has paid 
the price of popularity based on plain speech. I te nder him my congratulations. 
I know that he is a philosopher. He once told me th at he often wrote plays to 
pay the fines he had at times to pay for his journa listic adventures. He was 
content to run this paper and through it educate pu blic opinion according to his 
lights, so long as he could do so without running i nto debts for paying fines. The 
unconcern with which he was describing his adventur es enhanced the respect I 
always felt for his ability and constancy of purpos e and sacrifice for the sake of 
the country. I wish that he had not thrown away goo d money in the counsel's 
fees. Law courts like every other Government instit ution are designed to 
protect the Government in time of need. We have had  practical experience of 
this time without number. They are necessarily so. Only we do not realize it, 
when popular liberty and Government run in the same  direction. When however 
popular liberty has to be defended in spite of Gove rnment opposition, law 
courts are poor guardians thereof. The less we have  to do with them the better 
for us. 
Young India,  4-4-1929, p. 108 at p. 109 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233   
68. AUNDH CONSTITUTION 
(From "Notes") 
There are several startling things in the Aundh con stitution. For the moment I 
am concerned with only two things — the qualificati on for the vote and the 
courts of justice. 
I have myself hitherto sworn by simple adult franch ise as well for the illiterate 
as the literate. My observations of the Working of the Congress constitution has 
altered my opinion. I have come round to the view t hat a literacy test is 
necessary for two reasons. The vote should be regar ded as a privilege and 
therefore carry some qualification. The simplest qu alification is a literacy test. 
And if the ministry appointed under the literacy fr anchise is sincere and 
solicitous about the disqualified illiterates, the much desired literacy would 
come in no time. The Aundh constitution has made pr imary education free and 
compulsory. I have been assured by Appasaheb that h e will see that illiteracy is 
driven out from Aundh State inside of six months. I  hope, therefore, that there 
will be no opposition in Aundh to the literacy test . 
The second important departure from the ordinary pr actice is the making of 
justice in the lower court free and incredibly simp le. What would, however, 
displease critics is not the freeness or the simpli city as such but the abolition of 
intermediate courts and the fate of litigants and p ersons charged with offences 
being made to depend on a High Court presided over by one person. In a 
population of 75,000 a multiplicity of judges would  be both unnecessary and 
impossible. And if the right type of person is chos en as the Chief Judge, he is as 
likely to deal out unadulterated justice as a bench  of highly paid judges. This 
simplification contemplates abolition of the cumbro us procedure and the use of 
tomes of law books including hundreds of law report s used in British law courts. 
Harijan, 14-1-1939, p. 422 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234   
69.  CIVIL v. CRIMINAL  
When a man wilfully breaks his own laws, the disobe dience becomes criminal. 
For he commits the breach not against himself but a gainst someone else, and 
not only escapes punishment for the breach for ther e is none provided against 
himself by the maker of laws, but he avoids also th e inconvenience caused by 
their observance. What is true of the individual is  true of the corporation. At 
the present moment one observes this criminal breac h by the Government of its 
own laws throughout India. Sections of Penal Code a nd the Criminal Procedure 
Code are being freely abused. And because non-co-op erators refrain from 
questioning orders issued by officials, bare-faced illegalities are being 
committed by them with impunity. We have seen this in Bulandshahr, in 
Chittagong, all over Sind, and nowhere so systemati cally and so deliberately as 
in the Madras Presidency. Mr. Yakub Hassan has poin ted out with great 
justification that his arrest and conviction are co ntrary to the spirit of the 
Vicerigal pledge. Indeed it is against not only the  spirit of Lord Reading's pledge 
but it is against the letter even of his predecesso r's communique  in which it was 
declared in solemn tones that so long as non-cooper ation remained non-violent 
there would be no repression, No one dare accuse Mr . Yakub Hassan of having 
incited to violence in his Tanjore address before a n audience of picked 
representatives. Nor was any violence done in the T anjore district as a result of 
his speech. The Magistrate in the case of Mr. Iyer of the  Deshabhaktan actually 
admitted that there was not a trace of violence in the writing that was 
impeached and that it actually contained exhortatio ns to nonviolence., Mr. 
Ramaswami lyenger, leading pleader of Coimbatore, h as been arrested for a 
spirited letter to  The Hindu  though there was no violence in it. And so have Dr . 
Varadarajulu and Mr. Gopalkrishnayya been arrested for their speeches and 
writings, although it is known that they not only d o not incite to violence but 
that theirs is actually a restraining influence in the face of provocation. Is it 
any wonder if one infers from this campaign of repr ession an intention on the 
part of the Government to invite violence? In not o ne of these cases I have The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235  mentioned has there been any outbreak of violence a s a result of the speeches 
and writings concerned. And so we see that the Gove rnment is guilty of 
criminal breach of its own laws. And what legal rem edy has the afflicted 
individual against the Government? There is certain ly no sanction provided 
against the Government in law when it prostitutes t he law itself to its own base 
ends. When therefore a Government thus becomes lawl ess in an organized 
manner, civil disobedience becomes a sacred duty an d is the only remedy open 
specially to those who had no hand in the making of  the Government or its 
laws. Another remedy there certainly is, and that i s armed revolt. Civil 
disobedience is a complete, effective and bloodless  substitute. And it is as well 
that by exemplary restraint and discipline in the w ay of submission to unjust 
and even illegal orders we have created the necessa ry atmosphere for civil 
disobedience. For thereby on the one hand the tyran nical nature of the 
Government has been made more manifest, and on the other by willing 
obedience we have fitted ourselves for civil disobe dience. 
It is equally as well that civil disobedience is be ing confined even now to the 
smallest area possible. It must be admitted that it  is an abnormal state, even as 
a corrupt and unpopular Government should be in civ ilized society like disease 
an abnormal state. Therefore, only when a citizen h as disciplined himself in the 
art of voluntary obedience to the state laws is he justified on rare occasion 
deliberately but non- violently to disobey them, an d expose himself to the 
penalty of the breach. If then we are to achieve th e maximum result in the 
minimum of time, whilst fiercest disobedience is go ing on in a limited area, 
perfect submission to the laws must be yielded in a ll the other parts so as to 
test the nation's capacity for voluntary obedience and for understanding the 
virtue of civil disobedience. Any unauthorized outb reak of disobedience, 
therefore, in any part of India will most certainly  damage the cause and will 
betray an unpardonable ignorance of the principles of civil disobedience. 
Young India,  17-11-1921 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236   
70. GANDHIJI'S FAMOUS CUSTOMS DECLARATION 
[Editor's Note: In the course of history there have  been two customs declarations which 
have become the stuff of legend. The first is that of Oscar Wilde, (1856-1900) the 
celebrated Irish poet, playwright and man of letter s, and the second that of Mahatma 
Gandhi, (1869-1948) who was the architect of India' s freedom through non-violence. 
In 1881 Wilde visited America on a lecture tour. Wh en he alighted at the sea port of 
Boston, the customs officer on duty asked if Wilde had anything to declare. The eccentric 
poet thereupon came out with his most quoted retort : "I have nothing to declare except 
my genius." 
While Wilde's declaration is well-known and often q uoted, much less known but even more 
witty was Mahatma Gandhi's customs declaration.] 
On August 29, 1931 Gandhiji sailed from Bombay by t he S. S. Rajputana as the 
sole delegate of the Indian National Congress to at tend the Second Round Table 
Conference which was being held in London. He disem barked at the French sea 
port of Marseilles in order to catch the train to L ondon. The French customs 
officer on duty asked Gandhiji whether he had anyth ing to declare. The 
Mahatma promptly replied: 
"I am a poor mendicant. My kit consists of two spin ning wheels, a few jail 
utensils, a can of goat's milk, four loin clothes, two towels — and my reputation 
which cannot be worth much." 
Mahatma, Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, Vol.3, by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237   
71. VEILED MARTIAL LAW 
[BILIM0RA,  
April 29, 1930 ] 
The revival in the form of an ordinance of the Pres s Act that was supposed to 
be dead was only to be expected, and I observe that  in its new form the Act 
contains additional provisions making the whole pie ce more deadly than before. 
Whether we realize it or not, for some days past we  have been living under a 
veiled form of martial law. After all, what is mart ial law if it is not the will of 
the commanding officer for the time being? The Vice roy is that officer, and 
wherever he considers it desirable he supersedes th e whole of the law, both 
common and statute, and imposes ordinances on a peo ple too submissive to 
resent or resist him. I hope, however, that the tim e for tame submission to the 
dictation from British rulers is gone forever. I ho pe that the people will not be 
frightened by this ordinance. The Press men, if the y are worthy representatives 
of public opinion, will not be frightened by the or dinance. Let us realize the 
wise dictum of Thoreau that it is difficult under t yrannical rule for honest men 
to be wealthy. And if we have decided to hand over our bodies without a 
murmur to the authorities let us also be equally re ady to hand over our 
property to them and not sell our souls. I would, t herefore, urge Press men and 
publishers to refuse to furnish securities, and if they are called upon to do so, 
either to cease publication or to challenge the aut horities to confiscate 
whatever they like. When freedom is actually knocki ng at our door and when 
for the sake of wooing it thousands have suffered t ortures, let it not be said of 
the Press representatives that they were weighed an d found wanting. They may 
confiscate type and machinery, they will not confis cate pen and still less 
speech, but I recognize that they can succeed in co nfiscating even these last 
two. But what they will never succeed in suppressin g and what is after all the 
thing that matters is the thought of the nation and  at the present moment 
there is hardly a man or woman breathing in India w ho with every breath does 
not breathe in disaffection, sedition, disloyalty a nd whatever other term one 
may use to describe the mentality of the nation whi ch has set its mind on 
destroying the existing system of Government. 
Young India , 8-5-1930 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238   
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX I 
[The three articles written and published by Gandhi ji in his weekly paper  Young India  for 
which he was tried on the charge of sedition have b een reproduced below. The first article 
"Tampering with Loyalty" was published in  Young India  on September 29, 1921, the second 
article "The Puzzle and Its Solution" was published  in  Young India  on December 15, 1921 
and the third article "Shaking the; Manes" was publ ished in  Young India  on February 23, 
1922.] 
1. TAMPERING WITH LOYALTY 
His Excellency the Governor of Bombay had warned th e public some time ago, 
that he 'meant business', that he was no longer goi ng to tolerate the speeches 
that were being made. In his note on the Ali Brothe rs and others he has made 
clear his meaning. The Ali Brothers are to be charg ed with having tampered 
with the loyalty of the sepoy and with having utter ed sedition. I must confess, 
that I was not prepared for the revelation of such hopeless ignorance on the 
part of the Governor of Bombay. It is evident that he has not followed the 
course of Indian history during the past twelve mon ths. He evidently does not 
know, that the National Congress began to tamper wi th the loyalty of the sepoy 
in September last year, that the Central Khilafat C ommittee began it earlier 
and that I began it earlier still, for I must be pe rmitted to take the credit or the 
odium of suggesting, that India had a right openly to tell the sepoy and 
everyone - who served the Government in any capacit y whatsoever, that he 
participated in the wrongs done by the Government. The Conference at Karachi 
merely repeated the Congress declaration in terms o f Islam. Only a Musalman 
divine can speak for Islam, but speaking for Hindui sm and speaking for 
nationalism, I have no hesitation in saying, that i t is sinful for any one, either 
as soldier or civilian, to serve this Government wh ich has proved the 
treacherous to the Musalmans of India and which has  been guilty of the 
inhumanities of the Punjab. I have said this from m any a platform in the 
presence of sepoys. And if I have not asked individ ual sepoys to come out, it The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239  has not been due to want of will but of ability to support them. I have not 
hesitated to tell the sepoy, that if he could leave  the service and support 
himself without the Congress or the Khilafat aid, h e should leave at once. And I 
promise, that as soon as the spinning wheel finds a n abiding place in every 
home and Indians begin to feel that weaving gives a nybody any day an 
honourable livelihood, I shall not hesitate, at the  peril of being shot, to ask the 
Indian sepoy individually to leave his service and become a weaver. For, has 
not the sepoy been used to hold India under subject ion, has he not been used 
to murder innocent people at Jallianwala Bagh, has he not been used to drive 
away innocent men, women and children during that d readful night at 
Chandpur, has he not been used to subjugate the pro ud Arab of Mesopotamia, 
has he not been utilised to crush the Egyptian? How  can any Indian having a 
spark of humanity in him and any Musalman having an y pride in his religion feel 
otherwise than as the Ali Brothers have done? The s epoy has been used more 
often as a hired assassin than as a soldier defendi ng the liberty or the honour of 
the weak and the helpless. The Governor has pandere d to the basest in us by 
telling us what would have happened in Malabar but for the British soldier or 
sepoy. I venture to inform His Excellency, that Mal abar Hindus would have 
fared better without the British bayonet, that Hind us and Musalmans would 
have jointly appeased the Moplahs, that possibly th ere being no Khilafat 
question there would have been no Moplah riot at al l, that at the worst 
supposing that Musalmans had made common cause with  the Moplahs, Hinduism 
would have relied upon its creed of non-violence an d turned every Musalman 
into a friend, or Hindu valour would have been test ed and tried. The Governor 
of Bombay has done a disservice to himself and his cause (whatever it might 
be), by fomenting Hindu-Muslim disunion, and has in sulted the Hindus, by 
letting them infer from his note, that Hindus are h elpless creatures unable to 
die for or defend their hearth, home or religion. I f however the Governor is 
right in his assumptions, the sooner the Hindus die  out, the better for 
humanity. But let me remind His Excellency, that he  has pronounced the 
greatest condemnation upon British rule, in that it  finds Indians today devoid of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240  enough manliness to defend themselves against loote rs, whether they arc 
Moplah Musalmans or infuriated Hindus of Arrah. 
His Excellency's reference to the sedition of the A li Brothers is only less 
unpardonable than his reference to the tempering. F or he must know, that 
sedition has become the creed of the Congress. Ever y non-co- operator is 
pledged to preach disaffection towards the Governme nt established by law. 
Non-co-operation, though a religious and strictly m oral movement, deliberately 
aims at the overthrow of the Government, and is the refore legally seditious in 
terms of the Indian Penal Code. But this is no new discovery. Lord Chelmsford 
knew it. Lord Reading knows it. It is unthinkable t hat the Governor of Bombay 
does not know it. It was common cause that so long as the movement remained 
non-violent, nothing would be done to interfere wit h it. 
But it may be urged, that the Government has a righ t to change its policy when 
it finds, that the movement is really threatening i ts very existence as a system. 
I do not deny its right. I object to the Governor's  note, because it is so worded 
as to let the unknowing public think, that tamperin g with the loyalty of the 
sepoy and sedition were fresh crimes committed by t he Ali Brothers and 
brought for the first time to His Excellency's noti ce. 
However the duty of the Congress and Khilafat worke rs is clear. We ask for no 
quarter; we expect none from the Government. We did  not solicit the promise 
of immunity from prison so long as we remained nonv iolent. We may not now 
complain, if we are imprisoned for sedition. Theref ore our self-respect and our 
pledge require us to remain calm, unperturbed and n on-violent. We have our 
appointed course to follow. We must reiterate from a thousand platforms the 
formula of the Ali Brothers regarding the sepoys, a nd we must spread 
disaffection openly and systematically till it plea se the Government to arrest 
us. And this we do, not by way of angry retaliation , but because it is our 
Dharma.  We must wear  Khadi even as the brothers have worn it, and spread 
the Gospel of Swadeshi. The Musalmans must collect for Smyrna relief and the 
Angora Government. We must spread like the Ali Brot hers the Gospel of Hindu-
Muslim unity and of non-violence for the purpose of  attaining Swaraj and the  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  redress of the Khilafat and the Punjab wrongs. 
We have almost reached the crisis. It is well with a patient who survives a 
crisis. If on the one hand we remain firm as a rock  in the presence of danger, 
and on the other observe the greatest self-restrain t, we shall certainly attain 
our end this very year.  
Young India , 29-9-1921, pp. 309-10  
 
2. A PUZZLE AND ITS SOLUTION  
Lord Reading is puzzled and perplexed. Speaking in reply to the 
addresses from the British Indian Association and t he Bengal National 
Chamber of Commerce at Calcutta, His Excellency sai d, "I confess that 
when I contemplate the activities of a section of t he : community, I find 
myself still, notwithstanding persistent study ever  since I have been in 
India, puzzled and perplexed. I ask myself what pur pose is served by 
flagrant breaches of the law for the purpose of cha llenging the 
Government and in order to compel arrest?" The answ er was partly given 
by Pandit Motilal Nehru when he said on being arres ted that he was 
being taken to the house of freedom. We seek arrest  because the so-
called freedom is slavery. We are challenging the m ight of this 
Government because we consider its activity to be w holly evil. We want 
to overthrow the Government. We want to compel its submission to the 
people's will. We desire to show that the Governmen t exists to serve the 
people, not the people the Government. Free life un der the Government 
has become intolerable, for the price exacted for t he retention of 
freedom is unconscionably great. Whether we are one  or many, we must 
refuse to purchase freedom at the cost of our self- respect or our 
cherished convictions. I have known even little chi ldren become 
unbending when an attempt has been made to cross th eir declared 
purpose, be it ever so flimsy in the estimation of their parents. 
Lord Reading must clearly understand that the non-c o-operators are at 
war with the Government. They have declared rebelli on against it in as 
much as it has committed a breach of faith with the  Musalmans, it has The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242  humiliated the Punjab and it insists upon imposing its will upon the 
people and refuses to repair the breach and repent of the wrong done in 
the Punjab. 
There were two ways open to the people, the way of armed rebellion 
and the way of peaceful revolt. Non-co-operators ha ve chosen, some out 
of weakness, some out of strength, the way of peace , i.e. voluntary 
suffering. 
If the people are behind the sufferers, the Governm ent must yield or be 
overthrown. If the people are not with them they ha ve at least the 
satisfaction of not having sold their freedom. In a n armed conflict the 
more violent is generally the victor. The way of pe ace and suffering is 
the quickest method of cultivating public opinion, and therefore when 
victory is attained it is for what the world regard s as Truth. Bred in the 
atmosphere of law courts, Lord Reading finds it dif ficult to appreciate 
the peaceful resistance to authority. His Excellenc y will learn by the 
time the conflict is over that there is a higher co urt than courts of 
justice and that is the court of conscience. It sup ersedes all other 
courts. 
Lord Reading is welcome to treat all the sufferers as lunatics, who do 
not know their own interest. He is entitled therefo re to put them out of 
harm's way. It is an arrangement that entirely suit s the lunatics and it is 
an ideal situation if it also suits the Government.  He will have cause to 
complain if having courted imprisonment, non-co-ope rators fret and fume or 
'whine for favours' as Lalaji puts it. The strength  of a non-co- operator lies in 
his going to gaol uncomplainingly. He loses his cas e if having courted 
imprisonment he begins to grumble immediately his c ourtship is rewarded. 
The threats used by His Excellency are unbecoming. This is a fight to the finish. 
It is a conflict between the reign of violence and of public opinion. Those who 
are fighting for the latter are determined to submi t to any violence rather than 
surrender their opinion. 
Young India,  15-12-1921, p. 418 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243   
3. SHAKING THE MANES 
How can there be any compromise whilst the British Lion continues to shake his 
gory claws in or faces? Lord Birkenhead reminds us that Britain has lost none of 
her hard fibre. Mr. Montagu tells us in the plaines t language that the British are 
the most determined nation in the world, who will b rook no interference with 
their purpose. Let me quote the exact words telegra phed by Reuter: — 
"If the existence of our Empire were challenged, th e discharge of 
responsibilities of the British Government to India  prevented and demands were 
made in the very mistaken belief that we contemplat ed retreat from India — 
then India would not challenge with success the mos t determined people in the 
world, who would once again answer the challenge wi th all the vigour and 
determination at its command." 
Both Lord Birkenhead and Mr. Montagu little know th at India is prepared for all 
'the hard fibre' that can be transported across the  seas and that her challenge 
was issued in the September of 1920 at Calcutta tha t India would be satisfied 
with nothing less than Swaraj and full redress of t he Khilafat and the Punjab 
wrongs. This does involve the existence of the 'Emp ire', and if the present 
custodians of the British Empire are not satisfied with its quiet transformation 
into a true Commonwealth of free nations, each with  equal rights and each 
having the power to secede at will from an honourab le and friendly 
partnership, all the determination and vigour of 't he most determined people in 
the world' and the 'hard fibre' will have to be spe nt in India in a vain effort to 
crush the spirit that has risen and that will neith er bend nor break. It is true 
that we have no 'hard fibre'. The rice-eating, puny  millions of India seems to 
have resolved upon achieving their own destiny with out any further tutelage 
and without arms. In the Lokamanya's language it is  their 'birthright', and they 
will have it in spite of the 'hard fibre' and in sp ite of the vigour and 
determination with which it may be administered. In dia cannot and will not 
answer this insolence with insolence, but if she re mains true to her pledge, her 
prayer to God to be delivered from such a scourge w ill certainly not go in vain. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244  No empire intoxicated with the red wine of power an d plunder of weaker races 
has yet lived long in this world, and this 'British  Empire', which is based upon 
organized exploitation of physically weaker races o f the earth and upon a 
continuous exhibition of brute force, cannot live i f there is a just God ruling the 
universe. Little do these so-called representatives  of the British nation realise 
that India has already given many of her best men t o be dealt with by the 
British 'hard fibre'. Had Chauri Chaura not interru pted the even course of the 
national sacrifice, there would have been still gre ater and more delectable 
offerings placed before the Lion, but God had wille d it otherwise. There is 
nothing, however, to prevent all those representati ves in Downing Street and 
White Hall from doing their worst. I am aware that I have written strongly 
about the insolent threat that has come from across  the seas, but it is high time 
that the British people were made to realise that t he fight that was 
commenced in 1920 is a fight to the finish, whether  it lasts one month or one 
year or many months or many years and whether the r epresentatives of Britain 
re- enact all the indescribable orgies of the Mutin y days with redoubled force or 
whether they do not. I shall only hope and pray tha t God will give India 
sufficient humility and sufficient strength to rema in non-violent to the end. 
Submission to the insolent challenges that are cabl ed out on due occasions is 
now an utter impossibility. 
Young India,  23-2-1922, p, 119 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245   
APPENDIX II 
GANDHIJI'S THOUGHTS ON  THE LAW AND THE LAWYERS 
1. I had learnt the true practice of law. I had learnt  to find out the better 
side of human nature and to enter men's hearts. I r ealized that the true 
function of a lawyer was to unite parties riven asu nder. The lesson was so 
indelibly burnt into me that a large part of my tim e during the twenty 
years of my practice as a lawyer was occupied in br inging about private 
compromises of hundreds of cases. I lost nothing th ereby - not even 
money, certainly not my soul. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), p. 97 
 
2. It was not impossible to practise law without compr omising truth. Even 
truthfulness in the practice of the profession cann ot cure it of the 
fundamental defect that vitiates it. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), p. 269 
 
3. Throughout my career at the bar I never once depart ed from the strictest 
truth and honesty. The first thing which you must a lways bear in mind, if 
you would spiritualize the practice of law, is not to make your profession 
subservient to the interests of your purse, as is u nfortunately but too often 
the case at present, but to use your profession for  the service of your 
country. . . . The fees charged by lawyers are unco nscionable everywhere. 
I confess, I myself have charged what I would now c all high fees. But even 
whilst I was engaged in my practice, let me tell yo u I never let my 
profession stand in the way of my public service. .  . . And there is another 
thing I would like to warn you against. In England,  in South Africa, almost 
everywhere I have found that in the practice of the ir profession Lawyers 
are consciously or unconsciously 'led into untruth for the sake of their 
clients. An eminent English Lawyer has gone so far as to say that it may The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246  even be the duty of a lawyer to defend a client who m he knows to be 
guilty. There I disagree. The duty of a lawyer is a lways to place before the 
judges, and to help them to arrive at, the truth, n ever to prove the guilty 
as innocent. 
Young India,  22-12-1927, pp. 427-28 
 
4. A true lawyer is one who places truth and service i n the first place and the 
emoluments of the profession in the next place only . 
Harijan, 26-11-1938, p. 351 
 
5. Facts mean truth, and once we adhere to truth, the law comes to our aid 
naturally. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), p. 96  
 
6. I recalled the late Mr. Pincutt's advice - facts ar e three-fourths of the law. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), p. 95 
 
7. Lawyers and English-educated persons do not by any means enjoy a 
monopoly of hair-splitting. 
Satyagraha in South Africa,  Madras, Ganesan, p. 202 
 
8. Lawyers are also men, and there is something good i n every man. 
Whenever instances of lawyers having done good can be brought forward, 
it will be found that the good is due to them as me n rather than as 
lawyers. 
Indian Home Rule,  1958, p. 55 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247  9. Lawyers will, as a rule, advance quarrels instead o f repressing them. 
Moreover, men take up that profession, not in order  to help others out of 
their miseries, but to enrich themselves. It is one  of the avenues of 
becoming wealthy and their interest exists in multi plying disputes. It is 
within my knowledge that they are glad when men hav e disputes. 
Indian Home Rule,  1958, p. 55 
 
10. I have not a shadow of a doubt that society would b e much cleaner and 
healthier if there was less resort to law courts th an there is. 
Young India,  3-12-1919 
 
11. An unjust law is itself a species of violence. Arre st for its breach is more 
so. 
Non-violence in Peace and War,  Vol. 2, p. 150 
 
12. The economic drain that the law courts cause has at  no time been 
considered. And yet it is not a trifle. Every insti tution founded under the 
present system is run on a most extravagant scale. Law courts are probably 
the most extravagantly run. I have some knowledge o f the scale in 
England, a fair knowledge of the Indian and an inti mate knowledge of the 
South African. I have no hesitation in saying that the Indian is 
comparatively the most extravagant and bears no rel ation to the general 
economic condition of the people. 
The best South African lawyers - and they are lawye rs of great ability - 
dare not charge the fees the lawyers in India do. F ifteen guineas is almost 
a top fee for legal opinion. Several thousand rupee s have been known to 
have been charged in India. There is something sinf ul in a system under 
which it is possible for a lawyer to earn from fift y thousand to one lakh 
rupees per month. Legal practice is not - ought not  to be — a speculative The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248  business. The best legal talent must be available t o the poorest at 
reasonable rates. 
Young India, 6-10-1920, pp. 2-3
 
[Ideas derived by Gandhiji from Ruskin's Unto This Last  in the year 1904:] 
13. The teachings of  Unto This Last  I understood to be: 
a) That the good of the individual is contained in the  good of all. 
b) That a lawyer’s work has the same value as the barb er’s, inasmuch as 
all have the same right of earning their livelihood  from their work. 
c) That a life of labour, i.e. the life of the tiller of the soil and the 
handicraftsman is the life worth living. 
The first of these I knew. The second I had dimly r ealized. The third had never 
occurred to me.  Unto This Last  made it as clear as daylight for me that the 
second and the third were contained in the first. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), p. 221 
 
14. If all labored for their bread and no more, then th ere would be enough 
food and enough leisure for all. 
Then there would be no cry of over-population, no d isease and no such 
misery as we see around. Such labour will be the hi ghest form of sacrifice. 
Men will no doubt do many other things either throu gh their bodies or 
through their minds, but all this will be labour of  love for the common 
good. . . . May not men earn their bread by intelle ctual labour? No. The 
needs of the body must be supplied by the body. "Re nder unto Caesar that 
which is Caesar's", perhaps, applies here as well. Mere mental, that is, 
intellectual labour is for the soul and is its own satisfaction. It should 
never demand payment. In the ideal State, doctors, lawyers and the like 
will work solely for the benefit of society, not fo r self. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249  Harijan, 29-6-1935, p. 165 
 
15. 15. A medical practitioner from Kenya asks whether medical practitioners 
can engage in money-lending business or speculation . I have long held the 
opinion that professional men, whether medical or l egal or other, should 
not seek to add to their income by speculation or o ther pursuits. It tends 
to make them careless in their special work. There have been cases in 
which doctors and lawyers have ruined their reputat ion by going outside 
their profession to make money. 
Harijan, 16-12-1939, p. 379 
 
16. Justice in British courts is an expensive luxury. I t is often 'the longest purse 
that wins'. 
 
17. It is much to be wished that people would avoid lit igation. 'Agree with 
thine adversary quickly' is the soundest legal maxi m ever uttered. The 
author knew what he was saying. But it will be aske d, what when we are 
dragged, as we often are, to the courts? 
I would say 'do not defend'. If you are in the wron g, you will deserve the 
sentence whatever it may be. If you are wrongly bro ught to the court and 
yet penalized, let your innocence soothe you in you r unmerited suffering. 
Undefended, you will in every case suffer the least  and what is more you 
will have the satisfaction of sharing the fate of t he majority of your 
fellow-beings who cannot get themselves defended. 
Young India,  23-7-1919 
 
18. Put your talents in the service of the country inst ead of converting them 
into £ s.d. If you are a medical man, there is dise ase enough in India to 
need all your medical skill. If you are a lawyer, t here are differences and 
quarrels enough in India. Instead of fomenting more  trouble, patch up The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250  those quarrels and stop litigation. If you are an e ngineer, build model 
houses suited to the means and needs of our people and yet full of health 
and fresh air. There is nothing that you have learn t which cannot be 
turned to account. 
Young India,  5-11-1931, p. 334 
 
[Several Mysore lawyers who had taken part in the M ysore Satyagraha struggle had been 
disbarred by the Mysore Chief Court. Gandhiji wrote  about them :] 
19. Let these lawyers be proud of their poverty which w ill be probably their 
lot now. Let them remember Thoreau's saying that po ssession of riches is a 
crime and poverty a virtue under an unjust administ ration. This is an 
eternal maxim for Satyagrahis. The disbarred lawyer s have a rare 
opportunity of so re-modeling their lives that they  can always be above 
want. Let them remember that practice of law ought not to mean taking 
more daily than, say, a village carpenter's wage. 
Harijan, 13-7-1940, p. 205 
 
20. If India is to live an exemplary life of independen ce which will be the envy 
of the world, all the  bhangis  (sweepers), doctors, lawyers, teachers, 
merchants and others would get the same wages for a n honest day's work. 
Indian society may never reach the goal, but it is the duty of every Indian 
to set his sail towards that goal and no other, if India is to be a happy 
land. 
Harijan, 16-3-1947, p. 67 
 
21. A wise man deliberately forgets many things, even a s a lawyer forgets the 
cases and their details as soon as they are dispose d of. 
Letter to Mirabehn, 25-1-1931 in  Bapu's Letters to Mira,  p. 150 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251  22. Only he who has mastered the art of obedience to la w knows the art of 
disobedience to law. 
Young India,  5-11-1919 
 
23. Once a law is enacted, many difficulties must be en countered before it 
can be reversed. It is only when public opinion is highly educated that the 
laws in force in a country can be "repealed. A Cons titution under which 
laws are modified or repealed every now and then ca nnot be said to be 
stable or well organized. 
Satyagraha in South Africa,  Ch. 10. p., 140 
 
[Editor's Note: In 1927, an American authoress, Mis s Catherine Mayo, published under the 
title  Mother India  a book which was scurrilous and grossly defamatory  of India and her 
people. Reviewing the said book in  Young India Gandhiji called it a 'Drain Inspector's 
Report'. In the course of his articles Gandhiji obs erved:] 
24. "She (Miss Mayo) has done me the honour of quoting me frequently in 
support of her argument. . . . But in her hurry to see everything Indian in 
bad light, she has not only taken liberty with my w ritings, but she has not 
thought it necessary even to verify through me cert ain things ascribed by 
her or others to me. In fact she has combined in he r own person what we 
understand in India the judicial and the executive officer. She is both the 
prosecutor and the judge.... Having no case, she ha s followed the method 
of the pettifogging lawyer who vainly tries to disc redit a hostile but 
unshakable witness by making him state things from memory which might 
be found on verification to be not quite accurate."  
Young India,  15-9-1927, p. 308 and 2-2-1928, p. 34 
 
25. If everybody lives by the sweat of his brow, the ea rth will become a 
paradise. The question of the use of special talent s hardly needs separate 
consideration. If everyone labours physically for h is bread it follows that The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252  poets, doctors, lawyers, etc. will regard it their duty to use those talents 
gratis for the service of humanity. Their output wi ll be all the better and 
richer for their selfless devotion to duty. 
Harijan, 2-3-1947, p. 47 
 
26. I believe in the division of labour or work. But I do insist on equality of 
wages. The lawyer, the doctor or the teacher is ent itled to no more than 
the  bhangi. Then only will the division of work uplift the nati on or the 
earth. There is no other royal road to true civiliz ation or happiness. 
Harijan, 23-3-1947, p. 78 
 
27. May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour ? No. The needs of the 
body must be supplied by the body. "Render unto Cae sar that which is 
Caesar's" perhaps applies here as well. Mere mental , that is intellectual, 
labour is for the soul and is its own satisfaction.  It should never demand 
payment. In the ideal state, doctors, lawyers and t he like will work solely 
for the benefit of society not for self. 
Harijan, 29-6-1935, p. 156 
 
28. If we were not under the spell of lawyers and law c ourts and if there were 
no touts to tempt us into the quagmire of the court s and to appeal to our 
basest passions we would be leading a much happier life than we do today. 
Let those who frequent the law courts - the best of  them - bear witness to 
the fact that the atmosphere about them is foetid. Perjured witnesses are 
ranged on either side ready to sell their very soul s for money or for 
friendship's sake. 
Young India,  6-10-1920, p. 2 
 
29. I am unconvinced of the advantages of jury trials o ver those by judges.... 
At the right moment juries have been found to fail even in England. When The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253  passions are roused juries are affected by them and  give perverse verdicts. 
Nor need we assume that they are always on the side  of leniency. 1 have 
known juries finding prisoners guilty in the face o f evidence and even 
judge's summing up to the contrary. We must not sla vishly copy all that is 
English. In matters where absolute impartiality, ca lmness and ability to sift 
evidence and understand human natures are required,  we may not replace 
trained judges by untrained men brought together by  chance. What we 
must aim at is an incorruptible, impartial and able  judiciary right from the 
bottom. 
Young India,  27-8-1931, p. 240 
 
30. In Independent India of the non-violent type, there  will be crime but no 
criminals. They will not be punished. Crime is dise ase like any other 
malady and is a product of the prevalent social sys tem. Therefore, all 
crime including murder will be treated as a disease . Whether such an India 
will ever come into being is another question. 
Harijan, 5-5-1946, p. 124 
 
31. The symbol of a Court of Justice is a pair of scale s held evenly by an 
impartial and blind but sagacious woman. Fate has p urposely made her 
blind, in order that she may not judge a person fro m his exterior but from 
his intrinsic worth. 
An Autobiography,  (1959), p. 105 
 
32. All crimes are different kinds of diseases and they  should be treated as 
such by the reformers. That does not mean that the police will suspend 
their function of regarding such cases as public cr imes, but their measures 
are never intended to deal with causes of these soc ial disturbances. To do 
so is the special prerogative of the reformer. And unless the moral tone of The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254  society is raised such crimes will flourish, if onl y for the simple reason that 
the moral sense of these perverts has become blunt.  
Gandhiji - His Life and Work,  edited by D. G. Tendulkar and others, p. 381 
 
33. I cannot in all conscience agree to any one being s ent to the gallows.... I 
would draw the distinction between killing and dete ntion or even corporal 
punishment. I think there is a difference not merel y in quantity but also in 
quality. I can recall the punishment of detention. I can make reparation to 
the man upon whom I inflict corporal punishment. Bu t once a man is 
killed, the punishment is beyond recall or reparati on. God alone can take 
life, because He alone gives it. 
Gandhiji - His Life and Work,  edited by D. G. Tendulkar and others, p. 381 
 
34. I do wish as a practised draftsman to warn writers of petition, whether 
they be pleaders or otherwise, to think of the caus e they may be espousing 
for the time being. I assure them that a bare state ment of facts 
embellished with adjectives is far more eloquent an d effective than a 
narrative glowing with exuberant language. Petition  writers must 
understand that they address busy men, not necessar ily sympathetic, 
sometimes prejudiced, and almost invariably prone t o sustain the decisions 
of their subordinates. 
Young India,  27-9-1919 
 
35. When there is war, the poet lays down the lyre, the  lawyer his law reports, 
the school-boy his books. The poet will sing the tr ue note after the war is 
over, the lawyer will have occasion to go to his la w books when people 
have time to fight among themselves. 
Young India,  1-9-1921 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255   
36. Under the Swaraj Government the law will not tolera te any arrogation of 
superiority by any person or class whether in the n ame of custom or 
religion.  
Young India, 11-6-1931, p. 143 
 
37. My experience has shown me that we win justice quic kest by rendering 
justice to the other party.  
M. K. Gandhi, An Autobiography, De Luxe Edition, 19 68 Vol. one, p. 270 
 
38. There is a higher court than courts of justice and that is the court of 
conscience. It supersedes all other courts.  
Quotes of Gandhi, UBS Publishers, New Delhi, (1995)  p. 34 
 
39. Justice that love  gives is a surrender, justice that law gives is a 
punishment.  
Quotes of Gandhi, UBS Publishers, New Delhi (1995) p. 65 
 
40. Legal maxims are not so legal as they are moral. I believe in the 
eternal truth of 'sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas' (use thy own 
property so as notto injure thy neighbour's).  
Young India, 26-3-1921, p. 50 at p. 51 
 
41. In order to enhance the status and the market-value  of the 
provincial languages, I would have the language of the law courts 
to be the language of the province where the court is situated. 
Harijan, 9-7-1938, pp. 177-178 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256   
42. The fear of the judge  within is more terrible than that of the one witho ut. 
Mahatma,  Vol. 2 by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 63 
 
43. Justice should become cheap and expeditious. Today it is the luxury of the 
rich and the joy of the gambler. 
Mahatma,  Vol. 4 by D. G, Tendulkar, p. 222 
 
44. Justice does not help the ones who slumber but help s only those who are 
vigilant. This is not a maxim to be mouthed in cour ts of law but to be 
applied in every concern of practical life. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Publications Division, Government of 
India, Vol. XIV, p. 177 
 
45. A Satyagrahi cannot go to law for a personal wrong.  
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Publications Division, Government of 
India, Vol. XXV, p. 163 
 
46. The recognition of the golden rule of never taking the law into one's own 
hands has no exceptions. 
Mahatma,  Vol. 8, 2nd Edition (1960) by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 103 
 
47. Where death without resistance or death after resis tance is the only way, 
neither party should think of resorting to law cour ts or help from 
government. Even if one of the parties resorts to s uch aid, the other 
should refrain. If resort to law courts cannot be a voided, there ought to be 
at least no resort to false evidence.  
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhii, Publications Division, 
Government of India, Vol. XXV; p. 138 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257   
48. Independence meant voluntary restraint and discipli ne, voluntary 
acceptance of the rule of law.  
Mahatma, Vol. 8, 2nd Edition (1960) by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 1 00 
 
49. All taxation to be healthy must return tenfold to t he taxpayer in 
the form of necessary services.  
Mahatma, Vol. 4, by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 211 
 
50. Legal imposition avoids the necessity of honour or good faith.  
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Publications Division, 
Government of India, Vol. XXVI, p. 162 
 
51. Whether there is or there is not any law in force, the Government 
cannot exercise control over us without our coopera tion. The 
existence of a law means that if we refused to acce pt it, we are 
liable to punishment, and generally it so happens t hat the fear  
of punishment leads men to submit to the restrictio n. But a 
Satyagrahi differs from the generality of men in th at if he submits 
to a restriction, he submits voluntarily, not becau se he is afraid of 
punishment, but because he thinks such submission i s essential to 
the common weal. 
Satyagraha in South Africa, De Luxe Edition, 1968, Ch. 22, p. 218 
 
52. It was the function of democracy to make justice ch eap and expeditious 
and to ensure all possible purity in the administra tion. But, for the 
ministers to replace or to influence courts of just ice was the very negation 
of democracy and law. No minister has the right to interfere with the 
course of justice, even for his dearest ones. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258  Mahatma,  Vol. 8, by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 193 
 
53. The demands of equity supersede the letter of law. There is a homely 
maxim of law, which has been in practice for centur ies in England, that 
when common law seems to fail, equity comes to the rescue. 
Mahatma,  Vol. 8, by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 316 
 
54. An oath may be taken in the name of God and yet may  not be styled 
religious. An oath that witness takes in a court of  law is a legal not a 
religious oath, breach of which would carry legal c onsequences. An oath 
taken by members of Parliament may be called a cons titutional not a 
religious oath, breach of which may involve mundane  consequences. 
Breach of a religious oath carries no legal consequ ences, but in the opinion 
of the taker does carry divine punishment. This doe s not mean that any of 
the three varieties of oaths is less binding than t he others on a 
conscientious man. A conscientious witness will tel l the truth, not for fear 
of the legal consequence, but he will do so in ever y case. 
Harijan, 22-5-1937, p. 116 
 
55. The poet (Rabindranath Tagore) thinks, for instance , that I want 
everybody to spin the whole of his time to the excl usion of all other 
activity, that is to say, that I want the poet to f orsake his muse, the 
farmer his plough, the lawyer his brief and the doc tor his lancet. So far is 
this from truth that I have asked no one to abandon  his calling, but on the 
contrary to adorn it by giving every day only thirt y minutes to spinning as 
sacrifice for the whole nation. 
Young India , 5-11-1925 
 
56. It is my confirmed belief that every Government mas ks its brute-force and 
maintains its control over the people through civil  and criminal courts, for The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259  it is cheaper, simpler and more honourable for a ru ler that instead of his 
controlling the people through naked force, they th emselves, lured into 
slavery through courts, etc., submit to him of thei r own accord. If people 
settle their civil disputes among themselves and th e lawyers, unmindful of 
self-interest, boycott the courts in the interest o f the people, the latter 
can advance in no time. I have believed for many ye ars that every State 
tries to perpetuate its power through lawyers. 
The Penguin Gandhi Reader,  Edited by Rudrangshu Mukheijee 1993 p. 135.  
 
57. The master-key to the solution of the problem of Hi ndu-Muslim Unity is the 
replacement of the rule of the sword by that of arb itration. Honest public 
opinion should make it impossible for aggrieved par ties to take the law 
into their own hands and every case must be referre d to private 
arbitration or to law courts if the parties do not believe in non-co-
operation. 
Ibid, p. 262 
 
58. We shall never be able to raise the standard of pub lic life through laws. 
We are not made that way. Only if the lives of the leaders, both private 
and public, are perfect, will they be able to produ ce any effect on the 
people. Mere preaching will have no effect. 
The Essential Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  edited by Raghavan Iyer, Oxford 
University Press, 1996 p. 411 
 
59. On the political field, the struggle on behalf of t he people mostly consists 
in opposing error in the shape of unjust laws. When  you have failed to 
bring the error home to the law-giver by way of pet itions and the like, the 
only remedy open to you, if you do not wish to subm it to it, is to compel 
him to retrace his steps by suffering in your perso n, i.e., by inviting the 
penalty for the breach of the law. Hence, satyagrah a largely appears to The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260  the public as civil disobedience or civil resistanc e. It is civil in the sense 
that it is not criminal. 
Gandhi and Gandhism,  by B. Pattabhi Sitaramayya Vol. 1, Kitabistan, All ahabad 
p. 104 
 
60. The criminal, i.e., the ordinary lawbreaker breaks the law surreptitiously 
and tries to avoid the penalty: not so the civil re sister. He ever obeys the 
law of the State to which he belongs, not out of fe ar of the sanctions, but 
because he considers them to be good for the welfar e of society. But there 
come occasions, generally rare, when he considers c ertain laws to be so 
unjust as to render obedience to them a dishonour, he then openly and 
civilly breaks them and quietly suffers the penalty  for their breach. And in 
order to register his protest against the action of  the law-giver, it is open 
to him to withdraw his co-operation from the state by disobeying such 
other laws whose breach does not involve moral turp itude. 
Ibid, p. 104 
 
61. When the Rowlatt Bills were published, I felt that they were so restrictive 
of human liberty that they must be resisted to the utmost. I observed, too, 
that the opposition to them was universal among Ind ians. I submit that no 
state, however despotic, has the right to enact law s which are repugnant 
to the whole body of the people, much less a Govern ment guided by 
constitutional usage and precedent, such as the Ind ian Government. I felt, 
too, that the oncoming agitation needed a definite direction, if it was 
neither to collapse nor to run into violent channel s. I ventured therefore 
to present satyagraha to the country, emphasising i ts civil resistance 
aspect. 
Gandhi and Gandhism, by P. Pattabhi Sitaramayya Vol. I, pp. 104-105 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261  62. The councilors want their fares and extras, the min isters their salaries, the 
lawyers their fees, the suitors their decrees, the parents such education 
for their boys as would give them status in the pre sent life, the 
millionaires want facilities for multiplying their millions and the rest their 
unmanly peace. The whole revolves beautifully round  the central 
corporation. It is a giddy dance from which no one cares to free himself 
and so, as the speed increases, the exhileration is  the greater. But it is a 
death dance and the exhileration is induced by the rapid heartbeat of a 
patient who is about to expire. 
Young India , 9-3-1922, p. 148 
 
63. There is no doubt that untouchability is a mental a ttitude. It cannot be 
abolished by legislation. Law can touch the body, b ut not the mind. The 
mind can be touched only by love and persuasion. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Vol. LIV, p. 325 
 
64. 64. People seem to think that when a law is passed against any evil, it will 
die without any further effort. There never was a g rosser self-deception. 
Legislation is intended to be and is effective agai nst an ignorant or a small 
evil-minded minority; but no legislation which is o pposed by an intelligent 
and organized public opinion, or under cover of rel igion by a fanatical 
minority, can ever succeed. 
Young India, 7-7-1927, p. 219 
 
65. We must widen the prison gates and we must enter th em as a bridegroom 
enters the bride’s chamber. Freedom is to be wooed only inside prison 
walls and sometimes on gallows, never in the counci l chamber, courts, or 
the schoolrooms. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262  The Life of Mahatma Gandhi, by Louis Fischer, Harper & Row Publishers, New 
York, 1983, p. 204.  
 
66. Justice will come when it is deserved by our being and feeling strong. 
Mahatma, Vol. 2 by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 240 
 
67. The first condition of non-violence is justice all round, in every 
department of life. 
Mahatma, Vol. 5 by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 278 
 
68. Peace will not come out of a clash of arms but out of  justice, lived and 
done by unarmed nations in the face of odds. 
Mahatma, Vol. 5 by D . G. Tendulkar, p . 193 
 
69. It is open to a war resister to judge between two c ombatants and wish 
success to the one who has justice on his side.  
Mahatma, Vol. 5, by D. G. Tendulkar, p. 197 
 
70. I can certainly imagine a brave and believing weave r or cobbler 
more effectively leading our struggle than a timid and sceptical 
lawyer. Success depends upon bravery, sacrifice, tr uth, love and 
faith; not onlegal acumen, calculation, diplomacy, hate and 
unbelief.  
Young India, 25-8-1921 p. 266 
 
71. The removal of untouchability is not to be brought by any legal 
enactment. It will be brought about only when the H indu 
conscience is roused to action and of its own accor d removes the 
shame.  The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263  You ng India , 3 0-6-1927 
 
72. It is not legislation that will cure a popular evil . It is enlightened 
public opinion that can do it.  
Young India, 26-8-1926. 
 
73. We are the makers of our own state. Individuals who  realize the 
fact need not, ought not, to wait for collective ac tion even as a 
hungry man does not wait for others to commence a m eal before 
he falls to it. The one necessary condition for act ion is that like  
the hungry man, we must hunger after our deliveranc e.  
We need the same advice that was given to Martha by   
Jesus Christ. If we but do "the one thing needful",  there is no 
occasion for us to be "anxious and troubled" about the many things in the 
shape of wanting to know what our Governors will do , or who the next 
Prime Minister is likely to be, or what laws affect ing us are likely to be 
passed. 
Indian Opinion  14-5-1910 
 
74. For me patriotism is the same as humanity. I am pat riotic because I am 
human and humane. It is not exclusive. I will not h urt England or Germany 
to serve India. The law of the patriot is not diffe rent from that of the 
patriarch. And a patriot is so much the less a patr iot if he is a lukewarm 
humanitarian. There is no conflict between private and political law. A 
non- cooperator for instance, would act exactly in the same manner 
toward his father or brother as he is today acting toward the British 
Government. 
Young India , 16-3-1921.  
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264  75. The question of reform of the legal profession is a  big one. It does not 
admit of tinkering. I am strongly of opinion that l awyers and doctors 
should not be able to charge any fees but that they  should be paid a 
certain fixed sum by the state and the public shoul d receive their services 
free. They will have paid for them through the taxa tion that they would 
have paid for such services rendered to citizens au tomatically. The poor 
will be untaxed but the rich and the poor will have  then the same amount 
of attention and skill. Today the best legal talent s and the best medical 
advice are unobtainable by the poor. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Publications Division, Government of 
India, Vol. XXXVI, p. 84.  
 
76. The attack against Justice Duleepsingh (Judge of th e Punjab High Court 
who had on appeal acquitted the author of a pamphle t who had been 
prosecuted and sentenced by the lower courts under Section 153-A of the 
Indian Penal Code) was uncalled for, undeserved and  hysterical. The 
judiciary is by no means above being influenced by the Government, but it 
would be wholly unfit to render justice if it was o pen to popular attacks, 
threats and insults. So far as the Judge's integrit y was concerned, it 
should" have satisfied any Mussalman that he condem ned the pamphlet as 
he. did in unmeasured terms. His reading of the sec tion ought not to have 
been made a cause for virulent attack against him. That other judges have 
taken a different view from Justice Duleepsingh is irrelevant to the issue. 
Judges have been often known before now to have giv en honest and 
opposite interpretations of the same law. 
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , Publications Division, Government of 
India, Vol. XXXV, pp. 15-16 
 
77. A true Khudai Khidmatgar 1 will not go to a law court. Fighting in a law 
court is just like physical fighting. Only, you use  force by proxy. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265  A Pilgrimage for Peace Gandhi and Frontier Gandhi a mong N.W.F. Pathans, By 
Pyarelal p. 61 Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedaba d, 1950.  
 
1. Literally "servants of God" being the name given by  Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan — the 
Frontier Gandhi as he came to be known — to his Vol unteers when he founded the 
nonviolence movement among the warlike Frontier fol k. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266   
APPENDIX III 
GANDHIJI AS A JURIST 
[Editor's Note: In a speech delivered on July 1, 19 63 at the Symposium organised by the 
Bombay Branch of the Gandhi Smarak Nidhi, the late B. N. Gokhale, an ex-Judge of the 
Bombay High Court has dealt with Gandhiji's legal p hilosophy. The speech is reproduced 
below by courtesy Khadi Gramodyog.] 
1. We in India have often deplored the lack of jurists  in our country and 
attributed it to our standards of legal education. The University Education 
Commission presided over by no less a person than D r. Radhakrishnan had 
the following observation to make about it : 
"In our country, we have eminent practitioners and excellent judges. The 
law has also given us great leaders and men consecr ated to public service. 
Most conspicuous of these is Gandhiji. We have no i nternationally known 
exponents of jurisprudence and legal studies. Our c olleges of law do not 
hold a place of high esteem either at home or abroa d, nor has law become 
an ' area of profound scholarship and enlightened r esearch." 
Since this report was published, undoubtedly our me thods of legal training 
have made some progress but the verdict of the Dr. Radhakrishnan 
Commission has been confirmed by the Law Commission  of India as late as 
1958 under the distinguished chairmanship of Shri M otilal Setalvad. 
2. I have no doubt that when the sponsors of today's s ymposium chose the 
subject of Gandhiji as a Jurist, they did not have in mind the term jurist in 
its ordinary technical sense. But I do not think th at we shall be doing any 
injustice to Gandhiji's memory if we do not describ e him as a jurist in that 
sense. It cannot, however, be denied that Gandhiji had a legal philosophy 
of his own and entertained most refreshing views as  to the duties and 
functions of lawyers as well as of courts of law th ough they might not have 
gained acceptance in those days and might not get e ven today a whole-The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267  hearted acceptance. That, however, cannot detract f rom their value and 
the fruitfulness of a discussion like that of today 's evening. 
3. It would be impossible for me to refer in this spee ch to all the aspects of 
Gandhiji's legal philosophy. I, therefore, propose to deal only with one or 
two of the aspects of that philosophy and the quest ion of their general 
validity. 
4. But before I do so, let me pay a tribute to the ski lful manner in which 
Gandhiji analysed and discussed some of the materia l law cases from the 
unhappy Punjab of those days in the columns of  Young India.  Gandhiji had 
then to his credit legal practice of about 20 years  mostly in South Africa. 
As far as is known, he does not seem to have appear ed in any case in the 
Bombay High Court. But as I was saying, the manner in which Gandhiji 
analysed and discussed these cases arouses one's ad miration. His 
observation about the usual defence of alibi, about  the identification 
parades, about the entries in the police diaries, o r the value of approver's 
evidence or his caution in not accepting extraneous  evidence reveal him as 
a lawyer having a very keen insight into the intric acies of criminal law, and 
the principles which he touched are valid even toda y in the light of the 
rulings of our highest Courts. I would particularly  mention in this 
connection Gandhiji's article on the case of Karamc hand, a student of the 
Dayanand Anglo-Vedic College. I do not know how far  the articles in  Young 
India  affected the ultimate decision of the Government o f India which 
reviewed some of these cases. But there can be no d oubt that those 
articles aroused and galvanized public opinion in t he whole country 
regarding the enormity of the happenings in the Pun jab which otherwise 
might have been perhaps a closed book. 
5. Gandhiji's views regarding the duties and functions  of the legal profession 
must find the first mention in any discussion of hi s legal philosophy. 
According to him, though a lawyer must do his very best for his client, he 
ought not so to identify himself with his client as  to transgress the 
principles of truth and justice. In his very early life, Gandhiji learnt a The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268  bitter lesson when he tried to plead with the Polit ical Agent for his elder 
brother who, as the legal adviser and secretary to the Ranasaheb of 
Porbunder before he was installed on his Gadi, was said to have tendered 
wrong advice to the Ranasaheb. The Political Agent was rude to Gandhiji 
in this matter and Gandhiji was much embittered by the treatment 
received by him but ultimately accepted the wholeso me advice of Sir 
Pherozeshah Mehta not to do anything rash. Gandhiji  has admitted that 
this incident changed to some extent the course of his life. Gandhiji 
always regarded that over and above the interests o f his clients, he had a 
prior and perpetual retainer on behalf of truth and  justice. That led to his 
developing certain rules of conduct which he scrupu lously followed. 
6. Mis anxiety to discover the truth made him attain a  good deal of skill in 
cross-examination and it has been said that he foun d no difficulty in 
exposing dishonest witnesses. He always considered that within limits a 
defence counsel must wield the weapon of cross-exam ination to expose 
the falsity or at least the weakness in the prosecu tion case. When on one 
occasion the Chief Justice of the Patna High Court animadverted against 
what he regarded as the habit of counsel in abusing  the privilege of cross-
examination, and went to the length of saying that it should be 
circumstance warranting an enhancement of sentence,  Gandhiji publicly 
protested against this dictum and pointed out that an eminent counsel like 
Russel could never have succeeded in establishing t he Piggot forgeries but 
for his able and fiery cross-examination. But I hav e no doubt that Gandhiji 
would have equally deplored the use of this weapon merely to browbeat 
witnesses even though the lawyer might be knowing t he weakness of his 
own case. 
7. Gandhiji's insistence on truth also enabled him to be strict with his own 
clients who knowing his views often reserved for hi m their clean cases 
entrusting the doubtful ones to other lawyers. In t his perhaps Gandhiji was 
singularly fortunate. It would seem that there were  occasions when he 
would retire from a case even in the midst of the h earing if he realized The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269  that his client had deceived him. Other lawyers hav e done the same. I 
have known as to how once Shri D. N. Bahadurji, ex- Advocate General and 
a distinguished lawyer of great integrity, sat down  while he was arguing an 
appeal on the ground that he was misinstructed by t he advocate 
instructing him and had to be cajoled into resuming  the argument. How 
Gandhiji made a merchant-client of his confess to h is guilt in smuggling 
and defrauding the customs authorities is known to every reader of 
Gandhiji's autobiography. How many lawyers engaged in smuggling cases 
would be prepared to follow this example ? 
8. His adherence to justice and truth also led to anot her result. Gandhiji was 
always in favour of setting a case and often advise d his clients not to fight 
to the bitter end. That is illustrated by the very first case in which he was 
concerned on behalf of his employer one Abdulla Set h, between whom and 
the opponent Tyeb Seth, he was able to bring about an amicable 
settlement. This practice often creates a misconcep tion in the clients' 
mind especially in the case of junior lawyers. But in Gandhiji's case it 
brought him greater esteem and confidence on the pa rt of his clients. To 
some extent that was due to the fact that many of h is clients were co-
workers in his public work in South Africa. Gandhij i has always stressed 
that it is the glory of the legal profession to bri ng the two opposing parties 
together to agree to submitting their disputes to a rbitration. 
9. Gandhiji, very early in his career as a lawyer, lea rnt the importance of 
studying deeply and delving into the facts of a cas e, because, as he 
expressed it, if the facts were taken care of, the law would take care of 
itself. He has mentioned that he learnt this from s enior Mr. Leonard, a 
famous lawyer in South Africa, whom Gandhiji's clie nt had engaged in the 
very first case to which I have referred above. Gan dhiji adhered to and 
followed this method in his political work also. In  some of the martial law 
cases about which he had occasion to write in the c olumns of  Young India,  
he took meticulous care about his facts and express ed his annoyance if 
they were not properly handled or the case was spoi led by the improperly The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270  worded and angry arguments on the part of the lawye r. Lokmanya Tilak 
though he had legal training never practised as a l awyer. But he developed 
the same habit and was known to study law reports t o keep himself 
acquainted with the legal position in various matte rs. That enabled him 
ably to conduct his defence in many of his cases. I n writing an article on 
an important subject for the Kesari on the eve of a Congress Session, Tilak 
is said to have taken 36 hours to gather and collat e all the facts. In one of 
the martial law cases discussed in Young India,  Gandhiji strongly criticized 
bad draftsmanship which often spoils good causes. G andhiji was himself a 
practised draftsman and has uttered a warning which  is as valid today as it 
was forty-four years ago : 
"I do wish as a practised draftsman" he wrote, "to warn writers of 
petitions, whether they be pleaders or otherwise, t o think of the cause 
they may be espousing for the time being. I assure them that a bare 
statement of facts unembellished with adjectives is  far more eloquent and 
effective than a narrative flowing with exuberant l anguage." 
Gandhiji has fairly admitted that he learnt this le sson from Gopal Krishna 
Gokhale and Dadabhai Naoroji who always impressed o n him that, if he 
wanted to be heard, he must be brief, must write to  the point and adhere 
to facts, must never travel beyond the cause under notice and that he 
should be most sparing in his adjectives. Gandhiji has added that if success 
attended his efforts it was due to his acceptance o f what he characterises 
as 'golden advice' from these illustrious seniors a nd experienced 
politicians. The Gold Control Order leaves untouche d such 'golden advice', 
but unfortunately such advice is never sought now n or is it available. The 
gold streaks in the mines of advice seem to have be en completely 
exhausted. 
10. Being a humanist to the core of his being, Gandhiji  felt anguish at the 
sufferings and hardships of the litigants. His prot ests now and then against 
high cost of litigation and exorbitant character of  lawyers' fees were 
symptomatic of this spirit of humanism. A lawyer is  undoubtedly entitled The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271  to reasonable remuneration for his experience, tale nts and troubles. It is 
true, at least in the case of junior lawyers, that dishonest clients often 
seek to deprive them of even this. At the other ext reme are lawyers who 
are inclined to proceed on the economic principle o f the demand for their 
talents and what they are able to get. This has no reference to dishonest 
lawyers who can always be brought to book under the  disciplinary 
jurisdiction. Is it consistent with high profession al standards to fix fees not 
compatible with the claim involved in the litigatio n? It is a difficult 
question to answer. But I believe it is permissible  to say that putting a 
reasonable ceiling on lawyer's fee deserves to be t ackled by lawyers 
themselves with the creation of a professional coun cil on an all India basis. 
Gandhiji did not charge fees to his poor clients an d I believe many lawyers 
always have been doing this. But it is for the Gand hi Smarak Nidhi to 
consider whether among its activities it should not  interest itself in the 
problem of legal aid which has not yet been complet ely solved considering 
the interest that Gandhiji took in poor litigants. 
11. In his speeches in the Federal Structure Committee of the Round Table 
Conference in 1931, Gandhiji showed considerable fo resight in his demand 
for the establishment of a Federal or Supreme Court  with the widest 
possible jurisdiction and with no Privy, Council to  revise its decisions. In 
the course of 19 years his vision has become a real ity with the passage of 
the Abolition of the Privy Council Jurisdiction Act  of 1949 and the creation 
of the Supreme Court which has established its repu tation even outside 
the borders of India. But even then Gandhiji never thought that such a 
court would be able to exercise its jurisdiction ov er the princely States, 
and unfortunately he did not live to see the happen ing of the miracle in 
1948 itself when the princes consented to the merge r of their States with 
the rest of India due to the statesmanship of Sarda r Vallabhbhai Patel, 
then in charge of the Home Ministry. 
12. One final point and I have done. A reference cannot  be avoided to 
Gandhiji's views on civil resistance which is an im portant part of his legal The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 272  philosophy. Some of you might remember how strongly  he protested 
against the dictum of the Bombay High Court that "t hose who live by the 
law must keep the law". Commenting on this Gandhiji  wrote : 
"If it means that no lawyer may ever commit a civil  breach without 
incurring the displeasure of the court, it means ut ter stagnation. Lawyers 
are persons most able to appreciate the dangers of bad legislation and it 
must be with them a sacred duty by committing a civ il breach to prevent a 
criminal breach. Lawyers should be guardians of law  and liberty and as 
such are interested in keeping the statute book of the country 'pure and 
undefiled'." 
It is perhaps true that a situation contemplated by  Gandhiji may not arise 
in an Independent India with a Constitution based o n democratic 
principles. But when a body of lawyers condemns in strong terms 
legislative measures of Government as unconstitutio nal and objectionable, 
as has happened in recent times and may happen in f uture, it would be an 
interesting speculation as to what Gandhiji's react ion would have been if 
he had been alive today and shared the views of the se lawyers. 
13. As all of you are aware Gandhiji was considerably i nfluenced by the 
teachings and writings of Ruskin especially his  Unto  This Last.  This is what 
Ruskin wrote on the function of the five honourable  professions to be 
found in any civilized society. 
"Five great intellectual professions relating to da ily necessities of life have 
hitherto been in existence—there exist necessarily in every civilized 
nation: the soldier's profession to defend it; the pastor's to teach it; the 
physician's to keep it in health; the lawyer's to e nforce justice in it; the 
merchant's to provide for it. And the duty of all t hese men is, on due 
occasions, to die for it. On due occasions, namely,  the soldier rather than 
to leave his post in battle, the physician rather t han to leave his post in 
plague, the pastor rather than to teach falsehood, the lawyer rather than 
countenance injustice. What is the due occasion for  the merchant? It is the The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 273  main question for the merchant as for all of us. Fo r truly the man who 
does not know when to die, does not know how to liv e." 
Gandhiji wrote in a similar vein in his  Young India of November 1931, when 
he appealed to the professions to put their talents  in the service of the 
country instead of converting them into £. s.d. Gan dhiji wrote : 
"If you are a medicine man there is disease enough in India to need all your 
medical skill. If you are a lawyer, there are diffe rences and quarrels 
enough in India. Instead of fomenting more trouble,  patch up those 
quarrels and stop litigation. If you are an enginee r, build more houses 
suited to the means and needs of our people and yet  full of health and 
fresh air. There is nothing that you have learnt wh ich cannot be turned to 
account." 
In those good old days of 1931, there was no proble m of high soaring prices 
and black-marketeering. Otherwise I have no doubt t hat Gandhiji would 
have appealed to the merchants also more effectivel y perhaps than our 
public men are able to do now, to restrain their pr ofiteering instincts. 
14. It was Gandhiji's claim when he brought two litigan ts together that he had 
learnt the true practice of law and that he had lea rnt the better side of 
human nature and to enter men's minds. In one of th e articles in a volume 
dedicated to Gandhiji on his 75th birthday in 1944,  it is written : 
"Many of the world's great figures have entered men 's mind only to destroy 
human fellowship and goodwill. It is Gandhiji's gre at contribution to the 
civilization of his day that in entering men's mind  he seeks not to destroy 
but to promote in their hearts a love for their fel lowmen." 
That was Gandhiji's contribution in the sphere of l aw also though he gave 
up the practice of law to serve the country to enab le it to attain to the 
full stature of independent nationhood. 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 274   
APPENDIX IV 
GANDHIJI'S APPLICATION FOR ENROLMENT AS AN ADVOCATE  OF THE BOMBAY 
HIGH COURT 
Bombay  
November 16, 1891 
To, 
The Prothonotary and Registrar 
of the High Court of Judicature 
at Bombay.  
Sir, 
I am desirous of being admitted as an Advocate of t he High Court. I was called 
to the Bar in England on the 10th June last. I have  kept twelve terms in the 
Inner Temple and I intend to practise in the Bombay  Presidency. 
I produce the certificate of my being called to the  Bar. As to the certificate of 
my character and abilities, I have not been able to  obtain any certificate from 
a judge in England, for I was not aware of the rule s in force in the Bombay High 
Court. I, however, produce a certificate from Mr. W . D. Edwards, a practising 
Barrister in the Supreme Court of Judicature in Eng land. He is the author of the  
Compendium of the Law of Property in Land,  one of the books prescribed for 
the Bar final Examination. 
I beg to remain, 
Sir, 
Your most obedient servant, 
M. K. GANDHI 
 
See  The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,  Vol. 1 pp.63-64. 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 275    
APPENDIX V 
GANDHIJI'S CERTIFICATE OF BEING CALLED  TO THE BAR BY INNER TEMPLE 
INNER TEMPLE 
This is to Certify to whom it may concern That Moha ndas Karamchand Gandhi of 
20 Barons Court Road, West Kensington, the youngest  son of Karamchand 
Uttamchand Gandhi of Porbander, India deceased, was  generally admitted of 
The Honourable Society of the Inner Temple on the s ixth day of November One 
thousand eight hundred and eighty eight and was cal led to the Bar by the same 
Society on the tenth day of June One thousand eight  hundred and ninety one 
and has paid all duties to the House and to the Off icers thereunto belonging. 
In Testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand an d the Seal of the said 
Society this eleventh day of June in the year of Ou r Lord One thousand eight 
hundred and ninety one 
Witness Treasurer 
Mahatma, Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, D. G. Tendulkar Vol. I, Times 
of India Press, Bombay (1951), p. 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 276   
APPENDIX VI  
CERTIFICATE FROM MR. W. D. EDWARDS, AUTHOR AND PRAC TISING 
BARRISTER IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE IN ENG LAND 
RECOMMENDING GANDHIJI'S NAME FOR ADMISSION AS AN AD VOCATE OF THE 
HIGH COURT OF BOMBAY 
11, Stone Buildings 
Lincoln's Inn  
9th June 1891 
I beg to recommend Mr. M. K. Gandhi of the Inner Te mple, who has been 
proposed for call to the Bar in England in the pres ent term (Trinity 1891), and 
who as I understand will be duly called on the 10th  instant, as a fit and proper 
person, upon his admission to the English Bar, to b e admitted to practise as an 
advocate of the High Court of Bombay. Mr. Gandhi ha s resided in England for a 
period of about three years during which he has kep t terms for the Bar. I 
believe that his career as a student of the Inns of  Court has been in every 
respect creditable to him, and that he is a gentlem an of unexceptionable 
character. 
William Douglas Edwards  
11 Stone Buildings  
Lincoln's Inn  
Barrister at Law  
of Lincoln's Inn  
 
Mahatma, Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, D. G. Tendulkar Vol. I, Times 
of India Press, Bombay (1951), p. 40 
 
 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 277   
APPENDIX VII 
TRUE COPY OF THE ORDER ISSUED BY THE BENCHERS OF IN NER TEMPLE ON 
10TH NOVEMBER 1922 DISBARRING GANDHIJI AND REMOVING  HIS NAME FROM 
THE ROLL OF BARRISTERS ON HIS CONVICTION AND SENTEN CE TO SIX YEARS' 
IMPRISONMENT ON 18TH MARCH 1922 BY THE COURT OF THE  SESSIONS 
JUDGE, AHMEDABAD  
Inner Temple 
At a Parliament holden 
Friday, 10th day of November 1922 
WHEREAS at a Bench Table holden on the 7th day of N ovember 1922 the 
Treasurer having reported that he had received a ce rtified copy of the 
conviction and sentence to six years' imprisonment of Mohandas Karamchand 
Gandhi a Barrister of this Inn at the Court of the Sessions Judge, Ahmedabad, 
India on the 18th of March 1922 for sedition. It wa s ordered — That Mohandas 
Karamchand Gandhi having been convicted by a compet ent Tribunal of an 
offence which in the opinion of the Bench disqualif ies him from continuing a 
Member of the Inn should have his name removed from  the books. And at the 
same Bench Table. It was further ordered — That at the Parliament to be 
holden on Friday the 10th day of November 1922 the said Mohandas 
Karamchand Gandhi be disbarred and his name removed  from the books of this 
society and that this Order be communicated to the judges of the Supreme 
Court of Judicature to the other Inns of Court to t he General Council of the Bar 
and by registered letter to the said Mohandas Karam chand Gandhi and be 
screened in the Hall. 
It is at this Parliament ordered — That the said Or der be and the same is hereby 
confirmed and the said Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi i s hereby disbarred and 
his name removed from the books of this society. 
Walter G. Wrangham 
Sub-Treasurer 
 
Mahatma, Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, by D. G. Tendulkar Vol. 2, Times of India 
Press, Bombay (1951) p. 136 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 278   
APPENDIX VIII 
LETTER TO THE AUTHOR  
FROM THE RT. HON. LORD DENNING  
The Lawn, 
Whitchurch, Hants. 
15 December, 1984 
Dear Mr. Kher, 
Thank you very much for your letter and especially for  The Law and the 
Lawyers  by M. K. Gandhi which you compiled and edited. 
I have always been interested in Mahatma Gandhi bec ause, as you know, he was 
a member of the Inner Temple and was called to the Bar here in England in 
1891. Very recently, I was present when a special p ortrait of him was unveiled 
in the library of the Inner Temple. I have also bee n much interested in the 
Great Trial and have seen sketches reproducing it. I am very glad that the book 
has gone into the 4th edition and been recommended by the universities. This 
must be most satisfying and encouraging for you. 
Thank you for your very kind remarks about my own b ooks. I am very glad that 
the latest one, Landmarks in the Law , has already arrived in Bombay where I 
have many friends. I do not know whether I shall be  able to write any more 
books because I am getting old now, but I will see if I can think of something. 
It is kind of you to send me Christmas greetings, a nd Lady Denning joins me 
now in sending you our very best wishes for Christm as and the New Year, and 
we wish you continued success and happiness in law and in life. 
Yours sincerely,  
Denning 
Mr. Sunit B. Kher, 
51 Mahatma Gandhi Road, 
Fort, Bombay 400 001 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 279   
GLOSSARY  
Ahimsa - Non-violence; positively the practice of l ove. 
Ashram - A hermitage; a place for study and discipl ine of life; a quiet place 
where people having common ideals lead a community life and follow a 
particular discipline. The place where Gandhiji res ided with his co-workers and 
disciples was referred to as the Ashram. 
 
Bania - Hindu merchant or trader; member of the thi rd caste among the 
Hindus, whose traditional occupation is trade and c ommerce. 
Bhai - Brother; comrade. This word is used as an af fix and as a term in 
addressing a gentleman. 
Brahman - The first or the highest of the four cast es sanctioned by the Hindu 
religion (literally, one who knows Brahman). 
 
Chaprasis - Peons in uniforms. 
Coolie - Term for porter or hired labourer; in Sout h Africa, indiscriminately 
applied to all Indians. 
Crore - Ten millions. 
 
Dayada - Relative; dependent. 
Dharma - Religion; moral law or practice; duty. A c omprehensive Sanskrit term 
embracing the concepts of law, justice, duty and vi rtue rolled into one. 
Diwan - Chief minister of a princely state. 
 
Foujdar - The chief constable or sub-inspector of p olice. 
 The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 280  Gadi - A throne; a post of authority. 
 
Hartal - A strike; temporary suspension of business  or work as a mark of protest 
or mourning. 
 
Islam - The religion of the Prophet Muhammad. 
 
Ji - An affix added to names denoting respect, e.g.  Gandhiji. 
 
Khaddar or Khadi - Hand-woven cloth from hand-spun yarn. 
Khalifa or Caliph - The religious head of Islam. 
Khilafat - The office of Caliph. 
Khilafat Movement - A movement organized in India b y the Indian Muslims 
under the leadership of Maulana Muhammad Ali, from 1919 to 1924 in order to 
defend the office of the Caliph of Turkey and to re store his powers as the Head 
of the Muslim Faith. In 1924, after the proclamatio n of the Turkish Republic the 
office of the Caliph in Turkey was abolished by the  decision of Mustafa Kemal 
Pasha. Thus the Indian Khilafat Movement ceased to exist in 1924. 
 
Lakh - One hundred thousand. 
Langarkhanas - Community kitchens where food is ser ved free of costs. 
Lokmanya - Respected by the people. An honorific ti tle conferred by the people 
on the late Bal Gangadhar Tilak. 
 
Mahatma - A high-souled man; a noble-minded man; a great soul; a title 
generally given to Saints. In later years, Gandhi w as generally referred to in 
India as the Mahatma. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 281  Malgujar - A system of land holding (Zamindari) in the former C.P. and Berar 
Province of which Nagpur was the capital. 
Maulana - A learned Muslim divine. 
Mitakshara  - It is a running commentary on the Yajnavalkyasmr iti or the 
Institutes of Yajnavalkya. Yajnavalkyasmriti was co mpiled by the great sage 
Yajnavalkya in about the first century after Christ . Mitakshara was written in 
the latter part of the eleventh century by Vijnanes hwara. In the Mitakshara one 
finds the quintessence of the Smriti law and its pr ecepts and injunctions. The 
chief merit of the work consists in its synthesizin g of various Smriti texts. It is 
of supreme authority throughout India except in Ben gal where the Dayabhaga 
of Jimutavahana is given paramount importance. In B engal the  Mitakshara  is 
more revered than followed, but its authority is no t questioned on points on 
which there is no conflict between it and' the work s prevalent there. 
Moharrirs - Clerks. 
Moplahs - a tribe of Musalmans living in South Indi a in the State of Kerala. 
Musalman - Follower of Islam. 
Muslim - Belonging to Islam. 
 
Parsi - A follower of Zoroastrianism. 
Pugree - Turban. 
Ryot - Peasant. 
 
Sabha - An assembly, a meeting. 
Sahib - A master;, a gentleman; a term of respect; an European. 
Samaj - An assembly. . . 
Sanad - A commission, a charter, a giant, a warrant . 
Sannyasi - One who has renounced the worldly life; a recluse. The Law and The Lawyers 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 282  Sapinda - A blood relation or kinsman connected by offering of balls of rice  
(pinda). The affinity extends to six male descendants in th e male line and six 
male ascendants in the male line. Under the Mitakshara  the Sapinda 
relationship arises ' between two people through th eir being connected by 
particles of one body, namely, that of the common a ncestor, in other words, 
from community of blood in contradistinction to the  Dayabhaga notion of 
community in the offering of religious oblation. 
Satyagraha - A force which is born of truth and lov e or non-violence; a 
tenacious clinging to truth; civil or non-violent r esistance; literally, holding on 
to truth. Name given by Gandhiji to the technique o f non-violent resistance as 
practised by him and under his guidance. 
Satyagrahi - One practising Satyagraha. 
Shastras - Institutes of religion, law or letters; scriptures. 
Shirastedar - Head clerk in a Court of Justice. 
Smritis - Social and religious codes of conduct as delivered originally by Manu 
and other law-givers to their respective pupils and  committed by them, from 
memory, to writing. 
Streedhan - Property altogether at the disposal of the wife. 
Swadeshi - Manufacture of one's own country; belong ing to, or made in one's 
own country. 
Swami - Holy man; master. 
Swaraj - Self-government; self-rule. 
 
Tehsildar - The Officer in charge of Tehsil, a subd ivision of a district. 
 