 
Mahatma Gandhi as a 
student  
 
 
Compiled and Edited by: 
J. M. Upadhyaya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by: The Director Publications Division 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, 
Government of India, Patiala House 
New Delhi 110 001, India. 
© Publication Division  
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
FOREWORD 
So much has already been said about Mahatma Gandhi and yet there remains so 
much more to be said about him. The Mahatma’s life and work were all 
embracing; there was not an activity of our nationa l or social life which 
remained untouched by him. Whilst we have a number of books which give 
adequate accounts of Gandhiji’s social and politica l work, I think there is little 
information about his childhood and early youth. Af ter all the Mahatma that 
Gandhi became in later life was a child like many o ther children and it is 
interesting to find out what environment and influe nces were responsible for 
moulding him. It is from this point of view that I read the page proofs of this 
book. The author seems to have taken great pains an d I do hope his book will 
be widely read and appreciated. 
Zakin Hussain 
New Delhi 
January 15, 1965 
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
INTRODUCTORY 
Gandhiji, it has been well said, could fashion hero es out of common clay. His 
first and, undoubtedly, his most successful experim ent was with himself. This 
booklet is a modest, attempt to present a detailed and documented account of 
the student career of Gandhiji who set himself down  as "a mediocre student". It 
covers the period of his childhood, adolescence and  early youth and is based on 
authentic records. Legends and fantasies have been scrupulously kept out. A 
few relevant facts, not found in the school and col lege records, but falling 
within the period of his student life (1875 to 1891 ), have been woven into the 
narrative. 
The story of Mahatma Gandhi's student life reveals how Indian society, 
especially in the upper strata, felt during the las t quarter of the nineteenth 
century the impact of Western ways and ideas, thoug h child marriages and 
other ancient customs tenaciously lingered on. As a  result, the harmony 
between the home and the world had begun to disappe ar. Mohandas, virtuous 
son of staunch Vaishnava parents, could thus be per suaded in the name of 
'reform' into meat-eating and worse. 
The scholastic items here presented throw light on Indian education during the 
last quarter of the nineteenth century. The details  of school and college 
education in Kathiawar(Saurashtra) show how English  education had struck 
strong roots in Indian soil, after British rule had  survived the upheaval of 1857. 
There was little local or national colour in the go vernment-controlled system of 
education. Examinations after the British model, th e supreme importance 
assigned to English and thorough secularisation of the contents of education-
these features come out clearly in the details of G andhiji's student career. The 
particulars about the courses of study and the book s prescribed as well as the 
question papers for the Bombay Matriculation reprod uced here give a clear idea 
of the academic standards then prevailing. 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4   
CHAPTER  I 
CAREER  AT  PRIMARY  SCHOOLS 
Schools attended by Mohandas  
Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, born at Porbandar on Oc tober 2, 1869, was the 
fourth and last child of his father's fourth and la st marriage. His schooling 
probably began in the year 1876 in Porbandar which was then ruled by an 
Indian prince. It was a rather isolated town, almos t untouched by Western 
influence. 
The peninsula of Kattyawar, that is, Kathiawar (now  known as Saurashtra) was 
then a conglomeration of princely states, big and s mall, of which Porbandar 
was one. The little town of Porbandar, with a popul ation of about 15,000, was 
the capital of the state. It had three private prim ary schools and one 
Government primary school, subsequently known as th e Porbandar Taluka 
School 1. The schools started by the Government were mainta ined by the 
Education Fund and supervised by an officer of the Bombay Education 
Department. The name of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi could not be traced in 
any of the relevant records such as the annual exam ination result files and 
some files of correspondence which were available a t the Porbandar Taluka 
School on December 12, 1954. Shri Jivram Mahadev, w ho was the headmaster 
of this Taluka School in 1875, refers in his offici al correspondence No. 116 
dated March 16, 1875, to three private schools in P orbandar, namely, Adhyaru 
School, Laxman Bava School and Khoja School. It is not certain to which of 
these schools the boy Mohan was sent; no trace what soever now remains of 
these schools, much less of their records. 
Living contemporaries in Porbandar hold that the bo y Mohania, as the family 
affectionately called Mohandas, attended a private school run by Shri Virji 
Kamdar, popularly known as Lulia master because he was lame. This view is 
supported by Mahatmaji's cousin Shri Maneklal Amrit lal Gandhi who was born in 
1875. According to him, almost all the boys in the Gandhi family attended Lulia Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  master's school, possibly because it was within eas y reach of Karamchand 
Gandhi's house, the present Kirti Mandir on the bor der of the town. In those 
days, primary education was not compulsory and only  some twenty per cent of 
the boys of school-going age used to attend primary  schools. 
In his autobiography Mahatma Gandhi does not mentio n the name of the 
primary school which he had attended in Porbandar. "My intellect must have 
been sluggish and my memory raw", the adult Mahatma  complains against the 
child of six. Memorising the alphabet and the multi plication tables by reciting 
them in chorus, on which private schools laid speci al emphasis, must have been 
boring to children, who much preferred playing with  balloons and toys. 
The boy Mohandas was sent to some sort of primary s chool when he was six and 
he studied there in the Infant class for about a ye ar. This schooling must have 
been supplemented by 'home education'. The family w as cultured; there were 
books in the house, dealing chiefly with religion a nd mythology. Mohandas' 
mother Putlibai was deeply religious; the outstandi ng impression she left on his 
mind was that of saintliness. His father was truthf ul, generous and 
incorruptible. The loving care of his revered mothe r was, no doubt, the most 
important part of the early education of the boy. 
Besides his schooling in the Infant class, Mohandas  seems to have been coached 
privately by Shri Anandji Tulsi Adhyaru who was a t utor to the princes of 
Porbandar. This Adhyaru was perhaps the person from  whom Mohan and his 
elder brother Karsandas learnt the 'Ram-Raksha', at  the instance of their cousin 
Shri Amritlal Tulsidas. 2 
After this one-year schooling at Porbandar, Mohanda s was admitted into the 
Branch School at Rajkot, where his father was the C hief Karbhari. On his 
appointment in November 1874 as Chief Karbhari. 
Karamchand Gandhi came to Rajkot with his eldest so n, Laxmidas, who was 
then thirteen years old. The rest of the family, in cluding the seven-year-old 
Mohandas, shifted to Rajkot only towards the end of  1876. Karamchand Gandhi 
had been given a spacious residence near Darbargadh . Near the residence was a 
building, now in ruins, where a Gujarati school, kn own as the Branch School, Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6  used to be housed. 3 The school was subsequently shifted, and is now kno wn as 
Pratap Kunvarba School, or Shala No. 5. In the abse nce of any records, one can 
only assume that Mohandas went to this Branch Schoo l for two years, 1877 and 
1878, and did his Gujarati standards I and II there . From here he was 
transferred to the Main (City) Taluka School, Rajko t, where he was admitted to 
Gujarati standard III on January 21, 1879. 4 In 1878, while Mohandas, was in 
Gujarati Standard II at the Branch School, Karsanda s, his elder brother, was in 
Gujarati standard IV at the Taluka School, Rajkot. 
The Taluka School, Rajkot, was established in 1837 and is one of the oldest 
primary schools of the region. Mohandas attended th is school from January 21, 
1879 to October 2, 1880 during which period he stud ied Gujarati standards III 
and IV. Each of these standards at the Taluka Schoo l in Rajkot had two divisions 
and Mohandas was in the First division in both the years. While Mohandas was a 
schoolboy, the town of Rajkot grew fast, as it was made the seat of the 
Political Agency, under the Governor-General of Bri tish India. Its population 
rose from around 6,000 to more than 15,000. A large  number of Schools sprang 
up, but the City Taluka School seems to have been p referred to all others. In 
fact, the number of its pupils became large enough to warrant transferring the 
first two standards with an Infant class to the Bra nch School mentioned earlier. 
The City Taluka School sent forth every year a good  many pupils who after 
passing their Gujarati standard IV, wished to go on  to the Kattyawar High 
School, Rajkot, in search of English education. Nev ertheless, the Taluka School 
kept on its rolls 234 pupils from standards II to V I. The Taluka School was 
located in a  para  or suburb and hence was popularly known as the sub urban 
school. 5 It was less than five minutes' walk for Mohandas f rom his father's house 
near Darbargadh. Later the City Taluka School was s hifted to its present 
extensive building outside the Kotharia gate and ca me to be known as 
Kishorsinhji Taluka School. 
The age register of the Kishorsinhji Taluka School from 1879 to 1889 6 shows the 
name of Mohandas entered against serial No. 70 and his date of birth 
incorrectly recorded as 2-9-1869. The entry in the sixth column has been signed Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  by his eldest brother, Laxmidas Karamchand Gandhi f or Shri Karamchand 
Uttamchand. The error in the date of birth may be d ue to carelessness in 
naming the month according to the Christian calende r. Karsandas, the elder 
brother of Mohandas, was readmitted to Gujarati sta ndard IV on the same day; 
he is No. 36 in the same age register. It is strang e that these two brothers, the 
only pupils admitted into the school on January 21,  1879, when the term was 
far advanced, have not been assigned consecutive se rial numbers. 
 
Attendance and Progress 
In the annual examination of standard III held on N ovember 3, 1879, the result 
sheet 7 shows Mohandas as serial No. 6. The entry in colum n No. 4 says that he 
had failed (in standard II) at the Branch School. E vidently he had not passed 
under all the heads at the annual examination of st andard II in the Branch 
School, but had been promoted to standard III. This  failure may have been due 
to his serious illness, as is seen from his father Shri Karamchand Gandhi's letter 
written in 1879 to Raja Saheb Shree Banesinhji of W ankaner 8 wherein its is 
stated: "....of the five or six persons laid down w ith fever in my house, my 
youngest son has a very high temperature and hence I am not in a position to 
leave the house". It may be noted that in this very  year Karsandas (the elder 
brother of Mohandas) had also failed at the annual examination of standard IV, 
but was promoted on the recommendation of the headm aster dated November 
3, 1879 and subsequently admitted to Kattyawar High  School on January 5, 
1880. 
Column No. 2 in the result sheet of standard III re veals that his attendance 
during the year 1879 was only 110 days out of a tot al of 238. Making allowance 
for the fact that Mohandas was admitted late by abo ut two months, his absence 
for about 70 days cannot be easily accounted for. T here is no evidence that 
Mohandas was ill during 1879 as he had been in 1878 . It would appear that the 
boy Mohandas was not quite serious about attending school, possibly influenced 
by the example of his two elder brothers (Laxmidas and Karsandas) and also by Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  some of his class-mates. It is true that there is s ome improvement in standard 
IV 9, but even there an absence of 48 days in a year su ggests truancy. 
For the primary schools, the syllabus of studies in  each head (including 
subheads), the maximum marks for each part, and the  hours to be devoted to 
teaching each subject were laid down by the Directo r of Public Instruction, 
Bombay. 10  The annual examinations were held by the Sub-Deput y Educational 
Inspectors, on lines prescribed in the circulars of  the Director of Public 
Instruction. 
Mohandas passed under all the four heads at his ann ual examinations for 
standards III and IV. In the first year he scored 8 2½ marks out of 200 which 
makes 41.25 per cent and in the second, 214 out of 400, or 53.50 per cent. The 
annual examination result sheets of standards III a nd IV 11  show that in standard 
III the highest percentage of marks, secured by a p upil bearing the serial No.l, 
was 76.5 per cent while the lowest was 37.6 per cen t, secured by serial No. 68. 
In between these two comes Mohandas (serial 
No. 6) with a percentage of 41.25. In standard 
IV, however, the percentage of marks secured 
by Mohandas (serial No. 18) was 53.5, the 
highest percentage being 65.75 and the lowest 
41.86. 
The number of pupils taking the annual 
examination of standard II (divisions A and B 
combined) was 67. Out of these, 48 passed in 
ill the four heads. Among them, Mohandas, in 
order of merit, stood 47th in divisions A and B 
combined. Thus he was very near the bottom 
in standard III. There is, however, a distinct 
improvement in his performance at the annual 
examination of standard IV in which, out of a 
total of 54 pupils (of divisions A and B 
combined), 32 passed in all the heads and 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  Mohandas stood 21st. 
From the marks it is clear that he was not (like Da dabhai Naoroji) quick at 
multiplication tables or mental arithmetic. But he was strong in grammar, a 
sub-topic under the second head (Gujarati); in this  he was ahead of the other 
boys in both the divisions of standard IV. Poor in copy-writing, he was also 
below the mark in history and geography. 
Thus during the five-year period at primary schools , Mohandas was on the 
whole a mediocre student. Though not very regular i n his attendance, 
Mohandas, as reported by his elder sister Raliatben , was punctual. She recalls 
that rather than be late he would eat the food of t he previous day if breakfast 
was not ready. 12  It may also be noted that he preferred walking to school to 
going by carriage. 
 
Teachers and Class-mates 
The City Taluka School, Rajkot, in which 
Mohandas studied for two years was one of the 
oldest primary schools started by the Gov-
ernment, that is, by the authorities of the 
Kattyawar Agency whose administrative head was 
the Political Agent to the Governor-General of 
British India. These schools were manned by 
teachers with some pedagogic training in normal 
schools. They were recruited mainly from Gujarat 
and their assistants were local candidates who 
were trained as teachers in the Main or Taluka 
Schools such as the Taluka School, Rajkot. 
Mohandas was at the City Taluka School, Rajkot, fro m January 21, 1879 to 
October 2, 1880. His class teacher in standard III was Shri Kalidas Naranji and in 
standard IV Shri Chattrabhuj Bapuji. The headmaster  of the school was Shri 
Maneklal Nagardas Shah, a 'third- year trained' tea cher with energy and 
ambition. 13  Primary schools then could not, and even now canno t, afford the 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  luxury of specialised subject teachers. The class t eacher is expected to teach 
all the subjects laid down in the syllabus for a pa rticular standard. Mohandas 
was in division A of standard III. Shri Kalidas Nar anji, the class teacher of this 
division, had passed a qualifying examination then known as the Entrance 
Examination. In 1879, when Mohandas was studying un der him, Shri Kalidas 
naranji drew a monthly pay of only eight rupees. Sh ri Chattrabhuj Bapuji, the 
class teacher of Mohandas in standard IV (division A) was barely 23 years old. 
He drew a monthly pay of fifteen rupees as he had p assed the third year 
examination of P.T. Training College, Ahmedabad, in  1879. In his autobiography 
Gandhiji does not mention by name his teachers in p rimary schools. He only 
says: "There (in Rajkot) I was put into a primary s chool, and I can well recollect 
those days, including the names and other particula rs of the teachers who 
taught me." 
During the period of his primary schooling, Mohanda s was timid. Books and 
lessons were his sole companions. After school, he used to run home as he 
could not bear to talk to anybody. Among his classm ates during the period 
(from January 21, 1879 to October 2, 1880) were Tri bhuvan Purushottam Bhatt, 
Manshanker Ganeshji Anjaria and Amritlal Vardhaman Modi. These three boys 
lived in the neighbourhood of Mohandas house near D arbargarh. Sri Tribhuvan 
Bhatt subsequently held the post of Chief Karbhari of Rajkot State. The 
spacious house, the Chief Karbhari's residence, in which Mohandas had lived 
during the period of his primary schooling, is at p resent occupied by the family 
of the late Tribhuvan Bhatt. When Mohandas sailed f or England in 1886, his old 
class-mate Shri Manshanker Anjaria gave him a silve r chain on September 4, 
1888, as he saw him off on board the S.S. Clyde. 14  At the time of the annual 
examination of standard III, Mohandas and these thr ee class-mates were 10, 11, 
12 and 8 years old respectively. Of these four, Tri bhuvan Bhatt had scored the 
highest percentage (71.5) and Mohandas the lowest ( 41.25). At the annual 
examination of standard IV, the performance of Moha ndas showed a distinct im-
provement over the previous year. Even so, Tribhuva n Bhatt secured 12 per 
cent more marks than Mohandas. Amritlal Vardhaman f ailed at the examination 
and Manshanker Ganeshji could not appear for it bec ause of illness. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11   
1 The Kattyawar Directory for the year 1870 by Shri  D.H. Karaka refers (on page 120) to a 
girls' school in Porbandar. 
2 'Glimpses of Religion' in Autobiography, Part I, Chapter X. 
3 This school was opened in 1870, and taught up to Gujarati standard II. Latter, standard 
III was also added. It was a branch, or more correc tly a feeder, of the Main (City) Taluka 
School, which had five Gujarati standards (II to VI ). 
4 Vide Appendix (i) 
5 Vide An Autobiography, Part I, Chapter II 
6 Appendix (i) 
7 Appendix (iii) 
8 Vide File No. 40, Index No. 1, Wankaner Haznr Cou rt Revenue Records 
9 Vide Appendix (v), Serial No. 18 
10 See Appendices (ii) and (iv) 
11 Vide Appendices (iii) and (v) 
12 Life of Mahatma Gandhi, Louis Fischer, p. 28 
13 Shri Maneklal Shah, grandfather of Shri Manubhai  Shah, served as headmaster of this 
school from 1877 to 1881. 
14 Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. I., p. 1 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14   
APPENDIX (I) 
English translation of an extract from an Age Regis ter in Gujarati. 
Taluka School, Rajkot now known as Kishorsinhji Tal uka School, Rajkot. 
Age Register (from 1879 to 1889)  
1.  Age Register Number  70 
2.  Name  Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi 
3. Native Place Rajkot 
4. Caste Va. Mo. 1 
5. Date of birth 2-9-69 2 
6. Signature of the Guardian Laxmidas Karamchand fo r Karamchand 
Uttamchand 
7.  From what School Branch School 
8. Paying or free Paying 
9.  Date when admitted to this school 21-1-79 
10. In which standard III standard 
11. Date of leaving school 1-12-80 
12. Standard from which left IV standard 
13. Reason for leaving school  Left to join High Sc hool 
 
1. This stands for Vania Mod i.e. Modli Bania. 
2. "The date of birth is incorrect. According to th e Panchang (published by Shri Dayaram 
Ganeshji Dubai Limbdi, Vikram Samvat 1984 correspon ding to AD 1928) for 84 years from 
Vikram Samvat 1917 to 2000  i.e. from AD 1860-61 to AD 1944, the date of Gandhiji's  birth 
is Vikram Samvat 1925, Bhadarva Vadi 12, Saturday, which corresponds to Oct. 2, 1869. 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
APPENDIX (II) 
Taluka School, Rajkot. 
Annual Exam. Std. Ill Dvn.  
A Teacher: Kalidas Naranji  
Date of Exam. 3-11-1879  
Examiner : G.A. Tarkhad,  
Sub-Deputy Educational Inspector:  
Halar Prant. 
Syllabus of study in each head with maximum marks a nd hours to be devoted to 
teaching as laid down by the D.P.I, in his Report f or the year 1870-71, page 
464. 
 
First Head  
Arithmetic 50 marks. Teaching hours 10 per week. In 
addition to Std. II, the four compound Rules 
and reduction (Native system). Native 
Tables to be known. Easy Mental Arithmetic.  
Second Head  
Gujarati  50 marks. Teaching hours 10 per week. 
Reading whole of Third Departmental Book 
with understanding of part read, and 
meaning of words. Parts of speech to be 
pointed out. Poetry in Reading book to be 
understood and repeated. 
Third Head  
Dictation  50 marks. Teaching hours 10 per week. 
Writing to Dictation 2 or 3 sentences from 
the book read. A full writing book or slate to 
be shown. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  Fourth Head  
History & Geography  50 marks. Teaching hours 3 per week. 
Definition of Geography. Geography of the 
Presidency. Neighbouring provinces, moun-
tains, rivers, Native States, Zillas,  towns, 
ports etc. to be pointed out on the Map, and 
their significance to be explained. 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX (III) 
Page 17   
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
APPENDIX (IV) 
Taluka School, Rajkot.  
Annual Exam. Std. IV Dvn. A 
Teacher: Chatrabhuj Bapuji  
Date of Exam. 2-10-1880  
Examiner : G.A. Tarkhad,  
Sub-Deputy Educational Inspector:  
Halar Prant. 
Syllabus of study in each head, with maximum marks and hours to be devoted 
to teaching as laid down by the D.P.I, in his repor t for the year 1870-71 (pages 
464-465). 
 
First Head  
Arithmetic 100 marks. Teaching hours 10 per week. In 
addition to Std. Ill, English Tables. Easy 
sums in simple rule of Three and Vulgar 
Fractions. Mental Arithmetic. 
Second Head  
Gujarati  100 marks. Teaching hours 10 per week. 
Reading whole of Fourth Departmental Book 
with understanding of part read, meaning of 
words and simple parsing. In addition to 
Grammar of Std. Ill, the declensions as in 
any small Grammar. Poetry in reading book 
to be understood and repeated. Reading a 
well-written paper to be brought by the 
Examiner. 
Third Head  100 marks. Teaching hours 9 per week. 
Writing to Dictation, in medium sized Bal Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19  Dictation  Bodh, 5 lines from the book read. Gujarati 
writing in a book to be shown (small hand). 
Fourth Head  
History & Geography  100 ma rks. Teaching hours 4 per week.  
(a) History of the province as of Gujarat (50 
marks). 
(b) Geography (50 marks) In addition to Std. 
III. Map of India, including the information 
detailed in Std. Ill and knowledge of 
physical conformation, river systems, water-
sheds, routes of access, frontiers and 
adjacent countries. 
 
NOTE: It was after passing Std. IV that pupils were  allowed to study English. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX (V) 
Page 20   
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
Page 21  
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 22  Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24   
CHAPTER  II 
AT  THE  MIDDLE  SCHOOL 
Entrance Examination  
Under the rules of the Bombay Education Department,  pupils after passing 
vernacular standard IV were admitted to Anglo-Verna cular standard I of a high 
school if they got through a kind of public test kn own as the entrance 
examination, for which the syllabus and minima for passing were laid down by 
the Department. The teaching of English commenced f rom Anglo-Vernacular 
standard I. 
According to the syllabus, the first head, arithmet ic, was divided into  (i) 
written arithmetic carrying 60 marks and  (ii) oral or mental arithmetic carrying 
40 marks. The written examination in arithmetic pre ceded the oral. Generally, 
three examples were set in written arithmetic and t wo in oral arithmetic, each 
carrying 20 marks. The second head, Gujarati, was d ivided into sub-heads such 
as reading and recitation, letter-reading, etc. The  third head was dictation and 
copywriting; the fourth was history and geography. 
The strictness of the test may be judged from the f act that candidates who 
could make no score at all in arithmetic were preve nted from appearing at the 
remaining three heads of the examination. Moreover,  a candidate getting less 
than 25 per cent marks in a subhead was deemed to h ave failed in that head, 
even if his total exceeded 33 per cent. 
This entrance examination was held every year in a high school. The 
headmaster of the high school sent to headmasters o f primary schools in his 
area circular letters intimating the date of the ex amination and asking them to 
submit by the prescribed date lists of their pupils  to be sent up for the 
entrance examination. Mohandas passed his annual ex amination of Standard IV 
at the (city) Taluka School of Rajkot in October 18 80 securing 53.5 per cent 
marks. Shri Maneklal Nagardas Shah, the Taluka Scho ol master, Rajkot, 
received from Shri Uttamram Narbheram, the headmast er of the Kattyawar Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  High School, Rajkot, a circular letter, 1 in response to which a list of 30 pupils 
including Mohandas, was submitted by the (city) Tal uka School master, Rajkot. 2 
The entrance examination was held on November 18th at the Kattyawar High 
School, Rajkot. In all, 69 pupils appeared at this examination; 34 from the 
Station School, Rajkot, 29 from the (city) Taluka S chool, Rajkot, and two from 
the Practising School attached to Hunter Training C ollege, Rajkot, while the 
remaining four were outsiders. Of the 69 candidates , only 38 could get through 
under all heads. Mohandas scored 257 marks out of 4 00, securing the ninth rank 
among all the candidates and the sixth among those from his school. The 
percentage of marks secured by him was 64.25, the h ighest being 74. His best 
performance was in Arithmetic, where he obtained 85  per cent of the marks 
and secured the fourth rank among all the candidate s. In Gujarati, Mohandas 
did well in Grammar in which he secured 12 out of 2 5 marks and in letter-
reading in which his score was 10 out of 15. His pe rformance in the third head 
was spoiled by bad handwriting, though his dictatio n was faultless. In the fourth 
head, History and Geography, he bettered his perfor mance at the annual 
examinations of standards III and IV. 
It is noteworthy that out of the 38 boys who took t his examination and joined 
standard I of the Kattyawar High School in November  1880, only two, Mohandas 
Karamchand Gandhi and Jayashankar Dayashankar Buch,  passed the successive 
annual examinations of standards I to VI, and final ly the Bombay Matriculation 
in 1887, at the first attempt. 
 
The Kattyawar High School, Rajkot  
The results of the entrance examination were declar ed on November 19th, and 
on December 1st, Mohandas was enrolled in the Gener al Register of the 
Kattyawar High School, Rajkot, and admitted to the Anglo-Vernacular standard 
I. In the General Register, the name of Mohandas is  shown against serial No. 
516. 3 The entry in the sixth column has been signed in G ujarati as 'Mohandas 
Karamchand' in Mohandas' own handwriting. The age c ertificate has been signed 
by his father in Gujarati as 'Karamchand Uttamchand '. Mohandas was born, Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  according to Vikram Samvat, on Bhadarva Vadi 12, 19 25, (i.e., 2nd October, 
1869), and on the date of admission to the Kattyawa r High School, he was 11 
years, 2 months and 2 days old. 
Of all the educational institutions attended by Gan dhiji, the Kattyawar High 
School, Rajkot, was the one in which he passed the longest period, i.e., seven 
year. It was founded in 1853 as 'Rajkot English Sch ool', with 36 pupils. It was 
the ninth English School started in the Bombay Pres idency and the first in 
Kathiawar (now Saurashtra). Within 13 years it beca me a full-fledged high 
school, with standards I to VII, affiliated to the University of Bombay. Thanks to 
the fostering care and untiring endeavours of the h eadmaster, Shri Uttamram 
Narbheram Mehtaji, the institution made excellent p rogress and earned a great 
reputation. Pupils from every part of the Kathiawar  peninsula sought admission 
to this school. This institution bore four names at  different periods: 
(i) Rajkot English School (1853-66),  (ii) Rajkot High School (1866-68),  (iii) 
Kattyawar High School (1868-1907) and  (iv) Alfred High School from 1907 
onwards. 
From its very inception, the school received libera l donations and endowments 
from the princes and chiefs of Kathiawar. The prese nt main building of the 
school was constructed from the munificent donation  of Rs.. 63,000 given by 
H.H. Sir Mohbutkhan, Nawab of Junagadh. In 1883, wh en Mohandas was in 
Anglo-Vernacular standard II, two wings were added to the main building. The 
school had a hostel attached to it. Scholarships we re awarded to good students 
from the endowments made by princes and chiefs. Wit h such facilities to 
attract and encourage pupils, this school, like the  Elphinstone College, Bombay, 
produced a number of citizens who contributed much to the all-round 
advancement of the country. 
When, on December 1, 1880, Shri Karamchand Gandhi, the aged Diwan, of 
Rajkot State, had his youngest son, Mohandas admitt ed to this institution, the 
lad must have found himself in a new world. The sit e and construction of the 
school were quite new. It was equipped with new fur niture. The class-rooms 
had benches to sit on and desks at which to write w ith ease. The teachers Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27  possessed good qualifications and were imbued with modern ideas. Inside the 
class-room, the teacher had his seat on a raised da is facing the boys. 
 
Progress in the Middle School Classes  
Young Mohandas was placed in the B division of stan dard I, the new entrants 
being almost equally distributed between the two di visions. Standard I B was in 
the charge of Shri Nagi Nathu Ganatra, a Matriculat e of 1879, while the former 
master of standard I A was a fresh matriculate of 1 880. The class fee for 
standard I was only eight annas a month. On weekday s the school worked from 
11 a.m. to 5 p.m, with a recess of an hour from 2 t o 3. On Saturdays it worked 
for half an hour less. 
The working hours in a week were 29 in standard I a nd 29½ in standards II and 
III. 
In December of 1880, Laxmidas, the eldest brother o f Mohandas, was in 
standard V, while the elder brother, Karsandas, was  in standard I; the latter 
had failed in the annual examination of standard I held in November 1880. 
Thus, from December 1880 onwards both the brothers,  Karsandas and 
Mohandas, read together in one and the same class, namely standard IB. From 
his father's residence near Darbargadh, Mohandas to ok about 12 minutes to 
walk there. Though the two brothers were in the sam e class, Mohandas used to 
reach the school exactly at the stroke of the hour and to run back home as soon 
as the school closed, lest anybody might poke fun a t him.4 Before the end of 
the first term (December 1880 to April 1881) six of  the new entrants in the 
standard left the secondary school. Mohandas, howev er, got used to his new 
surroundings, though he continued to remain aloof. 
Mohandas' performance at the first terminal examina tion of standard I was 
discouraging. He passed in the first two heads, Ari thmetic and Gujarati. As for 
the third head, History and Geography, he was one o f the three pupils who 
secured no marks at all in Geography. His weakness in this subject continued, 
more or less, right from primary (Gujarati) standar d III. Mohandas was one of 
the six pupils (in standard I B) who secured no mar ks at all in English dictation. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  The terminal examination placed Mohandas almost at the bottom of the class. 
The absence of any adverse remark against his name in the result :sheet of the 
terminal examination was the only redeeming feature . 
But his failure at the examination was more than ma de up for by the term-
certificate (sent to his father), in which his cond uct was recorded as 'very 
good'. This was all the more creditable in view of the fact that the conduct of 
many other pupils, who had fared much better at the  examination and who had 
been regular in their attendance, was set down mere ly as 'good'. 
Mohandas was by nature 'above lying and deception.'  At the time of the annual 
inspection of the school by Mr Giles, the Education al Inspector, Mohandas 
declined to copy from his neighbour's slate the cor rect spelling of the word 
'kettle', even though his class teacher tried to pr ompt him with the point of his 
boot. 5 The teacher, whose prompting was not heeded, must have been 
impressed by Mohandas' 'moral rectitude'; in the te rminal report on the progress 
and conduct of the pupils he placed Mohandas on par  with Jayashankar 
Dayashankar Buch, a top-ranking boy in the class, w ith a hundred per cent 
attendance during the term. Only these two earned t he remark "very good" in 
the conduct column. A pupil's rank in the monthly r egister depended on the 
marks he had secured from day to day. In the first term, Mohandas was present 
only for 22 days out of 78, and so he had lost mark s for 56 days. 
The result of the terminal examination seems to hav e served as an eye-opener 
to Mohandas. At the terminal examination his rank w as 32nd among the 34 
pupils of his division. At the annual examination h e was able to secure the sixth 
rank among the pupils of both the divisions. His at tendance in the second term 
was 128 out of 153. This shows a great improvement,  in attendance as well as 
studies, during the second term in standard I B. In  the course of this term, it 
may be observed, the school had a new headmaster in  Mr Dorabji Edulji Gimi, 
B.A. (Hons.). Mohandas secured 63 per cent of marks  at the annual examination 
of standard I, the highest percentage being 64. He scored 18 marks out of 25 in 
English dictation, as against the 10 at the first t erminal examination. Mohandas Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  made good his deficiency in Geography also, wherein  he secured 30 marks out 
of 50 and the first place in the class. 
After his creditable success at the annual examinat ion of standard I, Mohandas 
was placed in the 'A' division of standard II. Duri ng his stay in this standard 
Mohandas suffered a series of unfortunate lapses wh ich adversely affected his 
studies. 6 At the age of 12, he began to smoke in partnership  with a young 
relative, and resorted to stealing copper coins fro m the servant's pocket. But 
smoking could be carried on only secretly. In order  to be free from parental 
control, they joined in a suicide pact. The idea wa s ultimately dropped because 
both of them felt 'shy of death'. Mohandas then mar ried at the age of 13, and 
sitting in the classroom of standard II, he day-dre amed about his wife. 7 
Sometime after the marriage of Mohandas, his father  relinquished his post as 
the Dewan of Rajkot owing to ill health which pract ically confined him to bed. 
And Mohandas served his ailing father with such dev otion that the latter could 
not do without him. 
This was the period during which Mohandas was in st andard II. He was in the A 
division while his elder brother Karsandas was in B . The class teacher of 
standard II A was Shri M.M. Pandya. The syllabus of  studies was much the same 
as in standard I, except that in the fourth head, E nglish, oral translation from 
Gujarati into English was added. The teaching of En glish was, on this account, 
assigned half an hour more. Hence for standard II t he teaching hours per week 
were 29 ½, as against 29 for standard I. 
In spite of the upset caused by his marriage, the t erminal examination result of 
Mohandas was fairly creditable; he secured 57 per c ent marks and the 13th rank 
in standard IIA. But the tide turned in the course of the second term. His ailing 
father moved with his family from Rajkot to Porband ar for a change. It was 
probably now that Mohandas consummated his marriage  with Kasturbai. He 
soon began to establish his authority as a husband and, being rather jealous 
kept a vigilant watch over her movements. A few mon ths after their return to 
Rajkot, Mohandas became acquainted with Sheikh Meht ab a class-mate in 
standard IIA. Sheikh was the chum of his elder brot her, Karsandas. Dazzled by Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  the physical prowess of this class-mate senior to h im by three years, Mohandas 
disregarded all warnings and, in his zeal to reform  him, continued his 
association with him till it ripened into close fri endship. 
All this adversely affected Mohandas' progress in s tandard II. During the year 
1882, his attendance at school was only 74 out of 2 22! He could not appear at 
the annual examination. The result sheet shows the remark 'Leave' against his 
name. Sheikh Mehtab appeared at this examination bu t was found unfit for 
promotion and was detained in the same standard. Th e fate of Karsandas was in 
no way better. He, too, could not appear at the ann ual examination of standard 
II, and he left the school on 4 February 1883. But in the new academic year 
Mohandas and Sheikh Mehtab continued their studies as 'repeaters' in the A 
division of standard II which had three divisions. 
During this year Mohandas was led further astray by  the strong, persuasive 
personality of Sheikh Mehtab. He was tempted into t he surreptitious partaking 
of meat dishes. But he could not bear the 'compunct ion of lying' especially to 
his mother, and after some time vowed to give up th e practice until his parents' 
death would enable him to be a carnivore openly. 
The result of the terminal examination in 1883 affo rded ample proof that, in 
his second year in standard II, Mohandas grew quite  serious in studies. In 
Gujarati he scored 64 per cent and in English 84 pe r cent, and stood second 
among the pupils of all three divisions of standard  II. His total percentage of 
66.5 and his 8th rank in class (standard II A) at t his examination, are a great 
advance on his performance at the terminal examinat ion a year earlier in the 
same standard. In the second term, his elder brothe r Karsandas was readmitted 
to standard IIA, and thus Sheikh Mehtab, Karsandas and Mohandas studied 
together once more in the same class for about four  months. 
The term ended with the annual examination in which  Mohandas secured 68 per 
cent marks, the highest percentage he ever achieved  throughout his career as a 
student. 8 
Thus, in spite of 'moral lapses', Mohandas' academi c performance was the best 
this year. He stood 4th in his class (standard II A ), despite his absence for 47 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  days during the two terms. His elder brother Karsan das failed at the 
examination, though a second-year student, and henc e Karsandas left the 
school and studies, once and for all, in January 18 84, along with his friend 
Sheikh Mehtab, whose name was struck off the school  register on March 2, 
1884, after he had passed the annual examination in  November 1883, in all the 
four heads with 57.5 percent marks. 
Anglo-Vernacular standard III was the preparatory y ear for admission to the 
high school course, which began with standard IV. S tandard III had three 
divisions, and Mohandas was placed in the B divisio n which had 27 pupils on the 
roll. The class teacher was Shri Nagji Ganatra, who  as class teacher of standard 
I B, had been impressed by the moral rectitude of M ohandas, three years 
earlier. As Mohandas had 'wasted' a year in standar d II, his class teacher, Shri 
Moorarji Mangalji, wished Mohandas to make good the  loss by skipping a class. 
Mr Gimi, the efficient headmaster of the school, wa s strict in the matter of 
promotions. Yet he would consider 'leap promotion' of any pupil whose 
performance at the terminal examination justified s uch special treatment. 
After studying for six months in standard III B, Mo handas appeared at the 
terminal examination and scored 58 per cent of mark s, standing 5 th  among 27 
pupils in standard III B. The name of Mohandas (ser ial No. 15) figured also in the 
result-sheet of the terminal examination of standar d IV. Apparently, his class 
teacher had recommended Mohandas as a candidate for  the privilege of 'leap 
promotion'. Mohandas, during the six months he was in standard III, must have 
prepared himself for the first term course of stand ard IV, and been permitted 
to appear simultaneously at the terminal examinatio n of both standards III and 
IV. Mohandas scqred 57 per cent in English, the hig hest percentage in standard 
III B. 9 He did fairly well at the terminal examination of standard IV also. He 
failed in Mathematics, but scored an average of 50 per cent marks in the three 
other heads of standard IV, standing 14th among the  33 pupils who appeared at 
the examination. In  Autobiography  Gandhiji modestly described himself as "a 
mediocre student", but he was the only pupil of sta ndard III to compete with 
the pupils of standard IV who had the advantage of six months' regular tuition Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  in the school. Because of his performance at the te rminal examination the 
headmaster, Mr Gimi, must have accepted the class t eacher's recommendation 
for promoting Mohandas to standard IV in the middle  of the academic year. 
 
Class-mates  
Among the class-mates of Mohandas, Jayashankar Daya shankar Buch, Virji 
Manordas Gandhi, Amritlal Vardhaman Modi, Tribhuvan  Purushottam Bhatt, 
Ratilal Ghelabhai Mehta and Sheikh Mehtab call for mention. 
Jayashankar Dayashankar Buch was with Mohandas in s tandard I. The most 
regular student of the class, he completed the firs t term without a single day's 
absence, while Mohandas was absent for 56 days duri ng the first term. 
Jayashankar's performance too was excellent. Mohand as could equal him only in 
regard to 'conduct'; this was recorded as 'very goo d' in the certificates issued to 
both at the end of the first term. Again, when Moha ndas of standard III was 
allowed to appear at the terminal examination of st andard IV, Jayashankar 
Buch appeared at the same examination as a regular student of standard IV. 
Here he secured only 48.2 per cent of marks and did  not fare much better than 
Mohandas in the three heads other than Mathematics,  despite the advantage of 
six months' regular tuition at school. 
Virji Manordas Gandhi was at first better than Moha ndas in studies. But during 
his second year in standard II, Mohandas took his w ork with the utmost 
seriousness and, at the terminal examination of sta ndard II, scored 64 per cent 
in Gujarati and 84 per cent in English, beating Vii ji Gandhi by 20 per cent in the 
former subject and by 6 per cent in the latter. As Viiji was a good student, the 
headmaster Mr Gimi granted him the privilege of a ' leap promotion' and he went 
through the two standards, II and III, in one year,  that is 1883, just as Mohandas 
got the privilege of combining standards III and IV  in the following year. 
Ratilal Mehta, who subsequently rose to be the head master of the same high 
school in which he had studied along with Mohandas,  was in the same standard 
II during his second year in that standard. At the annual examination of Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  standard II Mohandas, being a repeater, could score  74 per cent marks in the 
forth head, English, as against Ratilal Mehta's 58 per cent. 
Amritlal Vardhaman Modi and Tribhuvan Purushottam B hatt were class-mates of 
Mohandas even at the primary school, the City Taluk a School, Rajkot. They 
lived near Mohandas' house near Darbargadh in Rajko t. When Mohandas was in 
standard III he was allowed to appear in the termin al examination of standard 
IV in the Kattyawar High School. Mohandas' performa nce at this exam left his 
old associate Amritlal Modi far behind. At the term inal examination of standard 
II held in April 1883, Tribhuvan Bhatt had secured cent per cent marks in 
Arithmetic, while Mohandas though a 'repeater' secu red only 66 per cent. At the 
terminal examination of standard III, however, both  Mohandas and Tribhuvan 
Bhatt secured 232 marks out of 400, but Mohandas sc ored 57 marks out of 100 
in English, as against Tribhuvan Bhatt's 44. 
Sheikh Mehtab had the longest and closest associati on with Mohandas. In 1880, 
Sheikh Mehtab was the class-mate of Mohandas' elder  brother, Karsandas, in 
standard I at the Kattyawar High School, Rajkot. Th anks mainly to the influence 
of Sheikh Mehtab, Karsandas failed in standard I. T he name of Sheikh was 
struck off before the annual examination. Sheikh wa s readmitted in standard I 
in the New Year, and the two, Karsandas and Sheikh Mehtab, continued to be 
chums through 1881. Mehtab (aged 16) was senior to Mohandas by 3 years and 
to Karsandas by a year when the first two were in s tandard II A and Karsandas 
in standard II B in 1882. Tall and strongly built, Mehtab was a spectacular 
success at the school sports; he was "an adept 
in long jump". He was a meat-eater and he revelled in his circle of gangsters. 
As a fellow-pupil in standard II A, Mehtab's contac t with Mohandas was casual at 
first, but the association grew closer because of K arsandas who was by now 
almost one with Mehtab. Outside the school, Mehtab contrived to keep 
Mohandas away from the company of his old associate s like Amritlal Vardhaman 
Modi. In course of time Mohandas perceived Mehtab's  weaknesses; yet he 
continued his friendship, because he wished to 'ref orm' his dissolute class-mate. 
Mehtab convinced Mohandas that meat-eating was esse ntial in order to defeat Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  the English and make India free. He poisoned Mohand as' mind against his 
guileless wife, Kasturba, till she was driven to de speration. 1 
Mohandas' photo at the age of 14 shows him with one  of his classmates. 2 The 
contrast between the two is striking. Mohandas seem s to retain his tender 
softness, his tight lips are expressive of resolutn ess and the half-closed eyes of 
a thoughtful mood. The class-mate, on the other han d, has all the features of 
an adult, in point of height, dress and posture. Th e style of his turban, his loose 
shirt and trousers, suggest Sheikh Mehtab whom Gand hiji tried through many 
years to reform and whose wife and mother-in-law we nt to gaol as  satyagrahis  
in South Africa. 
The future career of some of the other class-mates is worth mentioning. Shri 
Tribhuvan Purushottam Bhatt built up a highly succe ssful career and became 
the Chief Minister of Rajkot where he had his prima ry and secondary education. 
It was a coincidence that Shri Tribhuvan Bhatt, as Chief Minister of Rajkot, 
lived for years in the same building, near Darbarga dh, where his class-mate 
Gandhi, had formerly stayed. Another class-mate, Sh ri Amritlal Vardhaman 
Modi, rose to be Judicial Secretary of Dharangadhra  State in Gujarat. 
 
1 No. 191 of 1880-81 dated November 16, 1880. 
2 Letter No. 172 of 1880-81, dated November 16, 188 0. 
3  Vide Appendix (vi) 
4   Vide Autobiography, part I, Chapter II 
5  Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter II. 
6 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter VIII. 
7 Ibid, Part I, Chapter IV. 
8  Vide Appendix (vii) 
9  Vide Appendix (viii) 
10 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter VII 
11 See pp. 40-41. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35   
APPENDIX (VI) 
Kattyawar High School, Rajkot 
General Register of Boys, No.2 
From January 1880 to November 1884 
(From Nos. 425 to 1240) 
Number  
Name 
Native Place 
Birth-date acc. to Christian chronology 
Age when admitted  
Attestation of age by boy 
Caste 
Attesting initial of the Head of School 
Previous Instruction  
Paying or Free 
Date of admission or re-admission 
Standard and Class into which 
admitted 
Date of Leaving 
Standard and class from which left  
Remarks 516  
Mohandas Karamchand  
Porbandar 
V. 12-11-1925 (Smt) 
Dt. 2-10-1869  
(Signature in Gujarati) Mohandas 
Karamchand 
Bania 
U.N.M. 
Rajkot Taluka School  
Paying 
1-12-80  
Std. I Class X  
1-1-88 
Std. VII; CI. I 
Left 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36   
APPENDIX (VII) 
ANNUAL EXAMINATION 1883 (Dated 21-12-83) 
Class VII Standard II A 
No.  Name Atten-
dance 1st 
Arth.  
100 2nd 
Guj. 
100 3rd 
Hist. 
& 
Geo. 
100 4th 
Eng. 
100 Total 
400 P. 
hds.   Rank Remarks  
2. Mohandas 
Karamchand 196 80 56 62 74 272 3 3 
3.  Tribhuvan 
Purshottam 243  100  64  67  78  309  4  
16.  Chhabildas 
Kashidas 237  60  42  57  52  211  4  
20.  Sheikh Mehtab 
Mohamed 143  80  41  67  42  230    
21.  Karsandas 
Karamchand 103  100  42' 36  22    Admit ted in 
July. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37   
APPENDIX (VIII) 
TERMINAL EXAMINATION, APRIL 1884 
Standard III B 
No.  Name 1st 
Arth. 
100 2nd  
Guj. 
100 3rd 
Hist. &  
Geo.  
100 4th  
Eng.  
100 Total 
400 P hds. 
in  Rank  Remarks 
2. Mohandas 
Karamchand  66 64 45 57 232 4 5 Weak in 
parsing 
3.  Tribhuvan 
Purshottam 66  62  60  44  232  4   
5.  Manishanker  
Ganeshji 33  49  37  36  155  4   
9.  Revashr.  
Anopchand 66  52  65  47  230  4   
20.  Vasudev  
Uttamram 66  29   33  20   2  Bad 
reading. 
 No. 20 was prompted from Std. I 
and No. 27 was admitted in the 
beginning of April 
 
 
 
Sd. N. N. Ganatra 19 passed in all heads  
3 passed in three heads  
5 passed in two heads 
1 failed in all heads 
 
27 fair   
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38   
 
 
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39   
CHAPTER III  
AT  THE  HIGH  SCHOOL 
Performance and Progress  
Mohandas creditable performance at the terminal exa mination of standard IV, 
which he was allowed to take simultaneously with th e terminal examination of 
standard III, qualified him to be placed in standar d IV as a regular student, in 
the second term of the year 1884. But unfortunately  this 'leap promotion' 
proved to be a doubtful privilege. No sooner did he  start his regular studies in 
standard IV than he "found himself completely at se a". 1 The main handicap was 
English which was the medium of instruction from st andard IV onwards. 
Geometry, a new subject, was taught through this un familiar medium. For a 
while, Mohandas was unnerved, and thought of going back to standard III. But 
the fear of bringing double discredit on himself an d on the teacher who had 
recommended his 'leap promotion' kept him at his po st. 
The subject of English, including translation 2, was taught by Shri Manshankar  P. 
Oza of Goga; Sanskrit by Shri Hargovind Harnarayan Vyas of Bardoli; and 
History, Geography and Mathematics by Shri Lallubha i Mathurbhai Sutaria of 
Nadiad. Though Shri Lallubhai Sutaria taught Mathem atics very well, Mohandas 
could not follow him. 3 However, the 13 th  proposition of Euclid revealed to him 
that Geometry was "pure reasoning", after which it became for him an "easy 
and interesting" subject. 
The result sheet of the annual examination of stand ard IV held in November 
1884 is not available. Hence we are not in a positi on to assess Mohandas' 
performance at the end of the year or his relative position in the class. Thanks 
to his tenacity, Mohandas found himself in standard  V in December 1884. 
During his year at the high school, Mohandas used t o leave bed not later than 
six o'clock even in winter, so that he could finish  his ablutions and prepare the 
daily lessons for the school in the morning hours. He attended school from 
eleven to five with a recess of one hour in the mid dle. The evening hours were Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  spent in compounding drugs for his ailing father, w henever they were to be 
prepared at home, and in taking long walks in the o pen air. At night Mohandas 
invariably undertook the massage and nursing of the  patient till he was 
permitted to retire or was fast asleep. Thus, Mohan das went to bed not earlier 
than ten. And when his wife Kasturba was with him a t Rajkot, he played the 
"lustful husband'. This routine left him no leisure  for loitering. 
To this period belongs the incident of stealing gol d described in Part I, Chapter 
VIII, of  Autobiography.  Karsandas (his elder brother) had run into debt. T o get 
his liability discharged, Karsandas and Sheikh Meht ab seem to have persuaded 
Mohan to cut a piece from the solid gold armlet tha t Karsandas used to wear. 4 
He made a clean confession of his guilt to his fath er and asked for adequate 
punishment. This encounter between 
erring son and forgiving father “was 
an object lesson in Ahimsa". 5 The 
tears that trickled down his father's 
cheeks cleansed the heart of 
Mohandas. 
The bed-ridden father must have felt 
satisfied when Mohandas brought 
home the result of the Inspector's 
examination held in March 1885. Out 
of 40 pupils in standard V, 35 took 
the examination and only 14 passed 
in all the four heads. Mohandas 
secured 62.4 per cent marks and the 
3rd  rank at this examination. 6 
The marks secured by Mohandas in 
individual subjects show that he had 
succeeded in mastering Mathematics, 
which had frightened him in standard 
IV. His performance in Sanskrit, too, 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  was creditable. But he was not up to the mark in En glish parsing and 
composition. On the whole, his 3rd rank in a class of 40 boys, and his 
attendance of 35 days out of 38 prove his earnestne ss as a student. 
The Inspector's examination was soon followed by th e terminal examination in 
which, out of 35 that appeared, only 7 boys, includ ing Mohandas, passed in all 
the four heads. Mohandas secured 55.75 per cent mar ks and the 5th rank in his 
class. Virji Manordas, who secured the first rank, scored 71.25 per cent marks. 
In the second term, a primer on sanitation was taug ht under the third head, 
History and Geography. At the time of the annual ex amination there were 37 
pupils on the rolls. Of them 34 appeared at the exa mination, 19 offering 
Persian and 15 Sanskrit as their second language. T he strictness of this annual 
examination of standard V may be judged from the fa ct that of the 34 who 
appeared, only 6 got through under all four heads. Great importance was given 
to English. The headmaster himself used to conduct the oral examination in the 
subject. Besides pronounciation, power of expressio n was thoroughly tested 
through questions on grammatical construction, anal ysis and explanation, as is 
seen from the individual remarks in respect of pupi ls, in the last column of the 
result sheet. Mohandas was assessed as 'not bad' in  the remarks column. 
Twenty-six pupils were promoted to standard VI and 11 were detained. With 
57.4 per cent marks, Mohandas stood 6th, Virji Mano rdas Gandhi stood first, 
securing 72.4 per cent. Mohandas' score of 85 per c ent in Mathematics made 
him eligible for the award of one of the four Junag adh and Jetpur junior 
scholarships of the value of Rs. 4-2-8 a month. 1 
The performance of Mohandas at the examination must  be deemed creditable 
in view of the fact that his father's illness cause d great anxiety during these 
days. A devoted nurse and an earnest student, Mohan das earned from his father 
the prediction that 'Manu' would bring honour to th e family. In November 1885, 
when Mohandas appeared at the annual examination of  standard V, he lost his 
father. Soon after this sad event, his wife gave bi rth to a child which died 
within a few days. This made Mohandas even more mis erable. Mohandas was 
looked after by his elder brother, Laxmidas Gandhi,  whose burden he tried to Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  lighten by handing over to him the entire amount of  his scholarship of Rs. 4-2-8 
per month. 7 
Mohandas was now in standard VI, the pre-matriculat ion class. 
The syllabus was varied and heavy. Intensive study was necessary for all 
subjects, particularly English, which was the main criterion for deciding 
promotion to the matriculation class. In this subje ct, 200 pages of prose from 
Addison's  Spectator  and 750 lines of poetry from Milton's  Paradise Lost were  
prescribed for study, with 200 lines from the latte r to be memorised. Moreover, 
Morell's  Analysis  and Adam's Grammar were to be studied along with  Pathmala, 
Part V,  for translation from Gujarati into English. The or al test in English 
reading, carrying 40 marks, was no less important t han the written test com-
prising translation into English and composition, c arrying 30 marks each. The 
oral test was thorough and searching; weaker points  were noted; individual and 
general remarks indicated how the performance was a ssessed. The course in 
Sanskrit, especially in grammar, was certainly form idable. Pupils had to 
memorise the declension of irregular nouns, and for ms of non-conjugational 
tenses. This disheartened Mohandas. The Sanskrit te acher, Shri Krishnashankar 
Pandya, was also a hard taskmaster. 
For all his earnestness, Mohandas, was slack in att endance during the first term 
in standard VI. He was absent for 32 out of 117 wor king days. This was, 
perhaps, because of his father's recent death. At t he terminal examination, 
Mohandas secured 47.2 per cent marks and the sixth rank in the class. In 
Mathematics he scored 18 marks more than Viiji Mano rdas Gandhi, who stood 
first in the entire examination. Mohandas' "careful  reading" in English 
distinguished him from all his fellow-pupils who ap peared at this examination. 
Mohandas was well aware of the responsibility that devolved upon him after his 
father's death. His photograph with Laxmidas is ind icative of his serious outlook 
at the age of 17 years. The substitution of a turba n for a cap is a mark of 
maturity. Mohandas now appears ready to face the re sponsibilities of life. 
During the second term in standard VI, Mohandas was  present on all the 125 
working days. In the annual examination he secured 49.4 per cent marks and Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43  the fourth rank in the class. 1 Virji Manordas Gandhi scored the highest 
percentage, namely 63.81. Mohandas secured 56 per c ent in Sanskrit, which 
was offered by only seven students of his class. 
The Junagadh and Jetpur Senior Scholarship (No.l) o f Rs. 10 per month was 
awarded to Mohandas after this examination. He coul d no longer be described 
as a mediocre student. 
Mohandas could gratify very well his innate desire to serve others during his 
father's prolonged illness. On passing the annual e xamination of standard VI, he 
might have read on the high school notice board a G overnment notification 
concerning admissions to the B. J. Medical School a t Ahmedabad and offering 
stipends worth Rs. 9 per month during the first yea r and Rs. 10 per month 
during the next two years, of the three-year mcdica l course. Mohandas 
apparently did not pursue the idea of joining the M edical School at Ahmedabad, 
because the Junagadh and Jetpur senior scholarship of Rs. 10 per month 
seemed to him to be enough for the time being. 
From December 1886 onwards Mohandas was in standard  VII, the highest class 
in the school. Those whose attendance and progress were found to be 
satisfactory at the end of the second term in stand ard VII were allowed to 
appear at the matriculation examination of Bombay U niversity. With the 
founding of the statutory universities in India in 1857-58, the academic 
functions of high schools came to be controlled by these universities. Each of 
the three universities laid down the syllabus, the mode of examination and the 
standard of performance for candidates from the hig h schools within its 
jurisdiction. In 1887, there were 77 full-fledged h igh schools preparing 
candidates for the matriculation examination of Bom bay University. 
The syllabus comprised five subjects classed under three groups, namely (i) 
Languages, (ii) Mathematics and (iii) General Knowl edge. In the language group 
English was compulsory for all. In this, a written paper of three hours' duration 
was set, with questions of paraphrasing or translat ion into English, grammar 
and composition. In the oral test, which followed t he written paper, candidates 
were called upon to read and explain an 'unseen' pr ose passage from a standard Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  author to be selected by the examiners. The second language was to be 
selected by the candidates from a list of 13 langua ges other than English, 
namely six classical languages like Sanskrit and Pe rsian, two modern European 
languages and five vernaculars or regional language s like Gujarati and Marathi. 
A total of 300 marks were assigned to the group of languages. 
The second group, Mathematics, included Arithmetic,  Algebra and Geometry. 
There was one three-hour paper carrying 100 marks i n Arithmetic and Algebra 
combined, and another paper of 75 marks and of two hours in Geometry. The 
third group, General Knowledge, was covered in two papers, each of two hours 
and carrying 75 marks, one on Elementary History of  England and India and on 
Elementary Geography, and the other on Natural Scie nce. For all five subjects 
falling under the three groups, the pupils of stand ard VII were required to read 
about 18 books, such as Jane Austen's  Pride and Prejudice, Dr Bhandarkar's  
Second Book of Sanskrit  and Lethbridge's  History of India.9 
There were 40 boys in standard VII when the termina l examination was held in 
April 1887. At this examination Mohandas secured 43 /150 in English, 25/100 in 
Sanskrit, 67/175 in Mathematics, 27/75 in His- tory -Geography and 21/75 in 
Natural Science. Thus he scored a grand total of 18 3/575, or 31.8 per cent. In 
the remarks column his progress is set down as 'fai r'. At the end of the term 
when the preliminary examination was held, only 16 out of the 32 students who 
appeared were 'granted forms' on October 18, 1887, to appear at the ensuing 
matriculation examination of Bombay University. Amo ng these 16, Mohandas 
was numbered 10th, even though he failed in Mathema tics, English and General 
Knowledge. Only one student was able to pass in all  the heads. In General 
Knowledge Mohandas' performance was poor; he scored  not more than 27 marks 
out of 150. 
 
Scholarships and Extra-curricular Activities  
Mohandas had no high opinion of his own ability. He  used to be astonished 
whenever he won prizes and scholarships, as he some times did in his high 
school career. He won some prizes after he passed o ut of standard II. In Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  standard V he obtained a scholarship of Rs. 4-2-8 a  month and in standard VI 
one of Rs. 10 a month. For these awards he thanked good luck more than his 
merit. 10  
There were six Junagadh and Jetpur scholarships ass igned to the Kattyawar 
High School Rajkot. Of these, two were senior schol arships tenable in standard 
VII and four junior scholarships tenable in standar d VI. These scholarships, 
created from an endowment of Rs. 10,000 donated by H.H. the Nawab of 
Junagadh and the Katty Chiefs of Jetpur, were meant  for students from the 
Sorath district. 1 Only those pupils who passed under all heads were eligible for 
the award of these scholarships. At the annual exam ination of standard V. 
Mohandas earned a junior scholarship of Rs. 4-2-8 a  month by his proficiency in 
Mathematics. The remaining three junior scholarship s for proficiency in English, 
History-Geography and Sanskrit went to non-Sorath B oys; Mohandas was the 
only Sorath boy who passed under all the heads. Moh andas also received an 
'exhibition' of Re. 1 a month, for October and Nove mber, 1886. Thus he 
received Rs. 52 during 1886 by way of scholarship a nd exhibition; of this he 
kept nothing for himself. The scholarships bill for  February 1886 2 shows that the 
recipients (excepting No. 5) have signed their name s in the last column exactly 
as they have been spelt in the second column. But M ohandas signed his name 
with double's' at the end, though in the second col umn it ends with a single's'. 
He signed himself 'Mohandass' in all the 13 receipt s for scholarship and 
exhibition amounts during 1886. 
According to the terms and conditions of the endowm ent, the two J. & J. senior 
scholarships—of Rs. 10 and Rs. 8-5-4 a month—were t o be awarded to two boys 
form the Sorath district; the first for proficiency  in General Knowledge and the 
other for proficiency in Mathematics. Since Mohanda s was the only Sorath boy 
from among those who were successful at the annual examination of standard 
VI, he was awarded the senior scholarship of Rs. 10  a month for proficiency in 
General Knowledge. The scholarship was tenable for one year in standard VII. 
When Mohandas went to Ahmedabad to appear for the U niversity matriculation 
examination of 1887, he authorised Shri Harakhchand  Rugnathjee, a student of Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  standard III, to receive the scholarship amount for  October, November and 
December, 1887. The letter of authority was dated 1 -11-1887. 
Though he was a scholar of the Kattyawar High Schoo l, Mohandas' extra reading 
seems to have been meagre; he had distaste for any reading beyond school 
books. During the period 1880 to 1887 when Mohandas  was a student there, the 
Kattyawar High School, Rajkot, rose to great eminen ce under the competent 
headmastership of Shri D.E. Gimi, who succeeded Shr i U.N. Mehtaji in 
December 1882. Shri Gimi had made gymnastics and cr icket compulsory for 
boys of upper standards. Mohandas disliked both, an d so had never taken part 
in any game or exercise, before they were made comp ulsory. However, he had 
formed the habit of taking long walks in the open a ir which gave him a fairly 
hardy constitution. 
Mohandas then had a false notion that gymnastics ha d nothing to do with 
education. He had a keen desire to serve his ailing  father. But compulsory 
gymnastics came directly in the way of this service . 13  So he requested Shri Gimi 
to exempt him from gymnastics so that he might be f ree to serve his father. But 
Shri Gimi would not hear of it. Furthermore, he fin ed Mohandas for staying 
away from the gymnasium one Saturday. Mohandas ulti mately succeeded in 
getting the fine remitted and also obtained exempti on from future attendance, 
on the strength of his father's note to the headmas ter saying that he wanted 
Mohandas at home after school. 
Though Mohandas had an aversion for physical exerci se at school, the game of 
cricket found in him a staunch supporter. There is the testimony of Shri Ratilal 
Ghelabhai Mehta, a school-mate of Mohandas at the K attyawar High School, 
Rajkot, to the effect that Mohandas was not only an  enthusiast but also wielded 
the willow. Says Shri Metha: "It is not commonly kn own that Gandhiji was a 
dashing cricketer and evinced a keen interest in th e game. Many a time we 
played cricket together and I remember that he was good at batting and 
bowling..." 14 . In his later life Mohandas, as Mahatma Gandhi, pr oved that he 
was a real cricketer who played the game in politic s. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  Mohandas does not seem to have participated in scho ol plays, debates and 
sports. He hardly made any conscious effort, during  this period, to cultivate 
other accomplishments which fitted one for polite s ociety and the westernised 
mode of life. He evinced little interest in gardeni ng or even newspaper reading. 
It was only after going to England that he cultivat ed an interest in newspapers. 
Thus Mohandas' 12 years of schooling did little to develop or draw out his 
faculties. Mohandas disliked gymnastics and extra r eading. His shyness and the 
consequent lack of healthy companionship aggravated  this distaste and 
prevented him from taking part in extra-curricular activities. 
 
Teachers and Class-mates  
A well behaved student who "very jealously guarded"  his character, Mohandas 
enjoyed the affection of his teachers. When he meri ted, or seemed to the 
teacher to merit, a rebuke, it was unbearable for h im. 15 Once Shri Gimi, the 
headmaster, refused to believe Mohandas when he sub mitted the reason for his 
absence from the school gymnasium on a Saturday. Th at he should have been 
accused of lying made him cry in deep anguish. 
In standard IV, Mohandas was taught English by Shri  Manshankar P. Oza of Goga, 
Sanskrit was taught by Shri Hargovind Harnarayan Vy as of Bardoli who, in his 
later life, became the Chief Minister of Radhanpur State in Gujarat. Shri 
Lallubhai Mathurbhai Sutaria of Nadiad was in charg e of History-Geography and 
Mathematics. In standard V, Shri Naranji Kunvarji M ehta, who had recently 
graduated from Elphinstone College, Bombay, taught him English. Shri 
Khorshedji Faramjee Daruwala was then the class tea cher of standard V. When 
Mohandas was in standard VI the class teacher was S hri Krishnashankar 
Harishankar Pandya of Nadiad who had also, like Shr i Naranji Kunvarji Mehta, 
graduated from Elphinstone College, Bombay. 
This Krishnashankar Pandya had also been Sanskrit t eacher of Mohandas in 
standard VI. He was a hard taskmaster, while Shri N anumia J. Katariwala, the 
Persian teacher, was known to be "lenient and consi derate to the students". 
Moreover, Persian was easier than Sanskrit, and Moh andas was tempted to sit Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  one day in the Persian class. This grieved Shri Pan dya, the Sanskrit teacher who 
offered Mohandas timely advice to resume the study of Sanskrit, "the language 
of his own religion". In his later life Mahatma Gan dhi could not but think with 
gratitude of Shri Krishnashankar Pandya. 1 
From among Mohandas' class-mates in the high school  Virji Manordas Gandhi, 
Jayashankar Dayashankar Buch and Kalyanji Chatrabhu j call for mention. 
Mohandas never envied his class-mates who surpassed  him in academic 
performance For him prizes and scholarships were ac cidents. 
Viiji Manordas Gandhi had been the class-mate of Mo handas when the latter 
was a 'repeater' in standard II. At the Inspector's  examination in standard V, 
Virji stood first, four places above Mohandas. At t he terminal examination also, 
Virji scored the highest marks, namely 72.4 per cen t while Mohandas stood 6th, 
with 57.4 per cent. Again, in standard VI, at the t erminal examination, Virji 
kept his first rank; Mohandas was 6th, though he sc ored 18 marks more than 
Virji in Mathematics. At the annual examination too  Virji stood first with 63.81 
per cent marks. Mohandas had 49.4 per cent and the 4th place. 
Jayashankar Dayashankar Buch was also Mohandas' cla ss-mate in standard I. Out 
of the 38 boys who had passed the entrance examinat ion held by the Kattyawar 
High School, Rajkot, in November 1880 and joined st andard I, only two, 
Mohandas and Jayashankar, passed the successive ann ual examinations of 
standards I to VI, and finally the Bombay matricula tion in 1887 at the first 
attempt. 
Kalyanji Chatrabhuj was Mohandas class-mate in stan dard V. Being the brother-
in-law of Mohandas he also stayed with him. Though he was senior to Mohandas 
in age by more than three years, he studied in the same standard. Kalyanji had 
come from Elphinstone High School Bombay; yet lys p erformance at the annual 
examination of standard V in the Kattyawar High Sch ool, Rajkot, was much 
poorer than that of Mohandas. 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49   
1. Vide Autobiography, Part I. Chapter V. 
2. The text book used was the Pathmala series. 
3. Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter V. 
4. Vide Tendulkar's Mahatma Volume I, page 31. 
5. Vide Autobiography, Volume I, Chapter VIII. 
6. Vide Appendix (ix) 
7. Vide Mahadev Desai's Diary. Vol. IV, page 53. 
8. Vide Appendix (x) 
9. Vide Appendix (xi) 
10. Vide Autobiography Part I, Chapter V. 
11. Vide Kathiawar Political Agency Gazette of 1867, p.  163 and of 1872 p. 249. 
12. Vide Appendix (xii) 
13. Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter V. 
14. See 'Gandhiji, the Cricketer' by Shri K.V. Gopal Ra tnam, in Sports and Pastime, 
Madras, July 7, 1962. 
15. Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter V. 
16. Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter V. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50   
APPENDIX (IX) 
INSPECTOR'S EXAMINATION HELD IN MARCH 1885 
Standard V 
Class teacher : Naranjee K. Mehta 
No.  Names  1st  2nd  3rd  Translation  4th  Total P.hds in Rank Remark 
  Math.  Eng.  H & G   S.L.  
  100  100  100  50  100  450  
7. Waghji 36 91 51 31 32  
 Pitamber        
13.  Mohandas  35  88  47  49  28   
 Karamchand        
26.  Amritlal  36  35  24  35  32   
 
Note: English taught by Mr Naranjee Kunverjee Mehta   
History and Geography taught by  -do- 
Mathematics taught by Mr Dahya Khetsi  
Sanskrit taught by Mr Hargovinddas 
Persian taught by Mr Nanumia  Presented  Passed 
English      35  23 
Mathematics     35  30 
History & Geography    35  28 
Second Language    35  28 
In all subjects     35  14 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51   
APPENDIX (X) 
ANNUAL EXAMINATION FOR PROMOTION 
NOVEMBER 1886 
Standard VI 
  
No.   Name  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th     6th  Total  P. in  Rank Re marks  
  Math.  S.L.  H.G.  Eng.  Guj. Astro -  hds   
  100  100  100  100  50    nomy     
      50  500    
5. Chhaganlal 
Mugatram 
214 48 72 60 48 35    32 295 6 3 
         
         
8.  Mohan das  
Karamchand 
210 63  56  37  45  25   21  247  6 4 
         
         
22.  Navalshr  
Vrajlal 
111 47 ½  43  37  30 %  25 19   5  
  Guj.        
         
29.  Vaghji  
Pitamber 
232 49  34  24  22  20 17   4  
  P       
         
         
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52   
Appendix (xi) 
TEXT BOOKS USED IN EACH STANDARD 
Standard VII 
 
English  
 Pride and Prejudice  Cowper,  
Webb & Row Grammar 
History & Geography  
 History of England,  
Lethbridge's History of India,  
Mackay's Geography 
Mathematics  Smith's Arithmeti c, Pott's Euclid, 
Colenso's Algebra, Cooke's Chemistry. 
2nd  Language, Sanskrit  Dr Bhandarkar's 2 nd  book  
'Raghuvamsa' 
'Kadambarisar'  
'Progressive Exercises' 
Kielhorn's Grammar 
 'Panchatantra' 
Persian  'Gulistan' of Saadi, Baria's Grammar  
Gujarati  Taylor' s Grammar, 'Vanraj Chavado' 
'Narma Gadya' 
 
Kattawar H. S.       Sd/-D.E. Gimi 
Rajkot 5-10-87       Headmaster 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 53  
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54   
CHAPTER  IV 
MATRICULATION  EXAMINATION  AND  ADMISSION  TO  COLLEGE 
Bombay Matriculation  
The Kattyawar High School, Rajkot, where Mohandas s tudied from standard I to 
VII was within the territorial jurisdiction of the University of Bombay. 
Mohandas, having studied in standard VII, from Dece mber 1886 was permitted, 
along with 15 class-mates, to appear at the matricu lation examination of 1887. 
Notification No. 277 of 1887-88, issued by Dr Pater  Paterson, Registrar of 
Bombay University, announced that the matriculation  examination of 1887 
would be held at five centres - Bombay, Poona, Belg aum, Ahmedabad and 
Karachi —commencing on Monday, November 21, and tha t the candidates 
should send their applications before October 21. A ccordingly, Mohandas' 
application for 'permission to attend the ensuing m atriculation examination' 
was duly sent, along with the prescribed fee of Rs.  10, to the University 
Registrar by Shri D.E. Gimi, Headmaster of the Katt yawar High School, Rajkot. 
The matriculation examination was then held only on ce a year, commencing on 
the third Monday in November. Candidates were exami ned in Languages, 
Mathematics, and General Knowledge. In the language  group there were two 
papers: 
1. English 
2. One of the following: - 
Sanskrit  Arabic   Gujarati 
Greek   Portuguese  Canarese 
Latin   Marathi  Hindustani 
      Persian 
Hebrew French  Sindhi 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  The English paper contained (i) one or more passage s for paraphrase, with, as 
an alternative, one or more passages for translatio n into English from the 
following languages: Marathi, Gujarati, Canarese, H industani, Sindhi and 
Portuguese, (ii) questions in grammar, and (iii) an  exercise or exercises in 
composition. The paper carried 150 marks, while 50 marks were assigned to 
oral English, in which candidates were called upon to read and to explain 
extempore an 'unseen' prose passage. The Second Lan guage paper, carrying 100 
marks, contained prose passages for translation fro m and into English and 
questions in grammar. Languages thus carried a tota l of 300 marks. 
In the second group, Mathematics, there were two pa pers. The first paper 
comprised Arithmetic and Algebra and was of three h ours' duration. In 
Arithmetic, examples had to be worked from first pr inciples, not merely by 
rules. In Algebra, problems involving simple equati ons were set. The second 
paper, that is Geometry, was of two hours' duration , and covered the first four 
books of Euclid, with deductions. To these two pape rs 175 marks were 
assigned. The third group, General Knowledge, also had two papers. The first 
paper comprised the elementary history of England a nd India, and elementary 
geography. The second paper was in Natural Science and required from the 
candidates an elementary knowledge of (a) the mecha nical powers, (b) the 
laws of chemical combination, the chemistry of air and water, and the 
phenomenon of combustion, and (c) the solar system.  The candidates had to 
satisfy the examiners in each branch of the examina tion. 1 
The questions had to be answered in English, except  when otherwise specified. 
The candidates were also examined  viva voce  in English. Names of examiners 
were printed on the top of question papers. 2 
On the fourth Monday after the commencement of the examination, the 
Registrar published, on behalf of the examiner, a l ist of successful candidates 
in order of merit, with the total number of marks o btained by each candidate 
and the name of his school. Certificates were given  to those who passed the 
examination. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  Mohandas appeared at the Ahmedabad centre, which wa s nearer to Kathiawar 
than any of the four other centres where the examin ation was held. That was 
his first journey from Rajkot to Ahmedabad and that  too without a companion. 1 
The headmaster of Kattyawar High School, Rajkot, ha d 'granted forms' for 
appearing at this examination to 16 students includ ing Mohandas, on October 
18, 1887. Soon after this, Mohandas would have gone  to Ahmedabad to appear 
for the examination commencing on November 21. Very  likely, he stayed on at 
Ahmedabad for some time after the examination was o ver. This explains why 
letters of authority to receive his Government scho larships for three months 
from October to December 1887 were given to Harakch and Rughnathjee, a 
distant relative of his, who was studying in standa rd III at the Kattyawar High 
School, Rajkot. 2 
 
Performance at the Public Examination  
At Ahmedabad and the four other centres, the examin ation commenced at 2 
P.M. on Monday, November 21. The seat number of Moh andas, at the 
examination, was 2275. Of the 3067 candidates enrol led for the examination, 
799 were declared successful. The rank of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in the 
list of successful candidates was 404th. 3 He secured the 5th rank among the 10 
successful candidates sent from Kattyawar High Scho ol, Rajkot. On January 23, 
1888, Shri Gimi the headmaster of the school, forwa rded (under his office No. 
178 of 1887-88) to the Political Agent of Kathiawar  a 'statement of the students' 
of the school who passed the matriculation examinat ion with a request "to 
cause it to be published in the Agency Gazette as u sual" 
The grand total of marks scored by Mohandas at this  examination was 247½ out 
of 625, that is about 40 per cent. In English he se cured 89 marks out of 200; 
and in Gujarati, 45½ out of 100. Mohandas' performa nce in Mathematics and 
General Knowledge was not as good as in Languages. He scored only 59 marks 
out of 175 in Mathematics and 54 out of 150 in Gene ral Knowledge. 
The question papers he had to answer are reproduced  in Appendix (xiii). They 
show the high standard of attainment expected of ma triculation candidates in Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  those days.  
 
Admission to Samaldas College, Bhavnagar  
It is not clear whether it was Mohandas himself who  was eager to pursue his 
studies at college after passing the matriculation examination in December, 
1887, or whether it was the desire of his elder bro ther that he should do so. In 
any case, Mohandas joined the Samaldas College at B havnagar in January, 1888. 
Founded in 1884, this was the only Arts College in Kathiawar. It was housed in a 
building which was then quite adequate for its thre e classes, i.e. the P.E. class, 
the 1st B.A. class and the 2nd B.A. class. There we re, in all, some 60 students 
and 7 teachers on the staff. The old college buildi ng to the east of Alfred High 
School at present forms a part of the Maji Girls' H igh School. 
The staff included eminent scholars like Shri Fardu nji M. Dastur, Professor of 
Mathematics and Natural Philosophy (who subsequentl y became Registrar of 
Bombay University) and Shri Manilal Nabhubhai Dwive di, a reputed Sanskrit 
scholar of Gujarat. The principal Mr R.N. Gurion, B .A. (Oxon), was professor of 
English Literature and History. The vice-principal was Mr J.N. Unwala, Professor 
of Physics. The other members of the teaching staff  were Shri B.A. Ente, (Logic 
and Political Economy), Shri Bhamshankar Harishanka r Munshi (Sanskrit) and 
Shri Sheikh Mohammed Isphani (Persian). 
 
A Term in the College  
In the General Register of the college, Mohandas wa s enrolled as serial number 
116, in January 1888. All the entries against his n ame are absolutely blank, as 
they are in respect of many other students on the R egister. The syllabus of 
studies for the P.E. class comprised English, Histo ry, Second Language, Algebra, 
Euclid, Logic and Physics. On joining the college, Mohandas found himself 
entirely at sea. He could not follow the lectures. Gandhiji admits in  
Autobiography that "It was no fault of theirs. The professors in that college 
were regarded as first-rate. But I was so raw". 6 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58  At the end of the first term he left the college fo r good. He appeared at the 
weekly examination held in February and March, 1888 . His performance at 
these examinations does him little credit. Of the 3 8 students in the result 
sheet, Mohandas stands at serial number 18, securin g only 16 per cent of the 
marks in English. At the first weekly examination i n the Second Language, held 
on February, 11, he got only 3 marks and at the sec ond weekly examination, 
held on March 7, only 10 marks out of 100. His high est percentage at the 
weekly examination was 28, in Logic, at the examina tion held on February, 4, 
1888. In spite of such a poor performance at the we ekly examinations, he 
appeared at the scholarship examination held on Apr il 9, 1888. He secured, at 
this examination, 34 marks in English, 18 in Histor y, 22 in Second Language and 
13 in Euclid, but he did not take the papers in Alg ebra, Logic and Physics. So 
the result sheet shows against his name the grand t otal of only 87 marks. No 
wonder his name finds no place among the 10 whose f ull names are given in the 
'list of the teaching staff and students of the Sam aldas College' sent by Principal 
Gurion to the University Registrar, Bombay, under h is office No. 31 dated May 
5, 1888. 
 
Fellow-students at College  
Among Mohandas fellow-students at the Samaldas Coll ege were Shri 
Pranshankar Bhavanishankar Joshi and Shri Manilal H arilal Mehta. 
Shri Pranshankar Joshi, one of the contemporaries o f Mohandas at the 
Kattyawar High School, Rajkot, became his class-mat e and close associate in 
the P.E. class at the' Samaldas College, Bhavnagar.  In January 1888, 
Pranshankar had travelled with Mohandas from Rajkot  to Jetpur in Abubakar 
Jamal's camel-cart and then by train to Bhavnagar t o join the Samaldas College. 
In his 'Recollections' Shri Pranshankar Joshi state s that once during a 
Mathematics class (in the P.E. class) Professor Das tur signed to Mohandas to go 
to the blackboard, but the latter obstinately refus ed to take the hint though 
repeated. After passing B.A. and L.L.B. examination s of Bombay University, Shri 
Pranshankar Joshi started his career as a teacher a t Gokuldas Tejpal High Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  School, Bombay, and ended it as Chief Minister of G ondal State in Katiawar 
(Saurashtra). Shri Joshi maintained his connections  with Gandhiji even during 
the tenure of his Chief Ministership which extended  up to 1948. 
Mohandas studied in the P.E. class for only one ter m from January to April, 
1888. He took little part in any of the college act ivities during his brief stay at 
Bhavnagar. Mohandas was a 'commoner', while his oth er associate Shri Manilal 
Harilal Mehta was a scholar, the 'Sir Jasvantsinhji  Scholar'1. A contemporary of 
Mohandas at the Kattyawar High School, Rajkot, Mani lal became a class-mate 
and an associate of his in the P.E. class at the Sa maldas College, Bhavnagar. 
Manilal had studied both at the Kattyawar High Scho ol, Rajkot, and the 
Bhavnagar High School, Bhavnagar, Pranshankar and M anilal had both passed 
the matriculation examination when they were about 20 years old, while 
Mohandas had passed it when he was 18. Like Pransha nkar, Manilal too, passed 
the B.A. and L.L.B. examinations of Bombay Universi ty. After graduation, Shri 
Manilal Harilal Mehta served the Bhavnagar State in  Kathiawar where he rose to 
be the Joint Chief Justice. 
 
1. Vide The Bombay University Calendar (1888-89), page s 40-42. 
2. See Appendix (xiii) 
3. Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XI. 
4. See Chapter III, p. 11. 
5. Vide Bombay University Calendar 1888-89, p. 225. 
6. Part Chapter XI. 
7. Vide Bombay University Calendar 1888-89, p. 280 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
Page 60   
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Page 61   Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
 
 
Page 62   
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org   
 
 
Page 63   
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64   
APPENDIX (XIII)* 
UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY 
Matriculation Examination 
Monday, 21st November 
(2 P.M. to 5 P.M.) 
ENGLISH 
D. MacDonald, M.D., B.Sc.,  
R.H. Gurion, B.A.,  
J. Oliver, Esq.,  
A. Barrett. B.A. C.M. The Rev. J.M. Hamilton,  
S.J. 
R.B. Stewart, C.S., B.A.  
Barjorji Jamsji Padshah, B.A., 
 
(The figures to the right indicate full marks) 
N.B.:- Ten marks are assigned to legibility and gen eral neatness of writing. 
1. Paraphrase:- 25 
Evening to all is Welcome! Faint and Sweet  
The light falls round the peasant's homeward feet,  
Who, slow returning from his task of toil 
Sees the low Sunset gild the cultured Soil,  
And, though such radiance around him brightly glows ,  
Marks the small spark his cottage window throws. 
Still as his heart forestalls his weary pace,  
Fondly he dreams of each familiar face,  
Recalls the treasures of his narrow life — 
His rosy children and his sun-burnt wife, Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  To whom  his  coming is the chief event  
Of simple days in cheerful labour spent,  
The rich man's chariot hath gone whirling past,  
And these poor cottagers have only cast 
One careless glance on that show of pride,  
Then to their tasks turned quietly aside;  
But him they wait for, him they welcome home,  
Fixed sentinels look forth to see him come; 
The faggot sent for when the fire grew dim, 
The frugal meal prepared, are all for him,  
For him the watching all that Sturdy boy,  
For him those smiles of tenderness and joy,  
For him—who plods his Sauntering way along,  
whistling the fragment of some village song. 
2. Write an easy of about forty lines on the advant ages 
of a cheerful disposition. 45 
3. Explain the following sentences:- 10 
(a) He had the subject so completely at his fingure s' ends that he had no 
difficulty in answering the paper. 
(b) It would be a kindness on your part to put the best construction on his 
conduct. 
(c) If he erred at all, he erred on the safe side. 
(d) A man who tries to do too much may sometimes fa ll between two stools. 
(e) Be careful how you act, so as to avoid taking a  leap in the dark. 
(f) He stole a march upon his rival. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  (g) A man who has received no education is greatly handicapped in the battle of 
life. 
(h) He is too much inclined to give himself airs. 
(i) Whilst the one was bent upon adding fuel to the  fire, the other made an 
effort to pour oil on the troubled waters. 
4. (a) Give the masculine or feminine of the follow ing words:- 12 
Hero, man-servant, duke, fox, marquis, ewe. 
(b) Give plural, or plurals if there are more than one of the following:- 
Formula, index, staff, calf, grotto, potato, die, c ow. 
(c) Give the comparative and superlative of the fol lowing words:- Many, bad, 
old, up, hind, in, nigh, little. 
5. Define the following terms:-Pleonasm, nominative , absolute, ellipsis, 
apposition, simile, metaphor. 
Give an example of each. 12 
6. Assign as many meaning as you can to each of the  following words:- 10 
Dear, expire, case, light, duties, spirits, late, c arriage, diversion. 
7. Write sentences illustrating the meaning of the following words when 
followed, respectively, by the different prepositio ns given:- 
Change With, for 
Confer on, with 
Confide in, to 
Correspond with, to ' 
Disappointed of, in 
8. Parse the italicised words in the following sent ences:-  16 
(a) Tom hurt the barber's fingers. 
(b) He handed the  lady  a chair. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67  (c) The monstrous faith of  many made  for  one 
(d) Methinks the lady doth protest too much. 
(e) Although in childhood he  promised  well, yet in later life he  turned  our a  
fool. 
(f) The rogue and fool by  fits  is fair and wise. 
9. Turn the following into indirect narration:- 10 
Miss B.-"You write uncommonly fast". 
Mr D.-"You are mistaken. I write rather slowly". 
Miss B.- "How many letters you must have occasion t o write in the course of the 
year! Letters of business too!  
 How odious I should think them". 
Mr D.- "It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my  lot instead of to yours". 
Miss B.- "Pray, tell your sister that I long to see  her." 
Mr D.- "I have told her so once, by your desire." 
Miss B.- "I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let  me mend it for you. I mend 
pens remarkably well". 
Mr D.- "Thank you, but I always mend my own". 
Miss B.- "How can you contrive to write so even?" H e was silent. 
Miss B.- "Tell your sister I am delighted to hear o f her improvement on the 
harp; and pray let her know that I am quite in rapt ures with her beautiful little 
design for a table, and I think it infinitely super ior to Miss Grantley's". 
Mr D.- "Will you give me leave to defer your raptur es till I write again? At 
present I have not room to do them justices". 
The candidate may substitute for the piece set for paraphrase a translation into 
English of any of the following language 1: 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  જગતનો વહ ૈglyphટ77વાર કામની વહ ૈglyphટઅ0ટચણ ઉપર ચાૈglyphઆઅ0યો ૈglyphઅ9ભય છે. કોઈ ૈglyphશ69 ુૈglyphટઆઅૈglyphઅ6આબળથી, કોઈ ૈglyphટઅભ7ગબળથી, 
કોઈ િવૈglyphઅ69ાબળથી, એ ૈglyph77શમાણે લોક કામ કરતા દ ૈglyphટ77ખાય છે. સઘળા સરખી જ હાલતમાં નથી. 
કોઈ ગરૈglyphટઆભબ છે, કોઈ પૈસાદાર છે. એૈglyphશ79 ું છે માટ ૈglyphટ77 અભાગીઆ ભાએગવાનંની આશા રાખે છે. 
ૈglyphશ7ટુખૈglyphટ90ને િવૈglyphઅ7ટાન, નબળાને સબળા, દૈglyphટભ7રૈglyph77અીને ધનવાન, ૈglyphશઆ7 ુૈglyphશ69ુૈglyphઅ6આૈglyphટઆભને ૈglyphશ8અ ુૈglyphશ69ુૈglyphટઆઅૈglyphઅ6આ, રોગીને નીરોગી, 
ૈglyphશ6આુ:ખીને ૈglyphશ8અ ુખી કામ લાગે છે. એ ઉપરથી જોતાં ૈglyphશઆ8 ુૈglyphઆઅ0ૈglyphશ77ું છે કૈglyphટ77 દૈglyphટ77શની હાલત ૈglyphશ8અ ુધારવામાં દરએક 
માણસને બે ૈglyph77શકારનાં દ ૈglyphટ77ણ ૈglyphશશઅૂકવવાનાં છે. એક ના પોતે જ મહ ૈglyphટ77નત કરાવી, અને બીૈglyphશશઆ ું  આ કૈglyphટ77 
બીૈglyphઅ9ભઓને પોતાથી બની શક ૈglyphટ77 તેટલી મદદ કરવી. એ બે દ ૈglyphટ77ણ અદા થયેથી ૈglyphઆઅશવદ ૈglyphટ77શાૈglyphટભ6ભમાન 
ૈglyphશ6આૃઢ થશે.  
આપણા ૈglyphશઆ9 ુજરાત દ ૈglyphટ77શમાં નૈglyphટભ7હ નૈglyphટભ7હ તો પણ ક ૈglyphટ77ટલેક ઠ ૈglyphટ77કાણે ૈglyphશ67 ુૈglyphઆઅઆકળ ૈglyph77અૈglyphઆઅઅય છે. અલબતાં મોટા 
ભાગના લોકો ઘણા જ હ ૈglyphટ77રાન છે. તો પણ દૈglyphટભ6ૈglyphઅભ6ણીઓની જોડ ૈglyphટ77 ૈglyphશ7ટુકાબલો કરતાં ૈglyphશઆ9 ુજરાતીઓ 
સારૈglyphટઆભ હાલતમાં માૈglyphશ77 ૂમ પડૈglyphટ77 છે. ૈglyphશઆ9ુજરાત મૈglyphઆટટયેના મોટાં શહ ૈglyphટ77રોના ૈglyph787ીમંતોને ઓરડ ૈglyphટ77 અજવળાં 
છે. પણ તેઓ પોતાના પૈસાનો ખરો ઉપયોગ કરૈglyphટઆભ ૈglyphઅ9ભણતા નથી. હર ૈglyphટ77ક ઉૈglyphઅ69ોગ કરવામાં, 
ૈglyphશ69ુૈglyphટઆઅૈglyphઅ6આને ચાલાક કરવામાં, મોટાં ભાર ૈglyphટ77 કામ માથે લેવામાં, સંપત વધારવામાં પૈસો ૈglyphશ7ટ ુૈglyphભ9આય છે. 
પૈસા પૈસાને વધાર ૈglyphટ77 છે. એનો દ ૈglyphટ77ખઈતો અૈglyphશ66 ુભવ છતાં નઠારૈglyphટઆભ હાલતમાં રહ ૈglyphટ77ૈglyphશ79ું, ધનને દાટૈglyphટઆભ 
ૈglyphશ7ટૂકૈglyphશ79ું, ૈglyphશ7ટૂઆ પછવાડ ૈglyphટ77 આટલી દોલત નીકળૈglyphટઆભ એમ કહ ૈglyphટ77વડાવૈglyphશ79 ું, અને ૈglyphશઆ7 ુસંપથી છેવટ ૈglyphટ77 સરકારૈglyphટઆભ 
િતજોરૈglyphટઆભમાં ભરૈglyphશ6ટ ું ભરૈglyphશ79ું એ ખોટો વહૈglyphટઆભવટ પૈસાદાર લોકોમાં જોવામાં આવે છે. આપણા 
ૈglyph77શાંતૈglyphશ66ું  કૈglyphટ77ટૈglyphશ77ું એક ધન ભોયરામાં, ઘરના મોભમાં તથા બીૈglyphઅ9ભ સંચોમાં નકાૈglyphશ7ટ ું પડૈglyphટઆભ રહ ૈglyphટ77ૈglyphશ77ું છે.
 
* Question papers actually answered by Gandhiji in the matriculation examination. 
1 In addition to the Gujarati passages, passages in other languages were also set for 
translation Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69   
UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY 
MATRICULATION EXAMINATION, 1887 
Tuesday, the 22nd November 1887  
(2 P.M. to 5 P.M.) 
ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA 
Govind Vithal Kurkaray, B.A.  
Kavasji Jamshedji Sanjana, M.A. 
(The figures to the right indicate full marks) 
1.  Simplify    8 
 .142857 x .076923  Plus  2.75 x 11.25 
 ------------------------  ----------------- 
       .010989             6.2 
 
2. If 9 lbs. of rice cost as much as 4 lbs. of sugar, and   8 
 14 lbs. of sugar are worth as much as l½ of tea, 
 and 2 lbs. of tea arc worth 5 lbs. of coffee, find  the cost 
 of 11 lbs. of coffee if 2 ½ lbs. of nee cost 6 ¼ d . 
3. If Rs. 165 annas 14 and pies 1 7/17 be the discount  8 of debt of  
             Rs. 2820, simple interest being at the  rate of 3 per cent, how many  
 months before due was the debt paid? 
4. The price of gold is £3.17 s. 10½ d. per oz. : a co mposition of gold and  
 silver weighing 18 lbs. is worth £637-7 s., but if  the proportion of gold  
 and silver were interchanged, it would be worth on ly £259-Is. Find the  
 proportion of gold and silver in the composition a nd the price of silver  
 per oz. 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org  5. By selling 4 dozen mangoes for 13 rupees, it was 12  found that 3/10ths 
 of the outl ay was gained; what 
 have been in order to have gained 60 per cent? 
 
 
 
 
  
By selling 4 dozen mangoes for 13 rupees, it was 12  found that 3/10ths 
ay was gained; what  ought the retail price per mango to 
have been in order to have gained 60 per cent?  
Page 70  By selling 4 dozen mangoes for 13 rupees, it was 12  found that 3/10ths   
ought the retail price per mango to  Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71   
UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY 
MATRICULATION EXAMINATION, 1887 
Wednesday, 23rd November 
(2 P.M. to 4 P.M.) 
EUCLID 
Govind Vithal Kurkaray, B.A., 
Kavasji Jamshedji Sanjana, M.A. 
(The figures to the right indicate full marks). 
 
1. The straight line which joins the middle point of t wo sides of a triangle is 
parallel to and half of the third side. Prove this with the help of the First 
Book only. 9 
 
2. Describe a parallelogram that shall be equal to a g iven triangle, and have 
one of its angles equal to a given rectillineal ang le. 7 
 
3. In obtuse angled triangles, if a perpendicular be d rawn from either of the 
acute angles, the opposite side produced, the squar es on the side 
subtending the obtuse angle is greater than the squ ares on the sides 
containing the obtuse angle, by twice the rectangle  contained by the side 
on which when produced the perpendicular falls, and  the straight line 
intercepted without the triangle, between the perpe ndicular and the 
obtuse angle. 7 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  4. ABC is an equilateral triangle; in BC produced D: i s taken so that the 
rectangle BD, DC is equal to the square on BC. Prov e that the square on AD 
is equal to twice the square on AC. 
5. Draw a straight line from a given point, either wit hout in the 
circumference, which shall touch a given circle. 
6. If from any point without a circle there be drawn t wo straight lines, one of 
which cuts the circle and the other meets it; and i f the rectangle 
contained by the whole line which cuts the circle a nd the part of it 
without the circle be equal to the square on the li ne which meets the 
circle, the line which meets the circle shall touch  it. 8 
7. From an external point O, OP is drawn to touch a 9 circle and OQR to cut 
it; and it is found that OP is twice the radius, an d that OR is twice OQ. 
Prove that QR subtends- a right angle at the centre . 8 
8. Describe a circle in a given triangle. 8 
9. If a circle be inscribed in a right angled triangle , the  excess of the sides 
containing the right angle over the gypotenuse is e qual to the diameter of 
the circle. 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73   
UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY 
MATRICULATION EXAMINATION, 1887 
Thursday, 24th November 
(2 P.M. to 5 P.M.) 
GUJARATI 
 
Chimanlal Harilal Setalvad, B.A., L.L.B. 
(The figures to the right indicate full marks) 
Translate into Gujarati the following passage:-  
1. I shall, therefore, rejoice if part of the fund to be raised to commemorate 
the Jubilee of the Queen Empress be devoted to enab ling India to take her 
place in the new industrial world into which she ha s entered during the 
first fifty years of Her Majesty's reign. I hail th e circumstance that at this 
very juncture the need of technical education in In dia has been powerfully 
borne in on the mind of Her Majesty's honoured repr esentative in this land. 
I look upon this as a providential opportunity for directing a portion of the 
national wealth to a permanent means of national pr ogress. India will 
rejoice in many ways that her beloved sovereign has  been spared to reign 
during so many glorious years. Illuminations statue s, memorial buildings, 
the feeding of the poor are each and all fitting ex pressions of the glad 
heart of the people. But to enable India to worthil y fill the new place 
which she has won in the industrial world during Qu een Victoria's reign, 
seems to my mind one of the noblest purposes to whi ch the thanks-
offerings of a grateful nation can be devoted. For the last illumination will 
sputter out into darkness, and time will lay its de facing Finger on the 
marble and the bronze; but the education of the peo ple has within itself 
an inherent life which can never perish, and which will throw out new and 
ampler growths from generation to generation. 20 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  2. Translation into English the following:- 
ૈglyphશઆ7ુૈglyphશશ7ુંબ નાનમાં માણસો સાથે તેઓના ૈglyphભ0ભપ ઓળખીને તેઓની જોડ ૈglyphટ77 ૈglyph77શસંગ પાડવો, ઘરની ૈglyphશઆ9 ુૈglyphઅ8શ 
વાત બહાર કાઢવી નૈglyphટભ7હ, છેક એકલપેટૈglyphટઆભ અથવા કોઈને મોૈglyphશ60 ું ન ગમે એવી તૈglyphટભ6બયત પકડવી 
નૈglyphટભ7હ, ૈglyphશઆ7ુૈglyphશશ7ુંબનાં ૈglyphઅ8ટીૈglyphશ67 ુૈglyphભ0ભષ સાથે િનૈglyphઆઅઆકલંકૈglyphટઆભ િમલાનસારૈglyphટઆભ રાખવી, કામકાજ કરવામાં કોઈ  ચાર 
વાત કહ ૈglyphટ77 તે સાંભળવી અને સાંખી રહ ૈglyphટ77વી, કોઈ વખાણ કૈglyphટઆભધાં તો તેથી ૈglyphભ0ટલાઈ ન જૈglyphશ79 ું અને 
નઠાૈglyphભ0ભ કૈglyphશ99 ું તો તેથી રૈglyphટઆભશ ન ચડાવવી, અૈglyphઅ9ભૈglyphઆ07યા માણસ જોડ ૈglyphટ77 કાયૈglyphટ90 ૈglyphશઅ9ટૈglyphશ77 ું જ કામ પાડૈglyphશ79 ું, તમ 
ભલે અમ ભલા એવી વાત રાખવી, ચાકશે જોડ ૈglyphટ77 માયાૈglyphભ0આપણે પણ મયાૈglyphટ90દાસર કામ લેૈglyphશ79 ું, એ 
રૈglyphટઆભતે વર, સગા, આડોશી પાડોશી, વગેર ૈglyphટ77 સંબધી ચાલવાનો ૈglyphઅ8ટીનો ધમૈglyphટ90 છે. નઠારા ઇૈglyphઆઅશમોના 
ૈglyphશ8ભુમલામાંથી પોતે બચૈglyphશ79 ું તથા પોતે જખમો ખાઈને પોતાની પસેનાઓને બચાવવા, માના 
ઉપર છોૈglyphભ9ભસૈglyphશ66 ું થવાૈglyphશ66 ું ૈglyphઆઅશવૈglyphભ0ભપ આધાર રાખે છે માટ ૈglyphટ77 તેણીએ હસતે તસક ૈglyphટ77, ધવડાવતા, 
નવડાવતા, જમાડતા, રમાડતા, અને હર ૈglyphટ77ક વખતે ૈglyphટઅભ8ખમાં ૈglyph77શેમ આણીને તેઓને સારૈglyphટઆભ 
િશખામણનો બોધ આ પવો, માૈglyph770 છોકરા ઓને જ નૈglyphટભ7હ પણ પોતાની બહ ૈglyphટ77નપણી સખો વગેર ૈglyphટ77ને 
પણ ૈglyphભ0ભડૈglyphટઆભ િશખામણ અને સલાહ આપવી.  
3. Parse fully the words underlined in the above 8 pas sage. 
4. (a) Define the following terms:- 
વણૈglyphટ90, અથૈglyphટ90, ૈglyph7શશૈglyphટઆભયાનાથ, અૈglyphશ66 ુકરણ, સંયોજક, તૈglyphટઆ0ૈglyphઆ08ૈglyphઅ6આત. 
 (How are words classified, having regard to their meanings?  
 Give an instance of each class. 
5. Give the following forms of the root with their exa ct meaning:- 
(a) ૈglyphશ7ટૂળભેદ , ભિવૈglyphઆઅઆય વતૈglyphટ90માન કાલ, સંશપાથૈglyphટ90, ૈglyphશ6અ ૃતીય ૈglyphશ67 ુૈglyphભ0ભષ એકવચન.  
(b) સહયભેદ, િવશેષ ૈglyphશ70 ૂત વતૈglyphટ90માનકાલ, નીૈglyphઅ77યાથૈglyphટ90, ૈglyphશ6અ ૃતીય ૈglyphશ67 ુૈglyphશ76ુષ એકવચન  Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  (c) ૈglyph77શેરૈglyphભ9ભભેદ, ૈglyphટઆઅૈglyphઅ7ટતીૈglyphશ70 ુતકાલ, સંશપાથૈglyphટ90, ૈglyph77શથમ ૈglyphશ67 ુૈglyphભ0ભષ એકવચન.  
(d) ૈglyph77શેરૈglyphભ9ભભેદ, ભિવૈglyphઆઅઆયકાલ, આૈglyphઅભ7ાથૈglyphટ90, ૈglyphટઆઅૈglyphઅ7ટતીય ૈglyphશ67 ુૈglyphભ0ભષ એકવચન.  
6. Name and dissolve the following compounds:- 10 
કાૈglyphભ0આંધોૈglyphભ0આં, અઠવીશ, લોકલાજ, ૈglyphશ69 ુૈglyphટઆઅૈglyphઅ6આધન, નમૈglyphટ90ગૈglyphઅ69, ૈglyphશઆ7 ુંભાર, ૈglyphશઆ9 ૃહૈglyphઆઅશથ, મઘરાત, િૈglyph770ૈglyphશ70 ુવન, 
યથાશૈglyphટભ9ૈglyphભ9ભત  
7. Give the derivations of the following words and sho w the connection 
between their present meanings and those derivation s:- 
 ધરૈglyphટઆભ, ૈglyphશ79 ૃિૈglyphઅશ9, રસોૈglyphશશ9 ું, રખવાળ, પગરૈglyphશઆ8 ું, આસન, શાળા.  
8. Paraphrase into Gujarati the following lines:- 
િવનયસંધાતે બોલે, વૈદાભી, ૈglyphશ8અ ુંદરા  
   શા માટ ૈglyphટ77 ઉઠૈglyphટઆભ ૈglyphઅ9ભશેહ, તેડાૈglyphઆઅઅયા ખચૈglyphટ90 કરૈglyphટઆભ,  
અમોને રહ ૈglyphટ77ૈglyphશ79ું ઘટૈglyphટ77, બાંધીને ૈglyphટઅભ7તરપટ ૈglyphટ77 
   બોલે ૈglyphશ8ભ ું કૈglyphટ77મ ૈglyph77શગટ ૈglyphટ77, પરૈglyphશ67ુૈglyphભ0ભષની િનકટ ૈglyphટ77 
બેસોૈglyphઅ9આ બાજઠ ૈglyphટ77, બોલોૈglyphઅ9આ ઉલટ ૈglyphટ77, 
   નૈglyphટભ7હ ૈglyphશ67 ૂૈglyphઅ89ં કપટ ૈglyphટ77, બોલૈglyphશ79 ું િનમૈglyphટ90ળ ઘટ ૈglyphટ77, 
ૈglyphશ67ુૈglyphભ0ભષ ભરાયો હઠ ૈglyphટ77, ચાલે પોતાની ચટ ૈglyphટ77 
   ૈglyphટભ7હૈglyphટભભડ ૈglyphટ77 નારૈglyphટઆભને લટ ૈglyphટ77, ચાલે નૈglyphટભ7હ રાજવટ ૈglyphટ77 
જ જન મનકાળા, ૈglyphશ7ટ ુખે િવખની ૈglyphટઅ9આવાળા,  
  ૈglyphઅઆટામ િવૈglyphઅ9ભગના ભાલા, સહૈglyphટઆભ  શકૈglyphટ77 તે બાલા  
બાૈglyphશ8ભુૈglyphભ9ભૈglyphઅ9આ છો આચારૈglyphટઆભ, સાંભળો િવનંતી મારૈglyphટઆભ,  
   ૈglyphઅઆટાં ૈglyphશ7ટ ૂ ૈglyphટભ7કયે િવસારૈglyphટઆભ,  
   દોહલે પામી નારૈglyphટઆભ. 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76   
UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY 
MATRICULATION EXAMINATION, 1887 
Friday, 25th November 
(11 A.M. to 1 P.M.) 
HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY 
W. Doderet, C.S.; Pestanji Jamasji Padshah, M.A. 
(The Figures to the right indicate full marks) 
1. Who was the last of the Saxon kings of England? Des cribe briefly the events 
which led to their extinction. 
2. Write a short history of the Puritan Rule in Englan d.  15 
3. What events led to the American War of Independence ?  11 
Describe the concluding events of the War. 
4. State briefly what you know of the following:- 
The Gurkhas, Nadir Shah, the Siege of Gijni, the ba ttle of Gujarat, the 
treaty of Yendabu.  10 
5. What accessions were made by Wellesley to the Briti sh possessions in India 
and how?  10 
6. Name the principal States comprising the present Ge rman Empire.  6 
7. Draw a map tracing the course of the Rhine, mark ou t j2 by means of 
boundaries the countries through which it passes; a nd insert the names of 
the chief towns on the river's banks.  12 
8. State what you know of the following:- 
The snow-line, an oasis, a mirage, a crater, isothe rmal lines, a lagoon. 6 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77   
UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY 
MATRICULATION EXAMINATION, 1887 
Friday, 25th November 
(2 P.M. to 4 P.M.) 
NATURAL SCIENCE 
Kavasji Dadabhai Naegamvala, M.A., F.R.A.S., F.C.S. , F.I.C. Nanabhai Ardesir 
Moos, L.C.E., B. Sc. (Edin.) F.R.S.E., P.H.A.S. F.C .S. 
(The figures to the right indicate full marks)  
N.B.-Divide your paper into two Sections, A & B. 
 
SECTION A 
 
1.  Show that forces may be represented by straight lin es.  
Prove that when two forces intersect at right angle s, they and 
their resultant are proportional to the sides of a right-angled 
triangle. 7 
2.  A man who weighs five ma unds, wishing to raise a rock, rides the 
end of a crowbar 5 ft. long which is propped at the  distance of 5 
inches from the end in contact with the rock. What is the pressure 
on the prop? 6 
3.  Find the ratio of P to W in a single moveable pulle y when the 
cords are not parallel, and compare the mechanical advantage 
gained in such a case with that obtained when the c ords are 
parallel. 6 
4.  Determine the force necessary to raise a weight of 2400 lbs. by an 
arrangement of a set of six moveable pulleys in whi ch the same  Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  cord passes round each pulley.  
Explain the meaning of the symbols Hcl, KelO, Nacl,  and write 
down the chemical formulae for Neramic Oxide, Lime,  and 
Sulphuric acid. 
5.  What happens when the metal Potassium is thrown int o water? 
Give the reaction in symbols and mention the princi pal properties 
of the Gas produced. 8 
SECTION B  
6.  What is the result if you blow the air from your lu ngs for a long 
time through clear lime-water? 
Where do the growing plants obtain the carbon which  they need 
for their growth? 7 
7.  What is the main difference between fresh spring wa ter and sea 
water? Explain how drinkable water may be obtained from sea-
water. 8 
8.  When is Venus the morning and when the evening star ? Why have 
the transits of this planet been observed with so m uch care? 8 
9.  How many times is Mars smaller than the Earth? De scribe its 
general appearance as seen through the telescope. 7 
10.  Give two of the most obvious and convincing proofs of the 
rotundity of the Earth, and state clearly why the d ays and nights 
are unequal in length in different parts of the wor ld. 
  8 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79   
CHAPTER  V 
IN  ENGLAND 
Preparations  
When the first term at Samaldas College was over, M ohandas returned from 
Bhavnagar to Rajkot to enjoy his first vacation as a college student. At the 
college Mohandas had found himself so completely at  sea that a second term 
after the vacation seemed almost out of the questio n. 
The long vacation was thus a period of suspense for  Mohandas. The uncertainty 
regarding his future career must have weighed heavi ly on his mind. Luckily 
three well-wishers of the family helped him to find  a way out. Shri Mavji Dave, 
an old friend and adviser of the family, who had ke pt up his connection with it 
even after the death of Mohandas' father, happened to visit the family during 
the vacation. He inquired about Mohandas' studies a nd strongly advised his 
mother and elder brother to send him to England to become a barrister, if they 
wished him some day to become the Chief Minister of  a State like his father and 
grandfather. 
Shri Mavji Dave's son, Shri Kevalram, was an eminen t lawyer with progressive 
views. He too advised Mohandas to go to England and  qualify for the Bar. Shri 
Mavji Dave assured Mohandas' mother and elder broth er that Kevalram had 
numerous friends in England and would give notes of  introduction to them to 
that Mohandas would have an easy time of it there. In the opinion of Kevalram 
it was very easy to become a barrister, and the exp enses would be no more 
than four or five thousand rupees. 1 The third well-wisher who proved helpful to 
Mohandas at this juncture was Shri Vandravandas Pat wari who advanced to 
Mohandas the funds for his passage to London, when all other sources had 
failed. 2 
It is worthwhile to know why all other sources had failed. Mohandas had, of 
course, jumped at the idea of going abroad for furt her studies, but now that his 
father was no more, the family could not afford the  expenses of his education Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  abroad for three years. Moreover, his mother did no t like the idea of being 
separated from him. His uncle at Porbandar tried "t o evade direct co-operation 
in the irreligious act of a visit to England" 3 Mohandas wanted to qualify in 
England for the medical profession, but his elder b rother Laxmidas opposed it 
on the ground of religious sentiment. Laxmidas, how ever, was prepared to send 
Mohandas to England for studies in law. He promised  to try and find the money 
required for the purpose. As no one from his caste had so far gone abroad, a 
general meeting of the caste people resolved that M ohandas, who was 
preparing to go to England, should be treated as an  outcast, and that whoever 
helped him or went to see him off at the dock shoul d be punishable with a fine 
of one rupee and four annas. Laxmidas had made arra ngements with his 
brother-in-law at Bombay to provide funds to send M ohandas abroad, but 
because of the decision of the caste meeting the br other-in-law refused to 
make any funds available to Mohandas. Mohandas rema ined unperturbed, since 
he got financial help from Shri Patwari and Laxmida s' permission to go abroad, 
notwithstanding the caste embargo. And the mother a t last gave her consent 
and blessings to Mohandas, as he solemnly vowed not  to touch meat, wine and 
women. The fact that this eighteen-year old lad fro m Rajkot was to go to 
England was announced in the  Kathiawar Times  dated July 25, 1888 and the 
Gujarati monthly  GujaratShalapatra. The Kattyawar High School gave a send-
off in the old pupil's honour on August 9, 1888. Th e report of this function 
appeared inth z Kathiawar Times  of August 12, 1888. 4 
On September 4, 1888, Mohandas sailed from Bombay b y S.S. 'Cylde', in 
company with Shri Tryambakrai Mazmudar, a Junagadh lawyer who was also 
going to England to study law, When the prize distr ibution of the Kattyawar 
High School took place on September 28, 1888, both the headmaster and Col. 
Watson, the President, made reference to Mohandas' sailing for England. 
 
Arrival in England  
Mohandas reached England at the end of September in  1888. On the steamer he 
wore a black suit, but stepped ashore in white flan nels. He carried with him Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  letters of introduction to Dadabhai Naoroji, Prince  Ranjitsinghji, Dr P.J. Mehta 
and Shri Dalpatram Shukla, Dr Mehta, a friend of th e Gandhi family, came to 
see, Mohandas at the Victoria Hotel on the day of h is arrival in London. 
Mohandas found everything around him strange and gr ew homesick. Three days 
after his arrival, he shifted from the Victoria Hot el to less expensive quarters. 
During the voyage and in London he starved himself because he touched no 
non-vegetarian diet, while the other preparations h e found tasteless. He had to 
keep his solemn oath to his mother, resisting tempt ation and social pressure. In 
the course of his wandering, he discovered a vegeta rian restaurant where he 
came in contact with some 'pillars of vegetarianism '. This led him to make his 
own experiments in dietetics. 
During the first three months after his arrival in London, Mohandas aspired to 
be an English gentleman. He bought well-tailored su its (including a ten-pound 
evening suit) and even a top hat. He had himself ph otographed shortly after he 
arrived in London. He took lessons in dancing playi ng on the violin. French and 
elocution. But after a little introspection, he dec ided to settle down to a life of 
austerity and serious study. He gave up tea and cof fee, cooked his own 
breakfast and supper in a room which he rented, and  went on foot almost 
everywhere. He could thus live on seventeen shillin gs a week. 
 
Admission to the Inner Temple  
Mohandas was admitted to the Inner Temple on Novemb er 6, 1888, when he 
signed the prescribed declaration and two barrister s certified thereon that they 
believed him to be a gentleman of respectability, a nd a proper person to be 
admitted a Member of the Honourable Society of the Inner Temple. There were 
two conditions to be fulfilled before a student was  formally called to the Bar: 
keeping twelve terms (equivalent to about three yea rs) and passing 
examinations. 'Keeping terms' meant eating at least  six out of about twenty-
four dinners in a term. As Mohandas would not touch  meat or fish, he ate little 
at these dinners. Later, he applied for vegetarian dishes and got them. In the 
dinner, two bottles of wine were allowed to each gr oup of four and he was ever Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  in demand to form a quarter, so that three might em pty two bottles. 5 Mohandas 
could not see how these dinners fitted the students  for the bar. They no doubt 
gave them some knowledge of the world and a touch o f refinement. 
The curriculum of study was light. Students were re quired to take two 
examinations, one in Roman Law and the other in Com mon Law and they could 
be taken in compartments. Textbooks were prescribed , but few students cared 
to read them. Examinations were held four times in a year. The percentage of 
passes in the Roman Law examination used to be 95 a nd of those in the final 
examination 75 or more. Mohandas knew many to have passed the Roman Law 
examination by cramming "notes" for a couple of wee ks, and the Common Law 
examination by cramming them for two or three month s. 6 Easy question papers 
were set and answer books were generously assessed.  Mohandas however took 
his studies seriously. He spent  much  money in buying the prescribed text 
books. 
 
London Matriculation  
Since the bar examinations did not call for much st udy, Mohandas thought of 
utilising his three years' stay in London in other ways as well. His poor English 
was a source of constant worry to him. Mohandas wel comed a friend's 
suggestion to go in for the London Matriculation, w hich would require little 
extra expense. 
The London Matriculation meant a good deal of labou r, but he wished to have 
the satisfaction of taking a difficult examination.  Moreover, preparation for it 
would add to his stock of general knowledge, which he realised was quite 
meagre. The syllabus frightened him, especially bec ause Latin and a modern 
European language were compulsory. He decided, howe ver, to learn Latin and 
French and joined a private class. He worked hard a t Latin because a friend had 
convinced him that a knowledge of the language woul d help him in 
understanding law books, and would also give him gr eater command over 
English. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83  The London Matriculation examination was held once in six months. Mohandas 
had only five months in which to prepare for it. He  framed his own time-table, 
followed it to the minute and worked very hard. But  the task was impossible for 
him and he failed in Latin. 
Failure in the first attempt made Mohandas unhappy,  but he did not lose heart. 
He had by now acquired a taste for Latin. He wished  to improve his French too. 
So he began to prepare for another trial. This time  in the science group he 
opted for Heat and Light instead of Chemistry. He n ow made a further effort to 
simplify his way of living. The thought of his stru ggling elder brother, Laxmidas, 
who generously responded to his request calls for m oney, pained him deeply. 
Mohandas decided to stay in one room instead of two , and began cooking his 
breakfast at home. During this period of intensive study, he managed to live on 
a shilling and three pence a day. Besides saving mo ney, this plain living saved 
much time which was well utilised in preparing for the examination. Mohandas 
could now pursue his studies in a cheerful mood, as  this new simplicity 
harmonised his inward and outward life. In the resu lt Mohandas passed the 
London Matriculation held in June 1890. The name, M ohandas Karamchand 
Gandhi, appears in the 18- page list of successful candidates given in the 
minute of the Senate for the year 1890. But nothing  is known about his 
performance at the examination, because all Matricu lation marks sheets prior 
to 1904 have been destroyed. 7
 
Being Called to the Bar  
Admitted as a member of the Hounourable Society of the Inner Temple on 
November 6, 1888, Mohandas passed his Bar examinati ons at the age of 22, 
after keeping twelve terms. On May 28, 1891, he sig ned the declaration. He 
was called to the Bar on June 10, 1891 and enrolled  in the High Court on the 
11th. On the 12th he sailed for home. 
During this period (1888 to 1891) Mohandas studied law quite seriously. It was a 
fraud, he thought, not to read all the text books p rescribed for the Bar 
examinations. He read Roman law in Latin. It took h im nine months of fairly Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  hard labour to read through the Common Law of Engla nd. 8 Broom's  Common 
Law, being a big volume, took up a good deal of time bu t he found it to be 
interesting. Snell's Equity  was also full of interest, but Mohandas found it t o be 
a bit hard to understand. The reading of White and Tudor's  Leading Cases,  from 
which certain cases were prescribed for the examina tion, proved to be 
interesting and instructive. Mohandas also read wit h interest Williams and 
Edward's  Real Property,  and Goodeve's  Personal Property.  The reading of 
Roman Law helped Mohandas a great deal, later on in  South Africa, in 
understanding South African Law. But all these stud ies could not relieve him of 
his sense of helplessness. Even though he had been called to the Bar, he had 
learnt nothing at all of Indian law and did not eve n know how to draft a plaint. 
 
Associates in London  
Shri Tryambakrai Trikumrai Mazmudar, Dr Pranjivan J agjivan Mehta and Shri 
Dalpatram Bhagwanji Shukla were the close associate s of Mohandas in London. 
Shri T.T. Mazmudar was the Junagadh lawyer with who m Mohandas had sailed 
from Bombay on September 4, 1888 by S.S.  Clyde.  Mohandas was extremely 
shy, but Shri Mazmudar was a good mixer. He told Mo handas that lawyers 
should have a long tongue and talk freely with peop le. He advised him to take 
every possible opportunity of talking in English, n ot minding the mistakes which 
were obviously unavoidable with a foreign tongue. B ut nothing could make 
Mohandas overcome his shyness. 9 In the first month after their arrival in 
London, Shri Mazmudar and Mohandas had stayed toget her for some days. 
Mohandas once went to Ventnor with Shri Mazmudar an d stayed there with a 
vegetarian family. When invited to speak there at a  meeting for the promotion 
of vegetarianism. Shri Mazmudar made an excellent s peech. Mohandas could 
not even read his written speech, which task was do ne for him by Shri 
Mazmudar. Shri Mazmudar passed his Bar examination in 1891. 
Dr Pranjivan Jagjivan Mehta hailed from Morvi in Sa urashtra. Though a medical 
graduate of Bombay University, he had gone to Engla nd to become a barrister. 
Mohandas had a note of introduction to Dr Mehta who  greeted him heartily on Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  his first meeting with Mohandas in Victoria Hotel o n the day the latter arrived 
in London. Dr Mehta first initiated Mohandas into E uropean etiquette. He 
advised Mohandas to live with an English family bec ause they had come to 
England, as he thought, not so much for the purpose  of studies as for gaining 
some experience of English life and customs. In ord er to enable Mohandas to 
serve a period of apprenticeship, he made him stay with his own Indian friend 
in Richmond. Then Dr Mehta and Shri Shukla decided that Mohandas should be 
put up with some family. The acquaintance between M ohandas and Dr Mehta 
thus made in England ripened into permanent friends hip, and Dr Mehta in his 
later life devoted himself to the service of humani ty as a staunch follower of 
the Mahatma. 10  
Like Dr Mehta, Shri Dalpatram Bhagwanji Shukla also  hailed from Morvi in 
Kathiawar (Saurashtra). When Mohandas arrived in Lo ndon, he had with him a 
note of introduction to Shri Shukla. When it was de cided that Mohandas should 
put up with some family, Shri Shukla hit upon an An glo-Indian's house in West 
Kensington where Mohandas could be placed. In India  Mohandas had never read 
a newspaper. Shri Shukla induced Mohandas to read n ewspapers, and he soon 
cultivated a liking for them. Mohandas looked upon Shri Shukla as his elder 
brother, and the friendship between the two was mai ntained throughout their 
life. 
 
Other Activities  
On his arrival in London, Mohandas had found that e verything was strange—the 
people, their ways, and even their dwellings. A com plete novice in English 
etiquette he had to be continually on his guard. Hi s vow not to eat meat was an 
additional inconvenience. During his wanderings in search of a vegetarian 
restaurant, Mohandas hit on one in Farringdon Stree t. He noticed books for sale 
exhibited under a glass window near the door. He sa w among them Salt's  Plea 
for Vegetarianism,  which he purchased for a shilling. Then he went to  the 
dining room where he had his first hearty meal in L ondon. Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  It was a period of great intellectual activity in E ngland. The whole country was 
a kind of university in which unprecedented freedom  of thought and speech 
prevailed and was fully utilised. Lectures like tho se of Max Muller on Indian 
philosophy and religion drew large audiences. But b eing extremely shy, 
Mohandas avoided extra activities and pursued his s tudies for the London 
Matriculation and Bar examinations. He was so much impressed, however, by 
Salt's book that he became a vegetarian by choice, and the spread of 
vegetarianism became his mission. His friend in Ric hmond was afraid that 
Mohandas might fritter away his life in experiments , neglect his work, and 
become a crank. 11  
Mohandas decided to put this friend at ease and ass ured him that he would 
maker up for his vegetarianism by cultivating other  accomplishments which 
fitted one for polite society. And he undertook the  impossible task of becoming 
an English gentleman. His Bombay-cut clothes being unsuitable for English 
society, Mohandas got new ones at the Army and Navy  Stores and wasted ten 
pounds on an evening suit. Then there were other th ings needed for the making 
of an English gentleman. It was necessary to take l essons in dancing, French 
and elocution. French was the language of the Conti nent through which he had 
a desire to travel. So he began to study French. He  decided to take dancing 
lessons at a class and made a down payment of £ 3 a s fees for a term. He must 
have taken some six lessons in three weeks, but it was beyond him to achieve 
anything like rhythmic motion. Then he invested £3 in a violin and something 
more in fees, in order to learn to play the violin.  Lastly to a teacher who was to 
give him lessons in elocution, he paid a preliminar y fee of a guinea. Within 
three months Mohandas discovered that he was pursui ng a false idea. So he 
stopped the elocution and violin lessons. The punct iliousness in dress, however, 
persisted for years. 
The spread of vegetarianism and a wider acquaintanc e with religions through 
reading and discussions were now the only extra act ivities which Mohandas 
permitted himself. There was a Vegetarian Society i n London with a weekly 
journal of its own. Mohandas subscribed to the week ly, joined the society and Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  soon found himself on the executive committee. Here  he came in contact with 
people who were regarded pillars of vegetarianism, and began his own 
experiments in dietetics conducted from the viewpoi nt of health and economy. 
Full of the neophyte's zeal, he started a vegetaria n club in his locality, 
Bayswater. This club flourished for a while, but ca me to an end when he moved 
elsewhere. This brief experience gave him some trai ning in organising and 
conducting institution. Moreover, he attended every  meeting of the executive 
committee of the Vegetarian Society, and vegetarian  conferences at Ventnor 
and Portsmouth, even though he still did not know h ow to express himself. 
Towards the end of his second year in England, Moha ndas met two brothers. 
They were both Theosophists and both unmarried. The y talked to him about the  
Gita. Mohandas began to read with them Sir Edwin Arnold' s translation.  The 
Song Celestial.  After some time the Gita  became a book of daily reading for 
Mohandas. On the recommendation of these two brothe rs he also read, with 
even greater interest, Sir Edwin Arnold's  Light of Asia.  They also took him to 
Blavatsky Lodge and introduced him to Madame Blavat sky and Mrs Annie 
Besant. Madame Blavatsky's  Key to Theosophy  stimulated in him the desire to 
read books on Hinduism. The two brothers advised Mo handas to join the 
Theosophical Society, but he politely declined sayi ng that with his meagre 
knowledge of his own religion he did not want to be long to any religious body. 
About the same time he met in a vegetarian boarding  house a good Christian 
from Manchester who advised him to read the Bible. The New Testament 
produced a deep impression on his mind. All this re ading whetted his appetite 
to know more of the lives of religious teachers, bu t reading for the 
examinations left him scarcely any time. 12  Bradlaugh's atheism failed to appeal 
to him, yet, like most Indians then in London, he a ttended Bradlaugh's funeral. 
Mohandas once met Shri Narayan Hemchandra, an ambit ious Gujarati writer, at 
the house of Miss Manning of the National Indian As sociation. Whenever 
Mohandas went to her house he used to sit tongue-ti ed, never speaking except 
when spoken to. She introduced him to Shri Narayan Hemchandra who did not 
know English and who was a queer-looking and queerl y-dressed person. He Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  wished to learn English and Mohandas offered to tea ch him. Soon they were 
close friends. One day both of them called on Cardi nal Manning and thanked 
him for the good work he had done for the dock stri kers. 
Shri Narayan Hemchandra went to Paris after a few m onths' stay in London. He 
studied French and began translating French books. Mohandas knew enough 
French to revise his translation. He discovered tha t Hemchandra's was no 
translation, but an attempt "to bring out the spiri t". 
Mohandas also had a keen desire to go to France. He  went to Paris in 1890 when 
a great exhibition was held there. He stayed there seven days in a vegetarian 
restaurant. He did the sight-seeing mostly on foot,  with the help of a map of 
Paris and a guide to the exhibition. He was struck by the magnitude and variety 
of the exhibition, whose main attraction was the gr eat Eiffel Tower constructed 
entirely of iron. The grandeur and serene calm of t he ancient churches in Paris 
made a profound impression on his mind. 
 
1. 1 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XI 
2. 2 The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol.1, P.l l. 
3. 3 Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XI 
4. 4 Vide Appendix (xiv).  
5. 5 Vide Autography, Part I, Chapter XXIV 
6. 6 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XX. 
7. 7 Vide Letter dated 21st Oct. 1954, from Secretary to Entrance and School 
Examinations, Council of University of London, addr essed to Centenary Celebrations 
Committee, Alfred High School, Rajkot. 
8. 8 Vide Autobiography, Part I. Chapter XXIV. 
9. 9 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XIII. 
10. 10 Vide Mahadev Desai's Diary, Volume I, pp. 342, 36 2. 
11. 11 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XV. The frie nd in Richmond is not named in 
Autobiography. 
12. 12 Vide Autobiography, Part I, Chapter XX. 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89   
 
 
Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90   
APPENDIX (XIV) 
Kathiawar Times,  Sunday Evening, August 12, 1888 
(Vol. II, No. 30) 
DEPARTURE OF A BANIA STUDENT FOR ENGLAND 
On Thursday last a meeting was convened in the loca l High School, by his 
friends and well-wishers for presenting an address to Mr M.K. Gandhi, who left 
for England to study for the Bar. Mr Gandhi is the first Bania from Kathiawar 
who proceeds to England to prosecute his study for the Barrister's Examination. 
The address hoped that the Indians returning from E ngland with enlarged views 
of polity, commerce and Society would accelerate th e progress of reform in 
India and ere long restore her to her former glory.  The well-wishers appeared 
to be rather sanguine when they said: "We are certa inly justified in entertaining 
the hope that you will make it an object of your sp ecial care and attention to 
promote the interests of India in England at the sa me time that you compete 
for medals and prizes." The reply, too, did not fal l far short of the address. Mr 
Gandhi hoped that others would soon follow his exam ple and on return from 
England would devote themselves with self-sacrifice  of martyrs to the noble 
work of regenerating India. Mr Doctor, the first as sistant teacher of the High 
School who presided on the occasion remarked that i t was a matter of rejoicing 
to see that a student of the Kathiawar High School was proceeding to England 
to study for the Bar. After wishing Mr Gandhi succe ss in his endeavour, the 
party broke up with the customary distribution of b etel leaves, nosegays, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mahatma Gandhi as a student  
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91   
APPENDIX (XV) 
From the  Kathiawar Times  of September-30, 1888. Extract from the school 
report read at the time of the distribution of priz es on 28th September, 1888 
under the Presidentship of Col. Watson. 
It is a matter of great satisfaction to see that wi thin the last few years a strong 
partiality for English Universities has been displa yed by some of the students of 
this school. Some four years before Mr Goolam Mahmu d, a son of the late 
lamented Bawa Mian the popular Kotwal of the Agency , set a noble example to 
the rising youths of Kathiawar by proceeding to Eng land to study for the Bar. He 
was followed by Mr Shukla, an Elphinstonian Graduat e. The enterprising spirits 
displayed by Messrs Goolam Mahmud and Shukla create d in one of our last 
year's successful candidates a laudable ambition fo r worthily following in their 
footsteps. I mean Mr Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi who  a fortnight or so before 
left us to join one of the English colleges. 
 
(B) Extract from Col. Watson's Speech:- 
I am sure we have all listened with much interest t o Mr Krishnashanker's 
instructive discourse. The main facts appear to be that the attendance of this 
school has largely increased and that several disti nguished scholars have 
repaired to England to finish their education Mr Mo handas Karamchand is the 
son of a well known official of this province who s erved the Porbandar State 
long and faithfully and afterwards entered the Rajk ot State employ. He also 
served under Col. Law and myself for several years as member in the 
Rajasthanik court. I hope that Mr Mohandas will do credit to this institution, to 
his father and to the province. The other students in England also command our 
sympathies. 
 