 
The Mind of Mahatma 
Gandhi 
Encyclopedia of Gandhi’s Thoughts 
 
Compiled & Edited by : R. K. Prabhu & U. R. Rao 
 
Wi
th Foreword by : Acharya Vinoba Bhave & Dr. S. Radha krishnan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya, 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
FOREWORD  
TO THE REVISED EDITION 
It gives me pleasure that a new, revised and enlarged edition of The Mind of 
Mahatma Gandhi , edited by Shri Prabhu and Shri Rao is being published by the 
Navajivan Trust. The first two editions of the book were very popular and its 
translations had appeared in several languages. 
In the new edition, Gandhiji's thoughts in the last few years of his life have 
been incorporated. Thus the book has been brought uptodatc. 
"Who, indeed, can claim to know the mind of the Great?" is a famous saying of 
the Poet Bhavabhuti. Gandhiji was a great man; nevertheless, he had laid bare 
his mind in its fullness before the world. For his part, he had permitted no 
secrecy. Even so, I must confess, the last chapter of his life, which I have called 
the "Swarga-rohan Parva", or the chapter of the "Ascent to Heaven", remains a 
mystery to me. Indeed, in my eyes, it stands equal to the last phase of Lord 
Krishna's  leela To unravel its mystery, it may become necessary for Gandhiji 
himself to be born again. Till then, I hope, this book will be an essential help 
for understanding Gandhiji's mind to those who are striving to establish 
Sarvodaya and are searching for Truth. 
Kishanganj     Victory to the World!  
Purnea District 
Bihar      VlNOBA 
May 12, 1966 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3  
FOREWORD 
TO THE FIRST AND SECOND EDITIONS 
Only now and again does there arise above the common level some rare spirit, 
who, having thought about God more deeply, reflects more clearly the divine 
purpose and puts into practice more courageously the divine guidance. The 
light of such shines like a strong beacon on a dark and disordered world. Gandhi 
belongs to the race of the prophets who have the courage of the heart, the 
courtesy of the spirit and the laughter of the unafraid. Through his life and 
teaching, he bears testimony to the values for which this country has stood for 
ages, faith in spirit, respect for its mysteries, the beauty of holiness, the 
acceptance of life's obligations, the validity of character, values which are 
neither national nor international, but universal. 
There are many who dismiss Gandhi as a professional politician who bungles at 
critical moments. In one sense politics is a profession and the politician is one 
trained to transact public business in an efficient manner. There is another 
sense in which politics is a vocation and the politician is one who is conscious of 
a mission to save his people and inspire them with faith in God and love of 
humanity. Such a one may fail in the practical business of government, but 
succeed in filling his fellows with an invincible faith in their common cause. 
Gandhi is essentially a politician in the second sense. He has firm faith that we 
can build a world without poverty and unemployment, without wars and 
bloodshed, if only we get anchored in the world of spirit. He says: 'The world of 
tomorrow will be, must be, a society based on non-violence. It may seem a 
distant goal, an unpractical Utopia. But it is not in the least unobtainable, since 
it can be worked from here and now. An individual can adopt the way of life of 
the future—the non-violent way— without having to wait for others to do so. 
And if an individual can do it. cannot whole groups of individuals? Whole 
nations? Men often hesitate to make a beginning because they feel that the 
objective cannot be achieved in its entirety. This attitude of mind is precisely The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4 our greatest obstacle to progress—an obstacle that each man, if he only wills it, 
can clenr away.'1 
There is a common criticism that Gandhiji's vision outsoars his perception, that 
he proceeds on the comfortable but incorrect assumption that the world con-
sists of saints. This is a misrepresentation of Gandhi's views. He knows that life 
at best is a long second best, a perpetual compromise between the ideal and 
the possible. The kingdom of God knows no compromise, no practical 
limitations. But here on earth there are the pitiless laws of nature. We have to 
build an ordered cosmos on the basis of human passions. Through effort and 
difficulty ideals struggle to realization. Though Gandhi feels that non-violence 
is the ideal of a civilized society, he permits the use-of force. 'If one has the 
courage, I want mm to cuii.ivd.tc uie art of killing and being killed, rather than 
in a cowardly manner flee from danger.'2 'The world is not entirely governed by 
logic. Life itself involves some kind of violence and we have to choose the path 
of least violence.'3 In the progress of societies three stages are marked, the 
first where the law of the jungle prevails, where we have violence and 
selfishness; the second where we have the rule of law and impartial justice 
with courts, police and prisons, and the third where we have nonviolence and 
unselfishness, where love and law are one. The last is the goal of civilized 
humanity and it is brought nearer by the life and work of men like Gandhi. 
There is so much misunderstanding today about Gandhi's views and ways of 
thinking. This book, where we find collected together the relevant extracts 
from Gandhi's own writings on the central principles of his faith and conduct, 
will help to make Gandhi's position clearer to the modern mind. 
Benares         S Radhakrishnan 
4 April 1945 
 
 
1. Liberty. London, 1931 
2. Harijan, i ".-1-1933, p. 413 
3. Harijan, 28-9-1934, p. 259 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  
PREFACE 
TO THE REVISED EDITION 
To judge a great man or to decide his place in history, during his life-time, is 
not easy. Gandhiji had once observed: "Solon found it difficult to pronounce on 
a man's happiness during his life; how much more difficult it must be to 
adjudge on a man's greatness?"1 On another occasion, speaking of himself, he 
had said: "It will be time enough to pronounce a verdict upon my work after my 
eyes are closed, and this tabernacle is consigned to the flames."2 Nineteen 
years have now passed since he died—a martyr. 
His death was mourned by the entire world, surely as no other death in human 
history. Grief at his passing away was enhanced by the manner of it. As one 
observer put it, his assassination would be remembered for centuries to come. 
The Hearst Press of the United States believed that its emotional impact upon 
the world at the time had no parallel in human annals since the similar martyr-
dom of Lincoln. It could aptly be said also of Gandhiji that "he now belongs to 
the Ages". One recalls Jawahar- lal Nehru's memorable words on that sombre 
night: "Alight has gone out of our lives", a sentiment which the  New York Times , 
on January 31, 1948, underscored, adding that it remained for the inexorable 
hand of history to write down the rest. What, then, will history's verdict be on 
Gandhiji? 
If contemporary opinion is to be regarded, Gandhiji would be placed side by 
side with the greatest men of human history. While E. M. Forster believed that 
he was likely to be considered the greatest man of our century, Arnold Toynbee 
is convinced that he certainly is. Dr. J. H. Holmes offered a more concrete 
estimate when he described Gandhiji as "the greatest Indian since Gautama the 
Buddha and the greatest man since Jesus Christ". In the hearts of his people, 
however, he is likely to be enshrined as the Mahatma, or, more endearingly, as 
Bapu—the 'Father of the Nation' who led it to freedom—through a bloodless 
revolution. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6 What attributes in Gandhiji constituted the fibre of greatness? He was not 
merely a great man; rather, he was both a great and a good man—a 
combination which, as a critic put it—is too rarely achieved and too little 
appreciated. One recalls George Bernard Shaw's laconic comment: "It is 
dangerous to be toe good." 
History will also record that this little man -held tremendous—almost 
unparalleled—sway over the minds of his fellow men. Strangely, for that 
command was backed by no sanctions of temporal power or the might of arms. 
The clue to this enigma, if enigma it was, lay in Gandhiji's personal character 
and example, according to Lord Halifax who, as Viceroy during the days of 
Gandhiji's Salt Satyagraha, came very close to understanding him. It was that 
strength of character and of practice, as distinguished from precept, that 
enabled Gandhiji to influence so deeply the thought of his generation. Indeed, 
Prof. L. W. Grensted holds that Gandhiji's greatness lay not in his achievement, 
but in his character. To this Philip Noel-Baker would add purity of motive and 
selfless devotion to the cause in which he believed. 
But this, surely, is not all the reason for Gandhiji's unprecedented ascendancy. 
Reginald Sorensen, to cite again contemporary testimony, believed that if 
Gandhiji exercised an influence beyond calculation not only in India but upon 
our modern age, it was because he bore witness to the power of the spirit and 
sought to implement it in his political activities. Here, then, in his re-
affirmation of faith in the human spirit as well as in his introduction of spiritual 
values and techniques in mundane matters lies the uniqueness of Gandhiji. It is 
in this context that Dr. Francis Neilson says of Gandhiji: "A Diogenes in action, a 
St. Francis in humility, a Socrates in wisdom, he reveals to the world the utter 
paltriness of the methods of the statesman who relies upon force to gain his 
end. In this contest, spiritual integrity triumphs over the physical opposition of 
the forces of the State."2 
Gandhiji had pitted against the organized might of the State the pure strength 
of Non-Violence and Truth. And he had won. But the gospel of Non-violence and 
Truth which he had preached and practised was no new philosophy. He had The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 indeed admitted, nay even claimed, that it was "as old as the hills". Only, he 
had resurrected that philosophy and used it on a new plane. In conformity with 
his belief that Truth, as a living principle, has growth and as such, is bound to 
reveal to any earnest votary of it, newer and newer facets of it, he claimed to 
have discovered new dimensions and new potencies in the principle of Non-
violence. True, that principle was only the obverse of that of Truth; but, for 
that very reason, inseparable from it. Gandhiji had made it his life-mission to 
bring home to his fellow men all over the world the conviction that there is no 
salvation for them, whether as individuals, communities or nations, unless they 
tread the path of Nonviolence and Truth. 
That path in politics implied—and implies—what one critic put as a revolution 
much more radical than any other, because it meant that we must change the 
whole order of personal or political life, or change nothing. But, for Gandhiji 
there was or could be no wall of separation between the personal and the 
public, the inner and the outer life of man. In this respect he stood clearly 
apart from and above most of the world's politicians and statesmen. And 
therein lay the secret of his strength. 
Gandhiji has himself observed that whatever power, whatever influence he had 
possessed or exercised had been derived from religion. Stafford Cripps had 
perhaps this fact in mind when he remarked that there has been no greater 
spiritual leader in the world of our time.  Manchester Guardian , on January 31, 
1948, summed up this aspect of Gandhiji's personality when it wrote: "He is, 
above all, the man who revived and refreshed our sense of the meaning and 
value of religion. Though he had not the all- comprehending intellect or the 
emotional riches which can construct a new philosophy or a new religion, yet 
the strength and purity of his moral urge were clearly derived from deep 
religious feelings...." 
The world today admittedly stands on the verge of disaster that may well be 
irretrievable. The reason: the constant ideological conflict, the fierce race 
hatreds that may lead to wars more terrible than any in history, and the ever-
present threat of nuclear proliferation, involving the possibility of unimaginable The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8 destruction. Thus situated, mankind has to make its choice—for its sheer 
survival—between the moral and the material forces.  The latter are leading 
humanity headlong on the road to self-annihilation. Gandhiji shows the other 
road, because he represents the moral forces. Maybe, it is no new road. But it 
is the road which the world has either forgotten so long or has not had the 
courage to take, and which it can now ignore only at the cost of its very 
existence. 
Here in this book of his own words, the Mahatma speaks, and speaks for 
himself, with no interpreter between him and the reader, for none is 
necessary. Western people have sometimes expressed difficulty in 
understanding him. Note, for instance, Horace Alexander's statement that, in 
some ways, Gandhiji's deep metaphysical reasonings could be very baffling to 
the Anglo-Saxon mind. This volume offers basic material for understanding 
Gandhiji's mind on matters moral, social, political and spiritual. The advanced 
student of psychology, however, may need to probe deeper into the 
fundamental origins and sources of Gandhiji's motivation and conduct. To him 
this work can only be a source of reference. 
The present revised and enlarged edition appears over twenty years after the 
earlier ones. It incorporates what they could not: the thought and philosophy of 
Gandhiji's crucial final years: 1946-48, when he rose to the transcendental 
heights of the human spirit—above caste, creed, party, and even country. Then 
he belonged, more truly than ever, to all humanity. For, in those years which 
led him inevitably to the supreme denouement of martyrdom in defence of his 
faith, he preached and practised the religion of humanity, the religion by which 
alone mankind can survive. And it is because of this that the views and opinions 
which he had expressed in those last year’s assume for us and posterity a 
sanctity and a valedictory finality which make them indispensable to the 
comprehension of the totality of his mind. Their assimilation in the present 
volume has involved the introduction of some new chapters and the 
enlargement of several of the old ones. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 Again, the earlier editions suffered somewhat from the exclusion largely, if not 
wholly, of most of his thoughts on problems of purely Indian interest. This was 
done on grounds both of limitations of space and the needs of the wider 
readership abroad. The defect needed to be remedied if the personality and 
vision of Gandhiji had to be understood in their fullness. In his eyes, India had a 
mission for the world, and he bad wanted her to be at once the example and 
the exponent of his philosophy. This India of his dreams is now presented in an 
almost entirely new section: "Freedom and Democracy". 
There has also been a noticeable re-organization and re-arrangement of the 
material which is calculated to fulfill better the aim and purpose of the book. 
The compilers' grateful acknowledgments are due and are here made to the 
publishers of all the books, periodicals etc., from which the material has had to 
be drawn in the preparation of this volume. The compilers are deeply grateful 
to Acharya Vinoba Bhave for writing a foreword of great significance to the new 
edition. 
It remains only to add a personal note. This preface appears; it will be seen, 
under the initials of only one of the compilers. For, the other is no more. R. K. 
Prabu, life-long student and faithful exponent of Gandhiji's teachings, friend, 
philosopher and guide to many including his collaborator, passed away on 
January 4. This was before the preface to the new edition could be drawn up 
and the book itself published. For much of what has been written here, 
therefore, the responsibility is that of the surviving compiler; likewise, the 
blame for that which ought to have been said, but is not. Yet, both 
responsibility and blame stand somewhat mitigated in that the present writer 
had recourse to the random jottings and lucubrations, as Prabhu called them, 
conveyed in his letters almost to the last day. 
For thirty years the present writer has been privileged to enjoy Prabhu's 
friendship and, for quite some of them, active collaboration with him. No 
tribute that he can pay, therefore, may be adequate in his own eyes: for a 
similar reason, none that he pays may appear wholly impartial in those of the 
readers, Prabhu was the originator of the "grand" Gandhi project which was to The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10 encompass this and several other volumes of Gandhiji's thought and philosphy. 
Only three, however, could materialize from the joint labours. Fortunately, 
Prabhu by himself produced several others big and small, all published by 
Navajivan. It is for the serious student of Gandhian literature to evaluate 
Prabhu's contribution to it. His collaborator must content himself with 
acknowledging his debt to one who gave him his inspiration, initiation and 
association. 
Two very special and unsolicited observations as to Prabhu's place in the field 
of Gandhi compilations may, however, be cited here. One, Gandhiji's own, 
made to the compilers during a memorable interview on June 27, 1944, at the 
Nature Cure Clinic in Poona: "You are saturated with the spirit of my writings." 
The other by a notable philosopher-interpreter of Gandhiji: Dr. Sarvepalli 
Radhakrishnan who, in a personal message of condolence on Prabhu's death, 
wrote: "The publication of his work on Gandhiji will be a good reminder to us 
all of his main life-interest." 
U. R. R. 
New Delhi  
January 13, 1967 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Harijan, 10-12-1938, p. 377  
2. Yo
ung India, 4- 4-1929, p. 107  
3. S.
 Radhakrishnan :  Ma hatma Gandhi; Essays and Reflections on His Life and Work, George 
Allen & Unwin, London, (1949;, p. 537  
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  
PREFACE 
TO THE FIRST AND SECOND EDITIONS 
'GANDHI is an enigma.' How often does one hear this said, not only by people 
who are critical of his utterances and doings, but even by those closely 
associated with him! This is the more surprising because, for the past fifty 
years, he has had almost no private life. He is scarcely ever alone, and works, 
talks, meditates, prays and eats in the company of his followers. When he 
sleeps, it is in the open air in a dormitory, seldom in a room of his own. 
That there have been contradictions in his life Gandhiji has often admitted. Far 
from excusing himself for them, he has stated, 'I have never made a fetish of 
consistency. I am a votary of truth and I must say what I feel and think at a 
given moment on the question, without regard to what I may have said before 
on it... As my vision gets clearer, my views must grow clearer with daily 
practice.'1 He believed that his inconsistencies have been merely apparent. 
'There is, I fancy, a method in my inconsistences,'2 he has written. Some of his 
inconsistencies spring from that spirit of compromise which is an inalienable 
part of his spiritual make-up. 'All my life,' he has remarked, 'the very insistence 
on truth has taught me to appreciate the beauty of compromise.'3 It is his 
homage to truth that leads him to recognize the truth in the viewpoints of 
others. At the same time he holds that there are eternal principles which admit 
of no compromise and that one must be prepared to lay down one's life in their 
practice. 
The riddle of Gandhiji's mind is the riddle of his soul. 'Le coeur a ses raison, que 
la raison ne connait point.'4 His philosophy has to be synthesized from scattered 
writings and utterances. He has never sat down to write a complete statement 
of his creed, and the very title of his autobiography,  The Story of My 
Experiments with Truth, shows that he considers himself a mere seeker, ready 
and anxious to share his experiences with others, but claiming no finality for his 
own conclusions. He is ofien accused of irresponsibility for the way in which he 
speaks his mind at times when political expediency would seem to require The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12 silence or the expression of some other point of view from a national leader, 
but his answer to this charge is that it is every man's duty to express the truth 
as he sees it. If the motive is pure, no harm can result. 'I believe that if, in 
spite of the best of intentions, one is led into committing mistakes, they do not 
really result in harm to the world or, for the matter of that, any individual.'1 
In matters spiritual he claims to apply the method of trial and error, the 
experimental method of the scientist, and though he may have achieved no 
finality, yet, like an astronomer who is undeterred by his knowledge of 
Einstein's Theory of Relativity from stating that the mean distance of the Moon 
from the Earth is 238,857 miles, Gandhiji has reached a stage, after a life of 
'experiments with truth', when his moral judgements are hard and assured. In 
his universe, he steers by the stars of Truth, Love and Labour. 'Having made a 
ceaseless effort to attain self-purification,' he says, T have developed some 
little capacity to hear 'the still small voice within'2; and that inner voice is, for 
him, Truth. Love and God are interchangeable terms: 'My goal is friendship with 
the world. . . .'3 'I refuse to suspect human nature. It will, is bound to, respond 
to any noble and friendly action.'4 Lastly he believes 'there can never be too 
much emphasis placed upon work.'5 'If all laboured for their bread and no more, 
then there would be enough food and leisure for all.'1 Then, 'our wants would 
be minimized, our food would be simple. We should then eat to live, not live to 
eat.'2 Gandhiji is concerned with the salvation of the individual soul, and for 
him high thinking is not to be separated from plain living. 'I do want growth, I 
do v/ant self-determination, I do want freedom, but I want all these for the 
soul.'3 
It may be of interest to record how this work came to be composed. Over a 
dozen years ago, the idea occurred to one of us of making a systematic 
collection of the eternal verities' expressed by Gandhiji in his writings and 
speeches and stringing them together so as to bring into relief the philosophical 
thought behind them, and afford an insight into the Gandhian philosophy of 
life. A plan of a dozen volumes was drawn up, embodying Gandhiji's thoughts on 
such subjects as Truth, Non-violence, Satyagraha, Love, Faith, Non-possession, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13 Freedom, Fasting, Prayer, Brahmacharya , Labour, Machinery, and so on, as well 
as a separate volume containing the gist of his thoughts on these subjects, and 
the work of collecting the material was begun. Within a few years, the task was 
found to be so vast that it was necessary to enlist the co-operation of a fellow-
worker, and since then both of us have laboured at it without respite. 
Circumstances intervened during the last two years which obliged us to 
concentrate our attention on the last volume, the one containing the kernel of 
Gandhiji's teachings as a whole, and this is what is now presented to the 
reader, though in a more condensed form than was originally planned. 
The proofs of this work were submitted to and read by Gandhiji and we are 
sincerely thankful to him for his approval of our effort and to the Navajivan 
Trustees for permission to make use of his writings. We are also thankful to Shri 
Kanu Gandhi for allowing us to reproduce in this work one of his photographs of 
Gandhiji. 
R.K.P. 
U.R.R. 
 
  
 
1. Harijan, 28-9-1934, p. 260. 
2. Young India , 13-2-1930, p. 52. 
3. An Autobiography,  p. 107 
4. Pascal,  Pensees, iv. 277; 'The heart has its reasons which reason knows nothing of.' 
5. Harijan, 29-6-1935, p. 156. 
6. Ibid 
7. Young India,  13-10-1921, p. 325. 
 
  
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  
I.  OF MYSELF 
01. NEITHER SAINT, NOR SINNER 
 
I THINK that the word 'saint' should be ruled out of pr esent life. It is too sacred 
a word to be lightly applied to anybody, much less to one like myself who 
claims only to be a humble searcher after Truth, knows his limitations, makes 
mistakes, never hesitates to admit them when he makes them, and frankly 
confesses that he, like a scientist, is making experiments about some 'of the 
eternal verities' of life, but cannot even claim to be a scientist because he can 
show no tangible proof of scientific accuracy in his methods or such tangible 
results of his experiments as modern science demands. (YI, 12-5-1920, p2) 
 
To clothe me with sainthood is too early even if it is possible. I myself do not 
feel a saint in any shape or form. But I do feel I am a votary of Truth in spite of 
all my errors of unconscious omission and commission. 
 
Policy of Truth  
I am not a 'statesman in the garb of a saint'. But sin ce Truth is the highest 
wisdom, sometimes my acts appear to be consistent with the highest 
statesmanship. But, I hope I have no policy in me save the policy of Truth and 
ahimsa. I will not sacrifice Truth and ahimsa even for the deliverance of my 
country or religion. That is as much as to say that neither can be so delivered. 
(YI, 20-1-1927, p21) 
 
I see neither contradiction nor insanity in my life. It is true that, as a man 
cannot see his back, so can he not see his errors or insanity. But the sages have 
often likened a man of religion to a lunatic. I therefore hug the belief that I 
may not be insane and may be truly religious. Which of the two I am in truth 
can only be decided after my death. (YI, 14-8-1924, p267) 
 
It seems to me that I understand the ideal of truth better than that of ahimsa, 
and my experience tells me that if I let go my hold of truth, I shall never be 
able to solve the riddle of ahimsa..... In other words, perhaps, I have not the 
courage to follow the straight course. Both at bottom mean one and the same 
thing, for doubt is invariably the result of want or weakness offaith. 'Lord, give 
me faith' is, therefore, my prayer day and night. (A, p336) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15 I claim to be a votary of truth from my childhood. It was the most natural thing 
to me. My prayerful search gave me the revealing maxim 'Truth is God', instead 
of the usual one 'God is Truth'. That maxim enables me to see God face to face 
as it were. I feel Him pervade every fibre of my being.  
(H, 9-8-1942, p264) 
 
 
Faith in Right  
I remain an optimist, not that there is any evidence t hat I can give that right is 
going to prosper, but because of my unflinching faith that right must prosper in 
the end….. Our inspiration can come only from our faith that right must 
ultimately prevail. (H, 10-12-1938, p372) 
 
Somehow I am able to draw the noblest in mankind, and that is what enables 
me to maintain my faith in God and human nature. (H, 15-4-1939, p86) 
 
 
No Ascetic 
I have never described myself as a sannyasi. Sannyas i s made of sterner stuff. I 
regard myself as a house-holder, leading a humble life of service and, in 
common with my fellow-workers, living upon the charity of friends….. The life I 
am living is entirely very easy and very comfortable, if ease and comfort are a 
mental state. I have all I need without the slightest care of having to keep any 
personal treasures. (YI, 1-10-1925, p338) 
 
My loin cloth is an organic evolution in my life. It came naturally, without 
effort, without premeditation. (YI, 9-7-931, p175) 
 
I hate privilege and monopoly. Whatever cannot be shared with the masses is 
taboo to me. (H, 2-11-1934, p303) 
 
It is wrong to call me an ascetic. The ideals that regulate my life are presented 
for acceptance by mankind in general. I have arrived at them by gradual 
evolution. Every step was thought out, well considered, and taken with 
greatest deliberation. 
 
Both my continence and non-violence were derived from personal experience 
and became necessary in response to the calls of public duty. The isolated life I 
had to lead in South Africa, whether as a householder, legal practitioner, social The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16 reformer or politician, required for the due fulfillment of these duties the 
strictest regulation of sexual life and a rigid practice of non-violence and truth 
in human relations, whether with my own countrymen or with Europeans. (H, 3-
10-1936, p268) 
 
Mine is a life full of joy in the midst of incessant work. In not wanting to think 
of what tomorrow will bring for me, I feel as free as a bird….. The thought that 
I am ceaselessly and honestly struggling against the requirements of the flesh 
sustains me. (YI, 1-10-1925, p338) 
 
Work without faith is like an attempt to reach the bottom of a bottomless pit. 
(H, 3-10-1936, pp268-9) 
 
 
Shedding the Ego  
I know that I have still before me a difficult path to  traverse. I must reduce 
myself to zero. So long as man does not of his own free will put himself last 
among his fellow-creatures, there is no salvation for him. Ahimsa is the farthest 
limit of humility. (A, p371) 
 
If we could erase the 'It's’ and the 'Mine's' from religion, politics, economics, 
etc., we shall soon be free and bring heaven upon earth. (YI, 3-9-1926, p336) 
 
A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness of its parent, although it is 
unconscious of it. But it is dried up as soon as it enters upon an existence 
independent of the ocean. We do not exaggerate when we say that life is a 
mere bubble. 
 
A seeker after truth cannot afford to be an egotist. One who would sacrifice his 
life for others has hardly time to reserve for himself a place in the sun. (YI, 16-
10-1930, p2) 
 
There are limits to the capacity of an individual, and the moment he flatters 
himself that he can undertake all tasks, God is there to humble his pride. For 
myself, I am gifted with enough humility to look even to babes and suckling for 
help. (YI, 12-3-1931, p32) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17 Fates decide my undertakings for me. I never go to see them. They come to me 
almost in spite of me. That has been my lot all my life long, in South Africa as 
well as ever since my return to India. (YI, 7-5-1925, p163) 
 
 
Little Book Knowledge  
I admit my limitations. I have no university education  worth the name. My high 
school career was never above the average. I was thankful if I could pass my 
examinations. Distinction in the school was beyond my aspiration. (H, 9-7-1938, 
p176) 
 
During the days of my education I had read practically nothing outside 
textbooks, and after I launched into active life, I had very little time left me 
for reading. I cannot, therefore, claim much book knowledge. However, I 
believe I have not lost much because of this enforced restraint. On the 
contrary, the limited reading may be said to have enabled me thoroughly to 
digest what I did read. 
 
Of these books, the one that brought about an instantaneous and practical 
transformation in my life was Unto This Last. I translated it later into Gujarati, 
entitling it Sarvodaya (the welfare of all). I believe that I discovered some of 
my deepest convictions reflected in this great book of Ruskin, and that is why it 
so captivated me and made me transform my life. (A, p220) 
 
I was living in South Africa then. It was the reading of Unto This Last on a 
railway journey to Durban, in 1904, when I was thirty-five, that made me 
decide to change my whole outward life. There is no other word for it, Ruskin's 
words captivated me. I read the book in one go and lay awake all the following 
night, and I there and then decided to change my whole plan of life. Tolstoy I 
had read much earlier. He affected the inner being. (ICS, p245) 
 
 
Service of the Poor  
The heart's earnest and pure desire is always fulfille d. In my own experience, I 
have often seen this rule being verified. Service of the poor has been my heart's 
desire and it has always thrown me amongst the poor and enabled me to 
identify myself with them. (A, p110) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18 I have always had a love for the poor all my life and in abundance. I could cite 
illustrations after illustrations from my past life that it was something innate in 
me. I have never felt that there was any difference between the poor and me. I 
have always felt towards them as my own kith and kin. (H, 11-5-1935, p99) 
 
I have no desire for the perishable kingdom of earth. I am striving for the 
Kingdom of Heaven which is moksha. To attain my end it is not necessary for 
me to seek the shelter of a cave. I carry one about me, if I would but know it. 
 
A cave-dweller can build castles in the air whereas a dweller in a palace, like 
Janak, has no castles to build. The cave-dweller who hovers round the world on 
the wings of thought has no peace. A Janak, though living in the midst of 'pomp 
and circumstance', may have peace that passeth understanding. 
 
For me the road to salvation lies through incessant toil in the service of my 
country and there through of humanity. I want to identify myself with 
everything that lives. (YI, 3-4-1924, p114) 
 
My life is an indivisible whole, and all my activities run into one another; and 
they all have their rise in my insatiable love of mankind. (H, 2-3-1934, p24) 
 
I am used to misrepresentation all my life. It is the lot of every public worker. 
He has to have a tough hide. Life would be burdensome if every 
misrepresentation had to be answered and cleared. It is a rule of life with me 
never to explain misrepresentations except when the cause requires correction. 
This rule has saved much time and worry. (YI, 27-5-1926, p193) 
 
I have been known as a crank, faddist, mad man. Evidently the reputation is 
well deserved. For wherever I go, I draw to myself cranks, faddists and mad 
man. (YI, 13-6-1929, p193) 
 
 
Practical Dreamer  
I believe in absolute oneness of God and, therefore, a lso of humanity. What 
though we have many bodies? We have but one soul. The rays of the sun are 
many through refraction. But they have the same source. I cannot, therefore, 
detach myself from the wickedest soul (nor may I be denied identity with the 
most virtuous). Whether, therefore, I will or not, I must involve in my The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19 experiment the whole of my kind. Nor can I do without experiment. Life is but 
an endless series of experiments. (YI, 25-9-1924, p313) 
 
I must be taken with all my faults. I am a searcher after truth. My experiments I 
hold to be infinitely more important than the best-equipped Himalayan 
expeditions.(YI, 3-12-1925, p422) 
 
It has been my misfortune or good fortune to take the world by surprise. New 
experiments, or old experiments in new style, must sometimes engender 
misunderstanding. (EF, p132) 
 
I am indeed a practical dreamer. My dreams are not airy nothings. I want to 
convert my dreams into realities as far as possible. (H, 17-11-1933, p6) 
 
If any action of mine claimed to be spiritual is proved to be unpractical, it must 
be pronounced to be a failure. I do believe that the most spiritual act is the 
most practical in the true sense of the term. (H, 1-7-1939, p181) 
 
 
My Fallibility  
I claim to be a simple individual liable to err like a ny other fellow-mortal. I 
own, however, that I have humility enough in me to confess my errors and to 
retrace my steps. I own that I have an immovable faith in God and His 
goodness, and unconsumable passion for truth and love. But, is that not what 
every person has latent in him? (YI, 6-5-1926, p164) 
 
Those who have at all followed my humble career even superficially cannot 
have failed to observe that not a single act of my life has been done to the 
injury of any individual or nation..... I claim no infallibility. I am conscious of 
having made Himalayan blunders, but I am not conscious of having made them 
intentionally or having even harboured enmity towards any person or nation, or 
any life, human or sub-human. (EF, p133) 
 
I have made the frankest admission of my many sins. But I do not carry their 
burden on my shoulders. If I am journeying Godward, as I feel I am, it is safe 
with me. For I feel the warmth of the sunshine of His presence. 
 
My austerities, fastings and prayers are, I know, of no value if I rely upon them 
for reforming me. But they have an inestimable value, if they represent, as I The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20 hope they do, the yearnings of a soul striving to lay his weary head in the lap of 
his Maker. (H, 18-4-1936, p77) 
 
 
Kinship with all  
Whenever I see an erring man, I say to myself I have a lso erred; when I see a 
lustful man, I say to myself so was I once; and in this way, I feel kinship with 
everyone in the world and feel that I cannot be happy without the humblest of 
us being happy. (YI, 10-2-1927, p44) 
 
I shall have to answer my God and my Maker if I give any one less than his due, 
but I am sure that He will bless me if He knows that I gave someone more than 
his due. (YI, 10-3-1927, p80) 
 
I am too conscious of the imperfections of the species to which I belong to be 
irritated against any single member thereof. My remedy is to deal with the 
wrong wherever I see it, not to hurt the wrong-doer, even as I would not like to 
be hurt for the wrongs I continually do. (YI, 12-3-1930, pp89-90) 
 
I can truthfully say that I am slow to see the blemishes of fellow-beings, being 
myself full of them and, therefore, being in need of their charity, I have learnt 
not to judge any one harshly and to make allowances for defects that I may 
detect. (H, 11-3-1939, p47) 
 
 
Regard for Opponents  
Differences of opinion should never mean hostility. If they did, my wife and I 
should be sworn enemies of one another. I do not know two persons in the 
world who had no difference of opinion, and as I am a follower of the Gita, I 
have always attempted to regard those who differ from me with the same 
affection as I have for my nearest and dearest. (YI, 17-3-1927, p82) 
 
It is to me a matter of perennial satisfaction that I retain generally the 
affection and trust of those whose principles and policies I oppose. The South 
Africans gave me personally their confidence and extended their friendship. 
 
In spite of my denunciation of British policy and system, I enjoy the affection of 
thousands of Englishmen and women, and in spite of unqualified condemnation The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21 of modern materialistic civilization, the circle of European and American 
friends is ever widening. It is again a triumph of non-violence. (ibid, p86) 
 
I cannot intentionally hurt anything that lives, much less fellow-human beings, 
even though they may do the greatest wrong to me and mine. (YI, 12-3-1930, 
p93) 
 
It would be impossible for any person to point to a single act of mine during the 
past 50 years which could be proved to have been antagonistic to any person or 
community. I have never believed anyone to be my enemy. My faith demands 
that I should consider no one as such. I may not wish ill to anything that lives. 
(H, 17-11-1933, p4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  
02. MY MAHATMASHIP 
 
No Mahatma 
I DO not feel like being one [a Mahatma]. But I do kno w that I am among the 
humblest of God's creatures. ( YI, 27-10-1921, p.342) 
 
Often the title has deeply pained me; and there is not a moment I can recall 
when it may be said to have tickled me. (A, p. xiv) 
 
My Mahatma ship is worthless. It is due to my outward activities, due to my 
politics which is the least part of me and is, therefore, evanescent. What is of 
abiding worth is my insistence on truth, non-violence and brahmacharya which 
is the real part of me. That part of me, however small, is not to be despised. It 
is my all. I prize even the failures and disillusionment's which are but steps 
towards success. (YI, 25-12-1926, pp78-79) 
 
The world knows so little of how much my so-called greatness depends upon 
the incessant toil and drudgery of silent, devoted, able and pure workers, men 
as well as women. (YI, 26-4-1928, p130) 
 
Truth to me is infinitely dearer than the 'mahatmaship', which is purely a 
burden. It is my knowledge of my limitations and my nothingness which has so 
far saved me from the oppressiveness of the 'mahatmaship'. (YI, 1-11-1928, 
p361) 
 
 
Sick of Adoration 
I have become literally sick of the adoration of the u nthinking multitude. I 
would feel certain of my ground if I was spat upon by them. Then there would 
be no need for confession of Himalayan and other miscalculations, no retracing, 
no re-arranging. (YI, 2-3-1922, p135) 
 
In the majority of cases, addresses presented to me contain adjectives which I 
am ill able to carry. Their use can do good neither to the writers nor to me. 
They unnecessary humiliate me, for I have to confess that I do not deserve 
them. When they are deserved, their use is superfluous. It cannot add to the 
strength of the qualities possessed by me. They may, if I am not on my guard, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23 easily turn my head. The good that a man does is more often than not better 
left unsaid. Imitation is the sincerest flattery. (YI, 21-5-1925, p176) 
 
The Mahatma I must leave to his fate. Though a non-co-operator, I shall gladly 
subscribe to a Bill to make it criminal for anybody to call me Mahatma and to 
touch my feet. Where I can impose the law myself, i.e., at the Ashram, the 
practice is criminal. (YI, 17-3-1927, p86) 
 
 
True Honour 
The highest honour that my friends can do me is to en f orce in their own lives 
the programme that I stand for or to resist me to their utmost if they do not 
believe in it. (YI, 12-6-1924, p197) 
 
It will be waste of good money to spend . . . on erecting a clay or metallic 
statue of the figure of a man who is himself made of clay and is more fragile 
than a bangle which can keep by preservation for a thousand years, whereas 
the human body disintegrates daily and undergoes final disintegration after the 
usual span of life. I have learnt from my Muslim friends, among whom I have 
passed the best part of my life, my dislike of statues and photographs of my 
figure. . . . 
 
Let these lines serve as a warning to those who want to honour me by erecting 
statues and having portraits of my figure, that I heartily dislike these 
exhibitions. I shall deem it ample honour if those who believe in me will be 
good enough to promote the activities I stand for. (H, 11-12-1939, p1) 
 
 
No 'Avatar' 
I hold it to be a blasphemy to represent me as Shri Kr ishna. I claim to be a 
humble worker and no more among many in a great cause, which can only be 
injured rather than advanced by glorification of its leaders. A cause has the 
best chance of success when it is examined and followed on its own merits. 
Measures must always, in a progressive society, be held superior to men, who 
are after all imperfect instruments, working for their fulfillment. (YI, 13-7-
1921, p224) 
 
The only virtue I want to claim is Truth and Non-violence. I lay no claim to 
superhuman powers. I want none. I wear the same corruptible flesh that the 
weakest of my fellow-beings wears, and am, therefore, as liable to err as any. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24 My services have many limitations, but God has up to now blessed them in spite 
of the imperfections. (YI, 16-2-1922, p102) 
 
I lay claim to nothing exclusively divine in me. I do not claim prophetship. I am 
but a humble seeker after Truth and bent upon finding It. I count no sacrifice 
too great for the sake of seeing God face to face. The whole of my activity, 
whether it may be called social, political, humanitarian or ethical, is directed 
to that end. 
 
And as I know that God is found more often in the lowliest of His creatures than 
in the high and mighty, I am struggling to reach the status of these. I cannot do 
so without their service. Hence my passion for the service of the suppressed 
classes. And as I cannot render this service without entering politics, I find 
myself in them. Thus I am no master. I am but a struggling, erring, humble 
servant of India and there through of humanity. (H, 11-9-1924, pp298) 
 
It is curious how we delude ourselves. We fancy that one can make the 
perishable body impregnable and we think it impossible to evoke the hidden 
powers of the soul. Well, I am engaged in trying to show, if I have any of these 
powers, that I am as frail a mortal as any of us and that I never had anything 
extraordinary about me nor have any now. (YI, 6-5-1926, p164) 
 
I do not consider myself worthy to be mentioned in the same breath with the 
race of prophets. I am a humble seeker after truth. I am impatient to realize 
myself, to attain moksha in this very existence. My national service is part of 
my training for freeing my soul from the bondage of flesh. Thus considered, my 
service may be regarded as purely selfish. I have no desire for the perishable 
kingdom of earth. I am striving for the Kingdom of Heaven, which is moksha. 
(YI, 3-4-1924, p114) 
 
I claim to be no more than an average man with less than average ability. Nor 
can I claim any special merit for such non-violence or continence as I have been 
able to reach with laborious research. I have not the shadow of a doubt that 
any man or woman can achieve what I have, if he or she would make the same 
effort and cultivate the same hope and faith. (H, 3-10-1936, p269) 
 
Some of my correspondents seem to think that I can work wonders. Let me say 
as a devotee of truth that I have no such gift... All the power I may have comes 
from God. But He does not work directly. He works through His numberless 
agencies. (H, 8-10-1938, p285) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25 Awareness of Limitations 
I consider myself to be a sagacious worker and my saga city means no more and 
no less than a fine perception of my limitations. I hope I never travel beyond 
my limits. Certainly, I have never done so consciously. (YI, 23-6-1920, p3) 
 
I am conscious of my own limitations. That consciousness is my only strength. 
Whatever I might have been able to do in my life has proceeded more than 
anything else out of the realization of my own limitations. (YI, 13-11-1924, 
p378) 
 
If I was what I want to be, the fast would not have been necessary. I would not 
then need to argue with anyone. My word would go straight home. Indeed, I 
would not even need to utter the word. The mere will on my part would suffice 
to produce the required effect. But I am painfully aware of my limitations.  
(H, 15-4-1939, p86) 
 
I shall continue to confess blunders each time the people commit them. The 
only tyrant I accept in this world is the 'still small voice' within. And even 
though I have to face the prospect of a minority of one, I humbly believe I have 
the courage to be in such a hopeless minority. (YI, 2-3-1922, p135) 
 
I claim to be a fairly accurate student of human nature and vivisector of my 
own failings. I have discovered that man is superior to the system he 
propounds. (MGI, p241) 
 
I hope there is no pride in me. I feel I recognize fully my weakness. But my 
faith in God and His strength and love is unshakable. I am like clay in the 
Potter's hand. (YI, 26-1-1922, p49) 
 
I have no desire for prestige anywhere. It is furniture required in courts of 
Kings. I am a servant of Mussalmans, Christians, Parsis and Jews as I am of 
Hindus. And a servant is in need of love, not prestige. That is assured to me so 
long as I remain a faithful servant. (YI, 26-3-1925, p112) 
 
 
Readiness for Martyrdom 
There are certain things which you cannot escape all a t once, even whilst you 
are avoiding them. This earthly case in which I am locked up is the bane of my The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26 life, but I am obliged to put up with it and even indulge it. (YI, 27-10-1921, 
p342) 
 
I implicitly believe in the truth of the saying that not a blade of grass moves 
but by His will. He will save it [my life] if He needs it for further service in this 
body. None can save it against His will. (EF, p114) 
 
Do not seek to protect me. The Most High is always there to protect us all. You 
may be sure that when my time is up, no one, not even the most renowned in 
the world, can stand between Him and me. (YI, 2-4-1931, p64-55) 
 
I must be true to my Maker, and the moment I feel that life is insupportable for 
me, I hope not to be found wanting. What better reparation can I do than 
willing surrender of the body that has ceased to evoke response and may be a 
hindrance to the discovery of the true way? (ibid, p60) 
 
I am not aching for martyrdom, but if it comes in my way in the prosecution of 
what I consider to be the supreme duty in defense of the faith I hold. . . I shall 
have earned it. (H, 29-6-1934, p156) 
 
Whilst I prize the unbounded affection of the people, let them realize that my 
life is not worth keeping if anxiety to save it deflects the attention of the 
nation from the main purpose. (H, 11-3-1939, p44) 
 
Assaults have been made on my life in the past, but God has spared me till 
now, and the assailants have repented for their action. But if someone were to 
shoot me in the belief that he was getting rid of a rascal, he would kill not the 
real Gandhi, but the one that appeared to him a rascal. (BC, 9-8-1942) 
 
God alone is my protector. How can puny man, who is not sure even of his own 
tomorrow, presume to protect another? I am content to be under God's care. 
He may protect or destroy. I know He sometimes even destroys to protect. (H, 
9-6-1946, p170) 
 
I do not want to die . . . of a creeping paralysis of my faculties-a defeated man. 
An assassin's bullet may put an end to my life. I would welcome it. But I would 
love, above all, to fade out doing my duty with my last breath. (MGMLP, I, 
p562) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27 I am not afraid to die in my mission, if that is to be my fate. (H, 27-4-1947, 
p127) 
 
 
Avoidance of Anger 
I have learnt through bitter experience the one suprem e lesson to conserve my 
anger, and as heat conserved is transmuted into energy, even so our anger 
controlled can be transmuted into a power which can move the world. (YI, 15-
9-1920, p6) 
 
I spare neither friend nor foe when it is a question of departing from the code 
of honour. (YI, 2-3-1922, p140) 
 
It is not that I do not get angry. I do not give vent to anger. I cultivate the 
quality of patience as angerlessness, and, generally speaking, I succeed. But I 
only control my anger when it comes. How I find it possible to control it would 
be a useless question, for it is a habit that everyone must cultivate and must 
succeed in forming by constant practice. (H, 11-5-1935, p98) 
 
If I had no sense of humor, I should long ago have committed suicide. (YI, 18-8-
1921, p238) 
 
I am an irrepressible optimist, because I believe in myself. That sounds very 
arrogant, doesn't it? But I say it from the depths of my humility. I believe in the 
supreme power of God. I believe in Truth and, therefore, I have no doubt in the 
future of this country or the future of humanity. 
 
I am an optimist because I expect many things from myself. I have not got 
them, I know, as I am not yet a perfect being. If I was one, I should not even 
need to reason with you. When I am a perfect being, I have simply to say the 
word and the nation will listen. I want to attain that perfection by service.  
(YI, 13-8-1925, pp.279-80) 
 
My philosophy, if I can be said to have any, excludes the possibility of harm to 
one's cause by outside agencies. The harm comes deservedly and only when the 
cause itself is bad or, being good, its champions are untrue, faint-hearted or 
unclean. (H, 25-7-1936, p185) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  
03. I KNOW THE PATH 
 
I k
now the path. It is straight and narrow. It is like the edge of a sword. I 
rejoice to walk on it. I weep when I slip. God's word is: 'He who strives never 
perishes.' I have implicit faith in that promise. Though, therefore, from my 
weakness I fail a thousand times, I will not lose faith, but hope that I shall see 
the Light when the flesh has been brought under perfect subjection, as some 
day it must. (YI, 17-6-1926, p215) 
 
My soul refuses to be satisfied so long as it is a helpless witness of a single 
wrong or a single misery. But it is not possible for me, a weak, frail, miserable 
being, to mend every wrong or to hold myself free of blame for all the wrong I 
see. 
 
The spirit in me pulls one way, the flesh in me pulls in the opposite direction. 
There is freedom from the action of these two forces, but that freedom is 
attainable only by slow and painful stages. 
 
I cannot attain freedom by a mechanical refusal to act, but only by intelligent 
action in a detached manner. This struggle resolves itself into an incessant 
crucifixion of the flesh so that the spirit may become entirely free. (YI, 17-11-
1921, p368) 
 
 
Search for Truth 
I am but a seeker after Truth. I claim to have found a  way to it. I claim to be 
making a ceaseless effort to find it. But I admit that I have not yet found it. To 
find Truth completely is to realize oneself and one's destiny, i.e., to become 
perfect. I am painfully conscious of my imperfections, and therein lies all the 
strength I posses, because it is a rare thing for a man to know his own 
limitations. 
 
If I was a perfect man, I own I should not feel the miseries of neighbors as I do. 
As a perfect man I should take note of them, prescribe a remedy, and compel 
adoption by the force of unchallengeable Truth in me. But as yet I only see as 
through a glass darkly and, therefore, have to carry conviction by slow and 
laborious processes, and then, too, not always with success. 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29 That being so, I would be less than human if, with all my knowledge of 
avoidable misery pervading the land and of the sight of mere skeletons under 
the very shadow of the Lord of the Universe, I did not feel with and for all the 
suffering but dumb millions of India. (ibid, p377) 
 
 
Trust in God 
I am in the world feeling my way to light 'amid the en circling gloom'. I often err 
and miscalculate… My trust is solely in God. And I trust men only because I trust 
God. If I had no God to rely upon, I should be like Timon, a hater of my species. 
(YI, 4-12-1924, p398) 
 
I will not be a traitor to God to please the whole world. (H, 18-2-1933, p4) 
 
Whatever striking things I have done in life, I have not done prompted by 
reason but prompted by instinct, I would say, God. (H, 14-5-1938, p110) 
 
I am a man of faith. My reliance is solely on God. One step is enough for me. 
The next step He will make clear to me when the time for it comes. (H, 20-10-
1940, p330) 
 
 
No Secrecy 
I have no secret methods. I know no diplomacy save th a t of truth. I have no 
weapon but non-violence. I may be unconsciously led astray for a while, but not 
for all time. (YI, 11-12-1924, p406) 
 
My life has been an open book. I have no secrets and I encourage no secrets. 
(YI, 19-3-1931, p43) 
 
I am but a poor struggling soul yearning to be wholly good-wholly truthful and 
wholly non-violent in thought, word and deed, but ever failing to reach the 
ideal which I know to be true. I admit it is a painful climb, but the pain of it is 
a positive pleasure for me. Each step upward makes me feel stronger and fit for 
the next. (YI, 9-4-1924, p126) 
 
When I think of my littleness and my limitations on the one hand and of the 
expectations raised about me on the other, I become dazed for the moment, 
but I come to myself as soon as I realize that these expectations are a tribute The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30 not to me, a curious mixture of Jekyll and Hyde, but to the incarnation, 
however imperfect but comparatively great in me, of the two priceless 
qualities of truth and non-violence. I must, therefore, not shirk the 
responsibility of giving what aid I can to fellow-seekers after truth from the 
West. (YI, 3-10-1925, p344) 
 
 
Guidance 
I claim to have no infallible guidance or inspiration .  So far as my experience 
goes, the claim to infallibility on the part of a human being would be 
untenable, seeing that inspiration too can come only to one who is free from 
the action of opposites, and it will be difficult to judge on a given occasion 
whether the claim to freedom from pairs of opposites is justified. The claim to 
infallibility would thus always be a most dangerous claim to make. This, 
however, does not leave us without any guidance whatsoever. The sum-total of 
the experience of the sages of the world is available to us and would be for all 
time to come. 
 
Moreover, there are not many fundamental truths, but there is only one 
fundamental truth which is Truth itself, otherwise known as Non-violence. 
Finite human being shall never know in its fullness Truth and love which is in 
itself infinite. But we do know enough for our guidance. We shall err, and 
sometimes grievously, in our application. But man is a self-governing being, and 
self-government necessarily includes the power as much to commit errors as to 
set them right as often as they are made. (YI, 21-4-1927, p128) 
 
I deny being a visionary. I do not accept the claim of saintliness. I am of the 
earth, earthly . . . I am prone to as many weakness as you are. But I have seen 
the world. I have lived in the world with my eyes open. I have gone through the 
most fiery ordeals that have fallen to the lot of man. I have gone through this 
discipline. (SW, p531) 
 
 
Self-sacrifice   
I a
m asking my countrymen in India to follow no other gospel than the gospel of 
self-sacrifice which precedes every battle. Whether you belong to the school of 
violence or non-violence, you will still have to go through the fire of sacrifice 
and of discipline. (ibid, p532) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31 I want to declare to the world, although I have forfeited the regard of many 
friends in the West - and I must bow my head low; but even for their friendship 
or love, I must not suppress the voice of conscience, - the promptings of my 
inner basic nature today. There is something within me impelling me to cry out 
my agony. I have known humanity. I have studied something of psychology. 
Such a man knows exactly what it is. I do not mind how you describe it. That 
voice within tells me, "You have to stand against the whole world although you 
may have to stand alone. You have to stare in the face the whole world 
although the world may look at you with blood-shot eyes. Do not fear. Trust the 
little voice residing within your heart." It says: "Forsake friends, wife and all; 
but testify to that for which you have lived and for which you have to die." (MN, 
pp201-2) 
 
 
No Defeatism 
Defeat cannot dishearten me. It can only chasten me... .. I know that God will 
guide me. Truth is superior to man's wisdom. (YI, 3-7-1924, p218) 
 
I have never lost my optimism. In seemingly darkest hours hope has burnt bright 
within me. I cannot kill the hope myself. I must say I cannot give an ocular 
demonstration to justify the hope. But there is no defeat in me. (H, 25-1-1935, 
p399) 
 
I do not want to foresee the future. I am concerned with taking care of the 
present. God has given me no control over the moment following…
 
 
Trust 
It is true that I have often been let down. Many have deceived me and many 
have been found wanting. But I do not repent of my association with them. For 
I know how to non-co-operate, as I know how to co-operate. The most 
practical, the most dignified way of going on in the world is to take people at 
their word, when you have no positive reason to the contrary. (YI, 26-12-1924, 
p430) 
 
I believe in trusting. Trust begets trust. Suspicion is fetid and only stinks. He 
who trusts has never yet lost in the world. (YI, 4-6-1925, p193) 
 
A breach of promise shakes me to my root, especially when I am in any way 
connected with the author of the breach. And if it cost my life which, after all, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32 at the age of seventy has no insurance value, I should most willingly give it in 
order to secure due performance of a sacred and solemn promise. 
(H, 11-3-1939, p46) 
 
To my knowledge, throughout my public and private career, I have never 
broken a promise. (H, 22-4-1939, p100) 
 
 
My Leadership  
They say I claim to understand human nature as no one  else does. I believe I am 
certainly right, but if I do not believe in my rightness and my methods, I would 
be unfit to be at the helm of affairs. (YI, 1-1-1925, p8) 
 
As for my leadership, if I have it, it has not come for any seeking, it is a fruit of 
faithful service. A man can as little discard such leadership as he can the color 
of his skin. And since I have become an integral part of the nation, it has to 
keep me with all my faults and shortcomings, of some of which I am painfully 
conscious and of many others of which candid critics, thanks be to them, never 
fail to remind me. (YI, 13-2-1930, p52) 
 
It is a bad carpenter who quarrels with his tools. It is a bad general who blames 
his men for faulty workmanship. I know I am not a bad general. I have wisdom 
enough to know my limitations. God will give me strength enough to declare my 
bankruptcy if such is to be my lot. He will perhaps take me away when I am no 
longer wanted for the work which I have been permitted to do for nearly half a 
century. But I do entertain the hope that there is yet work for me to do, that 
the darkness that seems to have enveloped me will disappear, and that, 
whether with another battle more brilliant than the Dandi March or without, 
India will come to her own demonstrably through non-violent means. I am 
praying for the light that will dispel the darkness. Let those who have a living 
faith in non-violence join me in the prayer. (H, 23-7-1938, p193) 
 
 
My Work 
I am content with the doing of the task in front of me . I do not worry about the 
why and wherefore of things… Reason helps us to see that we should not dabble 
in things we cannot fathom. (H, 7-9-1935, p234) 
 
My work will be finished if I succeed in carrying conviction to the human family, 
that every man or woman, however weak in body, is the guardian of his or her The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33 self-respect and liberty. This defense avails, though the whole world may be 
against the individual resister. (Hst, 6-8-1944) 
 
It will be time enough to pronounce a verdict upon my work after my eyes are 
closed and this tabernacle is consigned to the flames. (YI, 4-4-1929, p107) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  
04. MY MISSION 
 
I A
M not a visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for the rishis and saints. It is meant for the 
common people as well. Non-violence is the law of our species as violence is 
the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher 
law-to the strength of the spirit. (YI, 11-8-1920, p3) 
 
There are more instances than one in my public life when, with the ability to 
retaliate, I have refrained from doing so and advised friends to do likewise. My 
life is dedicated to the spread of that doctrine. I read it in the teachings of all 
the greatest teachers of the world-Zoroaster, Mahavir, Daniel, Jesus, 
Muhammad, Nanak and a host of others. (YI, 9-2-1922, p85) 
 
Non-violence is the first article of my faith. It is also the last article of my 
creed. (YI, 23-3-1922, p166) 
 
I am but an humble explorer of the science of non-violence. Its hidden depths 
sometimes stagger me just as much as they stagger fellow-workers. (YI, 20-11-
1924, p382) 
 
 
Mission of Satyagraha 
My mission is to teach by example and precept under se ver restraint the use of 
the matchless weapon of Satyagraha; which is a direct corollary of non-violence 
and truth. I am anxious, indeed I am impatient, to demonstrate that there is no 
remedy for the many ills of life save that of non-violence…. 
 
When I have become incapable of evil and when nothing harsh or haughty 
occupies, be it momentarily, my thought-world, then, and not till then, my 
non-violence will move all the hearts of all the world. I have placed before me 
and the reader no impossible ideal or ordeal. It is man's prerogative and 
birthright. 
 
We have lost the paradise only to regain it. If it takes time, then it is but a 
speck in the complete time-circle. The Divine Teacher of the Gita knew when The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35 he said that millions of our days are equal to only a day of Brahma. (YI, 2-7-
1925, p232) 
 
Ahimsa is my God, and Truth is my God.  When I look for ahimsa, Truth says 
'Find it out through me'. When I look for Truth, ahimsa says 'Find it out through 
me'. (YI, 4-6-1925, p191) 
 
I believe myself to be saturated with ahimsa - non-violence. Ahimsa and Truth 
are as my two lungs. I cannot live without them. But I see every moment with 
more and more clearness the immense power of ahimsa and the littleness of 
man. Even the forest-dweller cannot be entirely free from violence, in spite of 
his limitless compassion. With every breath he commits a certain amount of 
violence. 
 
The body itself is a house of slaughter, and, therefore, moksha and Eternal Bliss 
consist in perfect deliverance from the body, and therefore, all pleasure, save 
the joy of moksha,is evanescent, imperfect. That being the case, we have to 
drink, in daily life, many a bitter draught of violence. (YI, 21-10-1926, p364) 
 
 
Application of Non-violence 
We have to make truth and non-violence not matters for  mere individual 
practice but for practice by groups and communities and nations. That, at any 
rate, is my dream. I shall live and die in trying to realize it. 
 
My faith helps me to discover new truths every day. Ahimsa is the attribute of 
the soul, and therefore, to be practiced by everybody in all the affairs of life. If 
it cannot be practiced in all departments, it has no practical value. (H, 2-3-
1940, p23) 
 
My faith in truth and non-violence is ever growing, and as I am ever trying to 
follow them in my life, I too am growing every moment. I see new implications 
about them. I see them in a newer light every day and read in them a newer 
meaning. (H, 1-5-1934, p94) 
 
I have not conceived my mission to be that of a knight-errant wandering 
everywhere to deliver people from difficult situations. My humble occupation 
has been to show people how they can solve their own difficulties. (H, 28-6-
1942, p201) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  
My imperfections and failures are as much a blessing from God as my successes 
and my talents, and I lay them both at His feet. Why should He have chosen 
me, an imperfect instrument, for such a mighty experiment? I think He 
deliberately did so. He had to serve the poor, dumb, ignorant millions. A 
perfect man might have been their despair. When they found that one with 
their failings was marching on towards ahimsa, they too had confidence in their 
own capacity. We should not have recognized a perfect man if he had come as 
our leader, and we might have driven him to a cave. May be he who follows me 
will be more perfect and you will be able to receive his message. (H, 21-7-
1940, p211) 
 
 
No Gandhian Sect 
I claim to be a humble servant of India and humanity, and would like to die in 
the discharge of such service. I have no desire to found a sect. I am really too 
ambitious to be satisfied with a sect for a following. For I represent no new 
truths. I endeavor to follow and represent Truth, as I know it. I do claim to 
throw a new light on many an old truth. (YI, 25-8-1921, p267) 
 
I have presented no new principles, but tried to restate old principles. (YI, 2-
12-1926, p419) 
 
There is no such thing as 'Gandhism', and I do not want to leave any sect after 
me. I do not claim to have originated any new principle or doctrine. I have 
simply tried in my own way to apply the eternal truths to our daily life and 
problems…. 
 
I have nothing new to teach the world. Truth and Non-violence are as old as the 
hills. All I have done is to try experiments in both on as vast a scale as I could 
do. In doing so I have sometimes erred and learnt by my errors. Life and its 
problems have thus become to me so many experiments in the practice of truth 
and non-violence. 
 
By instinct I have been truthful, but not non-violent. As a Jain muni once rightly 
said, I was not so much a votary of ahimsa as I was of truth, and I put the latter 
in the first place and the former in the second. For, as he put it, I was capable 
of sacrificing non-violence for the sake of truth. In fact, it was in the course of 
my pursuit of truth that I discovered non-violence. (H, 28-3-1936, p49) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37 I myself do not know what is the Gandhian hue. I am sailing on an uncharted 
sea.. I have to take frequent soundings. (H, 17-12-1938, p385) 
 
Gandhi-ites is no name worth having. Rather than that, why not ahimsa-ites? 
For Gandhi is a mixture of good and evil, weakness and strength, violence and 
non-violence, but ahimsa has no adulteration. (H, 13-5-1939, p121) 
 
I come now to what is called the 'Gandhian' ideology and the means of 
propagating it. The propagation of truth and non-violence can be done less by 
books than by actually living those principles. Life truly lived is more than 
books. (ibid, p122) 
 
There is always a saving clause about all my advice. No one need follow it 
unless it appeals to his head and heart. No one who has honestly the inner call 
need be deterred from obeying it because of my advice. In other words, it 
applies only to those who are not conscious of any inner call and who have faith 
in my riper experience and soundness of judgment. (H, 15-7-1939, p197) 
 
Let Gandhism be destroyed if it stands for error. Truth and ahimsa will never be 
destroyed, but if Gandhism is another name for sectarianism, it deserves to be 
destroyed. If I were to know, after my death, that what I stood for had 
degenerated into sectarianism, I should be deeply pained… 
 
Let no one say that he is a follower of Gandhi. It is enough that I should be my 
own follower. I know what an inadequate follower I am of myself, for I cannot 
live up to the convictions I stand for. You are no followers but fellow-students, 
fellow-pilgrims, fellow-seekers, fellow-workers. (H, 2-3-1940, p23) 
 
If there is one Gandhi-ite, it must be me. I hope, however, that I am humble 
enough not to arrogate any such claim. Gandhi-ite means a worshipper of 
Gandhi. There must be a God to worship. But I have never arrogated to myself 
any such claim. Hence there can be no devotee of mine. (H, 2-11-1947, p389) 
 
 
Law of Suffering   
I….
have ventured to place before India the ancient law  of self-sacrifice. For 
satyagraha and its off-shoots, non-co-operation and civil resistance are nothing 
but new names for the law of suffering. 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38 The rishis, who discovered the law of non-violence in the midst of violence, 
were greater geniuses than Newton. They were themselves greater warriors 
than Wellington. Having themselves known the use of arms, they realized their 
uselessness, and taught a weary world that its salvation lay not through 
violence but through non-violence. 
 
Non-violence in its dynamic condition means conscious suffering. It does not 
mean meek submission of the will of the evildoer, but it means putting of one's 
whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our being, it 
is possible for a single individual to defy the whole might of an unjust empire to 
save his honor, his religion, his soul, and lay the foundation for that empire's 
fall or its regeneration. 
 
 
India's Role 
And so I am not pleading for India to practice non-vio lence because it is weak. I 
want her to practice non-violence being conscious of her strength and power. 
No training in arms is required for realization of her strength. We seem to need 
it, because we seem to think that we are but a lump of flesh. 
 
I want India to recognize that she has a soul that cannot perish and that can 
rise triumphant above every physical weakness and defy the physical 
combination of a whole world. (YI, 11-8-1920, pp3-4) 
 
If I can say so without arrogance and with due humility, my message and 
methods are, indeed, in their essentials for the whole world and it gives me 
keen satisfaction to know that it has already received a wonderful response in 
the hearts of a large and daily growing number of men and women of the 
West.  
(YI, 17-9-1925 p320) 
 
 
Brotherhood of Man 
My mission is not merely brotherhood of Indian humanit y. My mission is not 
merely freedom of India, though today it undoubtedly engrosses practically the 
whole of my life and whole of my time. But, through realization of freedom of 
India, I hope to realize and carry on the mission of brotherhood of man. 
 
My patriotism is not an exclusive thing. It is all embracing and I should reject 
that patriotism which sought to mount upon the distress or exploitation of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39 other nationalities. The conception of my patriotism is nothing if it is not 
always, in every case without exception, consistent with the broadest good of 
humanity at large. 
 
Not only that, but my religion and my patriotism derived from my religion 
embrace all life. I want to realize brotherhood or identity not merely with the 
beings called human, but I want to realize identity with all life, even with such 
things as crawl upon earth….because we claim descent from the same God, and 
that being so, all life in whatever form it appears must be essentially one. (YI, 
4-4-1929, p107) 
 
I have that implicit faith in my mission that, if it succeeds - as it will succeed, 
it is bound to succeed--history will record it as a movement designed to knit all 
people in the world together, not as hostile to one another but as parts of one 
whole. (H, 26-1-1934, p8) 
 
 
Non-violent Way 
My aspiration is limited. God has not given me the pow er to guide the world on 
the path of non-violence. But I have imagined that He has chosen me as His 
instrument for presenting non-violence to India for dealing with her many ills. 
The progress already made is great. But much more remains to be done.  
(H, 23-7-1938, p193) 
 
Fraud and untruth today are stalking the world. I cannot sit as a helpless 
witness to such a situation…..If today I sit quiet and inactive, God will take me 
to task for not using up the treasure He had given me, in the midst of the 
conflagration that is enveloping the whole world. (BC, 9-8-1942) 
 
I cannot impose my personal faith on others, never on a national organization. I 
can but try to convince the nation of its beauty and usefulness… 
 
It would be a calamity if by obstinacy I stand in the way of the country's 
progress by other means, so long as they are not positively mischievous and 
harmful. I should, for instance, rise, even if I was alone, against methods of 
actual violence. But I have recognized that the nation has the right, if it so 
wills, to vindicate her freedom even by actual violence. Only, then India ceases 
to be the land of my love even though she be the land of my birth, even as I 
should take no pride in my mother if she went astray. (YI, 20-11-1924, p382) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40 I have not the capacity for preaching universal non-violence. I preach, 
therefore, non-violence restricted strictly to the purpose of winning our 
freedom and, therefore, perhaps for preaching the regulation of international 
relations by non-violent means. Before I can preach universal non-violence, I 
must be wholly free from passions, I must be wholly incapable of sin. (H, 25-1-
1942, p15) 
 
My preaching and teaching are not emotional or unpractical, for I teach what is 
ancient and strive to practice what I preach. And I claim that what I practice is 
capable of being practiced by all, because I am a very ordinary mortal open to 
the same temptations and liable to the same weaknesses as the least among us. 
(YI, 15-12-1927, p424) 
 
While I prate about Universal Non-violence, my experiment is confined to India. 
If it succeeds, the world will accept it without effort. There is, however, a bit 
BUT. The pause does not worry me. My faith is brightest in the midst of 
impenetrable darkness. (H, 11-2-1939, p8) 
 
Somehow or other, I dread a visit to Europe and America. Not that I distrust the 
peoples of these great continents any more than I distrust my own, but I 
distrust myself. I have no desire to go to the West in search of health or for 
sightseeing. I have no desire to deliver public speeches. I detest being lionized. 
I wonder if I shall ever again have the health to stand the awful strain of public 
speaking and public demonstrations. 
 
If God ever sent me to the West, I should go there to penetrate the hearts of 
the masses, to have quiet talks with the youth of the West and have the 
privilege of meeting kindred spirits--lovers of peace at any price save that of 
truth. 
 
But I feel that I have as yet no message to deliver personally to the West. I 
believe my message to be universal, but as yet I feel that I can best deliver it 
through my work in my own country. If I can show visible success in India, the 
delivery of the message becomes complete. 
 
If I came to the conclusion that India had no use for my message, I should not 
care to go elsewhere in search of listeners even though I still retained faith in 
it. If I ventured out of India, I should do so because I have faith, though I 
cannot demonstrate it to the satisfaction of all, that the message is being 
received by India, be it ever so slowly. (M, II, p417) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  
When I have become incapable of evil and when nothing harsh or haughty 
occupies, be it momentarily, my thought-world, then, and not till then, my 
non-violence, will move all the hearts of all the world. (YI, 2-7-1925, p232) 
 
Millions like me may fail to prove the truth in their own lives, that would be 
their failure, never of the eternal law. (M, VIII, p23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  
05. THE INNER VOICE 
 
There come to us moments in life when about some thing s we need no proof 
from without. A little voice within us tells us, 'You are on the right track, move 
neither to your left nor right, but keep to the straight and narrow way. (L, 25-
12-1916) 
 
There are moments in your life when you must act, even though you cannot 
carry your best friends with you. The 'still small voice' within you must always 
be the final arbiter when there is a conflict of duty. (YI, 4-8-1920, p3) 
 
Having made a ceaseless effort to attain self-purification, I have developed 
some little capacity to hear correctly and clearly the 'still small voice within'. 
(EF, p34) 
 
I shall lose my usefulness the moment I stifle the still small voice within. (YI, 3-
12-1925, p422) 
 
Penances with me are no mechanical acts. They are done in obedience to the 
inner voice. (YI, 2-4-1931, p60) 
 
 
No False Claim 
A person falsely claiming to act under divine inspirat ion or the promptings of 
the inner voice without having any such, will fare worse than the one falsely 
claiming to act under the authority of an earthly sovereign. Whereas the latter 
on being exposed will escape with injury to his body, the former may perish 
body and soul together. 
 
Charitable critics impute no fraud to me, but suggest that I am highly likely to 
be acting under some hallucination. The result for me, even then, will not be 
far different from what it would be if I was laying a false claim. A humble 
seeker that I claim to be has need to be most cautious and, to preserve the 
balance of mind, he has to reduce himself to zero before God will guide him. 
Let me not labour this point. 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43 There is no question of hallucination. I have stated a simple scientific truth, 
thus to be tested by all who have the will and the patience to acquire the 
necessary qualifications, which are again incredibly simple to understand and 
easy enough to acquire where there is determination. (BC, 18-11-1932) 
 
You have to believe no one but yourselves. You must try to listen to the inner 
voice, but if you will not have the expression "inner voice", you may use the 
expression "dictates of reason", which you should obey, and if you will not 
parade God, I have no doubt you will parade something else which in the end 
will prove to be God, for, fortunately, there is no one and nothing else but God 
in this universe. 
 
I would also submit that it is not everyone claiming to act on the urge of the 
inner voice [who] has that urge. Like every other faculty, this faculty for 
listening to the still small noise within requires previous effort and training, 
perhaps much greater than what is required for the acquisition of any other 
faculty, and even if out of thousands of claimants only a few succeed in 
establishing their claim, it is well worth running the risk of having and 
tolerating doubtful claimants.(M, III, p229) 
 
Nobody has to my knowledge questioned the possibility of the inner voice 
speaking to some, and it is a gain to the world even if one person's claim to 
speak under the authority of the inner voice can be really sustained. Many may 
make the claim, but not all will be able to substantiate it. But it cannot and 
ought not to be suppressed for the sake of preventing false claimants. 
 
There is no danger whatsoever if many people could truthfully represent the 
inner voice. But, unfortunately, there is no remedy against hypocrisy. Virtue 
must not be suppressed because many will feign it. Men have always been 
found throughout the world claiming to speak for the inner voice. But no harm 
has yet overtaken the world through their short-lived activities. 
 
Before one is able to listen to that voice, one has to go through a long and 
fairly serve course of training, and when it is the inner voice that speaks, it is 
unmistakable. The world cannot be successfully fooled for all time. There is, 
therefore, no danger of anarchy setting in because a humble man like me will 
not be suppressed and will dare to claim the authority of the inner voice, when 
he believes that he has heard it.(H, 18-3-1933, p8) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44 My claim to hear the voice of God is no new claim. Unfortunately, there is no 
way that I know of proving the claim except through results. God will not be 
God if He allowed Himself to be an object of proof by His creatures. But He 
does give His willing slave power to pass through the fiercest of ordeals. 
 
I have been a willing slave to this most exacting Master for more than half a 
century. His voice has been increasingly audible, as years have rolled by. He 
has never forsaken me even in my darkest hour. He has saved me often against 
myself and left me not a vestige of independence. The greater the surrender to 
Him, the greater has been my joy. (H, 6-5-1933, p4) 
 
 
Voice of God 
For me the Voice of God, of Conscience, of Truth, or t he Inner Voice or 'the 
Still Small Voice' mean one and the same thing. I saw no form. I have never 
tried, for I have always believed God to be without form. But what I did hear 
was like a Voice from afar and yet quite near. It was as unmistakable as some 
human voice definitely speaking to me, and irresistible. I was not dreaming at 
the time I heard the Voice. The hearing of the Voice was preceded by a terrific 
struggle within me. Suddenly the Voice came upon me. I listened, made certain 
it was the Voice, and the struggle ceased. I was calm. The determination was 
made accordingly, the date and the hour of the fast were fixed… 
 
Could I give any further evidence that it was truly the Voice that I heard and 
that it was not an echo of my own heated imagination? I have no further 
evidence to convince the skeptic. He is free to say that it was all self-delusion 
or hallucination. It may well have been so. I can offer no proof to the contrary. 
But I can say this, that not the unanimous verdict of the whole world against 
me could shake me from the belief that what I heard was the true Voice of 
God. 
 
But some think that God himself is a creation of our own imagination. If that 
view holds good, then nothing is real, everything is of our own imagination. 
Even so, whilst my imagination dominates, me I can only act under its spell. 
Realest things are only relatively so. For me the Voice was more real than my 
own existence. It has never failed me, or for that matter, anyone else. And 
everyone who wills can hear the Voice. It is within everyone. But like 
everything else, it requires previous and definite preparation. (H, 8-7-1933, p4) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45 Rightly or wrongly, I know that I have no other resource as a satyagrahi than 
the assistance of God in every conceivable difficulty, and I would like it to be 
believed that what may appear to be inexplicable actions of mine are really 
due to inner promptings. 
 
It may be a product of my heated imagination. If it is so, I prize that 
imagination as it has served me for a chequered life extending over a period of 
now nearly over fifty-five years, because I learned to rely consciously upon God 
before I was fifteen years old. (H, 11-3-1939, p46) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  
06. MY FASTS 
 
MY 
RELIGION teaches me that, whenever there is distress which one cannot 
remove, one must fast and pray. (YI, 25-9-1924, p. 319) 
 
They [fasts] are a part of my being. I can as well do without my eyes, for 
instance, as I can without fasts. What the eyes are for the outer world, fasts 
are for the inner. (YI, 3-12-1925, p. 422) 
 
 
Higher Dictate 
I am not responsible for these fasts. I do not underta ke them for my 
amusement. I would not torture the flesh for the love of fame. Though I bear 
joyfully the pangs of hunger and many other discomforts of fasting, let no one 
imagine that I do not suffer. These fasts are bearable only because they are 
imposed upon me by a higher Power and the capacity to bear the pain also 
comes from that Power. (H, 24-8-1934, p. 223) 
 
I cannot fast at the dictation of anyone. Such fasts [unto death] cannot be 
lightly undertaken. They can conceivably be wholly undesirable. They cannot 
be undertaken out of anger. Anger is a short madness. I must, therefore, 
undertake the fast only when the still small voice within me calls for it.  
(H, 15-6-1947, p. 194) 
 
 
Fasting and Prayer 
A genuine fast cleanses the body, mind and soul. It cr ucifies the flesh and to 
that extent sets the soul free. A sincere prayer can work wonders. It is an 
intense longing of the soul for its even greater purity. Purity thus gained, when 
it is utilized for a noble purpose, becomes a prayer. (YI, 24-3-1920, p. 1) 
 
I believe that there is no prayer without fasting, and there is no real fast 
without prayer. (H, 16-2-1933, p. 2) 
 
A complete fast is a complete and literal denial of self. It is the truest prayer. 
'Take my life and let it be, always, only, all for Thee' is not, should not be, a 
mere lip or figurative expression. It has to be reckless and joyous giving without 
the least reservation. Abstention from food and even water is but the mere The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47 beginning, the least part of the surrender. (H, 15-4-1933, p. 4) 
 
 
Subduing the Flesh 
Fasting, unless it is the result of God's grace, is us eless starvation, if not much 
worse.  
(H, 11-4-1939, p. 46) 
 
I know that the mental attitude is everything. Just as prayer may be merely a 
mechanical intonation as of a bird, so may a fast be a mere mechanical torture 
of the flesh..... Neither will touch the soul within. (YI, 16-2-1922, p. 103) 
 
It is my own firm belief that the strength of the soul grows in proportion as you 
subdue the flesh. (YI, 23-10-1924, p. 354) 
 
Mortification  of the flesh is a necessity when the flesh rebels against one; it is 
a sin when the flesh has come under subjection and can be used as an 
instrument of service. In other words, there is no inherent merit in 
mortification of the flesh. (H, 2-11-1936, p. 299) 
 
There is something in denying satisfaction of the flesh. It is not possible to see 
God face to face unless you crucify the flesh. It is one thing to do what belongs 
to it as a temple of God, and it is another to deny it what belongs to it as the 
body of flesh. (H, 10-12-1938, p. 373) 
 
Out of the fullness of my own experience and that of fellow cranks, I say 
without hesitation, fast (1) if you are constipated, (2) if you are anemic, (3) if 
you are feverish, (4) if you have indigestion, (5) if you have a headache, (6) if 
you are rheumatic, (7) if you are gouty, (8) if you are fretting and fuming, (9) if 
you are depressed, (10) if you are overjoyed; and you will avoid medical 
prescriptions and patent medicines. (YI, 17-12-1925, p. 442) 
 
 
Coercive Fasts 
Fasting can only be resorted to against a lover, not t o extort rights but to 
reform him, as when a son fasts for a father who drinks. My fast at Bombay and 
then at Bardoli was of that character. I fasted to reform, say, General Dyer, 
who not only does not love me, but who regards himself as my enemy.  
(YI, 1-5-1924, p. 145) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  
It is not to be denied that fasting can be really coercive. Such are fasts to 
attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wring money from a person or for 
fulfilling some such personal end would amount to the exercise of coercion or 
undue influence. I would unhesitatingly advocate resistance of such undue 
influence. 
 
I have myself successfully resisted it in the fasts that have been undertaken or 
threatened against me. And, if it is argued that the dividing line between a 
selfish and an unselfish end is often very thin, I would urge that a person who 
regards the end of a fast to be selfish or otherwise base should resolutely 
refuse to yield to it, even though the refusal may result in the death of the 
fasting person. If people will cultivate the habit of disregarding fasts which, in 
their opinion, are taken for unworthy ends, such fasts will be robbed of the 
taint of coercion and undue influence. 
 
Like all human institutions, fasting can be both legitimately and illegitimately 
used. But as a great weapon in the armoury of Satyagraha, it cannot be given 
up because of its possible abuse. (H, 9-9-1933, p. 5) 
 
The weapon of fasting, I know, cannot be lightly wielded. It can easily savour of 
violence unless it is used by one skilled in the art. I claim to be such an artist in 
this subject. (H, 11-3-1939, p. 46) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  
07. MY INCONSISTENCIES 
 
I DECLINE to be slave to precedents or practice I cann ot understand or defend 
on a moral basis. (YI, 21-7-1921, p228) 
 
I must admit my many inconsistencies. But since I am called 'Mahatma', I might 
well endorse Emerson's saying that 'Foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little 
minds.' There is, I fancy, a method in my inconsistencies. In my opinion, there 
is a consistency running through my seeming inconsistencies, as in Nature there 
is unity running through seeming diversity. (YI, 13-2-1930, p52) 
 
Friends who know me have certified that I am as much a moderate as I am an 
extremist and as much a conservative as I am a radical. Hence, perhaps, my 
good fortune to have friends among these extreme types of men. The mixture is 
due, I believe, to my view of ahimsa. 
 
Inconsistency is only apparent. It appears so to many friends because of my 
responsiveness to varying circumstances. Seeming consistency may really be 
sheer obstinacy. (YI, 16-4-1931, p77) 
 
 
Fetish of Consistency 
I am not at all concerned with appearing to be consis t ent. In my pursuit after 
Truth I have discarded many ideas and learnt many new things. Old as I am in 
age, I have no feeling that I have ceased to grow inwardly or that my growth 
will stop with the dissolution of the flesh. What I am concerned with is my 
readiness to obey the call of Truth, my God, from moment to moment. (H, 29-
4-1933, p2) 
 
I have never made a fetish of consistency. I am a votary of Truth and I must say 
what I feel and think at a given moment on the question, without regard to 
what I may have said before on it. … As my vision gets clearer, my views must 
grow clearer with daily practice. Where I have deliberately altered an opinion, 
the change should be obvious, only, a careful eye would notice a gradual and 
imperceptible evolution. (H, 28-9-1934, p. 260) 
 
My aim is not to be consistent with my previous statements on a given question, 
but to be consistent with truth as it may present itself to me at a given The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50 moment. The result has been that I have grown from truth to truth. (H, 30-9-
1939, p288) 
 
 
No Expedience 
I have sacrificed no principle to gain a political advan tage. (YI, 12-3-1925, p91) 
 
I am not aware of having done a single thing in my life as a matter of 
expedience. I have ever held that the highest morality is also the highest 
expedience. (H, 8-12-1933, p8) 
 
 
Compromise  
I have often been charged with having an unyielding na ture. I have been told 
that I would not bow to the decisions of the majority. I have been accused of 
being autocratic. … I have never been able to subscribe to the charge of 
obstinacy or autocracy. On the contrary, I pride myself on my yielding nature in 
non-vital matters. I detest autocracy. Valuing my freedom and independence, I 
equally cherish them for others. I have no desire to carry a single soul with me 
if I cannot appeal to his or her reason. 
 
My unconventionality I carry to the point of rejecting the divinity of the oldest 
Shastras if they cannot convince my reason. But I have found by experience 
that, if I wish to live in society and retain my independence, I must limit the 
points of utter independence to matters of first-rate importance. In all others 
which do not involve a departure from one's personal religion or moral code, 
one must yield to the majority. (YI, 14-7-1920, p4) 
 
All my life through, the very insistence on truth has taught me to appreciate 
the beauty of compromise. I saw in later life that this spirit was an essential 
part of satyagraha. It has often meant endangering my life and incurring the 
displeasure of friends. But truth is hard as adamant and tender as a blossom. 
(A, p107) 
 
Human life is a series of compromises, and it is not always easy to achieve in 
practice what one has found to be true in theory. (H, 5-9-1936, p237) 
 
There are eternal principles, which admit of no compromise, and one must be 
prepared to lay down one's life in the practice of them. (ibid, p238) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  
08. MY WRITINGS 
 
MY HESITANCY in speech, which was once an annoyance, i s now a pleasure. Its 
greatest benefit has been that it has taught me the economy of words. I have 
naturally formed the habit of restraining my thoughts. And I can now give 
myself the certificate that a thoughtless word hardly ever escapes my tongue or 
pen. I do not recollect ever having had to regret anything in my speech or 
writing. I have thus been spared many a mishap and waste of time. (A, p45) 
 
In the very first month of Indian Opinion, I realized that the sole aim of 
journalism should be service. The newspaper press is a great power, but just as 
an unchained torrent of water submerges whole country sides and devastates 
crops, even so an uncontrolled pen serves but to destroy. If the control is from 
without, it proves more poisonous than want of control. It can be profitable 
only when exercised from within. If this line of reasoning is correct, how many 
of the journals in the world would stand the test? But who would stop those 
that are useless? The useful and the useless must, like good and evil generally, 
go on together, and man must make his choice. (ibid, p211) 
 
There can be no room for untruth in my writings, because it is my unshakable 
belief that there is no religion other than truth and because I am capable of 
rejecting aught obtained at the cost of truth. 
 
My writings cannot but be free from hatred towards any individual because it is 
my firm belief that it is love that sustains the earth. (SL, No. 5, 17-9-1919) 
 
 
My Journalism 
I have taken up journalism not for its sake but merely  as an aid to what I have 
conceived to be my mission in life. My mission is to teach by example and 
precept under severe restraint the use of the matchless weapon of satyagraha 
which is a direct corollary of non-violence and truth. … To be true to my faith, 
therefore, I may not write in anger or malice. I may not write idly. I may not 
write merely to excite passion. 
 
The reader can have no idea of the restraint I have to exercise from week to 
week in the choice of topics and my vocabulary. It is a training for me. It 
enables me to peep into myself and to make discoveries of my weaknesses. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52 Often my vanity dictates a smart expression or my anger a harsh adjective. It is 
a terrible ordeal but a fine exercise to remove these weeds. (YI, 2-7-1925, 
p232) 
 
I write just as the Spirit moves me at the time of writing. I do not claim to 
know definitely that all conscious thought and action on my part is directed by 
the Spirit. But on an examination of the greatest steps that I have taken in my 
life, as also of those that may be regarded as the least, I think it will not be 
improper to say that all of them were directed by the Spirit. (A, p206) 
 
As for giving ideas, I have some originality. But writing is a by-product; I write 
to propagate my ideas. Journalism is not my profession. (H, 18-8-1946, p270) 
 
What I have done will endure, not what I have said or written. (H, 1-5-1947, 
p93) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  
09. THE GOSPEL OF TRUTH 
 
WHAT…is Truth? A difficult question; but I have solved it for myself by saying 
that it is what the voice within tells you. How then, you ask, [do] different 
people think of different and contrary truths? Well, seeing that the human mind 
works through innumerable media and that the evolution of the human mind is 
not the same for all, it follows that what may be truth for one may be untruth 
for another, and hence those who have made these experiments have come to 
the conclusion that there are certain conditions to be observed in making those 
experiments… 
 
It is because we have at the present moment everybody claiming the right of 
conscience without going through any discipline whatsoever, and there is so 
much untruth being delivered to a bewildered world. All that I can in true 
humility present to you is that Truth is not to be found by anybody who has not 
got an abundant sense of humility. If you would swim on the bosom of the 
ocean of Truth, you must reduce yourself to a zero. YI, 31-12-1931, p428) 
 
Truth and Love-ahimsa-is the only thing that counts. Where this is present, 
everything rights itself in the end. This is a law to which there is no exception. 
(YI, 18-8-1927, p265) 
 
 
Sovereign Principle 
For me truth is the sovereign principle, which includes  numerous other 
principles. This truth is not only truthfulness in word, but truthfulness in 
thought also, and not only the relative truth of our conception, but the 
Absolute Truth, the Eternal Principle, that is God. There are innumerable 
definitions of God, because His manifestations are innumerable. They 
overwhelm me with wonder and awe and for a moment stun me. 
 
But I worship God as Truth only. I have not yet found Him, but I am seeking 
after Him. I am prepared to sacrifice the things dearest to me in pursuit of this 
quest. Even if the sacrifice demanded be my very life, I hope I may be prepared 
to give it. But as long as I have not realized this Absolute Truth, so long must I 
hold by the relative truth as I have conceived it. That relative truth must, 
meanwhile, be my beacon, my shield and buckler. Though this path is strait and 
narrow and sharp as the razor's edge, for me it has been the quickest and 
easiest. Even my Himalayan blunders have seemed trifling to me because I have The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54 kept strictly to this path. For the path has saved me from coming to grief, and I 
have gone forward according to my light. Often in my progress I have had faint 
glimpses of the Absolute Truth, God, and daily the conviction is growing upon 
me that He alone is real and all else is unreal. 
 
 
Quest for Truth 
.....The further conviction has been growing upon me t hat whatever is possible 
for me is possible even for a child, and I have found sound reasons for saying 
so. The instruments for the quest of Truth are as simple as they are difficult. 
They may appear quite impossible to an arrogant person, and quite possible to 
an innocent child. 
 
The seeker after Truth should be humbler than the dust. The world crushes the 
dust under its feet, but the seeker after Truth should so humble himself that 
even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not till then, will he have a 
glimpse of Truth. (A, p. xv) 
 
Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more and more fruit the more you nurture 
it. The deeper the search in the mine of truth the richer the discovery of the 
gems buried there, in the shape of openings for an even greater variety of 
service. (ibid, p159) 
 
I think it is wrong to expect certainties in this world, where all else but God 
that is Truth is an uncertainty. All that appears and happens about and around 
is uncertain, transient. But there is a Supreme Being hidden therein as a 
Certainty, and one would be blessed if one could catch a glimpse of that 
certainty and hitch one's wagon to it. The quest for that Truth is the summum 
bonum of life. (ibid, p184) 
 
In the march towards Truth, anger, selfishness, hatred, etc., naturally give 
way, for otherwise Truth would be impossible to attain. A man who is swayed 
by passions may have good enough intentions, may be truthful in word, but he 
will never find the Truth. A successful search for Truth means complete 
deliverance from the dual throng such as of love and hate, happiness and 
misery. (ibid, pp254-5) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55 Vision of Truth 
To see the universal and all-pervading spirit of Truth  face to face one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a man who aspires after 
that cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. That is why my devotion to 
Truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest 
hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has nothing 
to do with politics do not know what religion means. (ibid, pp370-1) 
 
My uniform experience has convinced me that there is no other God than 
Truth… The little fleeting glimpses… that I have been able to have of Truth can 
hardly convey an idea of the indescribable luster of Truth, a million times more 
intense than that of the sun we daily see with our eyes. (YI, 7-2-1929, p42) 
 
In fact, what I have caught is only the faintest gleam of that mighty effulgence. 
But this much I can say with assurance, as a result of all my experiments, that a 
perfect vision of Truth can only follow a complete realization of ahimsa. (ibid) 
 
Truth resides in every human heart, and one has to search for it there, and to 
be guided by truth as one sees it. But no one has a right to coerce others to act 
according to his own view of truth. (H, 24-11-1933, p6) 
 
 
Absolute Truth 
It is not given to man to know the whole Truth. His du t y lies in living up to the 
truth as he sees it, and in doing so, to resort to the purest means, i.e., to non-
violence. (ibid) 
 
God alone knows absolute truth. Therefore, I have often said, Truth is God. It 
follows that man, a finite being, cannot know absolute truth. (H, 7-4-1946, 
p70) 
 
Nobody in this world possesses absolute truth. This is God's attribute alone. 
Relative truth is all we know. Therefore, we can only follow the truth as we see 
it. Such pursuit of truth cannot lead anyone astray. (H, 2-6-1946, p167) 
 
 
Truth and I 
I have in my life never been guilty of saying things I did not mean-my nature is 
to go straight to the heart and, if often I fail in doing so for the time being, I The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56 know that Truth will ultimately make itself heard and felt, as it has often done 
in my experience. (YI, 20-8-1925, pp285-6) 
 
Let hundreds like me perish, but let Truth prevail. Let us not reduce the 
standards of Truth even by a hair's breadth for judging erring mortals like 
myself. (A, p xv) 
 
In judging myself I shall try to be as harsh as truth, as I want others also to be. 
Measuring myself by that standard I must exclaim with Surdas. 
Where is there a wretch? 
So wicked and loathsome as I? 
I have forsaken by Maker, 
So faithless have I been. (ibid, p xvi) 
 
 
My Errors 
I may be a despicable person, but when Truth speaks th rough me, I am 
invincible. (EF, p71) 
 
I am devoted to none but Truth and I owe no discipline to anybody but Truth. 
(H, 25-5-1935, p115) 
 
I have no God to serve but Truth. (H, 15-4-1939, p87) 
 
I have no strength except what comes from insistence on truth. Non-violence, 
too, springs from the same insistence. (H, 7-4-1946, p70) 
 
I am a humble but very earnest seeker after Truth. And in my search, I take all 
fellow-seekers in uttermost confidence so that I may know my mistakes and 
correct them. I confess that I have often erred in my estimates and judgments… 
And inasmuch as in every case I retraced my steps, no permanent harm was 
done. On the contrary, the fundamental truth of non-violence has been made 
infinitely more manifest than it ever has been, and the country has in no way 
been permanently injured. (YI, 21-4-1927, p126) 
 
I am a learner myself, I have no axe to grind, and wherever I see a truth, I take 
it up and try to act up to it. (YI, 11-8-1927, p250) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57 I believe that, if in spite of the best of intentions, one is led into committing 
mistakes, they do not really result in harm to the world or, for the matter of 
that, any individual. God always saves the world from the consequences of 
unintended errors or men who live in fear of Him. 
 
Those who are likely to be misled by my example would have gone that way all 
the same even if they had not known of my action. For, in the final analysis, a 
man is guided in his conduct by his own inner promptings, though the example 
of others might sometimes seem to guide him. But be it as it may, I know that 
the world has never had to suffer on account of my errors because they were 
all due to my ignorance. It is my firm belief that not one of my known errors 
was willful. (YI, 3-1-1929, p6) 
 
Indeed, what may appear to be an obvious error to one may appear to another 
as pure wisdom. He cannot help himself even if he is under a hallucination. 
Truly as Tulsidas said: 'Even though there never is silver in mother o' pearl nor 
water in the sunbeams, while the illusion of silver in the shinning shell or that 
of water in the beam lasts, no power on earth can shake the deluded man free 
from the spell.' Even so must it be with men like me who, it may be, are 
labouring under a great hallucination. Surely God will pardon them and the 
world should bear with them. Truth will assert itself in the end. (ibid) 
 
Truth never damages a cause that is just. (H, 10-11-1946, p389) 
 
Life is an aspiration. Its mission is to strive after perfection, which is self-
realization. The ideal must not be lowered because of our weaknesses or 
imperfections. I am painfully conscious of both in me. The silent cry daily goes 
out to Truth to help me to remove these weakness and imperfections of mine.  
(H, 22-6-1935, p145) 
 
 
No Abandonment of Truth 
Believe me when I tell you, after 60 years of personal  experience, that the only 
real misfortune is to abandon the path of truth. If you but realize this, your one 
prayer to God will always be to enable you to put up, without flinching, with 
any number of trials and hardships that may fall to your lot in the pursuit of 
truth. (H, 28-7-1946, p243) 
 
Truth alone will endure, all the rest will be swept away before the tide of time. 
I must, therefore, continue to bear testimony to Truth even if I am forsaken by The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58 all. Mine may today be a voice in the wilderness, but it will be heard when all 
other voices are silenced, if it is the voice of Truth. (H, 15-8-1946, p284) 
 
A man of faith will remain steadfast to truth, even-though the whole world 
might appear to be enveloped in falsehood. (H, 22-9-1946, p322) 
 
When it is relevant, truth has to be uttered, however unpleasant it may be. 
Irrelevance is always untruth and should never be uttered. (H, 21-12-1947, 
p473) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  
10. TRUTH IS GOD 
 
God
 Is 
THERE IS an indefinable mysterious Power that pervades  everything. I feel it, 
though I do not see it. It is this unseen Power which makes itself felt and yet 
defies all proof, because it is so unlike all that I perceive through my senses. It 
transcends the senses. But it is possible to reason out the existence of God to a 
limited extent. 
 
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me is ever changing, ever-
dying, there is underlying all that change a Living Power that is changeless, 
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves, and recreates. That informing 
Power or Spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely through the senses 
can or will persist, He alone is. 
 
And is this Power benevolent or malevolent? I see it as purely benevolent. For I 
can see, that in the midst of death life persists, in the midst of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme Good. 
 
I confess… that I have no argument to convince… through reason. Faith 
transcends reason. All I can advise… is not to attempt the impossible. I cannot 
account for the existence of evil by any rational method. To want to do so is to 
be co-equal with God. I am, therefore, humble enough to recognize evil as 
such; and I call God long-suffering and patient precisely because He permits 
evil in the world. I know that He has no evil in Him and yet if there is evil, He is 
the author of it and yet untouched by it. 
 
I know, too, that I shall never know God if I do not wrestle with and against evil 
even at the cost of life itself. I am fortified in the belief by my own humble and 
limited experience. The purer I try to become the nearer to God I feel myself 
to be. How much more should I be near to Him when my faith is not a mere 
apology, as it is today, but has become as immovable as the Himalayas and as 
white and bright as the snows on their peaks? (YI, 11-10-1928, pp340-1) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60 My Faith 
I can easily put up with the denial of the world, but any denial by me of my 
God is unthinkable. (YI, 23-2-1922, p112) 
 
I know that I can do nothing. God can do everything. O God, make me Thy fit 
instrument and use me as thou wilt! (YI, 9-10-1924, p329) 
 
I have not seen Him, neither have I known Him. I have made the world's faith in 
God my own and as my faith is ineffaceable, I regard that faith as amounting to 
experience. However, as it may be said that to describe faith as experience is 
to tamper with truth, it may perhaps be more correct to say that I have no 
word for characterizing my belief in God. (A, p206) 
 
I am surer of His existence than of the fact that you and I are sitting in this 
room. Then I can also testify that I may live without air and water but not 
without Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but that cannot kill me. You may 
chop off my nose, but that will not kill me. But blast my belief in God, and I am 
dead. 
 
You may call this a superstition, but I confess it is a superstition that I hug, 
even as I used to hug the name of Rama in my childhood when there was any 
cause of danger or alarm. That was what an old nurse had taught me. (H, 14-5-
1938, p109) 
 
I believe that we can all become messengers of God, if we cease to fear man 
and seek only God's Truth. I do believe I am seeking only God's Truth and have 
lost all fear of man. 
 
…I have no special revelation of God's will. My firm belief is that He reveals 
Himself daily to every human being, but we shut our ears to the 'still small 
voice'. We shut our eyes to the Pillar of Fire in front of us. I realize His 
omnipresence. (YI, 25-5-1921, pp161-2) 
 
Some of my correspondents seem to think that I can work wonders. Let me say 
as a devotee of truth that I have no such gift. All the power I may have comes 
from God. But He does not work directly. He works through His numberless 
agencies. (H, 8-10-1938, p285) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61 Nature of God 
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and moralit y; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is above and beyond all these. 
God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the atheist. For in His boundless 
love God permits the atheist to live. He is the searcher of hearts. He transcends 
speech and reason. He knows us and our hearts better than we do ourselves. He 
does not take us at our word, for He knows that we often do not mean it, some 
knowingly and others unknowingly. 
 
He is a personal God to those who need His personal presence. He is embodied 
to those who need His touch. He is the purest essence. He simply is to those 
who have faith. He is all things to all men. He is in us and yet above and 
beyond us… 
 
He cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities or inhuman brutalities are 
committed in His name. He is long-suffering. He is patient but He is also 
terrible. He is the most exacting personage in the world and the world to come. 
He metes out the same measure to us that we mete out to our neighbors-men 
and brutes. 
 
With Him ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is ever forgiving, for He always 
gives us the chance to repent. 
 
He is the greatest democrat the world knows, for He leaves us 'unfettered' to 
make our own choice between evil and good. He is the greatest tyrant ever 
known, for He often dashes the cup from our lips and under cove of free will 
leaves us a margin so wholly inadequate as to provide only mirth for Himself at 
our expense. 
 
Therefore it is that Hinduism calls it all His sport-lila, or calls it all an illusion-
maya. We are not, He alone Is. And if we will be, we must eternally sing His 
praise and do His will. Let us dance to the tune of His bansi-lute, and all would 
be well. (YI, 5-3-1925, p81) 
 
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on this earth, and He tries you 
through and through. And when you find that your faith is failing or your body is 
failing you and you are sinking, He comes to your assistance somehow or other 
and proves to you that you must not lose your faith and that He is always at 
your beck and call, but on His terms, not on your terms. So I have found. I The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62 cannot really recall a single instance when, at the eleventh hour, He has 
forsaken me. (SW, p1069) 
 
In my early youth I was taught to repeat what in Hindu scriptures are known as 
one thousand names of God. But these one thousand names of God were by no 
means exhaustive. We believe-and I think it is the truth-that God has as many 
names as there are creatures and, therefore, we also say that God is nameless 
and, since God has many forms, we also consider Him formless, and since He 
speaks to us through many tongues, we consider Him to be speechless and so 
on. And so when I came to study Islam, I found that Islam too had many names 
for God. 
 
I would say with those who say God is Love, God is Love. But deep down in me I 
used to say that though God may be Love, God is Truth, above all. If it is 
possible for the human tongue to give the fullest description of God, I have 
come to the conclusion that, for myself, God is Truth. 
 
But two years ago I went a step further and said that Truth is God. You will see 
the fine distinction between the two statements, viz., that God is Truth and 
Truth is God. And I came to the conclusion after a continuous and relentless 
search after Truth which began nearly fifty years ago. 
 
I then found that the nearest approach to Truth was through love. But I also 
found that love has many meanings in the English language at least and that 
human love in the sense of passion could become a degrading thing also. I 
found too that love in the sense of ahimsa had only a limited number of 
votaries in the world. But I never found a double meaning in connection with 
truth and not even atheists had demurred to the necessity or power of truth. 
 
But, in their passion for discovering truth, the atheists have not hesitated to 
deny the very existence of God-from their own point of view, rightly. And it 
was because of this reasoning that I saw that, rather than say that God is Truth, 
I should say that Truth is God. (YI, 31-12-1931, p427-8) 
 
God is Truth, but God is many other things also. That is why I say Truth is 
God…. Only remember that Truth is not one of the many qualities that we 
name. It is the living embodiment of God, it is the only Life, and I identify 
Truth with the fullest life, and that is how it becomes a concrete thing, for God 
is His whole creation, the whole Existence, and service of all that exists-Truth-
is service of God. (H, 25-5-1935, p115) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  
Perfection is the attribute of the Almighty, and yet what a great democrat He 
is! What an amount of wrong and humbug He suffers on our part! He even 
suffers us insignificant creatures of His to question His very existence, though 
He is in every atom about us, around us and within us. But He has reserved to 
Himself the right of becoming manifest to whomsoever He chooses. He is a 
Being without hands and feet and other organs, yet he can see Him to whom He 
chooses to reveal Himself. (H, 14-11-1936, p314) 
 
 
God Through Service 
If I did not feel the presence of God within me, I see  so much of misery and 
disappointment every day that I would be a raving maniac and my destination 
would be the Hooghli. (YI, 6-8-1925, p275) 
 
If I am to identify myself with the grief of the least in India, aye, if I have the 
power, the least in the world, let me identify myself with the sins of the little 
ones who are under my care. And so doing in all humility, I hope someday to 
see God-Truth-face to face. (YI, 3-12-1925, p422) 
 
I am endeavoring to see God through service of humanity, for I know that God 
is neither in heaven, nor down below, but in every one. (YI, 4-8-1927, p247-8) 
 
I am a part and parcel of the whole, and I cannot find Him apart from the rest 
of humanity. My countrymen are my nearest neighbors. They have become so 
helpless, so resourceless, so inert that I must concentrate on serving them. If I 
could persuade myself that I should find Him in a Himalayan cave, I would 
proceed there immediately. But I know that I cannot find Him apart from 
humanity. (H, 29-8-1936, p226) 
 
I claim to know my millions. All the 24 hours of the day I am with them. They 
are my first care and last because I recognize no God except the God that is to 
be found in the hearts of the dumb millions. They do not recognize His 
presence; I do. And I worship the God that is Truth or Truth which is God 
through the service of these millions. (H, 11-3-1939, p44) 
 
 
Guide and Protector 
I must go… with God as my only guide. He is a jealous  Lord. He will allow no 
one to share His authority. One has, therefore, to appear before Him in all The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64 one's weakness, empty-handed and in a spirit of full surrender, and then He 
enables you to stand before a whole world and protects you from all harm.  
(YI, 3-9-1931, p247) 
 
I have learned this one lesson-that what is impossible with man is child's play 
with God and if we have faith in that Divinity which presides on the destiny of 
the meanest of His creation, I have no doubt that all things are possible; and in 
that final hope, I live and pass my time and endeavor to obey His will.  
(YI, 19-11-1931, p361) 
 
Even in darkest despair, where there seems to be no helper and no comfort in 
the wide, wide world, His Name inspires us with strength and puts all doubts 
and despairs to flight. The sky may be overcast today with clouds, but a fervent 
prayer to Him is enough to dispel them. It is because of prayer that I have 
known no disappointment. 
 
…I have known no despair. Why then should you give way to it? Let us pray that 
He may cleanse our hearts of pettiness, meanness and deceit and He will surely 
answer our prayers. Many I know have always turned to that unfailing source of 
strength. (H, 1-6-1935, p123) 
 
I have seen and believe that God never appears to you in person, but in action 
which can only account for your deliverance in your darkest hour. (H, 10-12-
1938, p373) 
 
Individual worship cannot be described in words. It goes on continuously and 
even unconsciously. There is not a moment when I do not feel the presence of a 
Witness whose eye misses nothing and with whom I strive to keep in tune. 
 
I have never found Him lacking in response. I have found Him nearest at hand 
when the horizon seemed darkest in my ordeals in jails when it was not all-
smooth sailing for me. I cannot recall a moment in my life when I had a sense 
of desertion by God. (H, 24-12-1938, p395) 
 
 
Self-realization   
I be
lieve it to be possible for every human being to a ttain to that blessed and 
indescribable, sinless state in which he feels within himself the presence of God 
to the exclusion of everything else. (YI, 17-11-1921, p368) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  
What I want to achieve, what I have been striving and pining to achieve…, is 
self-realization, to see God face to face, to attain moksha. I live and move and 
have my being in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of speaking and 
writing and all my ventures in the political field are directed to this same end.  
(A, p xiv) 
 
For it is an unbroken torture to me that I am still so far from Him, who, as I 
fully know, governs every breath of my life, and whose offspring I am. I know 
that it is the evil passions within that keep me so far from Him, and yet I 
cannot get away from them. (ibid, p xvi) 
 
This belief in God has to be based on faith, which transcends reason. Indeed, 
even the so-called realization has at bottom an element of faith without which 
it cannot be sustained. In the very nature of things it must be so. Who can 
transgress the limitations of his being? 
 
I hold that complete realization is impossible in this embodied life. Nor is it 
necessary. A living immovable faith is all that is required for reaching the full 
spiritual height attainable by human beings. God is not outside this earthly case 
of ours. Therefore, exterior proof is not of much avail, if any at all. 
 
We must ever fail to perceive Him through the senses, because He is beyond 
them. We can feel Him if we will but withdraw ourselves from the senses. The 
divine music is incessantly going on within ourselves, but the loud senses drown 
the delicate music, which is unlike and infinitely superior to anything we can 
perceive or hear with our senses. (H, 13-6-1936, pp140-1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  
11. TRUTH AND BEAUTY 
 
Inwardness of Art 
THERE ARE two aspects of things - the outward and the inward….The outward 
has no meaning except in so far as it helps the inward. All true Art is thus an 
expression of the soul. The outward forms have value only in so far as they are 
the expression of the inner spirit of man. (YI, 13-11-1924, p.377) 
 
I know that many call themselves artists, and are recognized as such, and yet in 
their works there is absolutely no trace of the soul's upward urge and unrest. 
(ibid) 
 
All true Art must help the soul to realize its inner self. In my own case, I find 
that I can do entirely without external forms in my soul's realization. I can 
claim, therefore, that there is truly efficient Art in my life, though you might 
not see what you call works of Art about me. 
 
My room may have blank walls; and I may even dispense with the roof, so that I 
may gaze out at the starry heavens overhead that stretch in an unending 
expanse. What conscious Art of man can give me the panoramic scenes that 
open out before me, when I look up to the sky above with all its shining stars? 
 
This, however, does not mean that I refuse to accept the value of productions 
of Art, generally accepted as such, but only that I personally feel how 
inadequate these are compared with the eternal symbols of beauty in Nature. 
These productions of man's Art have their value only in so far as they help the 
soul onward towards self-realization. (ibid) 
 
 
Truth First  
Truth is the first thing to be sought for, and Beauty and Goodness will then be 
added unto you. Jesus was, to my mind, a supreme artist because he saw and 
expressed Truth; and so was Muhammad, the Koran being, the most perfect 
composition in all Arabic literature - at any rate, that is what scholars say. It is 
because both of them strove first for Truth that the grace of expression 
naturally came in and yet neither Jesus not Muhammad wrote on Art. That is 
the Truth and Beauty I crave for, live for, and would die for. (YI, 20-11-1924, 
p.386) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67 Art for the Millions 
Here too, just as elsewhere, I must think in terms of the millions. And to the 
millions we cannot give that training to acquire a perception of Beauty in such 
a way as to see Truth in it. Show them Truth first and they will see Beauty 
afterwards… Whatever can be useful to those starving millions is beautiful to 
my mind. Let us give today first the vital things of life and all the graces and 
ornaments of life will follow. (ibid) 
 
I want art and literature that can speak to the millions. (H, 14-11-1936, p.135) 
 
Art to be art must soothe. (YI, 27-5-1926, p.196) 
 
After all, Art can only be expressed not through inanimate power-driven 
machinery designed for mass-production, but only through the delicate living 
touch of the hands of men and women. (YI, 14-3-1929, p.86) 
 
 
Inner Purity 
True art takes note not merely of form but also of wha t lies behind. There is an 
art that kills and an art that gives life… True art must be evidence of 
happiness, contentment and purity of its authors. (YI, 11-8-1921, p. 253) 
 
True beauty after all consists in purity of heart. (A, p. 228) 
 
I love music and all the other arts, but I do not attach such value to them as is 
generally done. I cannot, for example, recognize the value of those activities 
which require technical knowledge for their understanding. 
 
Life is greater than all art. I would go even further and declare that the man 
whose life comes nearest to perfection is the greatest artist; for what is art 
without the sure foundation and framework of a noble life? (AG, pp. 65-66) 
 
We have somehow accustomed ourselves to the belief that art is independent 
of the purity of private life. I can say with all the experience at my command 
that nothing could be more untrue. As I am nearing the end of my earthly life, I 
can say that purity of life, is the highest and truest art. The art of producing 
good music from a cultivated voice can be achieved by many, but the art of 
producing that music from the harmony of a pure life is achieved very rarely. 
(H, 19-2-1938, p. 10) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68 Beauty in Truth 
I see and find Beauty in Truth or through Truth. All T ruths, not merely true 
ideas, but truthful faces, truthful pictures, or songs, are highly beautiful. 
People generally fail to see Beauty in Truth, the ordinary man runs away from 
it and becomes blind to the beauty in it. Whenever men begin to see Beauty in 
Truth, then true Art will arise. (YI, 13-11-1924, p. 377) 
 
To a true artist only that face is beautiful which, quite apart from its exterior, 
shines with the Truth within the soul. There is… no Beauty apart from Truth. On 
the other hand, Truth may manifest itself in forms, which may not be 
outwardly beautiful at all. Socrates, we are told, was the most truthful man of 
his time, and yet his features are said to have been the ugliest in Greece. To 
my mind he was beautiful, because all his life was a striving after Truth, and 
you may remember that his outward form did not prevent Phidias from 
appreciating the beauty of Truth in him, though as an artist he was accustomed 
to see Beauty in outward forms also. (ibid) 
 
Truth and Untruth often co-exist; good and evil are often found together. In an 
artist also not seldom [do] the right perception of things and the wrong co-
exist. Truly beautiful creations come when right perception is at work. If these 
monuments are rare in life, they are also rare in Art. (ibid) 
 
These beauties ['a sunset or a crescent moon that shines amid the stars at 
night'] are truthful, inasmuch as they make me think of the Creator at the back 
of them. How else could these be beautiful, but for the Truth that is in the 
center of creation? When I admire the wonder of a sunset or the beauty of the 
moon, my soul expands in worship of the Creator. I try to see Him and His 
mercies in all these creations. But even the sunsets and sunrises would be mere 
hindrances if they did not help me to think of Him.  Anything which is a 
hindrance to the flight of the soul is a delusion and a snare; even like the body, 
which often does hinder you in the path of salvation. (H, 13-11-1924, p. 379) 
 
Why can't you see the beauty of colour in vegetables? And then, there is beauty 
in the speckles sky. But no, you want the colours of the rainbow, which is a 
mere optical illusion. We have been taught to believe that what is beautiful 
need not be useful and what is useful cannot be beautiful. I want to show that 
what is useful can also be beautiful. (H, 7-4-1946, p. 67) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  
12. THE GOSPEL OF FEARLESSNESS 
 
FEA
RLESSNESS IS the first requisite of spirituality. Cowards can never be moral. 
(YI, 13-10-1921, p. 323) 
 
Where there is fear there is no religion. (YI, 2-9-1926, p. 308) 
 
Every reader of the Gita is aware that fearlessness heads the list of the Divine 
Attributes enumerated in the 16th Chapter. Whether this is merely due to the 
exigencies of metre, or whether the pride of place has been deliberately 
yielded to fearlessness is more than I can say. In my opinion, however, 
fearlessness richly deserves the first rank assigned to it there, perhaps, by 
accident. 
 
Fearlessness is a sine qua non for the growth of the other noble qualities. How 
can one seek truth or cherish Love without fearlessness? As Pritam has it, 'The 
Path of Hari (the Lord) is the path of the brave, not of cowards.' Hari here 
means Truth, and the brave are those armed with fearlessness, not with the 
sword, the rifle or other carnal weapons, which are affected only by cowards. 
(YI, 11-9-1930, pp. 1-2) 
 
Fearlessness connotes freedom from all external fear - fear of disease, bodily 
injury or death, of dispossession, of losing one's nearest and dearest, of losing 
reputation or giving offence, and so on. (ibid) 
 
 
Attainment of Fearlessness 
Perfect fearlessness can be attained only by him who h as realized the Supreme, 
as it implies the height of freedom from delusions. But one can always progress 
towards this goal by determined and constant endeavour and by increasing 
confidence in oneself…. 
 
As for the internal foes, we must ever walk in their fear. We are rightly afraid 
of Animal Passion, Anger and the like. External fears cease of their own accord 
when once we have conquered these traitors within the camp. All fears revolve 
round the body as the centre, and would, therefore, disappear as soon as one 
got rid of the attachment for the body. 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70 We thus find that all fear is the baseless fabric of our own vision. Fear has no 
place in our hearts when we have shaken off the attachment for wealth, for 
family and for the body. 'Tena tyaktena bhunjithah' (enjoy the things of the 
earth by renouncing them) is a noble commandment. The wealth, the family 
and the body will be there, just the same; we have only to change our attitude 
to them. All these are not ours but God's. Nothing whatever in this world is 
ours. Even we ourselves are His. Why then should we entertain any fears? 
 
The Upanishad, therefore, directs us 'to give up attachment for things while we 
enjoy them'. That is to say, we must be interested in them not as proprietors 
but only as trustees. He on whose behalf we hold them will give us the strength 
and the weapons requisite for defending them against all comers. 
 
When we thus cease to be masters and reduce ourselves to the rank of servants 
humbler than the very dust under our feet, all fears will roll away like mists; 
we shall attain ineffable peace and see Satya- Narayan (the God of Truth) face 
to face. (ibid) 
 
 
Fear of God 
Let us fear God and we shall cease to fear man. (SW, p . 130) 
 
There is so much superstition and hypocrisy around that one is afraid even to do 
the right thing. But if one gives way to fear, even truth will have to be 
suppressed. The golden rule is to act fearlessly upon what one believes to be 
right. (H, 2-6-1946, p. 160) 
 
Fearlessness does not mean arrogance or aggressiveness. That in itself is a sign 
of fear. Fearlessness presupposes calmness and peace of mind. For that it is 
necessary to have a living faith in God. (H, 3-11-1946, p. 388) 
 
Fear is a thing which I dislike. Why should one man be afraid of another man? 
Man should stand in fear of God alone, and then he can shed all other fears. (H, 
5-1-1947, p. 477) 
 
 
Bravery of the Soul 
Each individual must be taught the art of self-defens e . It is more a mental state 
that has to be inculcated than that our bodies should be trained for retaliation. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71 Our mental training has been one of feeling helpless. Bravery is not a quality of 
the body, it is the soul. I have seen cowards encased in tough muscle and rare 
courage in the frailest body… The weakest of us physically must be taught the 
art of facing dangers and giving a good account of ourselves. (YI, 20-10-1921, p. 
335) 
 
We stand on the threshold of twilight-whether morning or evening twilight we 
know not. One is followed by the night, the other heralds the dawn. If we want 
to see the dawning day after the twilight and not the mournful night, it 
behaves everyone of us…to realize the truth at this juncture, to stand for it 
against any odds and to preach and practice it, at any cost, unflinchingly. (SW, 
p. 303) 
 
We have chosen for our march towards freedom the ancient path of truth and 
non-violence, and we must let God's covenant, that those who tread on the 
straight and narrow path shall never come to grief, inspire us with faith and 
hope. (YI, 2-4-1931, p. 54) 
 
In this country of self-suppression and timidity, almost bordering on cowardice, 
we cannot have too much bravery, too much self-sacrifice… I want… the greater 
bravery of the meek, the gentle and the nonviolent, the bravery that will 
mount the gallows without injuring, or harbouring any thought of injury to a 
single soul. (ibid, p. 58) 
 
There is no bravery greater than a resolute refusal to bend the knee to an 
earthly power, no matter how great, and that, without bitterness of spirit and 
in the fullness of faith that the spirit alone lives, nothing else does. (H, 15-10-
1938, p. 291) 
 
We have two choices before us. We can become a great military power or, if 
we follow my way, we can become a great non-violent and invincible power. In 
either case the first condition is the shedding of all fear. (H, 26-10-1947, p. 
382) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  
13. THE GOSPEL OF FAITH 
 
IT IS faith that steers us through stormy seas, faith that moves mountains and 
faith that jumps across the ocean. That faith is nothing but a living, wide-
awake consciousness of God within. He who has achieved that faith wants 
nothing. Bodily diseased, he is spiritually healthy; physically poor, he rolls in 
spiritual riches. (YI, 24-9-1925, p. 331) 
 
Without faith this world would come to naught in a moment. True faith is 
appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe to have 
lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief, therefore, in prophets or 
incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not an idle superstition but a 
satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want. (YI, 14-4-1927, p. 120) 
 
Faith is not a delicate flower, which would wither under the slightest stormy 
weather. Faith is like the Himalaya Mountains which cannot possibly change. No 
storm can possibly remove the Himalaya Mountains from their foundations. … 
And I want every one of you to cultivate that faith in God and religion.  
(H, 26-1-1934, p. 8) 
 
 
Limitations of Reason 
Experience has humbled me enough to let me realize th e  specific limitations of 
reason. Just as matter misplaced becomes dirt, reason misused becomes 
lunacy. 
 
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God. (YI, 14-
10-1924, p. 359) 
 
I plead not for the suppression of reason, but for a due recognition of that in us 
which sanctifies reason itself. (ibid) 
 
To me it is as plain as a pikestaff that, where there is an appeal to reason pure 
and undefiled, there should be no appeal to authority however great it may be. 
(YI, 26-9-1929, p. 316) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73 There are subjects where Reason cannot take us far and we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith then does not contradict Reason but transcends it. Faith is 
a kind of sixth sense which works in cases which are without the purview of 
Reason. (H, 6-3-1937, p.26) 
 
 
Meaning of Religion 
Let me explain what I mean by religion. It is not the Hindu religion which I 
certainly prize above all other religions, but the religion which transcends 
Hinduism, which changes one's very nature, which binds one indissolubly to the 
truth within and which ever purifies. It is the permanent element in human 
nature which counts no cost too great in order to find full expression and which 
leaves the soul utterly restless until it has found itself, known its Maker and 
appreciated the true correspondence between the Maker and itself. (YI, 12-5-
1920, p. 2) 
 
By religion, I do not mean formal religion, or customary religion, but that 
religion which underlies all religions, which brings us face to face with our 
Maker. (MKG, p. 7) 
 
 
My Religion 
My religion has no geographical limits. If I have a l i ving faith in it, it will 
transcend my love for India herself. (YI, 11-8-1920, p. 4) 
 
Mine is not a religion of the prison-house. It has room for the least among God's 
creation. But it is proof against insolence, pride of race, religion or colour. (YI, 
1-6-1921, p. 171) 
 
There is undoubtedly a sense in which the statement is true when I say that I 
hold my religion dearer than my country and that, therefore, I am a Hindu first 
and nationalist after. I do not become on that score a less nationalist than the 
best of them. I simply thereby imply that the interests of my country are 
identical with those of my religion. 
 
Similarly when I say that I prize my own salvation above everything else, above 
the salvation of India, it does not mean that my personal salvation requires a 
sacrifice of India's political or any other salvation. But it implies necessarily 
that the two go together. (YI, 23-2-1922, p. 123) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  
This is the maxim of life which I have accepted, namely, that no work done by 
any man, no matter how great he is, will really prosper unless he has religious 
backing. (SW, pp. 377-8) 
 
I have abundant faith in my cause and humanity. Indian humanity is no worse 
than any other; possibly it is better. Indeed, the cause presumes faith in human 
nature. Dark though the path appears, God will light it and guide my steps, if I 
have faith in His guidance and humility enough to acknowledge my helplessness 
without that infallible guidance. (YI, 27-11-1924, p. 391) 
 
This may be considered to be quixotic, but it is my firm faith that he who 
undertakes to do something in the name of God, and in full faith in Him, even 
at the end of his days, does not work in vain; and I am sure that the work I have 
undertaken is not mine, but is God's. (H, 1-3-1935, p. 24) 
 
That is dharma which is enjoined by the holy books, followed by the sages, 
interpreted by the learned and which appealed to the heart. The first three 
conditions must be fulfilled before the fourth comes into operation. Thus one 
has no right to follow the precepts of an ignorant man or a rascal even though 
they commend themselves to one. Rigorous observance of harmlessness, non-
enmity and renunciation are the first requisites for a person to entitle him to 
lay down the law, i.e., dharma. (H, 17-11-1946, p. 397) 
 
 
Futility of Force 
I have a deep conviction that no religion can be susta ined by brute force. On 
the contrary, those who take the sword always perish by the sword. (H, 9-3-
1934, p. 29) 
 
Religions, like nations, are being weighed in the balance. That religion and that 
nation will be blotted out of the face of earth, which pins its faith to injustice, 
untruth or violence. (H, 12-9-1936, p. 247) 
 
 
Morality 
With me moral includes spiritual. …In my career as a r eformer, I have regarded 
everything from the moral standpoint. Whether I am engaged in tackling a 
political question or a social or an economic one, the moral side of it always 
obtrudes itself and it pervades my whole attitude. (H, 29-3-1935, p. 51) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75  
There is no such thing as absolute morality for all times. But there is a relative 
morality, which is absolute enough for imperfect mortals that we are. Thus, it 
is absolutely immoral to drink spirituous liquors except as medicine, in 
medicinal doses and under medical advice. Similarly, it is absolutely wrong to 
see lustfully any woman other than one's wife. Both these positions have been 
proved by cold reason. Counter-arguments have always been advanced. They 
have been advanced against the very existence of God-the Sum of all that is. 
Faith that transcends reason is our only Rock of Ages. …My faith has saved me 
and is still saving me from pitfalls. It has never betrayed me. It has never been 
known to betray anyone. (H, 23-12-1939, p. 387) 
 
 
Diversity of Religion 
In reality there are as many religions as there are in dividuals. (HS, p. 49) 
 
Religions are different roads converging upon the same point. What does it 
matter that we take different roads, so long as we reach the same goal? (ibid, 
p. 50) 
 
I do not share the belief that there can or will be on earth one religion. I am 
striving, therefore, to find a common factor and to induce mutual tolerance. 
(YI, 31-7-1924, p. 254) 
 
 
Basic Unity 
The soul of religions is one, but it is encased in a m ultitude of forms. The latter 
will persist to the end of time. Wise men will ignore the outward crust and see 
the same soul living under a variety of crusts. (YI, 25-9-1924, p. 318) 
 
I believe that all the great religions of the world are true more or less. I say 
'more or less' because I believe that everything that the human hand touches, 
by reason of the very fact that human beings are imperfect, becomes 
imperfect. Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it is indescribable, 
untranslatable. I do believe that it is possible for every human being to become 
perfect even as God is perfect. It is necessary for us all to aspire after 
perfection, but when that blessed state is attained, it becomes indescribable, 
indefinable. And I therefore admit, in all humility, that even the Vedas, the 
Koran and the Bible are imperfect word of God and, imperfect beings that we The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76 are, swayed to and fro by a multitude of passions, it is impossible for us even to 
understand this word of God in its fullness. (YI, 22-9-1927, p. 319) 
 
I should love all the men-not only in India but in the world-belonging to the 
different faiths, to become better people by contact with one another, and if 
that happens, the world will be a much better place to live in than it is today. I 
plead for the broadest toleration, and I am working to that end. I ask people to 
examine every religion from the point of the religionists themselves. I do not 
expect the India of my dream to develop one religion, i.e., to be wholly Hindu, 
or wholly Christian, or wholly Mussalman, but I want it to be wholly tolerant, 
with its religions working side by side with one another. (YI, 22-12-1927, p. 425) 
 
I came to the conclusion long ago, after prayerful search and study and 
discussion with as many people as I could meet, that all religions were true and 
also that all had some error in them, and that, whilst I hold by my own, I should 
hold others as dear as Hinduism, from which it logically follows that we should 
hold all as dear as our nearest kith and kin and that we should make no 
distinction between them. (YI, 19-1-1928, p.22) 
 
Belief in one God is the corner stone of all religions. But I do not foresee a time 
when there would be only one religion on earth in practice. In theory, since 
there is one God, there can be only one religion. But in practice, no two 
persons I have known have had the same identical conception of God. 
Therefore, there will, perhaps, always be different religions answering to 
different temperaments and climatic conditions. (H, 2-2-1934, p. 8) 
 
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great religions of the world. I believe 
that they are all God-given, and I believe that they were necessary for the 
people to whom these religions were revealed. And I believe that, if only we 
could all of us read the scriptures of the different faiths from the standpoint of 
the followers of those faiths, we should find that they were at the bottom all 
one and were all helpful to one another. (H, 16-12-1934, p. 5-6) 
 
Religions are not for separating men from one another. They are meant to bind 
them. (H, 8-6-1940, p. 157) 
 
 
The Scriptures 
For me the Vedas are divine and unwritten. 'The lette r  killeth.' It is the spirit 
that giveth the light. And the spirit of the Vedas is purity, truth, innocence, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77 chastity, humility, simplicity, forgiveness, godliness, and all that makes a man 
or woman noble and brave. (YI, 19-1-1921, p. 22) 
 
I do not believe in the exclusive divinity of the Vedas. I believe the Bible, the 
Koran and Zend Avesta to be as much divinely inspired as the Vedas. My belief 
in the Hindu scriptures does not require me to accept every word and every 
verse as divinely inspired.....I decline to be bound by an interpretation, 
however learned it may be, if it is repugnant to reason or moral sense. (YI, 6-
10-1921, p. 317) 
 
I am not a literalist. Therefore, I try to understand the spirit of the various 
scriptures of the world. I apply the test of Truth and ahimsa laid down by these 
very scriptures for interpretation. I reject what is inconsistent with that test, 
and appropriate all that is consistent with it. (YI, 27-8-1925, p. 293) 
 
I have not been able to see any difference between the Sermon on the Mount 
and the Bhagavad Gita. What the Sermon describes in a graphic manner, the 
Bhagavad Gita reduces to a scientific formula. It may not be a scientific book in 
the accepted sense of the term, but it has argued out the law of love-the law 
of abandon, as I would call it-in a scientific manner. The Sermon on the Mount 
gives the same law in wonderful language. The New Testament gave me 
comfort and boundless joy, as it came after the repulsion that parts of the Old 
had given me. Today, supposing I was deprived of the Gita and forgot all its 
contents but had a copy of the Sermon, I should derive the same joy from it as I 
do from the Gita. (YI, 22-12-1927, p. 426) 
 
There is one thing in me and that is that I love to see the bright side of things 
and not the seamy side, and so I can derive comfort and inspiration from any 
great book of any great religion. I may not be able to reproduce a single verse 
from the Gita or the New Testament; a Hindu child or Christian child may be 
able to repeat the verses better; but those clever children cannot deprive me 
of the assimilation that is in me today of the spirit of the two books. (ibid) 
 
One's experience, therefore, must be the final guide. The written word 
undoubtedly helps, but even that has to be interpreted, and when there are 
conflicting interpretations, the seeker is the final arbiter. (H, 22-12-1933, p. 3) 
 
I believe I have no superstition in me. Truth is not truth merely because it is 
ancient. Nor is it necessarily to be regarded with suspicion because it is 
ancient. There are some fundamentals of life, which may not be lightly given The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78 up because they are difficult of enforcement in one's life. (H, 14-3-1936, p. 36) 
 
 
Religious Instruction 
If India is not to declare spiritual bankruptcy, relig ious instruction of its youth 
must be held to be at least as necessary as secular instruction. It is true that 
knowledge of religious books is no equivalent of that of religion. But if we 
cannot have religion, we must be satisfied with providing our boys and girls 
with what is next best. And whether there is such instruction given in the 
schools or not, grown-up students must cultivate the art of self-help about 
matters religious as about others. They may start their own class just as they 
have their debating, and now, spinners' clubs. (YI, 25-8-1927, p. 272) 
 
I do not believe that the State can concern itself or cope with religious 
education. I believe that religious education must be the sole concern of 
religious associations. Do not mix up religion and ethics. I believe that 
fundamental ethics is common to all religions. Teaching of fundamental ethics 
is undoubtedly a function of the State. By religion I have not in mind 
fundamental ethics but what goes by the name of denominationalism. We have 
suffered enough from State-aided religion and a State Church. A society or a 
group, which depends partly or wholly on State aid for the existence of its 
religion, does not deserve, or, better still, does not have any religion worth the 
name. (H, 23-3-1947, p. 76) 
 
A curriculum of religious instruction should include a study of the tenets of 
faiths other than one's own. For this purpose the students should be trained to 
cultivate the habit of understanding and appreciating the doctrines of various 
great religions of the world in a spirit of reverence and broad-minded 
tolerance. (YI, 6-12-1928, p406) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  
14. THE MEANING OF GOD 
 
Law-giver and Law 
GOD MAY be called by any other name so long as it conn otes the living Law of 
Life-in other words, the Law and the Law-giver rolled into one. (H, 14-4-1946, 
p80) 
 
God Himself is both the Law and the Law-giver. The question of anyone 
creating Him, therefore, does not arise, least of all by an insignificant creature 
such as man. Man can build a dam, but he cannot create a river.  He can 
manufacture a chair, but it is beyond him to make the wood. He can, however, 
picture God in his mind in many ways. But how can man who is unable to create 
even a river or wood create God? That God has created man is, therefore, the 
pure truth. The contrary is an illusion. However, anyone may, if he likes, say 
that God is neither the doer nor the cause. Either is predicable of him. (ibid) 
 
 
No Personal God 
I do not regard God as a person. Truth for me is God, and God’s Law and God 
are not different things or facts, in the sense that an earthly king and his law 
are different. Because God is an Idea, Law Himself. Therefore, it is impossible 
to conceive God as breaking the Law. He, therefore, does not rule our actions 
and withdraw Himself. When we say He rules our actions, we are simply using 
human language and we try to limit Him. Otherwise He and His Law abide 
everywhere and govern everything. 
 
Therefore, I do not think that He answers in every detail every request of ours, 
but there is no doubt that He rules our action. …The free will we enjoy is less 
than that of a passenger on a crowded deck. 
 
…Although I know that my freedom is less than that of a passenger, I appreciate 
that freedom, as I have imbibed through and through the central teaching of 
the Gita that man is the maker of his own destiny in the sense that he has 
freedom of choice as to the manner in which he uses that freedom. But he is no 
controller of results. The moment he thinks he is, he comes to grief. (H, 23-2-
1940, p55) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80 Let this however be quite clear. The Almighty is not a person like us. He or It is 
the greatest living Force or Law in the world. Accordingly, He does not act by 
caprice, nor does that Law admit of any amendment or improvement. His will is 
fixed and changeless, everything else changes every second. (H, 28-7-1946, 
p233) 
 
 
His Personality 
I have not seen God face to face. If I had, I would h a ve no need to be speaking 
to you. My thought would be potent enough to render speech and action on my 
part unnecessary. But I have an undying faith in the existence of God. Millions 
all over the world share this faith with me. The most learned cannot shake the 
faith of the illiterate millions. (H, 3-8-1947, p262) 
 
God is wholly good. There is no evil in Him. God made man in His own image. 
Unfortunately for us, man has fashioned Him in his own. This arrogation has 
landed mankind in a sea of troubles. God is the Supreme Alchemist. In His 
presence all iron and dross turn into pure gold. Similarly does all evil turn into 
good. 
 
Again, God lives, but not as we. His creatures live but to die. But God is life. 
Therefore, goodness and all it connotes is not an attribute. 
 
Goodness is God. Goodness conceived as apart from Him is a lifeless thing and 
exists only whilst it is a paying policy. So are all morals. If they are to live in us, 
they must be considered and cultivated in their relation to God. We try to 
become good because we want to reach and realize God. All the dry ethics of 
the world turn to dust because apart from God they are lifeless. Coming from 
God, they come with life in them. They become part of us and ennoble us. 
 
Conversely, God conceived without goodness is without life. We give Him life in 
our vain imagining. (H, 24-8-1947, p285) 
 
There is a big gulf between ‘seeing God face to face’ and ‘seeing Him in the 
embodiment of Truth from a far distance’. In my opinion, the two statements 
are not only not incompatible but each explains the other. We see the 
Himalayas from a very great distance and when we are on the top, we have 
seen the Himalayas face to face. Millions can see them from hundreds of miles 
if they are within the range of that seeing distance, but few having arrived at 
the top, after years of travel, see them face to face. (H, 23-11-1947, p432) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  
I have never had [the slightest doubt] about the reality that God Is and that His 
most graphic name is Truth. (H, 25-1-1948, p535) 
 
 
Power of God 
Everything that has a beginning must end. The sun, the  moon and the earth 
must all perish one day, even though it might be after an incalculable number 
of years. God alone is immortal, imperishable. How can anyone find words to 
describe Him? (H, 16-6-1946, p183) 
 
God cannot be realized through the intellect. Intellect can lead one to a 
certain extent and no further. It is a matter of faith and experience derived 
from faith. One might rely on the experience of one’s betters or else be 
satisfied with nothing less than personal experience. Full faith does not feel the 
want of experience. (H, 4-8-1946, p249) 
 
God alone knows Absolute Truth. Therefore, I have often said, Truth is God. It 
follows that man, a finite being, cannot know Absolute Truth. (H, 7-4-1946, 
p70) 
 
I call that great Power not by the name of Allah, not by the name of Khuda or 
God, but by the name of Truth. For me Truth is God and Truth overrides all our 
plans. The whole truth is only embodied within the heart of that Great Power—
Truth. I was taught from my early days to regard Truth as un-approachable—
something that you cannot reach. A great Englishman taught me to believe that 
God is unknowable. He is knowable, but knowable only to the extent that our 
limited intellect allows. (H, 20-4-1947, p109) 
 
God is all-powerful. He can change the hearts of man and bring real peace 
among them. (H, 3-8-1947, p262) 
 
 
His Rule 
Today, in the West, people talk of Christ, but it is r eally the Anti-Christ that 
rules their lives. Similarly, there are people who talk of Islam, but really follow 
the way of Satan. It is a deplorable state of affairs. …If people follow the way 
of God, there will not be all this corruption and profiteering that we see in the 
world. The rich are becoming richer and the poor poorer. Hunger, nakedness 
and death stare one in the face. These are not the marks of the Kingdom of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82 God, but that of Satan, Ravana or Anti-Christ. We cannot expect to bring the 
reign of God on earth by merely repeating His name with the lips. Our conduct 
must conform to His ways instead of Satan’s. (H, 23-6-1946, pp186-7) 
 
Only when God reigns in men’s hearts will they be able to shed their anger. (H, 
20-4-1947, p118) 
 
All universal rules of conduct known as God’s commandments are simple and 
easy to understand and carry out if the will is there. They only appear to be 
difficult because of the inertia, which governs mankind. Man is a progressive 
being. There is nothing at a standstill in nature. Only God is motionless for, He 
was, is and will be the same yesterday, today and tomorrow, and yet is ever 
moving. We need not, however, worry ourselves over the attributes of God. We 
have to realize that we are ever progressing. Hence, I hold that if mankind is to 
live, it has to come growingly under the sway of truth and non-violence. It is in 
view of these two fundamental rules of conduct that I and you have to work 
and live. (H, 9-11-1947, p406) 
 
A mind not set on God is given to wandering and lacks the quality of a temple 
of worship. (ibid) 
 
 
Genesis of Evil 
Why is there evil in the world is a difficult questio n  to answer. I can only give 
what I may call a villager’s answer. If there is good, there must also be evil, 
just as where there is light there is also darkness, but it is true only so far as 
we human mortals are concerned. Before God there is nothing good, nothing 
evil. We poor villagers may talk of His dispensation in human terms, but our 
language is not God’s. 
 
The Vedanta says the world is maya. Even that explanation is a babbling of 
imperfect humanity. I, therefore, say that I am not going to bother my head 
about it. Even if I was allowed to peep into the innermost recesses of God’s 
chamber I should not care to do it. For I should not know what to do there. It is 
enough for our spiritual growth to know that God is always with the doer of 
good. That again is a villager’s explanation. (H, 7-9-1935, p233) 
 
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any rational method. To want to 
do so is to be coequal with God. I am therefore humble enough to recognize 
evil as such. And I call God long-suffering and patient precisely because He The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83 permits evil in the world. I know that He has no evil. He is the author of it and 
yet untouched by it. 
 
I know too that I shall never know God if I do not wrestle with and against evil 
even at the cost of life itself. I am fortified in the belief by my own humble and 
limited experience. The purer I try to become, the nearer I feel to be to God. 
How much more should I be, when my faith is not a mere apology as it is today 
but has become as immovable as the Himalayas and as white and bright as the 
snows on their peaks? (YI, 11-10-1928, p341) 
 
In a strictly scientific sense God is at the bottom of both good and evil. He 
directs the assassin’s dagger no less than the surgeon’s knife. But for all that 
good and evil are, for human purposes, from each other distinct and 
incompatible, being symbolical of light and darkness, God and Satan… (H, 20-2-
1937, p9) 
 
To say that God permits evil in this world may not be pleasing to the ear. But if 
He is held responsible for the good, it follows that He has to be responsible for 
the evil too. Did not God permit Ravana to exhibit unparalleled strength? 
Perhaps, the root cause of the perplexity arises from a lack of the real 
understanding of what God is. God is not a person. He transcends description. 
He is the Law-maker, the Law and the Executor. No human being can well 
arrogate these powers to himself. If he did, he would be looked upon as an 
unadulterated dictator. They become only Him whom we worship as God. This 
is the reality, a clear understanding of which will answer the question [‘Does 
God permit evil?’] (H, 24-2-1946, p24) 
 
There is a saying to the effect that the outer is only the reflection of the inner. 
If you are good, the whole world will be good to you. On the contrary, if you 
feel tempted to regard anybody as evil, the odds are that the evil is within 
you.… 
 
We must neither think evil about others nor suspect others of thinking evil 
about us. Proneness to lend ear to evil reports is a sign of lack of faith. (H, 28-
4-1946, p111) 
 
 
Miracles 
I do [believe in miracles] and I do not. God does not  work through miracles. But 
the divine mind is revealed in a flash and it appears like a miracle to man. We The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84 do not know God, we know Him only through the working of His law. He and His 
law are one. There is nothing outside His law. Even earthquakes and tempests 
do not occur without His will-not a blade of grass grows but He will it. Satan is 
here only on His sufferance, not independently of Him. (H, 7-4-1946, pp75-76) 
 
Man cannot be transformed from bad to good overnight. God does not exercise 
magic. He too is within His own law. His law, however, is different from the law 
of the State. There may be mistakes in the latter, but God cannot err. If he 
were to go beyond the limits of His law, the world will be lost. (H, 19-5-1946, 
p136) 
 
History provides us with a whole series of miracles of masses of people being 
converted to a particular view-point in the twinkling of an eye. Take the Boer 
War. It has given to the English language the word 'Maffeking'. People went mad 
on the Maffeking Day. Yet, inside of two years, the whole British nation 
underwent a transformation. Henry Campbell Bannerman became the Premier 
and practically all the gains of war were given up. The recent Labour victory at 
the polls is another instance in point. To me it is a sufficient miracle that, in 
spite of his oratory and brilliance, Churchill should cease to be the idol of the 
British people who till yesterday hung on his lips and listened to him in awe. All 
these instances are enough to sustain the faith of a believer like me that, when 
all other powers are gone one will remain, call it God, Nature or whatever you 
like. (H, 10-11-1946, p389) 
 
 
Incarnation   
Al
l embodied life is in reality an incarnation of God, but it is not usual to 
consider every living being an incarnation. Future generations pay this homage 
to one who, in his own generation, has been extraordinarily religious in his 
conduct. I can see nothing wrong in this procedure; it takes nothing from God's 
greatness, and there is no violence done to Truth..... 
 
This belief in incarnation is a testimony of man's lofty spiritual ambition. Man is 
not at peace with himself till he has become like unto God. The endeavour to 
reach this state is the supreme, the only ambition worth having. And this is 
self-realization. And this self-realization is the subject of the Gita, as it is of all 
scriptures. (YI, 6-8-1931, p206) 
 
Belief, therefore, in prophets or incarnations who have lived in remote ages is 
not an idle superstition, but a satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want. (YI, 14-The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85 4-1927, p120) 
 
 
God's Laws 
Human language can but imperfectly describe God's ways . I am sensible of the 
fact that they are indescribable and inscrutable. But if mortal man will dare to 
describe them, he has no better medium than his own inarticulate speech. (A, 
p317) 
 
We do not know all the laws of God nor their working. Knowledge of the tallest 
scientist or the greatest spiritualist is like a particle of dust. If God is not a 
personal being for me like my earthly father, He is infinitely more. He rules me 
in the tiniest detail of my life. I believe literally that not a leaf moves but by 
His will. Every breath I take depends upon His sufferance. 
 
He and His law are one. The Law is God. Anything attributed to Him is not a 
mere attribute. He is the attribute. He is Truth, Love, Law and a million other 
things that human ingenuity can name. (H, 16-2-1934, p4) 
 
The laws of Nature are changeless, unchangeable, and there are no miracles in 
the sense of infringement or interruption of Nature's laws. But we, limited 
beings, fancy all kinds of things and impute our limitations to God. We may 
copy God, but not He us. We may not divide Time for Him. Time for Him is 
eternity. For us there is past, present and future. And what is human life of a 
hundred years but less than a mere speck in the eternity of Time? (H, 17-4-
1947, p87) 
 
 
Nature's Visitations 
I share the belief with the whole world-civilized and u ncivilized-that calamities 
such as the Bihar one [earth-quake] come to mankind as chastisement for their 
sins. When that conviction comes from the heart, people pray, repent and 
purify themselves…. 
 
I have but a limited knowledge of His purpose. Such calamities are not a mere 
caprice of the deity or Nature. They obey fixed laws as surely as the planets 
move in obedience to laws governing their movements. Only we do not know 
the laws governing these events and, therefore, call them calamities or 
disturbances. (H, 2-2-1934, p1) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  
This earthly existence of ours is more brittle than the glass bangles that ladies 
wear. You can keep glass bangles for thousands of years if you treasure them in 
a chest and let them remain untouched. But this earthly existence is so fickle 
that it may be wiped out in the twinkling of an eye. Therefore, while we have 
yet breathing time, let us get rid of the distinctions of high and low, purify our 
hearts and be ready to face our Maker when an earthquake or some natural 
calamity or death in the ordinary course overtakes us. (ibid, p5) 
 
There is a divine purpose behind every physical calamity. That perfected 
science will one day be able to tell us beforehand when earthquakes will occur, 
as it tells us today of eclipses, is quite possible. It will be another triumph of 
the human mind. But such triumph even indefinitely multiplied can bring about 
no purification of self without which nothing is of any value. 
 
I ask those who appreciate the necessity of inward purification to join the 
prayer that we may read the purpose of God behind such visitations, that they 
may humble us and prepare us to face our Maker whenever the call comes, and 
that we may be ever ready to share the sufferings of our fellows whosoever 
they may be. (H, 8-6-1935, p132) 
 
 
God's Names 
God has a thousand names, or rather, He is Nameless. W e may worship or pray 
to Him by whichever name that pleases us. Some call Him Rama, some Krishna, 
others call Him Rahim, and yet others call Him God. All worship the same spirit, 
but as all foods do not agree with all, all names do not appeal to all. Each 
chooses the name according to his associations, and He, being the In-Dweller, 
All-Powerful and Omniscient knows our innermost feelings and responds to us 
according to our deserts. 
 
Worship or prayer, therefore, is not to be performed with the lips, but with the 
heart. And that is why it can be performed equally by the dumb and the 
stammerer, by the ignorant and the stupid. And the prayers of those whose 
tongues are nectared but whose hearts are full of poison are never heard. He, 
therefore, who would pray to God, must cleanse his heart. 
 
Rama was not only on the lips of Hanuman, He was enthroned in his heart. He 
gave Hanuman exhaustless strength. In His strength he lifted the mountain and 
crossed the ocean. (YI, 24-9-1925, p331) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87  
I talk of God exactly as I believe Him to be… I believe God to be creative as 
well as non-creative. This too is the result of my acceptance of the doctrine of 
the manyness of reality. From the platform of the Jains I prove the non-
creative aspect of God, and from that of Ramanuja the creative aspect. As a 
matter of fact, we are all thinking of the Unthinkable, describing the 
Indescribable, seeking to know the Unknown, and that is why our speech 
falters, is inadequate and even often contradictory. That is why the Vedas 
describe Brahman as 'not this', 'not this'. (H, 21-1-1926, p30) 
 
In my opinion, Rama, Rahaman, Ahuramazda, God or Krishna are all attempts 
on the part of man to name that invisible force which is the greatest of all 
forces. It is inherent in man, imperfect though he be, ceaselessly to strive after 
perfection. In the attempt he falls into reverie. And, just as a child tries to 
stand, falls down again and again and ultimately learns how to walk, even so 
man, with all his intelligence, is a mere infant as compared to the infinite and 
ageless God. This may appear to be an exaggeration but is not. Man can only 
describe God in his own poor language. (H, 18-8-1946, p267) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88  
15. RAMANAMA 
 
My 
Saviour 
THOUGH MY reason and heart long ago realized the highe st attribute and name 
of God as Truth, I recognize Truth by the name of Rama. In the darkest hour of 
my trial, that one name has saved me and is still saving me. It may be the 
association of childhood, it may be the fascination that Tulsidas has wrought on 
me. 
 
But the potent fact is there, and as I write these lines, my memory revives the 
scenes of my childhood, when I used daily to visit the Ramji Mandir adjacent to 
my ancestral home. My Rama then resided there. He saved me from many fears 
and sins. It was no superstition for me. The custodian of the idol may have been 
a bad man. I know nothing against him. Misdeeds might have gone on in the 
temple. Again I know nothing of them. Therefore, they would not affect me. 
What was and is true of me is true of millions of Hindus. (H, 18-3-1933, p6) 
 
When a child, my nurse taught me to repeat Ramanama whenever I felt afraid 
or miserable, and it has been second nature with me with growing knowledge 
and advancing years. I may even say that the Word is in my heart, if not 
actually on my lips, all the twenty-four hours. It has been by saviour and I am 
ever stayed on it. In the spiritual literature of the world, the Ramayana of 
Tulsidas takes a foremost place. It has charms that I miss in the Mahabharata 
and even in Valmiki's Ramayana. (H, 17-8-1934, p213) 
 
 
Best Worship 
I myself have been a devotee of Tulasidas from my chil dhood and have, 
therefore, always worshipped God as Rama. But I know that if, beginning with 
Omkar, one goes through the entire gamut of God's names current in all climes, 
all countries and languages, the result is the same. He and His law are one. To 
observe His law is, therefore, the best form of worship. (H, 24-3-1946, p56) 
 
 
One God 
I laugh within myself when someone objects that Rama o r the chanting of 
Ramanama is for the Hindus only, how can Mussalmans therefore take part in it? 
Is there one God for the Mussalmans and another for the Hindus, Paris or The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89 Christians? No, there is only one omnipotent and omnipresent God. He is named 
variously and we remember Him by the name which is most familiar to us. 
 
My Rama, the Rama of our prayers is not the historical Rama, the son 
Dasharatha, the King of Ayodhya. He is the eternal, the unborn, the one 
without a second. Him alone I worship. His aid alone I see, and so should you. 
He belongs equally to all. I, therefore, see no reason why a Mussalman or 
anybody should object to taking His name. But he is in no way bound to 
recognize God as Ramanama. He may utter to himself Allah or Khuda so as not 
to mar the harmony of the sound. (H, 28-4-1946, p111) 
 
To me...Rama, described as the Lord of Sita, son of Dasharatha, is the all-
powerful essence whose name, inscribed in the heart, removes all suffering-
mental, moral and physical. (H, 2-6-1946, p158) 
 
 
Curative Power  
An 
apt question is as to why a man who recites Ramanama regularly and leads a 
pure life should ever fall ill. Man is by nature imperfect. A thoughtful man 
strives after perfection, but never attains it. He stumbles on the way, however 
unwittingly. The whole of God's law is embodied in a pure life. 
 
The first thing is to realize one's limitations. It should be obvious that, the 
moment one transgresses those limits, one falls ill. Thus a balanced diet eaten 
in accordance with needs gives one freedom from disease. How is one to know 
what is the proper diet for one? Many such enigmas can be imagined. The 
purport of it all is that everyone should be his own doctor and find out his 
limitations. The man who does so will surely live up to 125. (H, 19-5-1946, 
p148) 
 
Ramanama cannot perform the miracle of restoring to you a lost limb. But it 
can perform the still greater miracle of helping you to enjoy an ineffable peace 
in spite of the loss while you live and rob death of its sting and the grave its 
victory at the journey's end. Since death must come soon or late to everyone, 
why should one worry over the time? (H, 7-4-1946, p69) 
 
The practice of nature cure does not require high academic qualifications or 
much erudition. Simplicity is the essence of universality. Nothing that is meant 
for the benefit of the millions requires much erudition. The latter can be 
acquired only by the few and, therefore, can benefit the rich only. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  
But India lives in her seven lakhs of villages-obscure, tiny, out-of-the-way 
villages, where the population in some cases hardly exceeds a few hundred, 
very often not even a few score. 
 
I would like to go and settle down in some such village. That is real India, my 
India. You cannot take to these humble people the paraphernalia of highly 
qualified doctors and hospital equipment. In simple, natural remedies and 
Ramanama lies their only hope. (ibid) 
 
 
Purity of Thought   
Me
re lip recitation of Ramanama has nothing to do with  cure. Faith cure, if I 
know it correctly, is blind cure, such as the friend describes and thereby 
ridicules the living name of the living God. The latter is not a figment of one's 
imagination. It has to come from the heart. 
 
It is conscious belief in God and a knowledge of His law that make perfect cure 
possible without any further aid. That law is that a perfect mind is responsible 
for perfect health of the body. A perfect mind comes from a perfect heart, not 
the heart known by a doctor's stethoscope but the heart which is the seat of 
God. It is claimed that realization of God in the heart makes it impossible for 
an impure or an idle thought to cross the mind. 
 
Disease is impossible where there is purity of thought. Such a state may be 
difficult to attain. But the first step in the ascent to health is taken with its 
recognition. The next is taken when the corresponding attempt is made. This 
radical alteration in one's life is naturally accompanied by the observance of all 
other nature's laws hitherto discovered by man. One cannot play with them and 
claim to have a pure heart. 
 
It can be said with justice that possession of a pure heart should do equally 
well without Ramanama. Only, I know no other way of attaining purity. And it is 
the way trodden by the sages of old all over the world. They were men of God, 
not superstitious men or charlatans. (H, 9-6-1946, p171) 
 
Spiritual force is like any other force at the service of man. Apart from the fact 
that it has been used for physical ailments for ages, with more or less success, 
it would be intrinsically wrong not to use it, if it can be successfully used for The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91 the cure of physical ailments. For, man is both matter and spirit, each acting 
on and affecting the other. 
 
If you get rid of malaria by taking quinine, without thinking of the millions who 
do not get it, why should you refuse to use the remedy which is within you, 
because millions will not use it through their ignorance? 
 
May you not be clean and well because millions of others will not be so, 
ignorantly or, maybe even cussedly? If you will not be clean out of false notions 
of philanthropy, you will deny yourself the duty of serving the very millions by 
remaining dirty and ill. Surely refusal to be spiritually well or clean is worse 
than the refusal to be physically clean and well. (H, 1-9-1946, p286) 
 
To repeat Ramanama and to follow the way of Ravana in actual practice is 
worse than useless. It is sheer hypocrisy. One may deceive oneself or the world, 
but one cannot deceive the Almighty. (H, 23-6-1946, p186) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  
16. PRAYER THE FOOD OF MY SOUL 
 
I CLAIM to be a man of faith and prayer, and even if I were cut to pieces, I trust 
God would give me the strength not to deny Him and to assert that He is. (YI, 
8-12-1927, p413) 
 
No act of mine is done without prayer. Man is a fallible being. He can never be 
sure of his steps. What he may regard as answer to prayer may be an echo of 
his pride. For infallible guidance man has to have a perfectly innocent heart 
incapable of evil. I can lay no such claim. Mine is a struggling, striving, erring, 
imperfect soul. (YI, 25-9-1924, p313) 
 
Even if I am killed, I will not give up repeating the names of Rama and Rahim, 
which mean to me the same God. With these names on my lips, I will die 
cheerfully. (H, 20-4-1947, p118) 
 
 
Safeguard in Trial 
On all occasions of trial He has saved me. I know that  the phrase 'God saved me' 
has a deeper meaning for me today, and still I feel that I have not yet grasped 
its entire meaning. Only richer experience can help me to a fuller 
understanding. 
 
But in all my trials-of a spiritual nature, as a lawyer, in conducting institutions, 
and in politics-I can say that God saved me. When every hope is gone, 'when 
helpers fail and comforts flee', I experience that help arrives somehow, from I 
know not where. 
 
Prayer has been the saving of my life. Without it I should have been a lunatic 
long ago. My autobiography will tell you that I have had my fair share of the 
bitterest public and private experiences. They threw me into temporary 
despair, but if I was able to get rid of it, it was because of prayer. 
 
Now I may tell you that prayer has not been part of my life in the sense that 
truth has been. It came out of sheer necessity, as I found myself in a plight 
when I could not possibly be happy without it. And the more my faith in God 
increased, the more irresistible became the yearning for prayer. Life seemed to 
be dull and vacant without it. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  
I had attended the Christian service in South Africa, but it had failed to grip 
me. I could not join them in prayer. They supplicated God, but I could not do 
so, I failed egregiously. I started with disbelief in God and prayer, and, until at 
a late stage in life, I did not feel anything like a void in life. But at that stage I 
felt that, as food was indispensable for the body, so was prayer indispensable 
for the soul. In fact, food for the body is not so necessary as prayer for the 
soul. For starvation is often necessary in order to keep the body in health, but 
there is no such thing as prayer-starvation.... 
 
In spite of despair staring me in the face on the political horizon, I have never 
lost my peace. In fact, I have found people who envy my peace. That peace, I 
tell you, comes from prayer; I am not a man of learning, but I humbly claim to 
be a man of prayer. I am indifferent as to the form. Every one is a law unto 
himself in that respect. But there are some well-marked roads, and it is safe to 
walk along the beaten tracks, trod by the ancient teachers. 
 
...I have given my personal testimony. Let everyone try and find that, as a 
result of daily prayer, he adds something new to his life, something with which 
nothing can be compared. (YI, 24-4-1931, p274) 
 
 
God's Response 
Never own defeat in a sacred cause and make up your m i nds henceforth that 
you will be pure and that you will find a response from God. But God never 
answers the prayers of the arrogant, nor the prayers of those who bargain with 
Him.... 
 
If you would ask Him to help you, you would go to Him in all your nakedness, 
approach Him without reservations, also without fear or doubts as to how He 
can help a fallen being like you. He who has helped millions who have 
approached Him, is He going to desert you? He makes no exceptions whatsoever 
and you will find that every one of your prayers will be answered. I am telling 
this out of my personal experience. I have gone through the purgatory. Seek 
first the Kingdom of Heaven and everything will be added unto you. (YI, 4-4-
1929, p111) 
 
I have never found Him lacking in response. I have found Him nearest at hand 
when the horizon seemed darkest-in my ordeals in jails when it was not at all 
smooth sailing for me. I cannot recall a moment in my life when I had a sense The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94 of desertion by God. (H, 24-12-1938, p395) 
 
 
Character of Prayer 
Supplication, worship, prayer are no superstition; the y are acts more real than 
the acts of eating, drinking, sitting or walking. It is no exaggeration to say that 
they alone are real, all else is unreal. 
 
Such worship or prayer is no flight of eloquence; it is no lip-homage. It springs 
from the heart. If, therefore, we achieve that purity of the heart when it is 
'emptied of all but love', if we keep all the chords in proper tune, they 
'trembling pass in music out of sight'. 
 
Prayer needs no speech. It is in itself independent of any sensuous effort. I 
have not the slightest doubt that prayer is an unfailing means of cleansing the 
heart of passions. But it must be combined with the utmost humility. (A, pp51-
52) 
 
It is better in prayer to have a heart without words than words without a heart. 
(YI, 23-1-1930, p25) 
 
We go to the temple to worship not the stone or the metal image, but God who 
resides in it. The image becomes what man makes of it. It has no power 
independently of the sanctity with which it is invested by the worshipper. 
Therefore everyone, including children, should observe perfect silence at the 
time of prayer. (H, 28-4-1946, p112) 
 
Prayer is an impossibility without a living faith in the presence of God within. 
(YI, 20-12-1928, p420) 
 
Prayer is the first and the last lesson in learning the noble and brave art of 
sacrificing self in the various walks of life, culminating in the defense of one's 
nation's liberty and honour. Undoubtedly, prayer requires a living faith in God. 
(H, 14-4-1946, p80) 
 
Man often repeats the name of God parrot-wise and expects fruit from so 
doing. The true seeker must have that living faith which will not only dispel the 
untruth of parrot-wise repetition from within him, but also from the hearts of 
others. (H, 5-5-1956, p113) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95 Need for Prayer 
As food is necessary for the body, prayer is necessary  for the soul. A man may 
be able to do without food for a number of days-as Mac Swiney did for over 70 
days--but, believing in God, man cannot, should not live a moment without 
prayer. (YI, 15-12-1927, p424) 
 
There are many who, whether from mental laziness or from having fallen into a 
bad habit, believe that God is and will help us unasked. Why, then, is it 
necessary to recite His name? It is true that if God is, He is irrespective of our 
belief. But realization of God is infinitely more than mere belief. That can 
come only by constant practice. This is true of all science. How much more true 
of the science of all sciences? (H, 28-4-1946, p109) 
 
Prayer is the key of the morning and the bolt of the evening. (YI, 23-1-1930, 
p25) 
 
I am giving you a bit of my experience and that of my companions when I say 
that he who had experienced the magic of prayer may do without food for days 
together, but not a single moment without prayer. For without prayer there is 
no inward peace. (ibid) 
 
I agree that, if a man could practice the presence of God all the twenty-four 
hours, there would be no need for a separate time for prayer. But most people 
find this impossible. The sordid everyday world is too much with them. For 
them the practice of complete withdrawal of the mind from all outward things, 
even though it might be only for a few minutes everyday, will be found to be of 
infinite use. Silent communion will help them to experience an undisturbed 
peace in the midst of turmoil, to curb anger and cultivate patience. (H, 28-4-
1946, p109) 
 
It should be the general rule that prayers must not be delayed for anybody on 
earth. God's time never stops. From the very beginning the wheel of His time 
has gone ceaselessly on. As a matter of fact, there is no beginning for Him or 
His time....How can anyone afford to miss the time of offering prayers to Him 
whose watch never stops? (H, 5-5-1946, p113) 
 
In the first shloka of Ishopanishad that is repeated everyday at the beginning of 
the prayer, one is asked to dedicate everything to God and then use it to the 
required extent. The principle condition laid down is that one must not covet 
what belongs to another. These two maxims contain the quintessence of the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96 Hindu religion. 
 
 
Essence of Prayer 
In another shloka which is recited during the morning prayer it is said, 'I do not 
ask for temporal power, not do I ask to go to heaven, nor even to attain 
Nirwana, What I ask for is that I may be able to relieve the pain of those who 
are in pain.' The pain might be physical, mental or spiritual. Spiritual pain due 
to slavery to one's passions is sometimes greater even than the physical. 
 
But God does not come down in person to relieve suffering. He works through 
human agency. Therefore, prayer to God to enable one to relieve the suffering 
of others must mean a longing and a readiness on one's part to labour for it. 
 
The prayer... is not exclusive. It is not restricted to one's own caste or 
community. It is all inclusive. It comprehends the whole of humanity. Its 
realization would thus mean the establishment of the Kingdom of Heaven on 
earth. (H, 28-4-1946, p111) 
 
True meditation consists in closing the eyes and ears of the mind to all else 
except the object of one's devotion. Hence the closing of eyes during prayers is 
a n aid to such concentration. Man's conception of God is naturally limited. 
Each one has, therefore, to think of Him as best appeals to him, provided that 
the conception is pure and uplifting. (H, 18-4-1946, p265) 
 
He can truly pray who has the conviction that God is within him. He who has 
not, need not pray. God will not be offended, but I can say from experience 
that he who does not pray is certainly a loser. 
 
What matters, then, whether one man worships God as Person and another as 
Force? Both do right according to their lights. None knows and, perhaps, never 
will know what is the absolutely proper way to pray. The ideal must always 
remain the ideal. One need only remember that God is the Force among all the 
forces. All other forces are material. But God is the vital force or spirit which is 
all-pervading, all-embracing and, therefore, beyond human ken. (ibid, p267) 
 
 
Efficacy of Silence 
It has often occurred to me that a seeker after truth  has to be silent. I know 
the wonderful efficacy of silence. I visited a Trappist monastery in South Africa. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97 A beautiful place it was. Most of the inmates of that place were under a vow of 
silence. I inquired of the Father the motive of it and he said the motive is 
apparent: 'We are frail human beings. We do not know very often what we say. 
If we want to listen to the still small voice that is always speaking within us, it 
will not be heard if we continually speak.' I understood that precious lesson. I 
know the secret of silence. (YI, 6-8-1925, pp274-5) 
 
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the spiritual discipline of a 
votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppress or modify the truth, 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary 
in order to surmount it. A man of few words will rarely be thoughtless in his 
speech; he will measure every word. (A, p45) 
 
Silence of the sewn-up lips is no silence. One may achieve the same result by 
chopping off one's tongue, but that too would not be silence. He is silent who, 
having the capacity to speak, utters no idle word. (H, 24-6-1933, p5) 
 
It [silence] has now become both a physical and spiritual necessity for me. 
Originally it was taken to relieve the sense of pressure. Then I wanted time for 
writing. After, however, I had practiced it for some time, I saw the spiritual 
value of it. It suddenly flashed across my mind that that was the time when I 
could best hold communion with God. And now I feel as though I was naturally 
built for silence. (H, 10-12-1938, p323-4) 
 
Prayer is for remembering God, and for purifying the heart, and can be offered 
even when observing silence. (H, 20-4-1947, p118) 
 
As I believe that silent prayer is often a mightier [force] than any overt act, in 
my helplessness I continuously pray in the faith that the prayer of a pure heart 
never goes unanswered. (YI, 22-9-1927, p321) 
 
 
Power of Prayer 
I can give my own testimony and say that a heartfelt p rayer is undoubtedly the 
most potent instrument that man possesses for overcoming cowardice and all 
other bad old habits. (YI, 20-12-1928, p420) 
 
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in 
us. God demands nothing less than complete self-surrender as the price for the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98 only real freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself, he 
immediately finds himself in the service of all that lives. It becomes his delight 
and his recreation. He is a new man, never weary of spending himself in the 
service of God's creation. (ibid) 
 
There is an eternal struggle raging in man's breast between the powers of 
darkness and of light, and he who has not the sheet-anchor of prayer to rely 
upon will be a victim to the powers of darkness. The man of prayer will be at 
peace with himself and with the whole world; the man who goes about the 
affairs of the world without a prayerful heart will be miserable and will make 
the world also miserable.... 
 
Prayer is the only means of bringing about orderliness and peace and repose in 
our daily acts....Take care of the vital thing and other things will take care of 
themselves. Rectify one angle of a square, and the other angles will be 
automatically right. (YI, 23-1-1930, p26) 
 
Prayer is not an old woman's idle amusement. Properly understood and applied, 
it is the most potent instrument of action. (H, 14-4-1946, p80) 
 
When the mind is completely filled with His spirit, one cannot harbour ill-will or 
hatred towards anyone and, reciprocally, the enemy will shed his enmity and 
become a friend. It is not my claim that I have succeeded in converting 
enemies into friends, but in numerous cases it has been my experience that, 
when the mind is filled with His peace, all hatred ceases. An unbroken 
succession of world teachers since the beginning of time have borne testimony 
to the same. I claim to merit for it. I know it is entirely due to God's grace.  
(H, 28-4-1946, p109) 
 
One with a wicked heart can never be conscious of the all-purifying presence of 
God.  
(H, 29-6-1946, p209) 
 
God answers prayer in His own way, not ours. His ways are different from the 
ways of mortals. Hence they are inscrutable. Prayer presupposes faith. No 
prayer goes in vain. Prayer is like any other action. It bears fruit whether we 
see it or not, and the fruit of heart prayer is far more potent than action so-
called.  
(ibid, p215) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99  
17. MY HINDUISM IS NOT EXCLUSIVE 
 
All-embracing  
FOR
 ME Hinduism is all-sufficing. Every variety of belief finds protection under 
its ample folk. (SW, p329) 
 
I can no more describe my feelings for Hinduism than for my own wife. She 
moves me as no other woman in the world can. Not that she has no faults; I 
dare say she has many more than I see myself. But the feeling of an 
indescribable bond is there. Even so I feel for and about Hinduism with all its 
faults and limitations. (YI, 6-10-1921, p318) 
 
...Hinduism is not an exclusive religion. In it there is room for the worship of all 
the prophets in the world. It is not a missionary religion in the ordinary sense of 
the term. It has no doubt absorbed many tribes in its fold, but this absorption 
has been of an evolutionary, imperceptible character. Hinduism tells every one 
to worship God according to his own faith or Dharma and so it lives at peace 
with all the religions. (ibid) 
 
There is nothing in the world that would keep me from professing Christianity 
or any other faith, the moment I felt the truth of and the need for it. Where 
there is fear, there is no religion...If I could call myself, say, a Christian, or a 
Mussalman, with my own interpretation of the Bible or the Koran, I should not 
hesitate to call myself either. For then Hindu, Christian and Mussalman would 
be synonymous terms. I do believe that in the other world there are neither 
Hindus, nor Christians nor Mussalmans. They all are judged not according to 
their labels, or professions, but according to their actions, irrespective of their 
professions. During our earthly existence there will always be these labels. I, 
therefore, prefer to retain the label of my forefathers so long as it does not 
cramp my growth and does not debar me from assimilating all that is good 
anywhere else. (YI, 2-7-1926, p308) 
 
I know that friends get confused when I say I am a Sanatanist Hindu and they 
fail to find in me things they associate with a man usually labeled as such. But 
that is because, in spite of my being a staunch Hindu, I find room in my faith 
for Christian and Islamic and Zoroastrian teaching, and, therefore, my Hinduism 
seems to some to be a conglomeration and some have even dubbed me an 
eclectic. Well, to call a man eclectic is to say that he has no faith, but mine is The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  a broad faith which does not oppose Christians-not even a Plymouth Brother-not 
even the most fanatical Mussalman. It is a faith based on the broadest possible 
toleration. I refuse to abuse a man for his fanatical deeds because I try to see 
them from his point of view. It is that broad faith that sustains me. It is a 
somewhat embarrassing position, I know-but to others, not to me! (YI, 22-12-
1927, p426) 
 
The chief value of Hinduism lies in holding the actual belief that all life (not 
only human beings, but all sentient beings) is one, i.e., all life coming from the 
One universal source, call it Allah, God or Parameshwara. (H, 26-12-1936, p365) 
 
My Hinduism is not sectarian. It includes all that I know to be best in Islam, 
Christianity, Buddhism and Zoroastrianism....Truth is my religion and ahimsa is 
the only way of its realization. I have rejected once and for all the doctrine of 
the sword. (H, 30-4-1938, p99) 
 
 
Hinduism and Ahimsa 
Hinduism with its message of ahimsa is to me the most glorious religion in the 
world-as my wife to me is the most beautiful woman in the world--but others 
may feel the same about their own religion. (YI, 19-1-1928, p22) 
 
The most distinctive and the largest contribution of Hinduism to India's culture 
is the doctrine of ahimsa. It has given a definite bias to the history of the 
country for the last three thousand years and over and it has not ceased to be a 
living force in the lives of India's millions even today. It is a growing doctrine, 
its message is still being delivered. Its teaching has so far permeated our 
people that an armed revolution has almost become an impossibility in India 
not because, as some would have it, we as a race are physically weak, for it 
does not require much physical strength so much as a devilish will to press a 
trigger to shoot a person, but because the tradition of ahimsa has struck deep 
root among the people. (H, 24-3-1929, p95) 
 
 
Mother Gita 
I do not believe that the Gita teaches violence for doi ng good. It is pre-
eminently a description of the duel that goes on in our own hearts. The divine 
author has used a historical incident for inculcating the lesson of doing one's 
duty even at the peril of one's life. It inculcates performance of duty 
irrespective of the consequences, for we mortals, limited by our physical The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  frames, are incapable of controlling actions, save our own. The Gita 
distinguished between the powers of light and darkness and demonstrates their 
incompatibility. (YI, 25-8-1920, p2) 
 
Though I admire much in Christianity, I am unable to identify myself with 
orthodox Christianity...Hinduism as I know it entirely satisfies my soul, fills my 
whole being, and I find a solace in the Bhagavad Gita and Upanishads that I 
miss even in the Sermon on the Mount. Not that I do not prize the ideal 
presented therein; not that some of the precious teaching in the Sermon on the 
Mount have not left a deep impression upon me, but I must confess.... that, 
when doubt haunts me, when disappointments stare me in the face, and when I 
see not one ray of light on the horizon, I turn to the Bhagavad Gita, and find a 
verse to comfort me; and I immediately begin to smile in the midst of 
overwhelming sorrow. My life has been full of external tragedies, and if they 
have not left any visible and indelible effect on me, I owe it to the teachings of 
the Bhagavad Gita. (YI, 6-8-1925, p274) 
 
As for myself, I run to my Mother Gita whenever I find myself in difficulties, 
and up to now she has never failed to comfort me. It is possible that those who 
are getting comfort from the Gita may get greater help, and see something 
altogether new, if they come to know the way in which I understand it from day 
to day. (YI, 13-11-1930, p1) 
 
Today the Gita is not only my bible or my Koran; it is more than that--it is my 
mother. I lost my earthly mother who gave me birth long ago; but this eternal 
mother has completely filled her place by my side ever since. She has never 
changed, she has never failed me. When I am in difficulty or distress, I seek 
refuge in her bosom. (H, 24-8-1934, p222) 
 
 
The Way of the Buddha 
It is my deliberate opinion that the essential part of  the teachings of the 
Buddha now forms an integral part of Hinduism. It is impossible for Hindu India 
today to retrace her steps and go behind the great reformation that Gautama 
effected in Hinduism. By his immense sacrifice, by his great renunciation, and 
by the immaculate purity of his life he left an indelible impress upon Hinduism, 
and Hinduism owes an eternal debt of gratitude to that great teacher... What 
Hinduism did not assimilate of what passes as Buddhism today was not an 
essential part of the Buddha's life and his teachings. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  It is my fixed opinion that Buddhism or, rather, the teaching of the Buddha 
found its full fruition in India and it could not be otherwise, for Gautama was 
himself a Hindu of Hindus. He was saturated with the best that was in 
Hinduism, and he gave life to some of the teachings that were buried in the 
Vedas and which were overgrown with weeds. His great Hindu spirit cut its way 
through the forest of words, meaningless words, which had overlaid the golden 
truth that was in the Vedas. He made some of the words in the Vedas yield a 
meaning to which the men of his generation were utter strangers, and he found 
in India the most congenial soil. And wherever the Buddha went, he was 
followed by and surrounded not by non-Hindus but Hindus, those who were 
themselves saturated with vedic law. But the Buddha's teaching, like his heart, 
was all-expanding and all-embracing and so it has survived his own body and 
swept across the face of the earth. And at the risk of being called a follower of 
the Buddha, I claim this achievement as a triumph of Hinduism. The Buddha 
never rejected Hinduism, but he broadened its base. He gave it a new life and 
a new interpretation. But...I want to submit to you that the teaching of the 
Buddha was not assimilated in its fullness whether it was in Ceylon, or in 
Burma, or in China, or in Tibet... (YI, 24-11-1927, pp392-3) 
 
 
Moral Government of World 
I have heard it contended times without number and I h ave read in books also 
claiming to express the spirit of Buddhism that the Buddha did not believe in 
God. In my humble opinion such a belief contradicts the very central fact of the 
Buddha's teaching...The confusion has arisen over his rejection, and just 
rejection, of all the base things that passed in his generation under the name of 
God. He undoubtedly rejected the notion that a being called God was actuated 
by malice, could repent of his actions and, like the Kings of the earth, could 
possibly be open to temptations and bribes and could possibly have favourites. 
His whole soul rose in mighty indignation against the belief that a being called 
God required for his satisfaction the living blood of animals in order that he 
might be pleased-animals who were his own creation. He, therefore, reinstated 
God in the right place and dethroned the usurper who for the time being 
seemed to occupy that White Throne. He emphasized and re-declared the 
eternal and unalterable existence of the moral government of this universe. He 
unhesitatingly said that the law was God Himself. 
God's laws are eternal and unalterable and not separable from God Himself. It 
is an indispensable condition of His very perfection. And hence the great 
confusion that the Buddha disbelieved in God and simply believed in the moral 
law, and because of this confusion about God Himself, arose the confusion 
about the proper understanding of the great word Nirvana. Nirvana is The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  undoubtedly not utter extinction. So far as I have been able to understand the 
central fact of the Buddha's life, Nirvana is utter extinction of all that is base in 
us, all that is vicious in us, all that is corrupt and corruptible in us. Nirvana is 
not like the black, dead peace of the grave, but the living peace, the living 
happiness of a soul which is conscious of itself, and conscious of having found 
its own abode in the heart of the Eternal.... 
Great as the Buddha's contribution to humanity was in restoring God to His 
eternal place, in my humble opinion, greater still was his contribution to 
humanity in his exacting regard of all life, be it ever so low. (ibid, p393) 
 
 
Christianity in the West 
It is my firm opinion that Europe today represents not  the spirit of God or 
Christianity, but the spirit of Satan. And Satan's successes are the greatest 
when he appears with the name of God on his lips. Europe is today only 
nominally Christian. In reality it is worshipping Mammon. 'It is easier for a 
camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the 
Kingdom.' Thus really spoke Jesus Christ. His so-called followers measure their 
moral progress by their material possessions (YI, 8-9-1920, pp2-3) 
 
It is a very curious commentary on the West that although it professes 
Christianity, there is no Christianity or Christ in the West, or there should have 
been no war. That is how I understand the message of Jesus. (H, 17-11-1946, 
p405) 
 
Christianity became disfigured when it went to the West. I am sorry to have to 
say that. (H, 20-4-1947, p116) 
 
I ask my Christian brethren...not to take their Christianity as it is interpreted in 
the West. There, we know, they fight with one another as never before. After 
all, Jesus was an Asiatic depicted as wearing the Arabian flowing robe. He was 
the essence of meekness. I hope that the Christians of India will express in their 
lives Jesus the crucified, of the Bible, and not as interpreted in the West with 
her blood-stained fingers. I have no desire to criticize the West. I know and 
value the many virtues of the West. But I am bound to point out that Jesus of 
Asia is misrepresented in the West except in individuals. (H, 7-9-1947, p315) 
 
The indirect influence of Christianity has been to quicken Hinduism into life... 
But the effect of Christianity upon India in general must be judged by the life 
lived in our midst by the average Christian and its effect upon us. I am sorry to The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104  have to record my opinion that it has been disastrous. (YI, 31-7-1924, p254) 
 
 
Personality of Christ 
I may say that I have never been interested in a histo rical Jesus. I should not 
care if it was proved by someone that the man called Jesus never lived, and 
that [what] was narrated in the Gospels was a figment of the writer's 
imagination. For the Sermon on the Mount would still be true for me.  
(YI, 31-12-1931, p429) 
 
I cannot ascribe exclusive divinity to Jesus. He is as divine as Krishna or Rama 
or Mohamed or Zoroaster. Similarly, I do not regard every word of the Bible as 
the inspired word of God, even as I do not regard every word of the Vedas or 
the Koran as inspired. The sum total of each of these books is certainly 
inspired, but I miss that inspiration in many of the things taken individually. 
The Bible is as much a book of religion with me as the Gita and the Koran. (H, 
6-3-1937, p25) 
 
Though, I cannot claim to be a Christian in the sectarian sense, the example of 
Jesus' suffering is a factor in the composition of my undying faith in non-
violence which rules all my actions, worldly and temporal. (H, 7-1-1939, p417) 
 
 
What Christ Means to Me 
What...does Jesus mean to me? To me, He was one of th e  greatest teachers 
humanity has ever had. To His believers, He was God's only begotten Son. Could 
the fact that I do or do not accept this belief make Jesus have any more or less 
influence in my life? Is all the grandeur of His teaching and of His doctrine to be 
forbidden to me? I cannot believe so. (MR, Oct. 1941, pp406-7) 
 
To me it [the word 'begotten'] implies a spiritual birth. My interpretation, in 
other words, is that in Jesus' own life is the key of His nearness to God; that He 
expressed, as no other could, the spirit and will of God. It is in this sense that I 
see Him and recognize Him as the Son of God. (ibid) 
 
I believe that it is impossible to estimate the merits of the various religions of 
the world, and, moreover, I believe that it is unnecessary and harmful even to 
attempt it. But each one of them, in my judgment, embodies a common 
motivating force: the desire to uplift man's life and give it purpose. And 
because the life of Jesus has the significance and the transcendency to which I The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  have alluded, I believe that He belongs not solely to Christianity, but to the 
entire world, to all races and people-it matters little under what flag, name or 
doctrine they may work, profess a faith, or worship a God inherited from their 
ancestors. (ibid) 
 
There is much ignorance and superstition in India. But deep down in us is that 
faith in God-the instinct for religion. (H, 17-11-1946, p405) 
 
If Mohamed came to India today, he would disown many of his so-called 
followers and own me as a true Muslim, as Jesus would own me as a true 
Christian. (ibid) 
 
"How can we bring man back to God or the teaching of Jesus, or that of 
Mohamed?" I might give the answer that Jesus gave to one of his followers: "Do 
the will of my Father who is in Heaven, not merely say Lord, Lord." That holds 
true of you, me and everybody. If we have faith in the living God, all will be 
well with us. I hope not to lose that faith even to my dying day. In spite of my 
numerous failings and shortcomings of which I am but too well aware, my faith 
in God is burning brighter every day. (ibid) 
 
If it did not, I would take the same prescription that I gave a women 
threatened with dishonour and with no prospect of help or escape, viz., commit 
suicide. (ibid) 
 
 
Islam a Religion of Peace 
I do regard Islam to be a religion of peace in the sam e sense as Christianity, 
Buddhism and Hinduism are. No doubt there are differences in degree, but the 
object of these religions is peace. (YI, 20-1-1927, p21) 
 
Islam's distinctive contribution to India's national culture is its unadulterated 
belief in the oneness of God and a practical application of the truth of the 
brotherhood of man for those who are nominally within its fold. I call these two 
distinctive contributions. For in Hinduism the spirit of brotherhood has become 
too much philosophized. Similarly, though philosophical Hinduism has no other 
god but God, it cannot be denied that practical Hinduism is not so emphatically 
uncompromising as Islam. (YI, 21-3-1929, p95) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  Use of Force 
There is nothing in the Koran to warrant the use of fo rce for conversion. The 
Holy Book says in the clearest language possible, 'There is no compulsion in 
religion'. The Prophet's whole life is a repudiation of compulsion in religion. No 
Mussalman, to my knowledge, has ever approved of compulsion. Islam would 
cease to be a world religion of it were to rely upon force for its propagation. 
(YI, 29-9-1921, p307) 
 
I have given my opinion that the followers of Islam are too free with the sword. 
But that is not due to the teaching of the Koran. This is due, in my opinion, to 
the environment in which Islam was born. Christianity has a bloody record 
against it not because Jesus was found wanting, but because the environment 
in which it spread was not responsive to his lofty teaching. (YI, 20-1-1927, p21) 
 
 
The Koran 
I have more than once read the Koran. My religion enabl es me, obliges me, to 
imbibe all that it good in all the great religions of the earth. (H, 28-10-1939, 
p317) 
 
I certainly regard Islam as one of the inspired religions and, therefore, the Holy 
Koran as an inspired book and Muhammad as one of the prophets. (H, 13-7-
1940, p207) 
 
I have come to the conclusion that the teaching of the Koran is essentially in 
favour of non-violence. Non-violence is better than violence, it is said in the 
Koran. Non-violence is enjoined as a duty; violence is permitted as a necessity. 
(ibid, p193) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107   
18. RELIGION AND POLITICS 
 
Life an Integral Whole 
I CLAIM that human mind or human society is not divided into watertight 
compartments called social, political and religious. All act and react upon one 
another. (YI, 2-3-1922, p. 131) 
 
Human life being an undivided whole, no line can ever be drawn between its 
different compartments, not between ethics and politics. A trader who earns 
his wealth by deception only succeeds in deceiving himself when he thinks that 
his sins can be washed away by spending some amount of his ill-gotten gains on 
the so-called religious purposes. One's everyday life is never capable of being 
separated from one's spiritual being. Both act and react upon one another. (H, 
30-3-1947, p. 85) 
 
The politician in me has never dominated a single decision of mine, and if I 
seem to take part in politics, it is only because politics encircle us today like 
the coil of a snake from which one cannot get out, no matter how much one 
tries. I wish, therefore, to wrestle with the snake as I have been doing with 
more or less success consciously since 1894, unconsciously, as I have now 
discovered, ever since reaching years of discretion. Quite selfishly, as I wish to 
live in peace in the midst of a bellowing storm howling round me, I have been 
experimenting with myself and my friends by introducing religion into politics.  
(YI, 12-5-1920, p. 2) 
 
To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of Truth face to face, one must be 
able to love the meanest of creation as oneself. And a man who aspires after 
that cannot afford to keep out of any field of life. That is why my devotion to 
Truth has drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say without the slightest 
hesitation, and yet in all humility, that those who say that religion has nothing 
to do with politics do not know what religion means. (A, pp. 370-1) 
 
I could not be leading a religious life unless I identified myself with the whole 
of mankind, and that I could not do unless I took part in politics. The whole 
gamut of man's activities today constitutes an indivisible whole. You cannot 
divide social, economic, political and purely religious work into watertight 
compartments. I do not know any religion apart from human activity. It 
provides a moral basis to all other activities which they would otherwise lack, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  reducing life to a maze of 'sound and fury signifying nothing'. (H, 24-12-1938, p. 
393) 
 
I felt compelled to come into the political field because I found I could not do 
even social work without touching politics. I feel that political work must be 
looked upon in terms of social and moral progress. In democracy no fact f life is 
untouched by politics. (H, 6-10-1946, p. 341) 
 
For me, politics bereft of religion are absolute dirt, ever to be shunned. Politics 
concern nations and that which concerns the welfare of nations must be one of 
the concerns of a man who is religiously inclined, in other words, a seeker after 
God and Truth. For me, God and Truth are convertible terms, and if anyone 
told me that God was a god of untruth or a god of torture, I would decline to 
worship Him. Therefore, in politics also we have to establish the kingdom of 
Heaven. (YI, 18-6-1925, p. 214) 
 
I cannot isolate politics from the deepest things of my life, for the simple 
reason that my politics are not corrupt, they are inextricably bound up with 
non-violence and truth. (YI, 1-10-1931, p. 281) 
 
I could not live for a single second without religion. Many of my political friends 
despair of me because they say that even my politics are derived from religion. 
And they are right. My politics and all other activities of mine are derived from 
my religion. I go further and say that every activity of a man of religion must be 
bound to God, that is to say, God rules your every breath. (H, 2-3-1934, p. 23) 
 
Indeed, religion should pervade every one of our actions. Here religion does not 
mean sectarianism. It means a belief in ordered moral government of the 
universe. It is not less real because it is unseen. This religion transcends 
Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, etc. It does not supersede them. It harmonizes 
them and gives them reality. (H, 10-2-1940, p. 445) 
 
The life of the millions is my politics, from which I dare not free myself without 
denying my life-work and God. That my politics may take a different turn [after 
the 15th August 1947, when India will be free] is quite possible. But that will be 
determined by circumstances. (H, 17-8-1947, p. 281) 
 
There is undoubtedly a sense in which the statement is true when I say that I 
hold my religion dearer than my country and that, therefore, I am a Hindu first The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109  and nationalist after. I do not become on that score less a nationalist than the 
best of them. I simply thereby imply that the interests of my country are 
identical with those of my religion. Similarly, when I say that I prize my own 
salvation above everything else, above the salvation of India, it does not mean 
that my personal salvation requires a sacrifice of necessarily that the two go 
together. (YI, 23-2-1922, p. 123) 
 
Religion is no test of nationality, but a personal matter between man and his 
God. In the sense of nationality they are Indians first and Indians last, no 
matter what religion they profess. (H, 29-6-1947, p. 215) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110   
19. TEMPLES AND IDOLATRY 
 
Character of Idolatry 
I DO NOT disbelieve in idol worship. An idol does not excite any feeling of 
veneration in me. But I think that idol worship is part of human nature. We 
hanker after symbolism. Why should one be more composed in a church than 
elsewhere? Images are an aid to worship. No Hindu considers an image to be 
God. I do not consider idol worship a sin. (YI, 6-10-1921, p318) 
 
I am both an idolater and an iconoclast in what I conceive to be the true sense 
of the terms. I value the spirit behind idol worship. It plays a most important 
part in the uplift of the human race... I am an iconoclast in the sense that I 
break down the subtle form of idolatry in the shape of fanaticism that refuses 
to see any virtue in any other form of worshipping the Deity save one's own. 
This form of idolatry is more deadly for being more fine and evasive than the 
tangible and gross form of worship that identifies the Deity with a little bit of a 
stone or a golden image. (YI, 28-8-1924, p284) 
 
I am both a supporter and opponent of image worship. When image worship 
degenerates into idolatry and becomes encrusted with false beliefs and 
doctrines, it becomes a necessity to combat it as a gross social evil. On the 
other hand, image worship in the sense of investing one's ideal with a concrete 
shape is inherent in man's nature, and even valuable as an aid to devotion. Thus 
we worship an image when we offer homage to a book which we regard as holy 
or sacred. We worship an image when we visit a temple or a mosque with a 
feeling of sanctity or reverence. Nor do I see any harm in all this. On the 
contrary, endowed as man is with a finite, limited understanding, he can hardly 
do otherwise. Even so, far from seeing anything inherently evil or harmful in 
tree worship, I find in it a thing instinct with a deep pathos and poetic beauty. 
It symbolizes true reverence for the entire vegetable kingdom which, with its 
endless panorama of beautiful shapes and forms, declares to us, as it were with 
a million tongues, the greatness and glory of God.... (YI, 26-9-1929, p320) 
 
Far different, however, is the case of vows and prayers which votaries offer 
before trees. The offering of vows and prayers for selfish ends, whether offered 
in churches, mosques, temples or before trees and shrines, is a thing not to be 
encouraged. Making of selfish requests or offering of vows is not related to 
image worship as effect and cause. A personal selfish prayer is bad whether 
made before an image or an unseen God. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  Let no one, however, from this understand me to mean that I advocate tree 
worship in general. I do not defend tree worship because I consider it to be a 
necessary aid to devotion, but only because I recognize that God manifests 
Himself in innumerable forms, in this universe, and every such manifestation 
commands my spontaneous reverence. (ibid) 
 
As for idol worship, you cannot do without it in some form or other. Why does a 
Mussalman give his life for defending a mosque which he calls a house of God? 
And why does a Christian go to a church, and when he is required to take an 
oath, he swears by the Bible? Not that I see any objection to it. And what is it if 
not idolatry to give untold riches for building mosques and tombs? And what do 
the Roman Catholics do when they kneel before Virgin Mary and before saints, 
quite imaginary figures in stone or painted on canvas or glass? Even so, it is not 
the stone we worship, but it is God we worship in images of stone or metal, 
however rude they may be. (H, 13-3-1937, p39) 
 
 
Place of Worship 
I do not regard the existence of temples as a sin or s uperstition. Some form of 
common worship and a common place of worship appear to be a human 
necessity. Whether the temples should contain images or not is a matter of 
temperament and taste. I do not regard a Hindu or a Roman Catholic place of 
worship containing images as necessarily bad or superstitious and a mosque or a 
Protestant place of worship being good or free of superstition merely because 
of their exclusion of images. A symbol such as a Cross or a book may easily 
become idolatrous, and therefore, superstitious. And the worship of the image 
of Child Krishna or Virgin Mary may become ennobling and free of all 
superstition. It depends upon the attitude of the heart of the worshipper. (YI, 
5-11-1925, p378) 
 
Places of worship to me are not merely brick and mortar. They are but a 
shadow of the reality. Against every church and every mosque and every 
temple destroyed, hundreds have risen in their places. (YI, 4-11-1926, p386) 
I know of no religion or sect that has done or is doing without its house of God, 
variously described as a temple, mosque, church, synagogue or agissari. Nor is 
it certain that any of the great reformers including Jesus destroyed or 
discarded temples altogether. All of them sought to banish corruption from 
temples as well as from society...I have ceased to visit temples for years, but I 
do not regard myself on that account as a better person than before. My 
mother never missed going to the temple when she was in fit state to go there. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  Probably her faith was far greater than mine, though I do not visit temples. (H, 
11-3-1933, p5) 
 
Temples or mosques or churches... I make no distinction between these 
different abodes of God. They are what faith has made them. They are an 
answer to man's craving somehow to reach the Unseen. (H, 18-3-1933, p6) 
 
Acquisition of consciousness [of the living presence of God within one] does not 
require or mean temple-going. (H, 29-6-1947, p209) 
 
Our bodies are the real temples rather than buildings of stone. The best place 
for congregational worship is in the open with the sky above as the canopy and 
mother earth below for the floor. (H, 4-1-1948, p498) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113   
20. THE CURSE OF UNTOUCHABILITY 
 
I D
O NOT want to be reborn. But if I have to be reborn, I should be born an 
untouchable, so that I may share their sorrows, sufferings, and the affronts 
leveled at them, in order that I may endeavour to free myself and them from 
that miserable condition. I, therefore, prayed that, if I should be born again, I 
should do so not as a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya or Shudra, but as an 
Atishudra. (YI, 4-5-1921, p144) 
 
I was wedded to the work for the extinction of 'untouchability' long before I was 
wedded to my wife. There were two occasions in our joint life when there was 
choice between working for the untouchables and remaining with my wife and I 
would have preferred the first. But thanks to my good wife, the crisis was 
averted. In my Ashram, which is my family, I have several untouchables and a 
sweet but naughty girl living as my own daughter. (YI, 5-11-1931, p341) 
 
Love of the people brought the problem of untouchability early into my life. My 
mother said. 'You must not touch this boy, he is an untouchable.' 'Why not?' I 
questioned back, and from that day my revolt began. (H, 24-12-1938, p393) 
 
Swaraj is a meaningless term, if we desire to keep a fifth of India under 
perpetual subjection, and deliberately deny to them the fruits of national 
culture. We are seeking the aid of God in this great purifying movement, but 
we deny to the most deserving among his creatures the rights of humanity. 
Inhuman ourselves we may not plead before the Throne for deliverance from 
the inhumanity of others. (YI, 25-5-1921, p165) 
 
It is simple fanatical obstinacy to persist in persecuting man in the sacred name 
of religion. (YI, 11-3-1926, p95) 
 
For reforms of Hinduism and for its real protection, removal of untouchability is 
the greatest thing...Removal of untouchability is....a spiritual process. (YI, 6-1-
1927, p2) 
 
If untouchability lives, Hinduism must die. (H, 28-9-1947, p349) 
 
I would far rather that Hinduism died than that untouchability lived.190 
In battling against untouchability and in dedicating myself to that battle, I have The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  no less an ambition than to see a complete regeneration of humanity. It may be 
a mere dream, as unreal as the silver in the sea-shell. It is not so to me while 
the dream lasts, and in the words of Romain Rolland, 'Victory lies not in 
realization of the goal, but in a relentless pursuit after it. (YI, 26-11-1931, 
p372) 
 
 
Untouchability and Caste 
It is a wrong to destroy caste because of the outcast e , as it would be to destroy 
a body because of an ugly growth in it or of a crop because of the weeds. The 
outcasteness, in the sense we understand it, has therefore to be destroyed 
altogether. It is an excess to be removed, if the whole system is not to perish. 
Untouchability is the product, therefore, not of the caste system, but of the 
distinction of high and low that has crept into Hinduism and is corroding it. The 
attack on untouchability is thus an attack upon this 'high-and-low'-ness. The 
moment untouchability goes, the caste system itself will be purified, that is to 
say, according to my dream, it will resolve itself into the true Varnadharma, 
the four division of society, each complementary of the other and none inferior 
or superior to any other, each as necessary for the whole body of Hinduism as 
any other. (H, 11-2-1933, p3) 
 
 
Varnashrama Dharma 
Varnashrama Dharma defines man's mission on this eart h . He is not born day 
after day to explore avenues for amassing riches and to explore different means 
of livelihood; on the contrary, man is born in order that he may utilize every 
atom of his energy for the purpose of knowing his Maker. It restricts him, 
therefore, for the purpose of holding body and soul together, to the occupation 
of his forefathers. That and nothing more or nothing less is Varnashrama 
Dharma. (YI, 27-10-1927, p357) 
 
I do, however, believe in varna which is based on hereditary occupations. 
Varnas are four to mark four universal occupations,-imparting knowledge, 
defending the defenseless, carrying on agriculture and commerce, and 
performing service through physical labour. These occupations are common to 
all mankind, but Hinduism, having recognized them as the law of our being, has 
made use of it in regulating social relations and conduct. Gravitation affects us 
all, whether one knows its existence or not. But scientists who knew the law 
have made it yield results that have startled the world. Even so has Hinduism 
startled the world by its discovery and application of the law of varna. When The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115  Hindus were seized with inertia, abuse of varna resulted in innumerable castes, 
with unnecessary and harmful restrictions as to inter-marriage and inter-dine. 
These restrictions may be necessary in the interest of chastity and hygiene. But 
a Brahmana who marries a Shudra girl, or vice versa, commits no offence 
against the law of varnas. (YI, 4-6-1931, p129) 
 
Today Brahmins and Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras are mere labels. There is 
utter confusion of varna as I understand it and I wish that all the Hindus will 
voluntarily call themselves Shudras. That is the only way to demonstrate the 
truth of Brahminism and to revive Varnadharma in its true state. (H, 25-3-1933, 
p3) 
 
I believe that every man is born in the world with certain natural tendencies. 
Every person is born with certain definit limitations which he cannot overcome. 
From a careful observation of those limitations the law of varna was deduced. 
It established certain spheres of actions for certain people with certain 
tendencies. This avoided all unworthy competition. Whilst recognizing 
limitations, the law of varna admitted of no distinctions of high and low; on the 
one hand, it guaranteed to each the fruits of his labours, and one the other, it 
prevented him from pressing upon his neighbours. This great law has been 
degraded and fallen into disrepute. But my conviction is that an ideal social 
order will only be evolved when the implications of this law are fully 
understood and given effect to. (MR, Oct. 1935, p413) 
 
 
Inter-marriage and Inter-dining 
Though there is in Varnashrama no prohibition against inter-marriage and inter-
dining, there can be no compulsion. It must be left to the unfettered choice of 
the individual as to where he or she will marry or dine. (H, 16-11-1935, p316) 
 
 
Caste 
……I 
consider the four divisions alone to be fundamental, natural and essential. 
The innumerable sub castes are sometimes a convenience, often a hindrance. 
The sooner there is fusion the better. (YI, 8-12-1920, p3) 
 
From the economic point of view, its value was once very great. It ensured 
hereditary skill; it limited competition. It was the best remedy against 
pauperism. And it had all the advantages of trade guilds. Although it did not The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  foster adventure or invention there, it is not known to have come in the way 
either... 
Historically speaking, caste may regarded as man's experiment or social 
adjustment in the laboratory of Indian society. If we can prove it to be a 
success, it can be offered to the world as a leaven and as the best remedy 
against heartless competition and social disintegration born of avarice and 
greed. (YI, 5-1-1921, p2) 
 
 
Caste and Varna  
...
I have frequently said that I do not believe in caste in the modern sense. It is 
an excrescence and a handicap on progress. Nor do I believe in inequalities 
between human beings. We are all absolutely equal. But equality is of souls and 
not bodies. Hence, it is a mental state. We need to think of, and to assert, 
equality because we see great inequalities in the physical world. We have to 
realize equality in the midst of this apparent external inequality. Assumption of 
superiority by any person over any other is a sin against God and man. Thus 
caste, in so far as it 0connots distinctions in status, is an evil. (YI, 4-6-1931, 
p129) 
 
Caste distinctions have taken such deep root amongst us that they have also 
infected the Muslims, Christians and followers of other religions in India. It is 
true that class barriers are also to be found in more or less degree in other 
parts of the world. This means that it is a distemper common to the human 
race. It can be eliminated only by the inculcation of religion in its true sense. I 
have not found sanction for such barriers and distinctions in the scriptures of 
any religion. 
In the eye of religion all men are equal. Learning, intellect or riches do not 
entitle one to claim superiority over those who are lacking in these. If any 
person is suffused and sanctified with the purifying essence and discipline of 
true religion, he regards himself under the obligation to share his advantages 
with those who have fewer. That being so, in our present fallen state, true 
religion requires us all to become Atishudras by choice. We must regard 
ourselves not as owners, but as trustees of our wealth, and use it for the 
service of society, taking for ourselves no more than a fair return for service 
rendered. Under this system there would be none poor, none rich. All religions 
would be held equal. All quarrels arising out of religion, caste or economic 
grievance would cease to disturb peace on earth. (Hu, 19-9-1945) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117   
21. THE GOSPEL OF NON-VIOLENCE 
 
The Law of Our Species 
I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical ideali st. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for the rishis and saints. It is meant for the 
common people as well. Non-violence is the law of our species as violence is 
the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher 
law-to the strength of the spirit.... 
The rishis who discovered the law of non-violence in the midst of violence were 
greater geniuses than Newton. They were themselves known the use of arms, 
they realized their uselessness, and taught a weary world that its salvation lay 
not through violence but through non-violence. (YI, 11-8-1920, p3) 
 
 
My Ahimsa 
I know only one way-the way of ahimsa. The way of hims a goes against my 
grain. I do not want to cultivate the power to inculcate himsa...The faith 
sustains me that He is the help of the helpless, that He comes to one's succor 
only when one throws himself on His mercy. It is because of that faith that I 
cherish the hope that God will one day show me a path which I may confidently 
commend to the people. (YI, 10-10-1928, p342) 
 
I have been a 'gambler' all my life. In my passion for finding truth and in 
relentlessly following out my faith in non-violence, I have counted no stake too 
great. In doing so I have erred, if at all, in the company of the most 
distinguished scientist of any age and any clime. (YI, 20-2-1930, p61) 
 
I learnt the lesson of non-violence from my wife, when I tried to bend her to 
my will. Her determined resistance to my will, on the one hand, and her quiet 
submission to the suffering my stupidity involved, on the other, ultimately 
made me ashamed of myself and cured me of my stupidity in thinking that I was 
born to rule over her and, in the end, she became my teacher in non-violence. 
(H, 24-12-1938, p394) 
 
The doctrine that has guided my life is not one of inaction but of the highest 
action. (H, 28-6-1942, p201) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118  I must not...flatter myself with the belief--nor allow friends...to entertain the 
belief that I have exhibited any heroic and demonstrable non-violence in 
myself. All I can claim is that I am sailing in that direction without a moment's 
stop. (H, 11-1-1948, p504) 
 
 
CHARACTER OF NON-VIOLENCE  
Non-violence is the law of the human race and is infin itely greater than and 
superior to brute force. 
In the last resort it does not avail to those who do not possess a living faith in 
the God of Love. 
Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one's self-respect and sense of 
honour, but not always to possession of land or movable property, though its 
habitual practice does prove a better bulwark than the possession of armed 
men to defend them. Non-violence, in the very nature of things, is of no 
assistance in the defence of ill-gotten gains and immoral acts. 
Individuals or nations who would practice non-violence must be prepared to 
sacrifice (nations to last man) their all except honour. It is, therefore, 
inconsistent with the possession of other people's countries, i.e., modern 
imperialism, which is frankly based on force for its defence. 
Non-violence is a power which can be wielded equally by all-children, young 
men and women or grown-up people, provided they have a living faith in the 
God of Love and have therefore equal love for all mankind. When non-violence 
is accepted as the law of life, it must pervade the whole being and not be 
applied to isolated acts. 
It is a profound error to suppose that, whilst the law is good enough for 
individuals, it is not for masses of mankind. (H, 5-9-1936, p236) 
 
For the way of non-violence and truth is sharp as the razor's edge. Its practice 
is more than our daily food. Rightly taken, food sustains the body; rightly 
practiced non-violence sustains the soul. The body food we can only take in 
measured quantities and at stated intervals; non-violence, which is the spiritual 
food, we have to take in continually. There is no such thing as satiation. I have 
to be conscious every moment that I am pursuing the goal and have to examine 
myself in terms of that goal. 
 
 
Changeless Creed 
The very first step in non-violence is that we cultiva t e in our daily life, as 
between ourselves, truthfulness, humility, tolerance, loving kindness. Honesty, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  they say in English, is the best policy. But, in terms of non-violence, it is not 
mere policy. Policies may and do change. Non-violence is an unchangeable 
creed. It has to be pursued in face of violence raging around you. Non-violence 
with a non-violent man is no merit. In fact it becomes difficult to say whether 
it is non-violence at all. But when it is pitted against violence, then one 
realizes the difference between the two. This we cannot do unless we are ever 
wakeful, ever vigilant, ever striving. (H, 2-4-1938, p64) 
 
The only thing lawful is non-violence. Violence can never be lawful in the sense 
meant here, i.e., not according to man-made law but according to the law 
made by Nature for man. (H, 27-10-1946, p369) 
 
 
Faith in God 
[A living faith in non-violence] is impossible without  a living faith in God. A non-
violent man can do nothing save by the power and grace of God. Without it he 
won't have the courage to die without anger, without fear and without 
retaliation. Such courage comes from the belief that God sits in the hearts of 
all and that there should be no fear in the presence of God. The knowledge of 
the omnipresence of God also means respect for the lives even of those who 
may be called opponents.... (H, 18-6-1938, p64) 
 
Non-violence is an active force of the highest order. It is soul force or the 
power of Godhead within us. Imperfect man cannot grasp the whole of that 
Essence-he would not be able to bear its full blaze, but even an infinitesimal 
fraction of it, when it becomes active within us, can work wonders. 
The sun in the heavens fills the whole universe with its life-giving warmth. But 
if one went too near it, it would consume him to ashes. Even so it is with God-
head. We become Godlike to the extent we realize non-violence; but we can 
never become wholly God. (H, 12-11-1938, p326) 
 
The fact is that non-violence does not work in the same way as violence. It 
works in the opposite way. An armed man naturally relies upon his arms. A man 
who is intentionally unarmed relies upon the Unseen Force called God by poets, 
but called the Unknown by scientists. But that which is unknown is not 
necessarily non-existent. God is the Force among all forces known and 
unknown. Non-violence without reliance upon that Force is poor stuff to be 
thrown in the dust. (H, 28-6-1942, p201) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120  Consciousness of the living presence of God within one is undoubtedly the first 
requisite. (H, 29-6-1947, p209) 
 
 
Religious Basis 
My claim to Hinduism has been rejected by some, becaus e I believe and 
advocate non-violence in its extreme form. They say that I am a Christian in 
disguise. I have been even seriously told that I am distorting the meaning of the 
Gita, when I ascribe to that great poem the teaching of unadulterated non-
violence. Some of my Hindu friends tell me that killing is a duty enjoined by the 
Gita under certain circumstances. A very learned shastri only the other day 
scornfully rejected my interpretation of the Gita and said that there was no 
warrant for the opinion held by some commentators that the Gita represented 
the eternal duel between forces of evil and good, and inculcated the duty of 
eradicating evil within us without hesitation, without tenderness. 
I state these opinions against non-violence in detail, because it is necessary to 
understand them, if we would understand the solution I have to offer.... 
I must be dismissed out of considerations. My religion is a matter solely 
between my Maker and myself. If I am a Hindu, I cannot cease to be one even 
though I may be disowned by the whole of the Hindu population. I do however 
suggest that non-violence is the end of all religions. (YI, 29-5-1924, p175) 
 
The lesson of non-violence is present in every religion, but I fondly believe 
that, perhaps, it is here in India that its practice has been reduced to a 
science. Innumerable saints have laid down their lives in tapashcharya until 
poets had felt that the Himalayas became purified in their snowy whiteness by 
means of their sacrifice. But all this practice of non-violence is nearly dead 
today. It is necessary to revive the eternal law of answering anger by love and 
of violence by non-violence; and where can this be more readily done than in 
this land of Kind Janaka and Ramachandra? (H, 30-3-1947, p86) 
 
 
Hinduism's Unique Contribution 
Non-violence is common to all religions, but it has fo und the highest expression 
and application in Hinduism. (I do not regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate 
from Hinduism). 
Hinduism believes in the oneness not of merely all human life but in the 
oneness of all that lives. Its worship of the cow is, in my opinion, its unique 
contribution to the evolution of humanitarianism. It is a practical application of 
the belief in the oneness and, therefore, sacredness of all life. The great belief The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  in transmigration is a direct consequence of that belief. Finally, the discovery 
of the law of Varnashrama is a magnificent result of the ceaseless search for 
truth. (YI, 20-10-1927, p352) 
 
I have also been asked wherefrom in Hinduism I have unearthed ahimsa. Ahimsa 
is in Hinduism, it is in Christianity as well as in Islam. Whether you agree with 
me or not, it is my bounden duty to preach what I believe to be the truth as I 
see it. I am also sure that ahimsa has never made anyone a coward.  
(H, 27-4-1947, p126) 
 
 
The Koran and Non-violence 
[Barisaheb] assured me that there was warrant enough f or Satyagraha in the 
Holy Koran. He agreed with the interpretation of the Koran to the effect that, 
whilst violence under certain well-defined circumstances is permissible, self-
restraint is dearer to God than violence, and that is the law of love. That is 
Satyagraha. Violence is concession to human weakness, Satyagraha is an 
obligation. Even from the practical standpoint it is easy enough to see that 
violence can do no good and only do infinite harm.  
(YI, 14-5-1919, quoted in Communal Unity, p985) 
 
Some Muslim friends tell me that Muslims will never subscribe to unadulterated 
non-violence. With them, they say, violence is as lawful and necessary as non-
violence. The use of either depends upon circumstances. It does not need 
Koranic authority to justify the lawfulness of both. That is the well-known path 
the world has traversed through the ages. There is no such thing as 
unadulterated violence in the world. But I have heard it from many Muslim 
friends that the Koran teaches the use of non-violence. It regards forbearance 
as superior to vengeance. The very word Islam means peace, which is non-
violence. Badshahkhan, a staunch Muslim who never misses his namaz and 
Ramzan, has accepted out and out non-violence as his creed. It would be no 
answer to say that he does not live up to his creed, even as I know to my shame 
that I do not one of kind, it is of degree. But, argument about non-violence in 
the Holy Koran is an interpolation, not necessary for my thesis. (H, 7-10-1939, 
p296) 
 
 
No Matter of Diet 
Ahimsa is not a mere matter of dietetics, it transcen ds  it. What a man eats or 
drinks matters little; it is the self-denial, the self-restraint behind it that The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  matters. By all means practice as much restraint in the choice of the articles of 
your diet as you like. The restraint is commendable, even necessary, but it 
touches only the fringe of ahimsa. A man may allow himself a wide latitude in 
the matter of diet and yet may be a personification of ahimsa and compel our 
homage, if is heart overflows with love and melts at another's woe, and has 
been purged of all passions. On the other hand a man always over-scrupulous in 
diet is an utter stranger to ahimsa and pitiful wretch, if he is a slave to 
selfishness and passions and is hard of heart. (YI, 6-9-1928, pp300-1) 
 
 
Road to Truth 
My love for non-violence is superior to every other th ing mundane or 
supramundane. It is equaled only by my love for Truth, which is to me 
synonymous with non-violence through which and which alone I can see and 
reach Truth. (YI, 20-2-1930, p61) 
 
....Without ahimsa it is not possible to seek and find Truth. Ahimsa and Truth 
are so intertwined that it is practically impossible to disentangle and separate 
them. They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather of a smooth, unstamped, 
metallic disc. Who can say which is the obverse, and which is the reverse? 
Nevertheless ahimsa is the means; Truth is the end. Means to be means must 
always be within our reach, and so ahimsa is our supreme duty. If we take care 
of the means, we are bound to reach the end sooner of latter. When once we 
have grasped this point, final victory is beyond question. (FYM, pp12-3) 
 
Ahimsa is not the goal. Truth is the goal. But we have no means of realizing 
truth in human relationships except through the practice of ahimsa. A steadfast 
pursuit of ahimsa is inevitably bound to truth--not so violence. That is why I 
swear by ahimsa. Truth came naturally to me. Ahimsa I acquired after a 
struggle. 
But ahimsa being the means, we are naturally more concerned with it in our 
everyday life. It is ahimsa, therefore, that our masses have to be educated in. 
Education in truth follows from it as a natural end. 
(H, 23-6-1946, p199) 
 
 
No Cover for Cowardice 
My non-violence does not admit of running away from da n ger and leaving dear 
ones unprotected. Between violence and cowardly flight, I can only prefer 
violence to cowardice. I can no more preach non-violence to a coward than I The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123  can tempt a blind man to enjoy healthy scenes. Non-violence is the summit of 
bravery. And in my own experience, I have had no difficulty in demonstrating to 
men trained in the school of violence the superiority of non-violence. As a 
coward, which I was for years, I harboured violence. I began to prize non-
violence only when I began to shed cowardice. Those Hindus who ran away from 
the post of duty when it was attended with danger did so not because they 
were non-violent, or because they were afraid to strike, but because they were 
unwilling to die or even suffer an injury. A rabbit that runs away from the bull 
terrier is not particularly non-violent. The poor thing trembles at the sight of 
the terrier and runs for very life. (YI, 28-5-1924, p178) 
 
Non-violence is not a cover for cowardice, but it is the supreme virtue of the 
brave. Exercise of non-violence requires far greater bravery than that of 
swordsmanship. Cowardice is wholly inconsistent with non-violence. Translation 
from swordsmanship to non-violence is possible and, at times, even an easy 
stage. Non-violence, therefore, presupposes ability to strike. It is a conscious 
deliberate restraint put upon one's desire for vengeance. But vengeance is any 
day superior to passive, effeminate and helpless submission. Forgiveness is 
higher still. Vengeance too is weakness. The desire for vengeance comes out of 
fear of harm, imaginary or real. A dog barks and bites when he fears. A man 
who fears no one on earth would consider it too troublesome even to summon 
up anger against one who is vainly trying to injure him. The sun does not wreak 
vengeance upon little children who throw dust at him. They only harm 
themselves in the act. (YI, 12-8-1926, p285) 
 
The path of true non-violence requires much more courage than violence. (H, 
4-8-1946, pp248-9) 
 
The minimum that is required of a person wishing to cultivate the ahimsa of the 
brave is first to clear one's thought of cowardice and, in the light of the 
clearance, regulate his conduct in every activity, great or small. Thus the 
votary must refuse to be cowed down by his superior, without being angry. He 
must, however, be ready to sacrifice his post, however remunerative it may be. 
Whilst sacrificing his all, if the votary has no sense of irritation against his 
employer, he has ahimsa of the brave in him. 
Assume that a fellow-passenger threatens my son with assault and I reason with 
the would-be-assailant who then turns upon me. If then I take his blow with 
grace and dignity, without harbouring any ill-will against him, I exhibit the 
ahimsa of the brave. Such instances are of everyday occurrence and can be 
easily multiplied. If I succeed in curbing my temper every time and, though The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124  able to give blow for blow, I refrain, I shall develop the ahimsa of the brave 
which will never fail me and which will compel recognition from the most 
confirmed adversaries. (H, 17-11-1946, p404) 
 
Inculcation of cowardice is against my nature. Ever since my return from South 
Africa, where a few thousand had stood up not unsuccessfully against heavy 
odds, I have made it my mission to preach true bravery which ahimsa means. 
(H, 1-6-1947, p175) 
 
 
Humility Essential 
If one has...pride and egoism, there is no non-violenc e. Non-violence is 
impossible without humility. My own experience is that, whenever I have acted 
non-violently, I have been led to it and sustained in it by the higher promptings 
of an unseen power. Through my own will I should have miserably failed. When 
I first went to jail, I quailed at the prospect. I had heard terrible things about 
jail life. But I had faith in God's protection. Our experience was that those who 
went to jail in a prayerful spirit came out victorious, those who had gone in 
their own strength failed. There is no room for self-pitying in it either when you 
say God is giving you the strength. Self-pity comes when you do a thing for 
which you expect recognition from others. But there is no question of 
recognition. (H, 28-1-1939, p442) 
 
It was only when I had learnt to reduce myself to zero that I was able to evolve 
the power of Satyagraha in South Africa. (H, 6-5-1939, p113) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125   
22. THE POWER OF NON-VIOLENCE 
 
NON-VIOLENCE IN its dynamic condition means conscious suffering. It does not 
mean meek submission to the will of the evil-doer, but it means the pitting of 
one's whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our 
being, it is possible for a single individual to defy the whole might of an unjust 
empire to save his honour, his religion, his soul and lay the foundation for that 
empire's fall or its regeneration. (YI, 1-8-1920, p3) 
 
 
Active Force   
Th
e non-violence of my conception is a more active and more real fighting 
against wickedness than retaliation whose very nature is to increase 
wickedness. I contemplate a mental and, therefore, a moral opposition to 
immoralities. I seek entirely to blunt the edge of the tyrant's sword, not by 
putting up against it a sharper-edged weapon, but by disappointing his 
expectation that I would be offering physical resistance. The resistance of the 
should that I should offer instead would elude him. It would at first dazzle him, 
and at last compel recognition from him, which recognition would not humiliate 
him but would uplift him. It may be urged that this again is an ideal state. And 
so it is. The propositions from which I have drawn my arguments are as true as 
Euclid's definitions, which are none the less true because in practice we are 
unable to even draw Euclid's line on a blackboard. But even a geometrician 
finds it impossible to get on without bearing in mind Euclid's definitions. Nor 
may we...dispense with the fundamental propositions on which the doctrine of 
Satyagraha is based. (YI, 8-10-1925, p346) 
 
I admit that the strong will rob the weak and that it is sin to be weak. But this 
is said of the soul in man, not of the body. If it be said of the body, we could 
never be free from the sin of weakness. But the strength of soul can defy a 
whole world in arms against it. This strength is open to the weakest in body. 
(YI, 6-5-1926, p164) 
 
Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. It is mightier 
than the mightiest weapon of destruction devised by the ingenuity of man. 
Destruction is not the law of the humans. Man lives freely by his readiness to 
die, if need be, at the hands of his brother, never by killing him. Every murder 
or other injury, no matter for what cause, committed or inflicted on another is 
a crime against humanity. (H, 20-7-1935, pp180-1) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126   
Non-violence is like radium in its action. An infinitesimal quantity of it 
embedded in a malignant growth acts continuously, silently and ceaselessly till 
it has transformed the whole mass of the diseased tissue into a healthy one. 
Similarly, even a little of true non-violence acts in a silent, subtle, unseen way 
and leavens the whole society. (H, 12-11-1938, p327) 
 
 
Matchless Bravery   
An
 armed soldier relies on his weapons for his strengt h. Take away from him his 
weapons-his gun or his sword, and he generally becomes helpless. But a person 
who has truly realized the principle of non-violence has the God-given strength 
for his weapon and the world has not known anything that can match it. (H, 19-
11-1938, pp341-2) 
 
A small body of determined spirits fired by an unquenchable faith in their 
mission can alter the course of history. (ibid, p343) 
 
Non-violence of the strong is any day stronger than that of the bravest soldier 
fully armed or a whole host. (H, 12-5-1946, p128) 
 
 
Exercise in Faith   
Th
e hardest metal yields to sufficient heat. Even so t he hardest heart must 
melt before sufficiency of the heat of non-violence. And there is no limit to the 
capacity of non-violence to generate heat. 
Every action is a resultant of a multitude of forces even of a contrary nature. 
There is no waste of energy. So we learn in the books on mechanics. This is 
equally true of human actions. The difference is that in the one case we 
generally know the forces at work, and when we do, we can mathematically 
foretell the resultant. In the case of human actions, they result from a 
concurrence of forces of most of which we have no knowledge. But our 
ignorance must not be made to serve the cause of disbelief in the power of 
these forces. Rather is our ignorance a cause for greater faith. And non-
violence being the mightiest force in the world and also the most elusive in its 
working, it demands the greatest exercise of faith. Even as we believe in God in 
faith, so have we to believe in non-violence in faith. (H, 7-1-1939, p417) 
 
Violence like water, when it has an outlet, rushes forward furiously with an 
overwhelming force. Non-violence cannot act madly. It is the essence of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127  discipline. But, when it is set going, no amount of violence can crush it. For full 
play, it requires unsullied purity and an unquenchable faith... (H, 21-3-1939, 
p433) 
 
 
A Science 
Ahimsa is a science. The word 'failure' has no place i n the vocabulary of 
science. Failure to obtain the expected result is often the precursor to further 
discoveries. (H, 6-5-1939, p113) 
 
If the function of himsa is to devour all it comes across, the function of ahimsa 
is to rush into the mouth of himsa. In an atmosphere of ahimsa one has no 
scope to put his ahimsa to the test. It can be tested only in the face of himsa. 
(H, 13-5-1939, p121) 
 
Violence can only be effectively met by non-violence. This is an old, 
established truth...that the weapon of violence, even if it was the atom bomb, 
became useless when matched against non-violence. That very few understand 
how to wield this mighty weapon is true. It requires a lot of understanding and 
strength of mind. It is unlike what is needed in military schools and colleges. 
The difficulty one experiences in meeting himsa with ahimsa arises from 
weakness of mind. (H, 1-6-1947, p172) 
 
 
The Deed, not Doer   
'H
ate the sin and not the sinner' is a precept which, though easy enough to 
understand, is rarely practised, and that is why the poison of hatred spreads in 
the world. 
This ahimsa is the basis of the search for truth. I am realizing every day that 
the search is vain unless it is founded on ahimsa as the basis. It is quite proper 
to resist and attack a system, but to resist and attack its author is tantamount 
to resisting and attacking oneself. For we are all tarred with the same brush, 
and are children of one and the same creator, and as such, the divine powers 
within us are infinite. To slight a single human being is to slight those divine 
powers, and thus to harm not only that Being but with Him the whole world. (A, 
p203) 
 
Man and his deed are two distinct things. Whereas a good deed should call forth 
approbation and a wicked deed disapprobation, the doer of the deed, whether 
good or wicked, always deserves respect or pity as the case may be. (ibid) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128   
Those who seek to destroy men rather than manners adopt the latter and 
become worse than those whom they destroy under the mistaken belief that 
the manners will die with the men. They do not know the root of the evil. (YI, 
17-3-1927, p85) 
 
It is the acid test of non-violence that, in a non-violent conflict, there is no 
rancour left behind, and in the end the enemies are converted into friends. 
That was my experience in South Africa, with General Smuts. He started with 
being my bitterest opponent and critic. Today he is my warmest friend.  
(H, 12-11-1938, p327) 
 
The principal implication of ahimsa is that the ahimsa in us ought to soften and 
not to stiffen our opponents' attitude to us; it ought to melt him; it ought to 
strike a responsive chord in his heart. 
As ahimsa-ites, can you say that you practice genuine ahimsa? Can you say that 
you receive the arrows of the opponent on your bare breasts without returning 
them? Can you say that you are not angry, that you are not perturbed by his 
criticism? (H, 13-5-1939, p121) 
 
By reason of life-long practice of ahimsa, I claim to be an expert in it, though 
very imperfect. Speaking in absolute terms, the more I practice it the clearer I 
see how far I am from the full expression of ahimsa in my life. It is his 
ignorance of this, the greatest duty of man in the world, which makes him say 
that in this age non-violence has little scope in the face of violence, whereas I 
make bold to say that in this age of the Atom Bomb unadulterated non-violence 
is the only force that can confound all the tricks put together of violence. (H, 
16-11-1947, p412) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129   
23. TRAINING FOR NON-VIOLENCE 
 
"HO
W ARE we to train individuals or communities in this difficult art?" 
There is no royal road, except through living the creed in your life which must 
be a living sermon. Of course, the expression in one's own life presupposes 
great study, tremendous perseverance, and thorough cleansing of one's self of 
all the impurities. If for mastering of the physical sciences you have to devote a 
whole life-time, how many life-times may be needed for mastering the greatest 
spiritual force that mankind has known? But why worry even if it means several 
life-times? For, if this is the only permanent thing in life, if this is the only 
thing that counts, then whatever effort you bestow on mastering it is well 
spent. Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and everything else shall be added 
unto you. The Kingdom of Heaven is ahimsa. (H, 14-3-1936, p39) 
 
Arms are surely unnecessary for a training in ahimsa. In fact the arms, if any, 
have to be thrown away, as the Khansaheb did in the Frontier Province. Those 
who hold that it is essential to learn violence before we can learn non-violence, 
would hold that only sinners can be saints. 
 
 
Fearlessness the Pre-requisite 
Just as one must learn the art of killing in the trai n ing for violence, so one must 
learn the art of dying in the training for non-violence. Violence does not mean 
emancipation from fear, but discovering the means of combating the cause of 
fear. Non-violence, on the other hand, has no cause for fear. The votary of 
non-violence has to cultivate the capacity for sacrifice of the highest type in 
order to be free from fear. He racks not if he should lose his land, his wealth, 
his life. He who has not overcome all fear cannot practice ahimsa to 
perfection. The votary of ahimsa has only one fear, that is of God. He who 
seeks refuge in God ought to have a glimpse of the Atman that transcends the 
body; and the moment one has a glimpse of the Imperishable Atman, one sheds 
the love of the perishable body. Training in non-violence is thus diametrically 
opposed to training in violence. Violence is needed for the protection of things 
external, non-violence is needed for the protection of the Atman, for the 
protection of one's honour. 
This non-violence cannot be learnt by staying at home. It needs enterprise. In 
order to test ourselves we should learn to dare danger and death, mortify the 
flesh, and acquire the capacity to endure all manner of hardships. He who 
trembles or take to his heels the moment he sees two people fighting is not The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  non-violent, but a coward. A non-violent person will lay down his life in 
preventing such quarrels. The bravery of the non-violent is vastly superior to 
that of the violent. The badge of the violent is his weapon-spear, or sword, or 
rifle. God is the shield of the non-violent. This is not course of training for one 
intending to learn non-violence. But it is easy to evolve one from the principles 
I have laid down. (H, 1-9-1940, p268) 
 
 
Non-violence of the Brave 
Non-violence does not require any outside or outward t raining. It simply 
requires the will not to kill even in retaliation and the courage to face death 
without revenge. This is no sermon on ahimsa but cold reason and the 
statement of a universal law. Given the unquenchable faith in the law, no 
provocation should prove too great for the exercise of forbearance. This I have 
described as the non-violence of the brave. (H, 8-9-1946, p296) 
 
That non-violence which only an individual can use is not of much use in terms 
of society. Man is a social being. His accomplishments to be of use must be such 
as any person with sufficient diligence can attain. That which can be exercised 
only among friends is of value only as a spark of non-violence. It cannot merit 
the appellation of ahimsa. 'Enmity vanishes before ahimsa' is a great aphorism. 
It means that the greatest enmity requires an equal measure of ahimsa for its 
abatement. 
Cultivation of this virtue may need long practice, ever extending to several 
births. It does not become useless on that account. Traveling along the route, 
the pilgrim will meet richer experiences from day to day, so that he may have a 
glimpse of the beauty he is destined to see at the top. This will add to his zest. 
No one is entitled to infer from this that the path will be a continuous carpet of 
roses without thorns. A poet has sung that the way to reach God accrues only to 
the very brave, never to the faint-hearted. The atmosphere today is so much 
saturated with poison that one refuses to recollect the wisdom of the ancients 
and to perceive the varied little experience of ahimsa in action. 'A bad turn is 
neutralized by a good' ,is a wise saying of daily experience in practice. Why can 
we not see that if the sum total of the world's activities was destructive, it 
would have come to an end long ago? Love, otherwise, ahimsa, sustains this 
planet of ours. This much must be admitted. The precious grace of life has to 
be strenuously cultivated, naturally so because it is uplifting. Descent is easy, 
not so ascent. A large majority of us being undisciplined, our daily experience 
is that of fighting or swearing at one another on the slightest pretext. 
This, the richest grace of ahimsa, will descend easily upon the owner of hard 
discipline. (H, 14-12-1947, p468) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131   
24. APPLICATION OF NON-VIOLENCE 
 
IF ONE does not practice non-violence in one's persona l relations with others, 
and hopes to use it in bigger affairs, one is vastly mistaken. Non-violence like 
charity must begin at home. 
But if it is necessary for the individual to be trained in non-violence, it is even 
more necessary for the nation to be trained likewise. One cannot be non-
violent in one's own circle and violent outside it. Or else, one is not truly non-
violent even in one's own circle; often the non-violence is only in appearance. 
It is only when you meet with resistance, as for instance, when a thief or a 
murderer appears, that your non-violence is put on its trail. You either try or 
should try to oppose the thief with his own weapons, or you try to disarm him 
by love. Living among decent people, your conduct may not be described as a 
non-violent. 
Mutual forbearance is non-violence. Immediately, therefore, you get the 
conviction that non-violence is the law of life, you have to practice it towards 
those who act violently towards you, and the law must apply to nations as 
individuals. Training no doubt is necessary. And beginnings are always small. 
But if the conviction is there, the rest will follow. (H, 28-1-1939, pp441-2) 
 
 
Universality of Non-violence 
Non-violence to be a creed has to be all-pervasive. I c annot be non-violent 
about one activity of mine and violent about others. (H, 12-10-1935, p376) 
 
It is a blasphemy to say that non-violence can only be practiced by individuals 
and never by nations which are composed of individuals. (H, 12-11-1938, p328) 
 
In my opinion, non-violence is not passivity in any shape or form. Non-violence, 
as I understand it, is the most active force in the world...Non-violence is the 
supreme law. During my half a century of experience, I have not yet come 
across a situation when I had to say that I was helpless, that I had no remedy in 
terms of non-violence. (H, 24-12-1938, p393) 
 
 
Cultivation of Non-violence 
I am an irrepressible optimist. My optimism rests on m y belief in the infinite 
possibilities of the individual to develop non-violence. The more you develop it The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132  in your own being, the more infectious it becomes till it over-whelms your 
surroundings and by and by might over sweep the world. (H, 28-1-1939, p443) 
 
I have known from early youth that non-violence is not a cloistered virtue to be 
practiced by the individual for his peace and final salvation, but it is a rule of 
conduct for society if it is to live consistently with human dignity and make 
progress towards the attainment of peace for which it has been yearning for 
ages past. (GCG, pp42-44, pp170-1) 
 
To practice non-violence in mundane matters is to know its true value. It is to 
bring heaven upon earth. There is no such thing as the other world. All works 
are one. There is no 'here' and no 'there'. As Jeans has demonstrated, the whole 
universe including the most distant stars, invisible even through the most 
powerful telescope in the world, is compressed in an atom. 
I hold it, therefore, to be wrong to limit the use of non-violence to cave-
dwellers and for acquiring merit for a favoured position in the other world. All 
virtue ceases to have use if it serves no purpose in every walk of life. (H, 26-7-
1942, p248) 
 
 
Use on Mass Scale 
Unfortunately for us, we are strangers to the non-viol ence of the brave on a 
mass scale. Some even doubt the possibility of the exercise of non-violence by 
groups, much less by masses of people. They restrict its exercise to exceptional 
individuals. Only, mankind can have no use of it if it is always reserved only for 
individuals. (H, 8-9-1946, p296) 
 
 
Efficacy 
I have been practicing with scientific precision non-vi olence and its possibilities 
for an unbroken period of over fifty years. I have applied it in every walk of 
life, domestic, institutional, economic and political. I know of no single case in 
which it has failed. Where it has seemed sometimes to have failed, I have 
ascribed it to my imperfections. I claim no perfection for myself. But I do claim 
to be a passionate seeker after Truth, which is but another name for God. In 
the course of that search, the discovery of non-violence came to me. Its spread 
is my life mission. I have no interest in living except for the prosecution of that 
mission. (H, 6-7-1940, pp185-6) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  There is no hope for the aching world except through the narrow and straight 
path of non-violence. Millions like me may fail to prove the truth in their own 
lives, that would be their failure, never of the eternal law. (H, 29-6-1947, 
p209) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134   
25. THE NON-VIOLENT SOCIETY 
 
I H
OLD that nonviolence is not merely a personal virtue. It is also a social virtue 
to be cultivated like the other virtues. Surely society is largely regulated by the 
expression of non-violence in its mutual dealings. What I ask for is an extension 
of it on a larger, national and international scale. (H, 7-1-1939, p417) 
 
All society is held together by non-violence, even as the earth is held in her 
position by gravitation. But when the law of gravitation was discovered, the 
discovery yielded results of which our ancestors had no knowledge. Even so, 
when society is deliberately constructed in accordance with the law of 
nonviolence, its structure will be different in material particulars from what it 
is today. But I cannot say in advance what the government based on non-
violence will be like. 
What is happening today is disregard of the law of non-violence and 
enthronement of violence as if it were an eternal law. (H, 11-12-1939, p8) 
 
Society based on nonviolence can only consist of groups settled in villages in 
which voluntary co-operation is the condition of dignified and peaceful 
existence. (H, 13-1-1940, pp410-11) 
 
 
The Government  
The Government cannot succeed in becoming entirely no n -violent, because it 
represents all the people. I do not today conceive of such a golden age. But I do 
believe in the possibility of a predominantly nonviolent society. And I am 
working for it. (H, 9-3-1940, p31) 
 
There remains the question as to whether in an ideal society, there should be 
any or no government. I do not think we need worry ourselves about this at the 
moment. If we continue to work for such a society, it will slowly come into 
being to an extent, such that the people can benefit by it. Euclid's line is one 
without breadth, but no one has so far been able to draw it and never will. All 
the same, it is only by keeping the ideal line in mind that we have made 
progress in geometry. What is true here is true of every ideal. 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135   
Anarchy 
It must be remembered that nowhere in the world does a  State without 
government exist. If at all it could ever come into being, it would be in India; 
for, ours is the only country where the attempt has, at any rate, been made. 
We have not yet been able to show that bravery to the degree which is 
necessary and for the attainment of which there is only one way. Those who 
have faith in the latter have to demonstrate it. In order to do so, the fear of 
death has to be completely shed, just as we have shed the fear of prisons. (H, 
15-9-1946, p309) 
 
 
Democracy and Non-violence  
Science of war leads one to dictatorship pure and simpl e. Science of 
nonviolence can alone lead one to pure democracy. (H, 15-10-1938, p290) 
 
Democracy and violence can ill go together. The State that are today nominally 
democratic have either to become frankly totalitarian, or if they are to become 
truly democratic, they must become courageously non-violent. (H, 12-11-1938, 
p328) 
 
Holding the view that, without the recognition of non-violence on a national 
scale, there is no such thing as a constitutional or democratic government, I 
devote my energy to the propagation of non-violence as the law of our life, 
individual, social, political, national and international. I fancy that I have seen 
the light, though dimly. I write cautiously for I do not profess to know the 
whole of the Law. If I know the success of my experiments, I know also my 
failures. But the successes are enough to fill me with undying hope. 
I have often said that if one takes care of the means, the end will take care of 
itself. Non-violence is the means, the end for everyone is complete 
independence. There will be an international League only when all the nations, 
big or small, composing it are fully independent. The nature of that 
independence will correspond to the extent of nonviolence assimilated by the 
nations concerned. One thing is certain. In a society based on non-violence, the 
smallest nation will feel as tall as the tallest. The idea of superiority and 
inferiority will be wholly obliterated. 
...The conclusion is irresistible that for one like me, wedded to non-violence, 
constitutional or democratic government is a distant dream so long as non-
violence is not recognized as a living force, an inviolable creed, not a mere 
policy. While I prate about universal non-violence, my experiment is confined The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136  to India. If it succeeds, the world will accept it without effort. There is 
however a bit BUT. The pause does not worry me. My faith is brightest in the 
midst of impenetrable darkness. (H, 11-12-1939, p8) 
 
 
Use of Power  
By its very nature, nonviolence cannot 'seize' power, nor can that be its goal. 
But non-violence can do more; it can effectively control and guide power 
without capturing the machinery of government. That is its beauty. 
There is an exception, of course. If the nonviolent non-co-operation of the 
people is so complete that the administration ceases to function or if the 
administration crumbles under the impact of a foreign invasion and a vacuum 
results, the people's representatives will then step in and fill it. Theoretically 
that is possible. 
But the use of power need not necessarily be violent. A father wields power 
over his children; he may even punish but not by inflicting violence. The most 
effective exercise of power is that which irks least. Power rightly exercised 
must sit light as a flower; no one should feel the weight of it. 
The people accepted the authority of the Congress willingly. I was on more 
than one occasion invested with the absolute power of dictatorship. But 
everybody knew that my power rested on their willing acceptance. They could 
set me aside at any time and I would have stepped aside without a murmur. 
Prophets and supermen are born only once in an age. But if even a single 
individual realizes the ideal of ahimsa in its fullness, he covers and redeems the 
whole society. Once Jesus had blazed the trail, his twelve disciples could carry 
on his mission without his presence. 
It needed the perseverance and genius of so many generations of scientists to 
discover the laws of electricity, but today everybody, even children use electric 
power in their daily life. Similarly, it will not always need a perfect being to 
administer an ideal State once it has come into being. What is needed is a 
thorough social awakening to begin with. The rest will follow. 
To take an instance nearer home, I have presented to the working class the 
truth that true capital is not silver or gold, but the labour of their hands and 
feet and their intelligence. Once labour develops that awareness, it would not 
need my presence to enable it to make use of the power that it will release. 
(TNH, pp91-93) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137   
26. THE NON-VIOLENT STATE 
 
MAN
Y HAVE shaken their heads as they have said, "But you can't teach non-
violence to the masses. It is only possible for individuals and that too in rare 
cases." That is, in my opinion, a gross self-deception. If mankind was not 
habitually non-violent, it would have been self-destroyed ages ago. But in the 
duel between forces of violence and non-violence, the latter have always come 
out victorious in the end. 
The truth is that we have not had patience enough to wait and apply ourselves 
whole-heartedly to the spread of non-violence among the people as a means for 
political ends. (YI, 2-1-1930, p4) 
 
 
Political Power  
To me political power is not an end but one of the mea ns of enabling people to 
better their condition in every department of life. Political power means 
capacity to regulate national life through national representatives. If national 
life becomes so perfect as to become self-regulated, no representation become 
necessary. There is then a state of enlightened anarchy. In such a state 
everyone is his own ruler. He rules himself in such a manner that he is never a 
hindrance to his neighbour. 
In the ideal State, therefore, there is no political power because there is no 
State. But the ideal is never fully realized in life. Hence the classical statement 
of Thoreau that Government is best which governs the least. (YI, 2-7-1931, 
p162) 
 
 
Capitalism a Trusteeship  
It is my firm conviction that if the State suppressed c apitalism by violence, it 
will be caught in the coils of violence itself, and fails to develop nonviolence at 
any time. The State represents violence in a concentrated and organized form. 
The individual has a soul, but as the State is a soulless machine, it can never be 
weaned from violence to which it owes its very existence. Hence I prefer the 
doctrine of trusteeship. 
The fear is always there that the State may use too much violence against those 
who differ from it. I would be very happy, indeed, if the people concerned 
behaved as trustees; but if they fail, I believe we shall have to deprive them of 
their possessions through the State with the minimum exercise of violence. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138  That is why I said at the Round Table Conference that every vested interest 
must be subjected to scrutiny, and confiscation ordered where necessary with 
or without compensation as the case demanded. 
What I would personally prefer would be not centralization of power in the 
hands of the State, but an extension of the sense of trusteeship, as, in my 
opinion, the violence of private ownership is less injurious than the violence of 
the State. However, if it is unavoidable, I would support a minimum of State-
ownership. 
While admitting that man actually lives by habit, I hold that it is better for him 
to live by the exercise of will. I also believe that men are capable of developing 
their will to an extent that will reduce exploitation to a minimum. 
I look upon an increase in the power of the State with the greatest fear 
because, although while apparently doing good by minimizing exploitation, it 
does the greatest harm to mankind by destroying individuality, which lies at the 
root of the progress. 
We know of so many cases where men have adopted trusteeship, but non where 
the State has really lived for the poor. (MR, October, 1935, p412) 
 
 
Non-violent Swaraj  
In Swaraj based on ahimsa, people need not know their rights, but it is 
necessary for them to know their duties. There is no duty but creates a 
corresponding right, and those only are true rights which flow from a due 
performance of one's duties. Hence rights of true citizenship accrue only to 
those who serve the State to which they belong. And they alone can do justice 
to the rights that accrue to them. 
Everyone possesses the right to tell lies or resort to goondaism. But the 
exercise of such right is harmful both to the exerciser and society. But to him 
who observes truth and non-violence comes prestige, and prestige brings rights. 
And people who obtain rights as a result of performance of duty, exercise them 
only for the service of society, never for themselves. 
Swaraj of a people means the sum total of the Swaraj (self-rule) of individuals. 
And such Swaraj comes only from performance by individuals of their duty as 
citizens. In it no one thinks of his rights. They come, when they are needed, for 
better performance of duty. (YI, 25-3-1939, p64) 
 
Under Swaraj based on non-violence nobody is anybody's enemy, everybody 
contributes his or her due quota to the common goal, all can read and write, 
and their knowledge keeps growing from day to day. Sickness and disease are 
reduced to the minimum. No one is a pauper and labour can always find The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139  employment. There is no place under such a government for gambling, drinking 
and immorality or for class hatred. 
The rich will use their riches wisely and usefully, and not squander them in 
increasing their pomp and worldly pleasures. It should not happen that a 
handful of rich people should live in jeweled palaces and the millions in 
miserable hovels devoid of sunlight or ventilation... In non-violent Swaraj there 
can be no encroachment upon just rights; contrariwise no one can possess 
unjust rights. In a well-organized State, usurpation should be an impossibility 
and it should be unnecessary to resort to force for dispossessing a usurper. 
(ibid, p65) 
 
 
Decentralization  
I suggest that, if India is to evolve along nonviolent  lines, it will have to 
decentralize many things. Centralization cannot be sustained and defended 
without adequate force. Simple homes from which there is nothing to take 
away require no policing; the palaces of the rich must have strong guards to 
protect them against decoity. So must huge factories. Rurally organized India 
will run less risk of foreign invasion than urbanized India well equipped with 
military, naval and air forces. 
Centralization as a system is inconsistent with non-violent structure of society. 
(YI, 18-1-1942, p5) 
 
 
Modern State  
It is not possible for a modern State based on force n on-violently to resist 
forces of disorder, whether external or internal. A man cannot serve God and 
Mammon, nor be 'temperate and furious' at the same time. It is claimed that a 
State can be based on nonviolence, i.e., it can offer non-violent resistance 
against a world combination based on armed force. Such a State was Ashoka's. 
The example can be repeated. But the case does not become weak even if it be 
shown that Ashoka's State was not based on nonviolence. It has to be examined 
on its merits..... 
There can be no non-violence offered by the militarily strong. Thus, Russia in 
order to express non-violence has to discard all her power of doing violence. 
What is true is that if those, who were at one time strong in armed might, 
change their mind, they will be better able to demonstrate their non-violence 
to the world and, therefore, also to their opponents. (YI, 12-5-1946, p128) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140   
27. VIOLENCE AND TERRORISM 
 
MY 
EXPERIENCE teaches me that truth can never be propagated by doing 
violence. Those who believe in the justice of their cause have need to possess 
boundless patience and those alone are fit to offer civil disobedience who are 
above committing criminal disobedience or doing violence. (YI, 28-4-1920, p. 8) 
 
 
Popular Violence 
If I can have nothing to do with the organized violen c e of the Government, I 
can have less to do with the unorganized violence of the people. I would prefer 
to be crushed between the two. (YI, 24-11-1921, p. 382) 
 
For me popular violence is as much an obstruction in our path as the 
Government violence. Indeed, I can combat the Government violence more 
successfully than the popular. For one thing, in combating the latter, I should 
not have the same support as in the former. (YI, 24-4-1930, p. 140) 
 
I make bold to say that violence is the creed of no religion and that, whereas 
non-violence in most cases is obligatory in all, violence is merely permissible in 
some cases. But I have not put before India the final form of nonviolence. (YI, 
2-3-1922, p. 130) 
 
I object to violence because, when it appears to do good, the good is only 
temporary; the evil it does is permanent. (YI, 21-5-1925, p. 178) 
 
 
No Faith in Violence  
It is an unshakable faith with me that a cause suffers  exactly to the extent that 
it is supported by violence. I say this in spite of appearances to the contrary. If 
I kill a man who abstracts me, I may experience a sense of false security. But 
the security will be short-lived. For I shall not have dealt with the root cause. 
In due course, other men will surely rise to obstruct me. My business, 
therefore, is not to kill the man or men who obstruct me, but to discover the 
cause that impels them to obstruct me and deal with it. (YI, 26-2-1931, p. 1) 
 
I do not believe in armed risings. They are a remedy worse than the disease 
sought to be cured. They are a token of the spirit of revenge and impatience The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141  and anger. The method of violence cannot do good in the long run. (YI, 9-6-
1920, p. 3) 
 
 
The Revolutionary  
I do not deny the revolutionary's heroism and sacrific e. But heroism and 
sacrifice in a bad cause are so much waste of splendid energy and hurt the good 
cause by drawing away attention from it by the glamour of the misused heroism 
and sacrifice in a bad cause. I am not ashamed to stand erect before the heroic 
and self-sacrificing revolutionary because I am able to pit an equal measure of 
non-violent men's heroism and sacrifice untarnished by the blood of the 
innocent. Self-sacrifice of one innocent man is a million times more potent 
than the sacrifice of a million men who die in the act of killing others. The 
willing sacrifice of the innocent is the most powerful retort to insolent tyranny 
that has yet been conceived by God or man. 
I invite the attention of the revolutionaries to the three great hindrances to 
Swaraj-the incomplete spread of the spinning wheel, the discord between 
Hindus and Mussalmans and the inhuman ban on the suppressed classes. I ask 
them patiently to take their due share in this work of patient construction. It 
may not be spectacular enough. But on that very account it requires all the 
heroic patience, silent and sustained effort and self-effacement of which the 
tallest among the revolutionaries is capable. Impatience will blur the 
revolutionary's vision and lead him astray. 
Slow and inglorious self-imposed starvation among the starved masses is every 
time more heroic than the death on the scaffold under false exaltation. (YI, 12-
2-1925, p. 60) 
 
 
Prevention of Brutalization  
I am more concerned in preventing the brutalization of  human nature than in 
the preventing of the sufferings of my own people....I know that people who 
voluntarily undergo a course of suffering raise themselves and the whole of 
humanity, but I also know that people, who become brutalized in their 
desperate efforts to get victory over their opponents or to exploit weaker 
nations or weaker men, not only drag down themselves but making also. (YI, 
29-10-1931, p. 325) 
 
There is no necessary charm about death on the gallows; often such death is 
easier than a life of drudgery and toil in malarious tracts....I suggest to my The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  friend the revolutionary that death on the gallows serves the country only when 
the victim is a 'spotless lamb'. (YI, 9-4-1925, p. 124) 
 
....I do not condemn everything European. But I condemn for all climes and for 
all times secret murders and unfair methods even for a fair cause....Armed 
conspiracies against something satanic is like matching Satans against Satan. 
But since one Satan is one too many for me, I would not multiply him..... (ibid, 
p. 125) 
 
Cowardice, whether philosophical or otherwise, I abhor. And if I could be 
persuaded that revolutionary activity has dispelled cowardice, it will go a long 
way to soften my abhorrence of the method, however much I may still oppose 
it on principle.... 
I do not regard killing or assassination or terrorism as good in any circumstances 
whatsoever. I do believe that ideas ripen quickly when nourished by the blood 
of martyrs. But a man who dies slowly of jungle fever in service bleeds as 
certainly as the one on the gallows. And if the one who dies on the gallows is 
not innocent of another's blood, he never had ideas that deserved to ripen. 
 
 
Heroes of History  
....To compare their (revolutionaries') activities wit h those of Guru Govind 
Singh or Washington or Garibaldi or Lenin would be most misleading and 
dangerous. But, by test of the theory of non-violence, I do not hesitate to say 
that it is highly likely that, had I lived as their contemporary and in the 
respective countries, I would have called every one of them a misguided 
patriot, even though a successful and brave warrior.... 
I disbelieve history so far as details of acts of heroes are concerned. I accept 
broad facts of history and draw my own lessons for my conduct. I do not want 
to repeat it in so far as the broad facts contradict the highest laws of life. But I 
positively refuse to judge men from the scanty material furnished to us by 
history. De mortuis nil nisi bonum. 
Kemal Pasha and De Valera, too, I cannot judge. But, for me as a believer in 
non-violence out and out, they cannot be my guides in life in so far as their 
faith in war is concerned. I believe in Krishna. But my Krishna is the Lord of the 
Universe, the creator, preserver and destroyer of us all. He may destroy 
because He creates.... 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143   
Revolution Suicidal...  
I have not the qualifications for teaching my philosoph y of life. I have barely 
qualifications for practicing the philosophy I believe....The revolutionaries are 
at liberty to reject the whole of my philosophy....But India is not like Turkey or 
Ireland or Russia and that revolutionary activity is suicidal at this stage of the 
country's life at any rate, if not for all time in a country so vast, so hopelessly 
divided and with the masses so deeply sunk in pauperism and so fearfully 
terror-struck. (YI, 9-4-1925, p. 126) 
 
The revolutionary destroys the body for the supposed benefit of the adversary's 
soul....I do not know a single revolutionary who has even thought of the 
adversary's soul. His single aim has been to benefit the country, even though 
the adversary may perish body and soul. (YI, 30-4-1925, p. 153) 
 
I honour the anarchist for his love of the country. I honour him for his bravery 
in being willing to die for his country; but I ask him: Is killing honourable death? 
I deny it. (SW, p. 323) 
 
I repeat my deliberate opinion that, whatever may be true of other countries, 
in India at least political murder can only harm the country. (YI, 16-4-1931, p. 
75) 
 
The page of history is soiled red with the blood of those who have fought for 
freedom. I do not know an instance in which nations have attained their own 
without having to go through an incredible measure of travail. The dagger of 
the assassin, the poison bowl, the bullet of the rifle-man, the spear--and all 
these weapons and methods of destruction have been used up to now by what I 
consider blind lovers of liberty and freedom...I hold no brief for the terrorist. 
(YI, 24-12-1931, p. 408) 
 
Let the revolutionary pray with and for me that I may soon become that [free 
from passions, wholly incapable of sin]. But, meanwhile, let him take with me 
the one step to it which I see as clearly as day-light, viz. to win India's freedom 
with strictly non-violent means. (H, 25-1-1942, p. 15) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144   
28. BETWEEN COWARDICE AND VIOLENCE 
 
I W
OULD risk violence a thousand times rather than risk the emasculation of a 
whole race. (YI, 4-8-1920, p5) 
 
 
Violence the Choice  
I do believe that, where there is only a choice betwe e n cowardice and 
violence, I would advise violence....I would rather have India resort to arms in 
order to defend her honour than that she should, in a cowardly manner, 
become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour. 
But I believe that nonviolence is infinitely superior to violence, forgiveness is 
more manly than punishment. Forgiveness adorns a soldier...But abstinence is 
forgiveness only when there is the power to punish; it is meaningless when it 
pretends to proceed from a helpless creature.... 
But I do not believe India to be helpless....I do not believe myself to be a 
helpless creature....Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes 
from an indomitable will. (YI, 11-8-1920, p3) 
 
We do want to drive out the best in the man, but we do not want on that 
account to emasculate him. And in the process of finding his own status, the 
beast in him is bound now and again to put up his ugly appearance. (YI, 15-12-
1921, p419) 
 
The world is not entirely governed by logic. Life itself involves some kind of 
violence and we have to choose the path of least violence. (H, 28-9-1934, p259) 
 
 
No Cowardice  
I want both the Hindus and Mussalmans to cultivate the  cool courage to die 
without killing. But if one has not that courage, I want him to cultivate the art 
of killing and being killed rather than, in a cowardly manner, flee from danger. 
For the latter, in spite of his flight, does commit mental himsa. He flees 
because he has not the courage to be killed in the act of killing. (YI, 20-10-
1921, p335) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145  My method of nonviolence can never lead to loss of strength, but it alone will 
make it possible, if the nation wills it, to offer disciplined and concerted 
violence in time of danger. (YI, 29-5-1924, p176) 
 
My creed of nonviolence is an extremely active force. It has no room for 
cowardice or even weakness. There is hope for a violent man to be some day 
non-violent, but there is none for a coward. I have, therefore, said more than 
once....that, if we do not know how to defend ourselves, our women and our 
places of worship by the force of suffering, i.e., nonviolence, we must, if we 
are men, be at least able to defend all these by fighting. (YI, 16-6-1927, p196) 
 
No matter how weak a person is in body, if it is a shame to flee, he will stand 
his ground and die at his post. This would be nonviolence and bravery. No 
matter how weak he is, he will use what strength he has in inflicting injury on 
his opponent, and die in the attempt. This is bravery, but not nonviolence. If, 
when his duty is to face danger, he flees, it is cowardice. In the first case, the 
man will have love or charity in him. In the second and third cases, there would 
be a dislike or distrust and fear. (H, 17-8-1935, p211) 
 
My nonviolence does admit of people, who cannot or will not be non-violent, 
holding and making effective use of arms. Let me repeat for the thousandth 
time that nonviolence is of the strongest, not of the weak. (YI, 8-5-1941) 
 
To run away from danger, instead of facing it, is to deny one's faith in man and 
God, even one's own self. It was better for one to drown oneself than live to 
declare such bankruptcy of faith. (H, 24-11-1946, p410) 
 
 
SELF-DEFENCE BY VIOLENCE  
I have been repeating over and over again that he who cannot protect himself 
or his nearest and dearest or their honour by nonviolently facing death may and 
ought to do so by violently dealing with the oppressor. He who can do neither 
of the two is a burden. He has no business to be the head of a family. He must 
either hide himself, or must rest content to live forever in helplessness and be 
prepared to crawl like a worm at the bidding of a bully. (YI, 11-10-1928, p342) 
 
The strength to kill is not essential for self-defence; one ought to have the 
strength to die. When a man is fully ready to die, he will not even desire to 
offer violence. Indeed, I may put it down as a self-evident proposition that the 
desire to kill is in inverse proportion to the desire to die. And history is replete The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146  with instances of men who, by dying with courage and compassion on their lips, 
converted the hearts of their violent opponents. (YI, 21-1-1930, p27) 
 
Nonviolence cannot be taught to a person who fears to die and has no power of 
resistance. A helpless mouse is not non-violent because he is always eaten by 
pussy. He would gladly eat the murderess if he could, but he ever tries to flee 
from her. We do not call him a coward, because he is made by nature to 
behave no better than he does. 
But a man who, when faced by danger, behaves like a mouse, is rightly called a 
coward. He harbours violence and hatred in his heart and would kill his enemy 
if he could without hurting himself. He is a stranger to nonviolence. All 
sermonizing on it will be lost on him. Bravery is foreign to his nature. Before he 
can understand nonviolence, he has to be taught to stand his ground and even 
suffer death, in the attempt to defend himself against the aggressor who bids 
fair to overwhelm him. To do otherwise would be to confirm his cowardice and 
take him further away from nonviolence. 
Whilst I may not actually help anyone to retaliate, I must not let a coward seek 
shelter behind nonviolence so-called. Not knowing the stuff of which 
nonviolence is made, many have honestly believed that running away from 
danger every time was a virtue compared to offering resistance, especially 
when it was fraught with danger to one's life. As a teacher of nonviolence I 
must, so far as it is possible for me, guard against such an unmanly belief. (H, 
20-7-1935, pp180-1) 
 
Self-defence....is the only honourable course where there is unreadiness for 
self-immolation. (ibid, p181) 
 
Though violence is not lawful, when it is offered in self-defence or for the 
defence of the defenseless, it is an act of bravery far better than cowardly 
submission. The latter befits neither man nor woman. Under violence, there 
are many stages and varieties of bravery. Every man must judge this for 
himself. No other person can or has the right. (H, 27-10-1946, pp369-70) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147   
29. RESISTANCE TO AGGRESSION 
 
I MUST live. I would not be a vassal to any nation or body. I must have absolute 
independence or perish. To seek to win in a clash of arms would be pure 
bravado. Not so if, in defying the might of one who would deprive me of my 
independence, I refuse to obey his will and perish unarmed in the attempt. In 
so doing, though I lose the body, I save my soul, i.e., my honour. (H, 15-10-
1938, p290) 
 
 
Duty of Resistance 
The true democrat is he who with purely non-violent me ans defends his liberty 
and therefore, his country's and ultimately, that of the whole of mankind...But 
the duty of resistance accrues only to those who believe in non-violence as a 
creed-not to those who will calculate and will examine the merits of each case 
and decide whether to approve of or oppose a particular war. It follows that 
such resistance is a matter for each person to decide for himself and under the 
guidance of the inner voice, if he recognizes its existence. (H, 15-4-1939, p90) 
 
The true meaning of non-resistance has often been misunderstood or even 
distorted. It never implies that a nonviolent man should bend before the 
violence of an aggressor. While not returning the latter's violence by violence, 
he should refuse to submit to the latter's illegitimate demand even to the point 
of death. That is the true meaning of nonresistance.... 
He is not to return violence by violence, but neutralize it by withholding one's 
hand and, at the same time, refusing to submit to the demand. This is the only 
civilized way of going on in the world. Any other course can only lead to a race 
for armaments interspersed by periods of peace which is by necessity and 
brought about by exhaustion, when preparations would be going on for violence 
of a superior order. Peace through superior violence inevitably leads to the 
atom bomb and all that it stands for. It is completes negation of nonviolence 
and of democracy which is not possible without the former. (H, 30-3-1947, 
pp85-86) 
 
To answer brutality with brutality is to admit one's moral and intellectual 
bankruptcy and it can only start a vicious circle.... (H, 1-6-1947, p174) 
 
Resistance both forms [passive resistance and non violent resistance] are, but 
you have to pay a very heavy price when your resistance is passive, in the sense The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  of the weakness of the resister. Europe mistook the bold and brave resistance, 
full of wisdom, by Jesus of Nazareth for passive resistance, as if it was of the 
weak. As I read the New Testament for the first time, I detected no passivity, 
no weakness about Jesus as depicted in the four gospels, and the meaning 
became clearer to me when I read Tolstoy's Harmony of the Gospels and his 
other kindred writings. Has not the West paid heavily in regarding Jesus as a 
Passive Resister? Christendom has been responsible for the wars which put to 
shame even those described in the Old Testament and other records, historical 
or semi-historical. I know that I speak under correction, for I can but claim very 
superficial knowledge of history-modern or ancient. (H, 7-12-1947, p453) 
 
To die without killing requires more heroism [than to die in the act of killing]. 
There is nothing very wonderful in killing and being killed in the process. But 
the man who offers his neck to the enemy for execution, but refuses to bend to 
his will, shows courage of a far higher type. (H, 21-4-1946, p95) 
 
 
The Way of Ahimsa  
Ahimsa is one of the world's great principles which no  power on earth can wipe 
out. Thousands like myself may die in trying to vindicate the ideal, but ahimsa 
will never die. And the gospel of ahimsa can be spread only through believers 
dying for the cause. (H, 17-5-1946, p140) 
 
Ahimsa is the highest ideal. It is meant for the brave, never for the cowardly. 
To benefit by others' killing, and delude oneself into the belief that one is being 
very religious and non-violent is sheer self-deception. (H, 9-6-1946, p172) 
 
No power on earth can subjugate you when you are armed with the sword of 
Ahimsa. It ennobles both the victor and vanquished. (ibid, p174) 
 
The proper way to view the present outburst of violence throughout the world 
is to recognize that the technique of unconquerable non-violence of the strong 
has not been at all fully discovered as yet. Not an ounce of nonviolent strength 
is ever wasted. (H, 11-1-1948, p504) 
 
I do not say 'eschew violence in you dealing with robbers or thieves or with 
nations that may invade India'. But, in order that we are better able to do so, 
we must learn to restrain ourselves. It is a sign not of strength but of weakness 
to take up the pistol on the slightest pretext. Mutual fisticuffs are a training 
not in violence but in emasculation. (YI, 29-5-1924, p176) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149   
Whilst all violence is bad and must be condemned in the abstract, it is 
permissible for, it is even the duty of, a believer in ahimsa to distinguish 
between the aggressor and the defender. Having done so, he will side with the 
defender in a non-violent manner, i.e., give his life in saving him. His 
intervention is likely to bring a speedier end to the duel, and may even result in 
bringing about peace between the combatants. (H, 21-10-1939, p309) 
 
My non-violence does recognize different species of violence-defensive and 
offensive. It is true that in the long run the difference is obliterated, but the 
initial merit persists. A non-violent person is bound, when the occasion arises, 
to say which side is just. Thus I wished success to the Abyssinians, the 
Spaniards, the Czechs, the Chinese and the Poles, though in each case I wished 
that they could have offered non-violent resistance. (H, 9-12-1939, p371) 
 
If war is itself a wrong act, how can it be worthy of moral support or blessings? 
I believe all war to be wholly wrong. But, if we scrutinize the motives of two 
warring parties, we may find one to be in the right and the other in the wrong. 
For instance, if A wishes to seize B's country, B is obviously the wronged one. 
Both fight with arms. I do not believe in violent warfare, but all the same, B, 
whose cause is just, deserves my moral help and blessings. (H, 18-8-1940, p250) 
 
You can return blow for blow if you are not brave enough to follow the path of 
non-violence. But there is a moral code for the use of violence also. Otherwise, 
the very flames of violence will consume those who light them. I do not care if 
they are all destroyed. But I cannot countenance the destruction of India's 
freedom. (H, 17-11-1946, p402) 
 
 
India's Way  
I have recognized that the nation has the right, if it  so wills, to vindicate her 
freedom even by actual violence. Only, then India ceases to be the land of my 
love, even though the land of my birth, even as I should take no pride in my 
mother if she went astray. (YI, 20-11-1924, p382) 
 
When India becomes self-supporting, self-reliant, and proof against temptations 
and exploitation, she will cease to be the object of greedy attraction for any 
power in the West or the East and will then feel secure without having to carry 
the burden of expensive armaments. Her internal economy will be the strongest The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150  bulwark against aggression. (YI, 2-7-1931, p161) 
 
 
Nonviolent Resistance  
History has no record of a nation having adopted non-vi olent resistance. If 
Hitler is unaffected by my suffering, it does not matter. For I shall have lost 
nothing worth. My honour is the only thing worth preserving. That is 
independent of Hitler's pity. But as a believer in nonviolence, I may not limit its 
possibilities. Hitherto he and his likes have built upon their invariable 
experience that men yield to force. Unarmed men, women and children 
offering nonviolent resistance without any bitterness in them will be a novel 
experience for them. Who can dare say that it is not in their nature to respond 
to the higher and finer forces? They have the same soul that I have.... 
I have a call I must answer. I must deliver my message to my people. This 
humiliation has sunk too deep in me to remain without an outlet. I, at least, 
must act up to the light that has dawned on me. 
....When I first launched out on Satyagraha, I had no companion. We were 
thirteen thousand men, women and children against a whole nation, capable of 
crushing the existence out of us. I did not know who would listen to me. It all 
came as in a flash. All the 13,000 did not fight. Many fell back. But the honour 
or the nation was saved. New history was written by the South African 
Satyagraha.... 
My purpose will be fulfilled if I succeed in reaching these men's hearts and 
making them see that, if their nonviolence does not make them feel much 
braver than the possession of arms and the ability to use them, they must give 
up their non-violence, which is another name for cowardice, and resume their 
arms which there is nothing but their own will to prevent them from taking 
back. 
I present...a weapon not of the weak but of the brave. There is no bravery 
greater than a resolute refusal to bend the knee to an earthly power, no matter 
how great, and that without bitterness of spirit and in the fullness of faith that 
the spirit alone lives, nothing else does. (H, 15-10-1938, pp290-1) 
 
 
Basic Assumptions  
I have argued from the analogy of what we do in famili es or even clans. The 
humankind is one big family. And if the love expressed is intense enough, it 
must apply to all mankind. If individuals have succeeded even with savages, 
why should not a group of individuals succeed with a group, say, of savages? If 
we can succeed with the English, surely it is merely an extension of faith to The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  believe that we are likely to succeed with less cultured or less liberally-minded 
nations. I hold that, if we succeed with the English with unadulterated 
nonviolent effort, we must succeed with the others, which is the same thing as 
saying, that, if we achieve freedom with non-violence, we shall defend it also 
with the same weapon. If we have not achieved that faith, our non-violence is a 
mere expedient; it is the alloy, not pure gold. 
In the first place, we shall never achieve freedom with doubtful nonviolence; 
and in the second, even if we do--we shall find ourselves wholly unprepared to 
defend the country against an aggressor. If we have doubt about the final 
efficacy of non-violence, it would be far better for the Congress to revise its 
policy and invite the nation to training in arms. A mass organization like the 
Congress will be untrue to its charge if, not knowing its own mind, it misled the 
people into a false belief. It would be an act of cowardice.... Because we cease 
to pin our faith to non-violence, we do not necessarily become violent. We 
merely throw off the mask and are natural. It would be a perfectly dignified 
course to adopt. (H, 22-10-1938, p298) 
 
However small a nation or even a group may be, it is able, even as the 
individual, provided that it has one mind as also the will and the grit, to defend 
its honour and self-respect against a whole world in arms. Therein consists the 
matchless strength and beauty of the unarmed. That is non-violent defence 
which neither knows nor accepts defeat at any stage. Therefore, a nation or a 
group which has made non-violence its final policy cannot be subjected to 
slavery even by the atom bomb. (H, 18-8-1946, p265) 
 
The Congress has declared that she would carry out the struggle for India's 
independence through the method of non-violence. But she has not yet decided 
whether she would adhere to that method for the protection of that freedom 
against possible foreign aggression. 
To me it is a self-evident truth that, if freedom is to be shared equally by all--
even physically the weakest, the lame and the halt--they must be able to 
contribute an equal share in its defence. How that can be possible when 
reliance is placed on armaments my plebian mind fails to understand. I, 
therefore, swear and shall continue to swear by non-violence, i.e., by 
Satyagraha or soul force. In it physical incapacity is no handicap and even a 
frail woman or a child can pit herself or himself on equal terms against a giant, 
armed with the most powerful weapon. (H, 21-4-1946, p94) 
 
My ahimsa forbids me from denying credit where it is due, even though the 
creditor is a believer in violence. Thus, though I did not accept Subhash Bose's The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152  belief in violence and his consequent action, I have not refrained from giving 
unstinted praise to his patriotism, resourcefulness and bravery. Similarly, 
though I did not approve of the use of arms by the Union Government for aiding 
the Kashmiries, and though I could not approve of Sheikh Abdullah's resort to 
arms, I cannot possibly withhold admiration for either for their resourceful and 
praiseworthy conduct, especially if both the relieving troops and the Kashmiri 
defenders die heroically to a man. I know that if they can do so, they will 
perhaps change the face of India. But if the defence is purely non-violent in 
intention and action, I will not use the word 'perhaps', for I will be sure of 
change in the face of India even to the extent of converting to the defender's 
view the Union Cabinet, if not even the Pakistan Cabinet. 
The nonviolent technique, I will suggest, will be no armed assistance to the 
defenders. Nonviolent assistance can be sent from the Union without stint. But 
the defenders, whether they get such assistance or not, will defy the might of 
the raiders or even a disciplined army in overwhelming numbers. And defenders 
dying at their post of duty without malice and without anger in their hearts 
against the assailants, and without the use of any arms including even their 
fists will mean an exhibition of heroism as yet unknown to history. Kashmir will 
then become a holy land shedding its fragrance not only throughout India, but 
the world. (H, 16-11-1947, p413) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153   
30. THE CHOICE BEFORE INDIA 
 
I AM not pleading for India to practice nonviolence bec ause it is weak. I want 
her to practice nonviolence being conscious of her strength and power. No 
training in arms is required for realization of her strength. We seem to need it 
because we seem to think that we are a lump of flesh. (YI, 11-8-1920, p3) 
 
India has to make her choice. She may try, if she wishes, the way of war and 
sink lower than she has....If India can possibly gain her freedom by war, her 
state will be no better and will be, probably, much worse than that of France 
or England.... 
 
 
The Way of Peace  
But the way of peace is open to her. Her freedom is as sured if she has 
patience. That way will be found to be the shortest even though it may appear 
to be the longest to our impatient nature. The way of peace insures internal 
growth and stability. We reject it because we fancy that it involves submission 
to the will of the ruler who has imposes himself upon us. But the moment we 
realize that the imposition is only so called and that, through our unwillingness 
to suffer loss of life or property, we are party to the imposition, all we need do 
is to change that negative attitude of passive endorsement. The suffering to be 
undergone by the change will be nothing compared to the physical suffering 
and the moral loss we must insure in trying the way of war. And the sufferings 
of war harm both the parties. The sufferings in following the way of peace must 
benefit both. They will be like the pleasurable travail of a new birth.... 
The way of peace is the way of truth. Truthfulness is even more important than 
peacefulness. Indeed, lying is the mother of violence. A truthful man cannot 
long remain violent. He will perceive in the course of his search that he has no 
need to be violent, and he will further discover that, so long as there is the 
slightest trace of violence in him, he will fail to find the truth he is searching. 
(YI, 20-5-1926, p154) 
 
Nonviolence is not an easy thing to understand, still less to practice, weak as 
we are. We must all act prayerfully and humbly and continually asking God to 
open the eyes of our understanding, being ever ready to act according to the 
light as we daily receive it. My task as a lover and promoter of peace, 
therefore, today consists in unflinching devotion to nonviolence in the 
prosecution of the campaign for regaining our liberty. And if India succeeds in The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154  so regaining our liberty. And if India succeeds in so regaining it, it will be the 
greatest contribution to the world peace. (YI, 7-2-1929, p46) 
 
 
No Imitation of West  
The fashion nowadays is to take for granted that whate ver America and England 
are doing is good enough for us.....War has become a matter of money and 
resourcefulness in inventing weapons of destruction. It is no longer a matter of 
personal bravery or endurance. To compass the destruction of men, women and 
children, it might be enough for me to press a button and drop poison on them 
in a second. 
Do we wish to copy this method of defending ourselves? Even if we do, have we 
the financial ability? We complain of ever-growing military expenditure. But if 
we would copy America or England, we would have to increase the burden 
tenfold.... 
The nation cannot be kept on the nonviolent path by violence. It must grow 
from within to the state it may aspire to. The question, therefore, for us to 
consider is, "What is our immediate aspiration?" Do we first want to copy the 
western nations and then, in the demand distant future, after having gone 
through the agony, retrace our steps? Or do we want to strike out an original 
path, or rather retain what to me is our own predominantly peaceful path and 
there through win and assert our freedom? 
Here there is no question of compromise with cowardice. Either we train and 
arm ourselves for destruction, be it in self-defence, and in the process train for 
suffering too, or we merely prepare ourselves for suffering for defending the 
country or delivering it from domination. In either case bravery is 
indispensable. In the first case personally bravery is not of such importance as 
in the second. In the second case, too, we shall perhaps never be able to do 
without violence altogether. But violence then will be subservient to 
nonviolence and will always be a diminishing factor in national life. 
At the present moment, though the national and is nonviolence, in thought and 
word at least, we seem to be drifting towards violence. Impatience pervades 
the atmosphere. We are restrained from violence through our weakness. What 
is wanted is a deliberate giving up of violence out of strength. To be able to do 
this requires imagination coupled with a penetrating study of the world drift. 
Today the superficial glamour of the West dazzles us, and we mistake for 
progress the giddy dance which engages us from day to day. We refuse to see 
that it is surely leading us to death. Above all, we must recognize that to 
compete with the Western nations on their terms is to court suicide. Whereas, 
if we realize that, notwithstanding the seeming supremacy of violence, it is the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155  moral force that governs the universe, we should train for nonviolence with the 
fullest faith in its limitless possibilities. Everybody recognizes that, if a 
nonviolent atmosphere had been maintained in 1922, we could have completely 
gained our end. Even as it is, we had a striking demonstration of the efficacy of 
nonviolence crude though it was, and the substance of Swaraj then gained has 
never been lost. The paralyzing fear that had possessed the nation before the 
advent of Satyagraha has gone once for all. In my opinion, therefore, non-
violence is a matter of patient training. If we are to be saved and are to make a 
substantial contribution to the world's progress, ours must emphatically and 
predominantly be the way of peace. (YI, 22-8-1929, pp276-7) 
 
 
Alternative to War  
I feel in the innermost recesses of my heart, after a political experience 
extending over an unbroken period of close upon thirty-five years, that the 
world is sick unto death of blood-spilling. The world is seeking a way out, and I 
flatter myself with the belief that, perhaps, it will be the privilege of the 
ancient land of India to show that way out to the hungering world. 
I have, therefore, no hesitation whatsoever in inviting all the great nations of 
the earth to give their hearty co-operation to India in her mighty struggle. (ICS, 
p209) 
 
I venture to suggest, in all humility, that if India reaches her destiny through 
truth and nonviolence, she will have made no small contribution to the world 
peace for which all the nations of the earth are thirsting and she would also 
have, in that case, made some slight return for the help that those nations 
have been freely giving to her. (YI, 12-3-1931, p31) 
 
If in the glow of freedom, India could live up to that creed [of nonviolence, 
non-dependence on physical force], no power on earth would ever case an evil 
eye upon her. This would be India's crowning glory and her contribution to the 
world's progress. (H, 14-4-1946, p90) 
 
 
Nonviolence of the Brave  
Our nonviolence has brought us to the gate of independe nce. Shall we renounce 
it after we have entered that gate? I for one am firmly convinced that 
nonviolence of the brave, such as I have envisaged, provides the surest ad most 
efficacious means to face foreign aggression and internal disorder just as it has 
done for winning independence. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156  A truly non-violent India will have nothing to fear from any foreign power, nor 
will it look to British navy and air force for her defence. I know that we have 
not as yet the non-violence of the brave. (H, 21-4-1946, p95) 
 
I see clearly that, if the country cannot be turned to nonviolence, it will be bad 
for it and the world. It will mean goodbye to freedom. It might even mean a 
military dictatorship. I am day and night thinking how nonviolence of the brave 
can be cultivated. 
I said at the Asiatic Conference that I hoped the fragrance of the non-violence 
of India would permeate the whole world. I often wonder if that hope will 
materialize. (H, 27-7-1947, p253) 
 
 
India's Duty  
India is now free, and the reality is now clearly revea led to me. Now that the 
burden of subjection has been lifted, all the forces of good have to be 
marshaled in one great effort to build a country which forsook the accustomed 
method of violence in order to settle human conflicts, whether it is between 
two States or between two sections of the same people. I have yet the faith 
that India will rise to the occasion and prove to the world that the birth of two 
new States will be not a menace, but a blessing to the rest of mankind. It is the 
duty of Free India to perfect the instrument of nonviolence for dissolving 
collective conflicts, if its freedom is going to be really worthwhile. (H, 31-8-
1947, p302) 
 
[Nonviolence] has enabled a mighty nation of forty cores to shake off the 
foreign yoke without bloodshed. It is the freedom of India that has brought 
freedom to Burma and Ceylon. A nation that has won freedom without the 
force of arms should be able to keep it, too, without the force of arms. This in 
spite of the fact that India has an army, a navy in the making and an air force, 
and these are being developed still further. I am convinced that, unless India 
develops her non-violent strength, she has gained nothing either for herself or 
for the world. Militarization of India will mean her own destruction as well as 
the whole world. (H, 14-12-1947, p471) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157   
31. INDIA AND THE NON-VIOLENT WAY 
 
WHIL
E I admit my impotency regarding the spread of the ahimsa of the brave 
and the strong, as distinguished from that of the weak, the admission is not 
meant to imply that I do not know how she inestimable virtue is to be 
cultivated....It is truer (if it is a fact) to say that India is not ready for the 
lesson of the ahimsa of the strong than that no programme has been devised for 
the teaching. It will be perfectly just to say that the programme....for the 
ahimsa of the strong is not as attractive as that devised for the nonviolence of 
the weak has proved to be. (H, 29-6-1947, pp209-10) 
 
 
Mere Passive Resistance  
Passive resistance, unlike nonviolence, has no power t o change men's 
hearts....What is to be done to convert the poison into nectar? Is the process 
possible? I know that it is, and I think I know the way too. But whereas the 
Indian mind is ready to respond to the effort at passive resistance, it is not 
receptive enough to imbibe the lesson of nonviolence which, and perhaps which 
alone, is capable of turning the poison into nectar. 
Many admit that it is the way, but they have not the heart to adopt the golden 
path. I can proclaim from the house-top that nonviolence has not, has never 
failed. The people failed to rise to it. 
I do not mind being told that I do not know the technique of propagating 
nonviolence. My critics even go so far as to suggest that I have no nonviolence 
in myself. God alone knows men's hearts. (H, 20-7-1947, p243) 
 
It was not nonviolent resistance, but passive resistance which only the weak 
offer because they are unable, not unwilling, to offer armed resistance. 
Let me make one thing clear. I have frankly and fully admitted that what we 
practiced during the past thirty years 
If we knew the use of nonviolent resistance which only those with hearts of oak 
can offer, we would present to the world a totally different picture of free 
India instead of an India cut in twain, one part highly suspicious of the other 
and the two too much engaged in mutual strife to be able to think cogently of 
the food and clothing of the hungry and naked millions, who know no religion 
but that of the one and only God who appears to them in the guise of the 
necessaries of life. (H, 27-7-1947, p251) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  ....It was the passivity of the weak and not the non-violence of the stout in 
heart, who will never surrender their sense of human unity and brotherhood 
even in the midst of conflict of interests, who will ever try to convert and not 
coerce their adversary. 
If India can discover a way of sublimating the force violence...and turning it 
into constructive, peaceful ways whereby differences of interests can be 
liquidated, it will be a great day indeed. (H, 31-8-1947, p302) 
 
No one has a right to say that what could not be achieved during the struggle 
for independence is unachievable at all times. On the contrary, today there is a 
real opportunity to demonstrate the supremacy of ahimsa. True, our people 
have been sucked into the whirlpool of universal militarization. If even a few 
can keep out of it, it will be their privilege to set an example of ahimsa of the 
brave and be reckoned as the first servants of India. This cannot be 
demonstrated by intellect. Therefore, till it can be realized through 
experience, it must be accepted in faith. (H, 1-2-1948, p6) 
 
 
Police Force  
Throughout my life it has been part of my creed not to  avoid the police but to 
assist them in prying into all my work; for I have always abhorred of secrecy 
and it has made my life and work easy because of my indifference to this kind 
of surveillance. This indifference and invariable courtesy shown to the police 
result in the silent conversion of several amongst them. 
My indifference, however, is one thing and personal to me. As a system the 
police surveillance cannot but be described as a despicable thing, unworthy of 
a good government. It is a useless burden upon an already over-burdened tax-
payer. For, the whole of this extraordinary expenditure, it must be 
remembered, comes from the pockets of the toiling millions. (YI, 16-5-1929, 
p159) 
 
Even in a nonviolent State a police force may be necessary. This, I admit, is a 
sign of my imperfect ahimsa. I have not the courage to declare that we can 
carry on without a police force, as I have in respect of an army. Of course, I 
can and do envisage a State where the police will not be necessary; but 
whether we shall succeed in realizing it the future alone will show. 
The police of my conception will, however, be of a wholly different pattern 
from the present-day force. Its ranks will composed of believers in nonviolence. 
They will be servants, not masters, of the people. The people will instinctively The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159  render them every help, and through mutual co-operation they will easily deal 
with the ever-decreasing disturbances. 
The police force will have some kind of arms, but they will be rarely used, it at 
all. In fact the policemen will be reformers. Their police work will be confined 
primarily to robbers and dacoits. 
Quarrels between labour and capital and strikes will be few and far between in 
a nonviolent State, because the influence of the nonviolent majority will be so 
great as to command the respect of the principal elements in society. Similarly 
there will be no room for communal disturbances. (H, 1-9-1940, p265) 
 
Under Swaraj you and I shall have a disciplined, intelligent police force that 
would keep order within and fight raiders from without, if by that time I or 
someone else does not show a better way of dealing with either. (H, 25-1-1942, 
p15) 
 
 
Crime and Punishment  
In Independent India of the nonviolent type, there wil l be crime but no 
criminals. They will not be punished. Crime is a disease like any other malady 
and is a product of the prevalent social system. Therefore, all crime including 
murder will be treated as a disease. Whether such an India will ever come into 
being is another question. (H, 5-5-1946, p124) 
 
What should our jails be like in free India? All criminals should be treated as 
patients and the jails should be hospitals admitting this class of patients for 
treatment and cure. No one commits crime for the fun of it. It is a sign of a 
diseased mind. The causes of a particular disease should be investigated and 
removed. 
They need not have palatial buildings when their jails becomes hospitals. No 
country can afford that, much less can a poor country like India. But the 
outlook of the jail staff should be that of physicians and nurses in a hospital. 
The prisoners should feel that the officials are their friends. They are there to 
help them to regain their mental health and not to harass them in any way. The 
popular governments have to issue necessary orders, but meanwhile the jail 
staff can do not a little to humanize their administration. 
What is the duty of the prisoners?....They should behave as ideal prisoners. 
They should avoid breach of jail discipline. They should put their heart and soul 
into whatever work is entrusted to them. For instance, the prisoners' food is 
cooked by themselves. They should clean the rice, dal or whatever cereal is 
used so that there are no stones and grit or weevils in them. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  Whatever complaints the prisoners might have should be brought to the notice 
of the authorities in a becoming manner. They should so behave in their little 
community as to become better men when they leave the jail than when they 
entered it. (H, 2-11-1947, p395) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161   
32. INDIA AND THE VIOLENT WAY 
 
IF INDIA takes up the doctrine of the sword, she may g ain momentary victory. 
Then India will cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to India 
because I owe my all to her. I believe absolutely that she has a mission for the 
world. She is not to copy Europe blindly. 
India's acceptance of the doctrine of the sword will be the hour of my trial. I 
hope I shall not be found wanting. My religion has no geographical limits. If I 
have a living faith in it, it will transcend my love for India herself. My life is 
dedicated to service of India through the religion of nonviolence....  
(YI, 11-8-1920, p4) 
 
If India makes violence her creed, and I have survived, I would not care to live 
in India. She will cease to evoke any pride in me. My patriotism is subservient 
to my religion. I cling to India like a child to its mother's breast because I feel 
that she gives me the spiritual nourishment I need. She has the environment 
that responds to my highest aspirations. When that faith is gone, I shall feel 
like an orphan without hope of ever finding a guardian. (YI, 6-4-1921, p108) 
 
 
Unarmed Victory 
This I know that, if India comes to her own demonstra bl y through nonviolent 
means, India will never want to carry a vast army, an equally grand navy and a 
grander air force. If her self-consciousness rises to the height necessary to give 
her a non-violent victory in her fight for freedom, the world values will have 
changed and most of the paraphernalia of war would be found to be useless. 
Such an India may be a mere day-dream, a childish folly. But such, in my 
opinion, is undoubtedly the implication of an India becoming free through 
nonviolence....Hers will be the voice of a powerful nation seeking to keep 
under restraint all the violent forces of the world. (YI, 9-5-1929, p148) 
 
What policy the National Government will adopt I cannot say. I may not even 
survive it much as I would love to. If I do, I would advise the adoption of 
nonviolence to the utmost extent possible and that will be India's great 
contribution to the peace of the world and the establishment of a new world 
order. I expect that, with the existence of so many martial races in India, all of 
whom will have a voice in the government of the day, the national policy will 
incline towards militarism of a modified character. I shall certainly hope that 
all the effort...to show the efficacy of nonviolence as a political force will not The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  have gone in vain and a strong party representing true non-violence will exist in 
the country. (H, 21-6-1942, p197) 
 
 
Path of Militarization 
What place will India have in the comity of nations? W ill she be satisfied with 
being a fifth-rate power...? India will have long to wait before she can become 
a first-class military power. And for that she will have to go under the tutelage 
of some Western power. (H, 21-4-1946, p95) 
 
....India will have to decide whether, attempting to become a military power, 
she would be content to become, at least for some years, a fifth-rate power in 
the world without a message...or whether she will, by further refining and 
continuing her nonviolent policy, prove herself worthy of being the first nation 
in the world using her hard-won freedom for the delivery of the earth from the 
burden [of violence] which is crushing her in spite of the so-called victory [of 
the Allies]. (H, 5-5-1946, p116) 
 
A free India wedded to truth and nonviolence will teach the lesson of peace to 
the inhabitants of South Africa. But it will be for us and the Congress to decide 
whether a free India will follow the way of peace or the sword. It is bad enough 
that she small nations of the earth should denude humanity of its precious 
heritage; it will be awful if a sub-continent of some four hundred millions were 
to take to gun-powder and live dangerously. (H, 30-6-1946, pp206-7) 
 
Will the war-weary Asiatic countries follow in the footsteps of Japan and turn 
to militarization? The answer lies in what direction India will throw its 
weight....Will a free India present the world a lesson of peace of of hatred and 
violence of which the world is already sick unto death? (H, 8-6-1947, p177) 
 
I am only hoping and praying [that....there] will rise a new and robust India-not 
warlike, basely imitating the West in all its hideousness, but a new India 
learning the best that the West has to give and becoming the hope not only of 
Asia and Africa, but the whole of aching world.... 
In spite, however, of the madness and the vain imitation of the tinsel of the 
West, the hope lingers in me and many others that India shall survive this death 
dance and occupy the moral height that should belong to her after the training, 
however imperfect, in nonviolence for an unbroken period of thirty-two years 
since 1915. (H, 7-12-1947, p453) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  An India reduced in size but purged in spirit may still be the nursery of the 
nonviolence of the brave and take up the moral leadership of the world, 
bringing a message of hope and deliverance to the oppressed and exploited 
races. But an unwieldy, soul-less India will merely be an imitation, and a third-
rate imitation at that, of the Western military States, utterly powerless to 
stand up against their onslaught. I have no desire to outlive the India of my 
dreams. (H, 18-1-1948, p513) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164   
33. THE GOSPEL OF SATYAGRAHA 
 
Pas
sive Resistance 
PASSIVE RESISTANCE is an all-sided sword; it can be us ed anyhow; it blesses him 
who uses it and him against whom it is used. Without drawing a drop of blood it 
produces far-reaching results. It never rusts and cannot be stolen. (Hs, p. 82) 
 
I am quite sure that the stoniest heart will be melted by passive 
resistance...This is a sovereign and most effective remedy...It is a weapon of 
the purest type. It is not the weapon of the weak. It needs far greater courage 
to be a passive resister than a physical resister. It is the courage of a Jesus, a 
Daniel, a Crammer, a Latimer and a Ridley who could go calmly to suffering and 
death, and the courage of a Tolstoy who dared to defy the Czars of Russia, that 
stands out as the greatest. 
Indeed, one PERFECT resister is enough to win the battle of Right against 
Wrong. (YI, 10-11-1921, p. 362) 
 
I claim...that the method of passive resistance...is the clearest and safest, 
because, if the cause is not true, it is the resisters and they alone who suffer. 
Jesus Christ, Daniel and Socrates represented the purest form of passive 
resistance or soul force. All these teachers counted their bodies as nothing in 
comparison to their soul. Tolstoy was the best and brightest (modern) exponent 
of the doctrine. He not only expounded it, but lived according to it. In India, 
the doctrine was understood and commonly practiced long before it came into 
vogue in Europe. 
It is easy to see that soul force is infinitely superior to body force. If people in 
order to secure redress of wrongs resort to soul force, much of the present 
suffering will be avoided. 
In any case, the wielding of the force never causes suffering to others. So that 
whenever it is misused, It only injures the users and not those against whom it 
is used. Like virtue it has its own reward. There is no such thing as failure in 
the use of this kind of force. (SW, p. 165) 
 
The Buddha fearlessly carried the war into the enemy's camp and brought down 
on its knees an arrogant priesthood. Christ drove out the money-changers from 
the temple of Jerusalem and drew down curses from Heaven upon he 
hypocrites and the Pharisees. Both were for intensely direct action. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  But even as the Buddha and Christ chastised, they showed unmistakable 
gentleness and love behind every act of theirs. They would not raise a finger 
against their enemies, but would gladly surrender themselves rather than the 
truth for which they lived. 
The Buddha would have died resisting the priesthood, if the majesty of his love 
had not proved to be equal to the task of bending the priesthood. Christ died 
on the cross with a crown of thorns on his head, defying the might of a whole 
empire. And if I raise resistances of a non-violent character, I simply and 
humbly follow in the footsteps of the great teachers... (YI, 12-5-1920, p. 3) 
 
 
Civil Disobedience 
Disobedience to be civil must be sincere, respectful, restrained, never defiant, 
must be based upon some well-understood principle, must not be capricious 
and, above all, must have no ill-will or hatred behind it. (YI, 24-3-1920, p. 4) 
 
I hold the opinion firmly that civil disobedience is the purest type of 
constitutional agitation. Of course, it becomes degrading and despicable, if its 
civil, i.e., non-violent character is a mere camouflage. If the honesty of non-
violence be admitted, there is no warrant for condemnation even of the 
fiercest disobedience, because of the likehood of its leading to violence. 
No big or swift movement can carried on without bold risks, and life will not be 
worth living if it is not attended with large risks. Does not the history of the 
world show that there would have been no romance in life if there had been no 
risks? (YI, 15-12-1921, p. 419) 
 
Civil disobedience is the inherent right of a citizen. He dare not give it up 
without ceasing to be a man. Civil disobedience is never followed by anarchy. 
Criminal disobedience can lead to it. Every state puts down criminal 
disobedience by force. It perishes if it does not. (YI, 5-1-1922, p. 5) 
 
A Satyagrahi obeys the laws of society intelligently and of his own free will, 
because he considers it to be his sacred duty to do so. It is only when a person 
has thus obeyed the laws of society scrupulously that he is in a position of 
judge as to which particular laws are good and just and which unjust and 
iniquitous. Only when does the right accrue to him of civil disobedience of 
certain laws in well-defined circumstances. (A, p. 347) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  Condition Precedent 
The first indispensable condition precedent to any civi l resistance is that there 
should be surety against any outbreak of violence, whether on the part of those 
who are identified with civil resistance or on the part of the general public. It 
would be no answer in the case of an outbreak of violence that it was 
instigated by the State or other agencies hostile to civil resisters. 
It should be obvious that civil resistance cannot flourish in an atmosphere of 
violence. This does not mean that the resources of a satyagrahi have come to 
an end. Ways other than civil disobedience should be found out.9 (H, 18-3-
1939, p. 53) 
 
 
Character of Satyagraha 
That is the beauty of Satyagraha. It comes up to onese lf, one has not to go out 
in search for it. That is a virtue inherent in the principle itself. A 
dharmayuddha, in which there are no secrete to be guarded, no scope for 
canning and no place for untruth, comes unsought; and a man of religion is ever 
ready for it. A struggle which has to be previously planned is not and it is only 
when the Satyagrahi feels quite helpless, is apparently on his last legs and finds 
utter darkness all around him, that God comes to the rescue. (SSA, p. xiv) 
 
In the application of Satyagraha, I discovered, in the earliest stages, that 
pursuit of Truth did not admit of violence being inflicted on one's opponent, but 
that he must be weaned from error by patience and sympathy. For, what 
appears to be truth to the one may appear to be error to the other. And 
patience means self-suffering. So the doctrine came to mean vindication of 
Truth, not by infliction of suffering on the opponent but one's own self. (RCPS) 
 
Satyagraha and its off-shoots, non-co-operation and civil resistance, are nothing 
but new names for the law of suffering. (YI, 11-8-1920, p. 3) 
 
With satya combined with ahimsa, you can bring the world to your feet. 
Satyagraha in its essence is nothing but the introduction of truth and gentleness 
in the political, i.e., the national, life. (YI, 10-3-1920, p. 3) 
 
Satyagraha is utter self-effacement, greatest humiliation, greatest patience 
and brightest faith. It is its own reward. (YI, 26-2-1925, p. 73) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167  Satyagraha is a relentless search for truth and a determination to reach truth. 
(YI, 19-3-1925, p. 95) 
 
It is a force that works silently and apparently slowly. In reality, there is no 
force in the world that is so direct or so swift in working. (YI, 4-6-1925, p. 189) 
 
The word Satyagraha is often most loosely used and is made to cover veiled 
violence. But, as the author of the word, I may be allowed to say that it 
excludes every form of violence, direct or indirect, veiled or unveiled, and 
whether in thought, word or deed. It is breach of Satyagraha to with ill to an 
opponent or to say a harsh word to him or of him with the intention of harming 
him... 
Satyagraha is gentle, it never wounds. It must not be the result of anger or 
malice. It is never fussy, never impatient, never vociferous. It is the direct 
opposite of compulsion. It was conceived as a complete substitute for violence. 
(H, 15-4-1933, p. 8) 
 
The fight of satyagraha is for the strong in spirit, not the doubter or the timid. 
Satyagraha teaches us the art of living as well as dying. Birth and death are 
inevitable among mortals. What distinguishes the man from the brute is his 
conscious striving to realize the spirit within. (H, 7-4-1946, p. 74) 
 
 
Evolving Science 
I am myself daily growing in the knowledge of Satyagr a ha. I have no text-book 
to consult in time of need, not even the Gita which I have called my dictionary. 
Satyagraha as conceived by me is a science may prove to be no science at all 
and well prove to be the musings and doings of a fool, if not a madman. 
It may be that what is true in Satyagraha is as ancient as the hills. But it has 
not yet been acknowledged to be of any value in the solution of world problems 
or, rather, the one supreme problem or war. It may be that what is claimed to 
be new in it will prove to be really of no value in terms of that supreme 
problem. It may be that what are claimed to be victories of Satyagraha i.e., 
ahimsa, were really victories not of truth and non-violence but of fear of 
violence. These possibilities have always been in front of me. I am helpless. All 
I present to the nation for adoption is an answer to prayer or, which is the 
same thing, constantly waiting on God. (H, 24-9-1938, p. 266) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168  The Technique of Satyagraha 
Not to yield your soul to the conqueror means that you  will refuse to do that 
which your conscience forbids you to do. Suppose the 'enemy' were to ask you 
to rub your nose on the ground or to pull your ears or to go through such 
humiliating performances, you would not submit to any of these humiliations. 
But if he robs you of your possessions, you will yield them because, as a votary 
of ahimsa, you have from the beginning decided that earthly possessions have 
nothing to do with your soul. That which you look upon as your own you may 
keep only so long as the world allows you to own it. 
Not to yield your mind means that you will not give way to any temptation. Man 
is oftentimes weak-minded enough to be caught in the snare of greed and 
honeyed words. We see this happening daily in our social life. A weak-minded 
man can never be a Satyagrahi. The latter's 'no' is invariably a 'no' and his 'yes' 
an eternal 'yes'. Such a man alone has the strength to be a devotee of truth and 
ahimsa. But here one must know the difference between steadfastness and 
obstinacy. If, after having said 'yes' or 'no', one finds out that the decision was 
wrong and in spite of that knowledge clings to it, that is obstinacy and folly. It 
is necessary to think things out carefully and thoroughly before coming to any 
decision. 
The meaning of refusal to own allegiance is clear. You will not bow to the 
supremacy of the victor, you will not help him to attain his object. Herr Hitler 
has never dreamt of possessing Britain. He wants the British to admit defeat. 
The victor can then demand anything he likes from the vanquished, and the 
latter has perforce to yield. But if defeat is not admitted, the enemy will fight 
until he has killed his opponent. A Satyagrahi, however, is dead to his body 
even before the enemy attempts to kill him, i.e., he is free from attachment to 
his body and only lives in the victory of the soul. Therefore, when he is already 
thus dead, why would be yearn to kill anyone? To die in the act of killing is in 
essence to die defeated. Because, if the enemy is unable to get it after killing 
you. If, on the other hand, he realizes that you have not the remotest thought 
in your mind of raising your hand against him even for the sake of your life, he 
will lack the zest to kill you. Every hunter has had this experience. No one has 
ever heard of anyone hunting cows. (H, 18-8-1940, pp. 253-4) 
 
 
Power of Suffering 
The hardest heart and the grossest ignorance must disa ppear before the rising 
sun of suffering without anger and without malice. (YI, 19-2-1925, p. 61) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  Suffering has its well-defined limits. Suffering can be both wise and unwise, 
and when the limit is reached, to prolong it would be not unwise but the height 
of folly. (YI, 12-3-1931, p. 30) 
 
True suffering does not know itself and never calculates. It brings its own joy 
which surpasses all other joys. (YI, 19-3-1931, p. 41) 
 
The conviction has been growing upon me that things of fundamental 
importance to the people are not secured by reason alone, but have to be 
purchased with their suffering. Suffering is the law of human beings; war is the 
law of the jungle. But suffering is infinitely more powerful than the law of the 
jungle for converting the opponent and opening his ears, which are otherwise 
shut, to the voice of reason. (YI, 5-11-1931, p. 341) 
 
 
Code of Satyagraha 
A Satyagrahi bids good-bye to fear. He is therefore, n ever afraid of trusting the 
opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the Satyagrahi is 
ready to trust him the twenty-first time, for an implicit trust in human nature is 
the very essence of his creed. (SSA, p. 159) 
 
A Satyagrahi is nothing if not instinctively law-abiding, and it is his law-abiding 
nature which exacts from him implicit obedience to the highest law, that is the 
voice of conscience which overrides all other laws. (SW, p. 465) 
 
Since Satyagraha is one of the most powerful methods of direct action, a 
Satyagrahi exhausts all other means before he resorts to Satyagraha. He will, 
therefore, constantly and continually approach the constituted authority, he 
will appeal to public opinion, educate public opinion, state his case calmly and 
coolly before everybody who wants to listen to him, and only after he has 
exhausted all these avenues will he resort to Satyagraha. But when he has 
found the impelling call of the inner voice within him and launches out upon 
Satyagraha, he has burnt his boats and there is no receding. (YI, 20-10-1927, p. 
353) 
 
The Satyagrahi, whilst he is ever ready for fight, must be equally eager for 
peace. He must welcome any honourable opportunity for peace. (YI, 19-3-1931, 
p. 40) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170  My advice is Satyagraha first and Satyagraha last. There is no other or better 
road to freedom. (H, 15-9-1946, p. 312) 
 
In the code of the Satyagrahi there is no such thing as surrender to brute force. 
Or the surrender then is the surrender of suffering and not to the wielder of the 
bayonet. (YI, 30-4-1931, p. 93) 
 
As a Satyagrahi I must always allow my cards to be examined and re-examined 
at all times and make reparation if an error is discovered. (H, 11-3-1939, p. 44) 
 
 
Qualifications of a Satyagrahi 
...The following qualifications....I hold are essentia l for every Satyagrahi in 
India: 
He must have a living faith in God, for He is his only Rock. 
He must believe in truth and non-violence as his creed and, therefore, have 
faith in the inherent goodness of human nature which he expects to evoke by 
his truth and love expressed through his suffering. 
He must be leading a chaste life and be ready and willing, for the sake of his 
cause, to give up his life and his possessions. 
He must be a habitual Khadi-wearer and spinner. This is essential for India. 
He must be a teetotaler and be free from the use of other intoxicants in order 
that his reason may be always unclouded and his mind constant. 
He must carry out with a willing heart all the rules or discipline as may be laid 
down from time to time. 
He should carry out the jail rules unless they are specially devised to hurt his 
self-respect. 
The qualifications are not to be regarded as exhaustive. They are illustrative 
only. (H, 25-3-1939, p. 64) 
 
A Satyagrahi may not even ascend to heaven on the wings of Satan. (H, 15-4-
1939, p. 86) 
 
In Satyagraha there is no place for fraud or falsehood, or any kind of untruth. 
(BC, 9-8-1942) 
 
A Satyagrahi never misses, can never miss, a chance of compromise on 
honourable terms, it being always assumed that, in the event of failure, he is The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171  ever ready to offer battle. He needs no previous preparation, his cards are 
always on the table. (YI, 16-4-1931, p. 77) 
 
It is often forgotten that it is never the intention of a Satyagrahi to embarrass 
the wrong-doer. The appeal is never to his fear; it is, must, always to his heart. 
The Satyagrahi' s object is to convert, not to coerce, the wrong-doer. He should 
avoid artificiality in all his doings. He acts naturally and from inward 
conviction. (H, 25-3-1939, p. 64) 
 
Satyagraha is essentially a weapon of the truthful. A Satyagrahi is pledged to 
non-violence and, unless people observe it in thought, word and deed, I cannot 
offer Satyagraha. (A, p. 345) 
 
I have always held that it is only when one sees one's own mistakes with a 
convex lens, and does just the reverse in the case others, that one is able to 
arrive at a just relative estimate of the two. I further believe that a scrupulous 
and conscientious observance of this rule is necessary for one who wants to be 
a Satyagrahi. (ibid, p. 346) 
 
A Satyagrahi relies upon God for protection against the tyranny of brute 
force... (H, 7-4-1946, p. 73) 
 
No confirmed Satyagrahi is dismayed by the dangers, seen or unseen, from his 
opponent's side. What he must fear, as every army must, is the danger from 
within. (H, 14-7-1946, p. 220) 
 
 
Satyagraha and Repression 
Repression itself affords a training in Satyagraha, eve n as an unsought war 
affords a training for the soldier. Satyagrahis should discover the causes 
repression. They will find that repressed people are easily frightened by the 
slightest show of force and are unprepared for suffering and self-sacrifice. This 
is then the time for learning the first lessons of Satyagraha. 
Those who know anything of this matchless force should teach their neighbours 
to bear repression not weakly and helplessly, but bravely and knowingly..... 
And yet they [the unexciting rules of preparation] are much the most important 
part of Satyagraha training. Potent and active nonviolence cannot be cultivated 
unless the candidate goes through the necessary stages which require a lot of 
plodding. (H, 8-4-1939, p. 80) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172   
34. POWER OF SATYAGRAHA 
 
Vict
ory of Satyagraha 
………..A CLEAR victory of Satyagraha is impossible so lo ng as there is ill-will. 
But those who believe themselves to be weak are incapable of loving. Let, 
then, our first act every morning be to make the following resolve for the day: 
'I shall not fear any one on earth. I shall fear God only; I shall not bear ill-will 
towards any one. I shall not submit to injustice from any one. I shall conquer 
untruth by truth and in resisting untruth I shall put up with all suffering. (SL 
NO. 14, 4-5-1919) 
 
There is no time-limit for a Satyagrahi nor is there a limit to his capacity for 
suffering. Hence there is no such thing as defeat in Satyagraha. (YI, 19-2-1925, 
p. 61) 
 
It is not because I value life low that I countenance with joy thousands 
voluntarily losing their lives for Satyagraha, but because I know that it results, 
in the long run, in the least loss of life and, what is more, it ennobles those 
who lose their lives and morally enriches the world for their sacrifice.  
(YI, 8-10-1925, p. 345) 
 
And when once it is set in motion, its effect, if it is intensive enough, can 
overtake the whole universe. It is the greatest force because it is the highest 
expression of the soul. (YI, 23-9-1926, p. 332) 
 
My experience has taught me that a law of progression applies to every 
righteous struggle. But in the case of Satyagraha the law amounts to an axiom. 
As a Satyagraha struggle progresses onward, many another element helps to 
swell its current and there is a constant growth in the results to which it leads. 
This is really inevitable, and is bound up with the first principles of Satyagraha. 
For in Satyagraha the minimum is also the maximum, and as it is the irreducible 
minimum, there is no question of retreat, and the only movement possible is an 
advance. In other struggles, even when they are righteous, the demand is first 
pitched a little higher so as to admit of future reduction, and hence the law of 
progression does not apply to all of them without exception. (S, p. 319) 
 
To me it is one of the most active forces in the world, It is like the sun that 
rises upon us unfailingly from day to day. Only if we would but understand it, it The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173  is infinitely greater than a million suns put together. It radiates life and light 
and peace and happiness. (YI, 18-4-1929, p. 126) 
 
 
One True Satyagrahi 
If a single Satyagrahi holds out to the end, victory i s certain. (SSA, p. xiv) 
 
Self-sacrifice of one innocent man is a million times more potent than the 
sacrifice of a million men who die in the act of killing others. The willing 
sacrificed of the innocent is the most powerful retort to insolent tyranny that 
has yet been conceived by God or man. (YI, 12-2-1925, p. 60) 
 
I have maintained that, even if there is one individual who is almost completely 
non-violent, he can put out the conflagration...In this age of democracy, it is 
essential that desired results are achieved by the collective effort of the 
people. It will no doubt be good to achieve an objective through the effort of a 
supremely powerful individual, but it can never make the community conscious 
of its corporate strength. (H, 8-9-1940, p. 277) 
 
I believe in walking alone. I came alone in this world, I have walked alone in 
the valley of the shadow of death and I shall quit alone when the time comes. I 
know I am quite capable of launching Satyagraha even if I am all alone. I have 
done so before. (YI, 21-7-1946, p. 227) 
 
 
Application of Satyagraha 
It is a force that may be used by individuals as well as by communities. It may 
be used as well in political as in domestic affairs. Its universal applicability is a 
demonstration of its permanence and invincibility. It can be used alike by men, 
women and children. It is totally untrue to say that it is a force to be used only 
by the weak so long as they are not capable of meeting violence by violence.... 
This force is to violence and, therefore, to all tyranny, all injustice, what light 
is to darkness. In politics, its use is based upon the immutable maxim that 
government of the people is possible only so long as they consent either 
consciously or unconsciously to be governed. (YI, 3-11-1927, 369) 
 
I have never claimed to be the one original Satyagrahi. What I have claimed is 
the application of that doctrine on an almost universal scale, and it yet remains 
to be seen and demonstrated that it is a doctrine which is capable of 
assimilation by thousands upon thousands of peoples in all ages and climes.  The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174  (YI, 22-9-1927, p. 317) 
 
 
The Nonviolent Sanction 
Satyagraha is a law of universal application. Beginnin g with the family, its use 
can be extended to every other circle. 
Supposing a landowner exploits his tenants and mulcts them of the fruit of their 
toil by appropriating it to his own use. When they expostulate with him he does 
not listen and raises objections that he requires so much for his wife, so much 
for his children and so on. The tenants or those who have espoused their cause 
and have influence will make an appeal to his wife to expostulate with her 
husband. She would probably say that for herself she does not need his 
exploited money. The children will say likewise that they would earn for 
themselves what they need. 
Supposing further that he listens to nobody or that his wife and children 
combine against the tenants, they will not submit. They will quit if asked to do 
so, but they will make it clear that the land himself and he will have to give in 
to their just demands. 
It may, however, be that the tenants are replaced by others. Agitation short of 
violence will then continue till the replacing tenants see their error and make 
common cause with the evicted tenants. 
Thus Satyagraha is a process of educating public opinion, such that it covers all 
elements of society and in the end makes itself irresistible. Violence interrupts 
the process and prolongs the real revolution of the whole social structure. 
The conditions necessary for the success of Satyagraha are: (1) The Satyagrahi 
should not have any hatred in his heart against the opponent. (2) The issue 
must be true and substantial. (3) The Satyagrahi must be prepared to suffer till 
the end for his cause. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 64) 
 
 
Training for Self-defence 
I believe that every man and woman should learn the ar t of self-defence in this 
age. This is done through arms in the West. Every adult man is conscripted for 
army training for a definite period. The training for Satyagraha is meant for all, 
irrespective of age or sex. The more important part of the training here is 
mental, not physical. There can be no compulsion in mental training. The 
surrounding atmosphere no doubt acts on the mind, but that cannot justify 
compulsion... 
Satyagraha is always superior to armed resistance. This can only be effectively 
proved by demonstration, not by argument. It is the weapon that adorns the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175  strong. It can never adorn the weak. By weak is meant the weak in mind and 
spirit, not in body. That limitation is a quality to be prized and not defect to be 
deplored. 
One ought also to understand one of its other limitations. It can never be used 
to defend a wrong cause. 
Satyagraha brigades can be organized in every village and in every block of 
buildings in the cities. Each brigade should be composed of those persons who 
are well-known to the organizers. In this respect satyagraha differs from armed 
defence. For the latter the State impresses the service of everybody. For a 
Satyagraha brigade only those are eligible who believe in ahimsa and satya. 
Therefore, an intimate knowledge of the persons enlisted is necessary for the 
organizers. (H, 17-3-1946, pp. 45-46) 
 
 
Duragraha  
I can see nothing but catastrophe for India from metho ds of violence. Workmen 
would be committing suicide and India would have to suffer indescribable 
misery if workingmen were to vent their anger by criminal disobedience of the 
laws of the land.... 
When I began to preach Satyagraha and civil disobedience, it was never meant 
to cover criminal disobedience. My experience teaches me that truth can never 
be propagated by doing violence. 
Those who believe in the justice of their cause need to possess boundless 
patience, and those alone are fit to offer civil disobedience who are above 
committing criminal disobedience or doing violence. 
A man cannot commit both civil and criminal disobedience at the same time, 
even as he cannot be both temperate and furious at the same time, and just as 
self-restraint is acquired only after one has been able to master his passions, so 
is the capacity for civil disobedience acquired after one has disciplined oneself 
in complete and voluntary obedience of the laws of the land. 
Again, just as he alone can be said to be proof against temptations who, having 
been exposed to them, has succeeded in resisting them, so may we be said to 
have conquered anger when, having sufficient cause for it, we have succeeded 
in controlling ourselves. (YI, 28-4-1920, pp. 7-8) 
 
Some students have revived the ancient form of barbarity in the form of 'sitting 
dhurna'...I call it 'barbarity' for it is a crude way of using coercion. It is also 
cowardly, because one who sits dhurna knows that he is not going to be 
trampled over. It is difficult to call the practice violent, but it is certainly 
worse. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176  If we fight our opponent, we at least enable him to return the blow. But when 
we challenge him to walk over us, knowing that he will not, we place him in a 
most awkward and humiliating position. I know that the over-zealous students 
who sat dhurna never thought of the barbarity of the deed. But one who is 
expected to follow the voice of conscience and stand even single-handed in the 
face of odds cannot afford to be thoughtless. 
There must be no impatience, no barbarity, no insolence, no undue pressure. If 
we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be 
intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause. (YI, 2-2-1921, p. 
33) 
 
I have not been able to understand the cause of so much excitement and 
disturbance that followed my detention. It is not Satyagraha. It is worse than 
Durgraha. 
Those who join Satyagraha demonstrations were bound one and all to refrain at 
all hazard from violence, not to throw stones or in anyway whatever to injure 
anybody. But in Bombay we have been throwing stones. We have obstructed 
tram-cars by putting obstacles in the way. This is not Satyagraha. We have 
demanded the release of about 50 men who had been arrested for deeds of 
violence. Our duty is chiefly to get ourselves arrested. It is breach of religious 
duty to endeavour to secure the release of those who have committed deeds of 
violence. (SW, p. 474) 
 
I have said times without number that Satyagraha admits of no violence, no 
pillage, no incendiarism; and still, in the name of Satyagraha, we have burnt 
buildings, forcibly captured weapons, extorted money, stopped trains, cut off 
telegraph wires, killed innocent people and plundered shops and private 
houses. If deeds such as these could save me from the prison-house or the 
scaffold, I should not like to be so saved. (ibid, p. 476) 
 
....Heroism and sacrifice in a bad cause are so much waste of splendid energy 
and hurt the good cause by drawing away attention from it by the glamour of 
the misused heroism and sacrifice in a bad cause. (YI, 12-12-1925, p. 60) 
 
....Indiscriminate resistance to authority must lead to lawlessness and 
unbridled license and consequent self-destruction. (YI, 2-4-1931, p. 58) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177   
35. NON-CO-OPERATION 
 
NON
-CO-OPERATIONS is an attempt to awaken the masses to a sense of their 
dignity and power. This can only be by enabling them to realize that they need 
not fear brute force if they would but know the soul within. (YI, 1-12-1920, p. 
3) 
 
Non-co-operation is a protest against an unwitting and unwilling participation in 
evil....Non-co-operation with evil is as much a duty as co-operation with good. 
(YI, 1-6-1921, p. 172) 
 
Non-co-operation is not a passive state, it is an intensively active state, more 
active than physical resistance or violence. Passive resistance is a misnomer. 
Non-co-operation in the sense used by me must be non-violent and therefore, 
neither punitive nor based on malice, ill-will or hatred. (YI, 25-8-1920, p. 322) 
 
 
Religious Basis 
I venture to submit that the Bhagavadgita is a gospel of non-co-operation 
between the forces of darkness and those of light. If it is to be literally 
interpreted, Arjuna representing a just cause was enjoined to engage in bloody 
warfare with the unjust Kauravas. Tulasidas advises the sant (the good) to shun 
the asant (the evil doers). The Zend Avesta represents a perpetual duel 
between Ormuzd and Ahriman, between whom there is no compromise. To say 
of the Bible that it taboos non-co-operation is not to know Jesus, a prince 
among passive resisters, who uncompromisingly challenged the might of the 
Sadducees and the Pharisees and, for the sake of truth, did not hesitate to 
divide sons from their parents. And what did the Prophet of Islam do? He non-
co-operated in Mecca in a most active manner so long as his life was not in 
danger, and wiped the dust of Mecca off his faith when he found that he and 
his followers might have uselessly to perish, and fled to Medina and returned 
when he was strong enough to give battle to his opponents. The duty of non-co-
operation with unjust men and kings is as strictly enjoined by all the religions 
as is the duty of co-operation with just men and kings. Indeed, most of the 
scriptures of the world seem even to go beyond non-co-operation and prefer 
violence to effeminate submission to a wrong. The Hindu religious 
tradition.....clearly proves the duty of non-co-operation. Prahlad dissociated 
from his father, Meerabai from her husband, Bibhishan from his brutal brother. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  (YI, 4-8-1920, p. 4) 
 
 
Basic Principle  
The
 basic principle on which the practice of non-violence rests is that what 
holds good in respect of oneself equally applies to the whole Universe. All 
mankind in essence are alike. What is therefore possible for me, is possible for 
everybody.... 
This is essence is the principle of non-violent non-co-operation. It follows 
therefore that it must have its root in love. Its object should not be to punish 
the opponent or to inflict injury upon him. Even while non-co-operating with 
him, we must make him feel that in us he has a friend and we should try to 
reach his heart by rendering him humanitarian service whenever possible. 
In fact, it is the acid test of non-violence that in a non-violent conflict there is 
no rancour left behind and, in the end, the enemies are converted into friends. 
That was my experience in South Africa with General Smuts. He started with 
being my bitterest opponent and critic. Today he is my warmest friend..... 
 
 
Enduring Quality 
Times change and systems decay. But it is my faith tha t, in the result, it is only 
non-violence and things that are based on non-violence that will endure. 
Nineteen hundred years ago Christianity was born. The ministry of Jesus lasted 
for only three brief years. His teaching was misunderstood even during his own 
time and today Christianity is a denial of his central teaching [: "Love your 
enemy." But what are nineteen hundred years for the spread of the central 
doctrine of a man's teaching?] Six centuries rolled by and Islam appeared on the 
scene. Many Musalmans will not even allow me to say that Islam, as the word 
implies, it unadulterated peace. My reading of the Koran has convinced me that 
the basis of Islam is not violence. But, here again, thirteen hundred years are 
but a speck in the cycle of Time. I am convinced that both these great faiths 
will life only to the extent that their followers imbibe the central teaching of 
non-violence. But it is not a thing to be grasped through mere intellect, it must 
sink into our hearts.  (H, 12-11-1938, p. 327) 
 
Although non-co-operation is one of the main weapons in the armoury of 
Satyagraha, it should not be forgotten that it is after all only a means to secure 
the co-operation of the opponent consistently with truth and justice. The 
essence of non-violent technique is that it seeks to liquidate antagonisms but 
not the antagonists themselves. In non-violent fight you have, to a certain The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179  measure, to conform to the tradition and conventions to the system you are 
pitted against. Avoidance of all relationship with the opposing power, 
therefore, can never be a Satyagrahi's object, but transformation or 
purification of that relationship. (H, 29-4-1939, p. 101) 
 
 
Ethics of Non-co-operation 
I consider non-co-operation to be such a powerful and pu re instrument that, if 
it is enforced in an earnest spirit, it will be like seeking first the Kingdom of 
God and everything else following as a matter of course. People will then have 
realized their true power. They would have learnt that value of discipline, self-
control, joint action, non-violence, organization and everything else that goes 
to make a nation great and good, and not merely great. (YI, 2-6-1920, p. 3) 
 
There is no instrument so clean, so harmless and yet so effective as non-co-
operation. Judiciously handled, it need not produce any evil consequences. And 
its intensity will depend purely on the capacity of the people for sacrifice. (YI, 
30-6-1920, p. 3) 
 
We had lost the power of saying 'no'. It had become disloyal, almost sacrilegious 
to say 'no' to the Government. This deliberate refusal to co-operate is like the 
necessary weeding process that a cultivator has to resort to before he sows. 
Weeding is as necessary to agriculture as sowing. Indeed, even whilst the crops 
are growing, the weeding fork, as every husbandman knows, is an instrument 
almost to daily use. 
The nation's non-co-operation is an invitation to the Government to co-operate 
with it on its own terms, as is every nation's right and every good government's 
duty. Non-co-operation is the nation's notice that it is no longer satisfied to be 
in tutelage. (YI, 1-6-1921, p. 173) 
 
The movement of non-violent non-co-operation has nothing in common with the 
historical struggles for freedom in the west. It is not based on brute force or 
hatred. It does not aim at destroying the tyrant. It is a movement of self-
purification. It therefore seeks to convert the tyrant. It may fail because India 
was not ready for mass non-violence. But it would be wrong to judge the 
movement by false standards. My own opinion is that the movement has in no 
wise failed. It has found an abiding place in India's struggle for freedom. (YI, 
11-2-1926, 59) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180  A Duty 
At times non-co-operation becomes as much a duty as co -operation. No one is 
bound to co-operate in one's own undoing or slavery. Freedom received through 
the effort of others, however benevolent, cannot be retained when such effort 
is withdrawn. In other words, such freedom is not real freedom. But the 
lowliest can feel its glow as soon as they learn the art of attaining it through 
non-violent no-co-operation.... 
I am quite sure that non-violent non-co-operation can secure what violence 
never can, and this by ultimate conversion of the wrong-doers. We in India have 
never given non-violence the trial it has deserved. The marvel is that we have 
attained so much even with our mixed non-violence. (YI, 20-4-1920, p. 97) 
 
I have presented non-co-operation in terms of religion, because I enter politics 
only in so far as it develops the religious faculty in me. (YI, 19-1-1921, p. 19) 
 
Behind my non-co-operation there is always the keenest desire to co-operate 
on the slightest pretext even with the worst of opponents. To me, a very 
imperfect moral, ever in need of God's grace, no one is beyond redemption. (YI, 
4-6-1925, p, 193) 
 
....Nothing crooked will have countenance from me. For me, the law of 
Satyagraha, the law of love, is an eternal principle. I co-operate with all that is 
good. I desire to non-co-operate with all that is evil... (YI, 18-6-1925, p. 213) 
 
 
No Hatred 
By a long course of prayerful discipline, I have cease d for over forty years to 
hate anybody. I know that this is a big claim. Nevertheless, I make it in all 
humility. But I can and I do hate evil wherever it exists. My non-co-operation 
has its root not in hatred, but in love. My personal religion peremptorily forbids 
me to hate anybody. I learnt this simple yet grand doctrine when I was twelve 
years old through a school book, and the conviction has persisted up to now. It 
is daily growing on me. It is a burning passion with me. (YI, 6-8-1925, p. 272) 
 
It is not that I harbour disloyalty towards anything whatsoever, but I do so 
against all untruth, all that is unjust, all that is evil.....I remain loyal to an 
institution so long as that institution conduces to my growth, to the growth of 
the nation. Immediately I find that the institution, instead of conducing to its 
growth, impedes it, I hold it to be my bounden duty to be disloyal to it. (YI, 13-
8-1925, p. 277) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181   
My non-co-operation, though it is part of my creed, is a prelude to co-
operation. My non-co-operation is with methods and systems, never with men. I 
may not harbour ill-will even against a Dyer. I regard ill-will as beneath the 
dignity of man. (YI, 12-9-1929, p. 300) 
 
Some have called me the greatest revolutionary of my time. It may be false, 
but I believe myself to be a revolutionary, a non-violent revolutionary. My 
means are non-co-operation. No person can amass wealth without the co-
operation, willing or forced, of the people concerned. (YI, 26-11-1931, p. 369) 
 
I am by instinct a co-operator; my very non-co-operation is intended to purge 
co-operation of all meanness and falsity, for I hold such so-operation is not 
worth the name. (EF, p. 84) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182   
36. FASTING AND SATYAGRAHA 
 
Wea
pon of Satyagraha  
FAST
ING is a potent weapon in the Satyagraha armoury. It cannot be taken by 
everyone. Mere physical capacity to take it is no qualification for it. It is of no 
use without a living faith in God. It should never be a mechanical effort or a 
mere limitation. It must come from the depth of one's soul. It is, therefore, 
always rare. (H, 18-3-1939, p. 56) 
 
There can be no room for selfishness, anger, lack of faith or impatience in a 
pure fast....Infinite patience, firm resolve, single-mindedness of purpose, 
perfect calm, and no anger must of necessity be there. But since it is 
impossible for a person to develop all these qualities all at once, no one who 
has not devoted himself to following the laws of ahimsa should undertake a 
Satyagrahi fast. (H, 13-10-1940, p. 322) 
 
[Fasting] is...fierce and not altogether free from danger. I myself have before 
condemned fasting when it seemed to me to be wrong or morally unjustified. 
But to shirk a fast where there is a clear moral indication is a dereliction of 
duty. Such a fast has to be based on unadulterated truth and ahimsa.  
(H, 28-7-1946, p. 235) 
 
 
Fasting and Death 
Fasting unto death is the last and the most potent wea pon in the armoury of 
Satyagraha. It is a sacred thing. But it must be accepted with all its 
implication. It is not the fast itself, but what it implies that matters. (H, 18-8-
1846, p. 262) 
 
 
Fasting and the way of Christ 
Fasting cannot be undertaken mechanically. It is a pow erful thing but a 
dangerous thing, if handled amateurishly. It requires complete self-purification, 
much more than what is required in facing death with retaliation even in mind. 
One such act of perfect sacrifice would suffice for the whole world. Such is 
held to be Jesus' example. (H, 27-10-1946, p. 272) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183  Of course, it is not to be denied that fasts can be really coercive. Such are fasts 
to attain a selfish object. A fast undertaken to wring money from a person or 
for fulfilling some such personal end would amount to the exercise of coercion 
or undue influence. I would unhesitatingly advocate resistance of such undue 
influence. I have myself successfully resisted it in the fasts that have been 
undertaken or threatened against me. 
And if it is argued that the dividing line between a selfish and unselfish end is 
often very thin, I would urge that a person who regards the end of a fast to be 
selfish or otherwise base should resolutely refuse to yield to it, even though the 
refusal may result in the death of the fasting person. 
If people will cultivate the habit of disregarding fasts which, in their opinion, 
are taken for unworthy ends, such fasts will be robbed of the taint of coercion 
and undue influence. Like all human institutions, fasting can be both 
legitimately and illegitimately used. (H, 9-9-1931, p. 5) 
 
If a man, however popular and great he may be, takes up an improper cause 
and fasts in defence of the impropriety, it is the duty of his friends (among 
whom I count myself), fellow-workers and relatives to let him die rather than 
that an improper cause should triumph so that he may live. Fairest means cease 
to be fair when the end sought is unfair. (H, 17-3-1946, p. 43) 
 
 
Last Resort 
One general principle, however, I would like to enunc i ate. A Satyagrahi should 
fast only as a last resort when all other avenues of redress have been explored 
and have failed. There is no room for imitation in fasts. He who has no inner 
strength should not dream of it, and never with attachment to success. 
But if a Satyagrahi once undertakes a fast from conviction, he must stick to his 
resolve whether there is a chance of his action bearing fruit or not. This does 
not mean that fasting cannot or can bear fruit. He who fasts in the expectation 
of fruit generally fails. And even if he does not seemingly fail, he loses all the 
inner joy which a true fast holds... 
Ridiculous fasts spread like plague and are harmful. But, when fasting becomes 
a duty, it cannot be given up. Therefore, I do fast when I consider it to be 
necessary and cannot abstain from it on any score. What I do myself I cannot 
abstain from it on any score. What I do myself I cannot prevent others from 
doing under similar circumstances. It is common knowledge that the best of 
good things are often abused. We see this happening every day. (H, 21-4-1946, 
p. 93) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  ...When human ingenuity fails, the votary fasts. This fasting quickens the spirit 
of prayer, that is to say, the fasting is a spiritual act, and therefore, addressed 
to God. The effect of such action on the life of the people is that, where the 
person fasting is at all known to them, their sleeping conscience is awakened. 
But there is the danger that the people through mistaken sympathy may act 
against their will in order to save the life of the loved one. This danger has got 
to be faced. One ought not to be deterred from right action when one is sure of 
the rightness. It can best promote circumspection. Such a fast is undertaken in 
obedience to the dictates of the inner voice and, therefore, prevents haste. (H, 
21-12-1947, p. 476) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185   
37. THE GOSPEL OF NON-POSSESSION 
 
Key to Service 
WHEN I found myself drawn into the political coil, I a sked myself what was 
necessary for me in order to remain absolute untouched by immorality, by 
untruth, by what is known as political gain... it was a difficult struggle in the 
beginning and it was wrestle with my wife and-as I can vividly recall-with my 
children also. But be that as it may, I came definitely to the conclusion that, if 
I had to serve the people in whose midst my life was cast and of whose 
difficulties I was a witness from day to day, I must discard all wealth, all 
possession.... 
I cannot tell you with truth that, when this belief came to me, I discarded 
everything immediately. I must confess to you that progress at first was slow. 
And now, as I recall those days of struggle, I remember that it was also painful 
in the beginning. But, as days went by, I saw that I had to throw overboard 
many other things which I used to consider as mine, and a time came when it 
became a matter of positive joy to give up those things. And one after another, 
then, by almost geometric progression, the things slipped away from me. 
And, as I am describing my experiences, I can say a great burden fell off my 
shoulders, and I felt that I could now walk with ease and do my work also in the 
service of my fellow-men with great comfort and still greater joy. The 
possession of anything then became a troublesome thing and a burden. 
Exploring the cause of that joy, I found that, If I kept anything as my own, I had 
to defend it against the whole world. I found also that there were many people 
who did not have the thing, although they wanted it; and I would have to seek 
police assistance also if hungry, famine-stricken people, finding me in a lonely 
place, wanted not merely to divide the thing with me but to dispossess me. And 
I said to myself, if they want it and would take it, they do so not from any 
malicious motive, but they would do it because theirs was a greater need than 
mine. (SW, pp. 1066-7) 
 
It is open to the world...to laugh at my dispossessing myself of all property. For 
me the dispossession has been a positive gain. I would like people to complete 
with me in my contentment. It is the richest treasure I own. Hence it is perhaps 
right to say that, though I preach poverty, I am a rich man! (YI, 30-4-1925, p. 
149) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  Voluntary Self-denial 
Our civilization, our culture, our Swaraj depend not u pon multiplying our 
wants--self-indulgence, but upon restricting our wants--self-denial. (YI, 23-2-
1921, p. 59) 
 
Non-possession is allied to non-stealing. A thing not originally stolen must 
nevertheless be classified as stolen property, if we possess it without needing 
it. Possession implies provision for the future. A seeker after Truth, a follower 
of the law of Love, cannot hold anything against tomorrow. God never stores 
for tomorrow. He never creates more than what is strictly needed for the 
moment. If, therefore, we repose faith in His Providence, we should rest 
assured that He will give us every day our daily bread, meaning everything that 
we require.... 
Our ignorance or negligence of the Divine Law, which gives to man from day to 
day his daily bread and no more, has given rise to inequalities with all the 
miseries attendant upon them. The rich have superfluous store of things which 
they do not need and which are, therefore, neglected and wasted, while 
millions are starved to death for want of sustenance. 
If each retained possession of only what he needed, no one would be in want, 
and all would live in contentment. As it is, the rich are discontented no less 
than the poor. The poor man would fain become a millionaire, and the 
millionaire a multi-millionaire. 
The rich should take the initiative in dispossession with a view to a universal 
diffusion of the spirit of contentment. If only they keep their own property 
within moderate limits, the starving will be easily fed, and will learn the lesson 
of contentment along with the rich. 
Perfect fulfillment of the ideal of non-possession requires that man should, like 
the birds, have no roof over his head, no clothing and no stock of food for the 
morrow. He will indeed need his daily bread, but it will be God's business, and 
not his, to provide it. Only the fewest possible, if any at all, can reach this 
ideal. We ordinary seekers may not be repelled by the seeming impossibility. 
But we must keep the ideal constantly in view, and in the light thereof, 
critically examine our possessions and try to reduce them. 
Civilization, in the real sense of the term, consists not in the multiplication, 
but in the deliberate and voluntary reduction of wants. This alone promotes 
real happiness and contentment, and increases the capacity for service. 
From the standpoint of pure truth, the body too is a possession. It has been 
truly said that desire for enjoyment creates bodies for the soul. When this 
desire vanishes, there remains no further need for the body, and man is free 
from the vicious cycle of births and deaths. The soul is omnipresent; why The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187  should she care to be confined within the cage-like body, or do evil and even 
kill for the sake of the cage? 
 
 
Ideal of Renunciation 
We thus arrive at the ideal of total renunciation, and learn to use the body for 
the purpose of service so long as it exists, so much so that service and not 
bread becomes with us the staff of life. We eat and drink, sleep and wake for 
service alone. Such an attitude of mind brings us real happiness, and the 
beatific vision in the fullness of time. Let us all examine ourselves from this 
standpoint. 
Needless to say, this is not a plea for inertia. Every moment of our life should 
be filled with mental or physical activity, but that activity should be sattvika, 
tending to truth. One who has consecrated his life to service learns to 
distinguish between good activity and evil activity. This discernment goes 
naturally with a single-minded devotion to service. (FYM, pp. 23-6) 
 
 
Moral Purpose 
Why should all of us possess property? Why should not we, after a certain time, 
dispossess ourselves of all property? Unscrupulous merchants do this for 
dishonest purpose. Why may we not do it for a moral and a great purpose? 
For a Hindu it was the usual thing at a certain stage. Every good Hindu is 
expected, after having lived the household life for a certain period, to enter 
upon a life of non-possession of property. Why may we not revive the noble 
tradition? In effect it merely amounts to this that for maintenance we place 
ourselves at the mercy of those to whom we transfer our property. To me the 
idea is attractive. In the innumerable cases of such honourable trust there is 
hardly one case in a million of abuse of trust. 
...How such a practice can be worked without giving handle to dishonest 
persons can only be determined after long experimenting. No one, however, 
need be deterred from trying the experiment for fear of the example being 
abused. The divine author of Gita was not deterred from delivering the 
message of he 'Song Celestial' although he probably knew that it would be 
tortured to justify every variety of vice including murder. (YI, 3-7-1924, p. 221) 
 
The highest fulfillment of religion...requires a giving up of all possession. 
Having ascertained the law of our being, we must set about reducing it to 
practice to the extent of our capacity and no further. That is the middle way. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  (YI, 5-2-1925, p. 48) 
 
 
Golden Rule 
The golden rule...is resolutely to refuse to have what  the millions cannot. This 
ability to refuse will not descend upon us all of a sudden. The first thing is to 
cultivate the mental attitude that will not have possessions or facilities denied 
to millions, and the next immediate thing is to re-arrange our lives as fast as 
possible in accordance with that mentality. (YI, 24-6-1926, p. 226) 
 
Love and exclusive possession can never go together. Theoretically, where 
there is perfect love, there must be perfect non-possession. The body is our 
last possession. So, a man can only exercise perfect love and be completely 
dispossessed if he is prepared to embrace death and renounce his body for the 
sake of human service. 
But that is true in theory only. In actual life we can hardly exercise perfect 
love, for the body as possession will always remain imperfect and it will always 
be his part to try to be perfect. So that perfection in love or non-possession will 
remain an unattainable ideal as long as we are alive, but towards which we 
must ceaselessly strive. (MR, October 1935, p. 412) 
 
Jesus, Mahomed, Buddha, Nanak, Kabir, Chaitanya, Shankara, Dayanand, 
Ramakrishna were men who exercised an immense influence over and molded 
the character of thousands of men. The world is the richer for their having 
lived in it. And they were all men who deliberately embraced poverty as their 
log....In so far as we have made the modern materialistic craze our goal, so far 
are we going downhill in the path of progress. (SW, p. 353) 
 
How heavy is the toll of sins and wrongs that wealth, power and prestige exact 
from man! (A, p. 168) 
 
To take something from another without his permission is theft of course. But it 
is also theft to use a thing for a purpose different from the one intended by the 
lender or to use it for a period longer than that which has been fixed with him. 
The profound truth upon which this observance is based is that God never 
creates more than what is strictly needed for the moment. Therefore, whoever 
appropriates more than the minimum that is really necessary for him is guilty of 
theft. (AOA, p. 58) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189  Secret of Life 
Renounce all and dedicate it to God and then live. The  right of living is thus 
derived from renunciation. It does not say, 'When all do their part of the work, 
I too will do it.' It says, 'Don't bother about others, do your job first and leave 
the rest to Him. (H, 6-3-1937, p. 27) 
 
You may have occasion to possess or use material things, but the secret of life 
lies in never missing them. (H, 10-12-1938, p. 371) 
 
The secret of happy life lies in renunciation. Renunciation is life. Indulgence 
spells death. Therefore, everyone has a right and should desire to live 125 years 
while performing service without an eye on result. Such life must be wholly and 
solely dedicated to service. Renunciation made for the sake of such service is 
an ineffable joy of which none can deprive one, because that nectar springs 
from within and sustains life. In this there can be no room for worry or 
impatience. Without this joy, long life is impossible and would not be worth 
while even if possible. (H, 24-2-1946, p. 19) 
 
This does not mean that, if one has wealth, it should be thrown away and wife 
and children should be turned out of doors. It simply means that one must give 
up attachment of these things and dedicate one's all to God and make use of 
His gifts to serve Him only. (H, 28-4-1946, p. 111) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190   
38. POVERTY AND RICHES 
 
Avo
idance of Strife 
I cannot picture to myself a time when no man shall be richer than another. But 
I do picture to myself a time when the rich will spurn to enrich themselves at 
the expense of the poor and the poor will cease to envy the rich. Even in a 
most perfect world, we shall fail to avoid inequalities, but we can and must 
avoid strife and bitterness. (YI, 7-10-1926, p. 348) 
 
I have heard many of our countrymen say that we will gain American wealth, 
but avoid its methods. I venture to suggest that such an attempt, if it were 
made, is foredoomed to failure. We cannot be 'wise, temperate and furious' in a 
moment. (SW, pp. 353-4) 
 
Every palace that one sees in India is a demonstration, not of her riches, but of 
the insolence of power that riches give to the few, who owe them to the 
miserably requited labours of the millions of the paupers of India. (YI, 28-4-
1927, p. 137) 
 
 
Duty of the rich 
The rich should ponder well as to what their duty is t oday. They who employ 
mercenaries to guard their wealth may find those very guardians turning on 
them. The moneyed classes have got to learn how to fight either with arms or 
with the weapon of non-violence. 
For those who wish to follow the latter way, the best and most effective 
mantra is:[******************************************] (Enjoy the wealth by renouncing 
it). Expanded it means: "Earn your cores by all means. But understand that your 
wealth is not yours; it belongs to the people. Take what you equire for your 
legitimate needs, and use the remainder for society." 
This truth has hitherto not been acted upon; but, if the moneyed classes do not 
even act on it in these times of stress, they will remain the slaves of their 
riches and passions and, consequently, of those who overpower them. 
...I see coming the day of the rule of the poor, whether that rule be through 
force of arms or of non-violence. Let it be remembered that physical force is 
transitory even as the body is transitory. But the power of the spirit is 
permanent, even as the spirit is everlasting. (H, 1-2-1942, p. 20) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191  I have no hesitation in endorsing the opinion that generally rich men and, for 
that matter, most men are not particular as to the way they make money. In 
the application of the method of non-violence, one must believe in the 
possibility of every person, however depraved, being reformed under humane 
and skilled treatment. We must appeal to the good in human beings and expect 
response. 
 
 
Good of All 
It is not conducive to the well-being of society that  every member uses all his 
talents, only not for personal aggrandizement but for the good of all? We do not 
want to produce a dead equality where every person becomes or is rendered 
incapable of using his ability to the utmost possible extent. Such a society must 
ultimately perish. 
I therefore suggest that my advice, that moneyed men may earn their cores 
(honestly only, of course) but so as to dedicate them to the service of all, is 
perfectly sound. [******************************] is a mantra based on uncommon 
knowledge. It is the surest method to evolve a new order of life of universal 
benefit in the place of the present one where each one lives for himself 
without regard to what happens to his neighbour. (H, 22-2-1942, p. 49) 
 
 
Beg
gary 
The grinding poverty and starvation with which our co u ntry is afflicted is such 
that it drives more and more every year into the ranks of the beggars, whose 
desperate struggle for bread renders them insensible to all feelings of decency 
and self-respect. And our philanthropists, instead of providing work for them 
and insisting on their working for bread, give them alms. (A, p. 320) 
 
My ahimsa would not tolerate the idea of giving a free meal to a healthy person 
who has not worked for it in some honest way, and if I had the power, I would 
stop every Sadavrat where free meals are given. It has degraded the nation and 
has encouraged laziness, idleness, hypocrisy and even crime. Such misplaced 
charity adds nothing to the wealth of the country, whether material or 
spiritual, and gives a false sense of meritoriousness to the donor. 
 
 
Work, Not Charity 
How nice and wise it would be if the donors were to o pe n institutions where 
they would give meals under healthy, clean surroundings to men and women The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192  who would work for them. I personally think that the spinning wheel or any of 
the processes that cotton has to go through will be an ideal occupation. But if 
they will not have that, they may choose any other work; only the rule should 
be, "No labour, no meal.".... 
I know that it is easier to fling free meals in the faces of idlers, but much more 
difficult to organize an institution where honest work has to be done before 
meals are served. From a pecuniary standpoint, in the initial stages at any rate, 
the cost of feeding people after taking work from them will be more than the 
cost of the present free kitchen. But I am convinced that it will be cheaper in 
the long run, if we do not want to increase in geometrical progression the race 
of loafers which is fast over-running this land. (YI, 13-8-1925, p. 282) 
 
To people famishing and idle, the only acceptable form in which God can dare 
appear is work and promise of food as wages. (YI, 13-10-1921, p. 325) 
 
I must refuse to insult the naked by giving them clothes they do not need, 
instead of giving them work which they sorely need. I will not commit the sin of 
becoming their patron but, on learning that I had assisted in impoverishing 
them, I would give them neither crumbs nor cast off clothing, but the best of 
my food and clothes and associate myself with them in work. (ibid) 
 
I do feel that, whilst it is bad to encourage begging, I will not send away a 
beggar without offering him work and food. If he will not work, I should let him 
go without food. Those who are physically disabled like the halt and the 
maimed have got to be supported by the State. 
There is, however, a lot of fraud going on under cover of pretended blindness 
or even genuine blindness. So many blind have become rich because of ill-
gotten gains. It would be a good thing if they were taken to an asylum, rather 
than be exposed to his temptation. (H, 11-5-1935, p. 99) 
 
 
Dependence on Servants 
I hold that a man who desires the co-operation of and w ishes of co-operate 
with others should not be dependent on servants. If anyone has to have one at 
a time of scarcity of servants, he will have to pay what is demanded and accept 
all other conditions with the result that he will instead of being master, 
become the servant of his employee. This is good for neither the master nor the 
servant. 
But if what an individual seeks is not slavery, but the co-operation of a fellow-
being, he will not only serve himself but also him whose co-operation he needs. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193  Through the extension of this principle, a man's family will become co-terminus 
with the world and his attitude towards his fellow-beings will also undergo a 
corresponding change. There is no other way of reaching the desired 
consummation. (H, 10-3-1946, p. 40) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194   
39. DARIDRANARAYAN 
 
God
 of the Poor 
DARIDRANARAYAN IS one of the millions of names by whic h humanity knows God 
who is unnamable and unfathomable by human understanding, and it means 
God of the poor, God appearing in the hearts of the poor. (YI, 4-4-1929, p. 110) 
 
For the poor the economic is the spiritual. You cannot make any other appeal 
to those starving millions. It will fall flat on them. But you take food to them 
and they will regard you as their God. They are incapable of any other thought. 
(YI, 5-5-1927, p. 142) 
 
With this very hand I have collected soiled pies from them, and tied tightly in 
their rags. Talk to them of modern progress. Insult them by taking the name of 
God before them in vain. They will call you and me friends if we talk about God 
to them. They know if they know any God at all, a God of terror, vengeance, a 
pitiless tyrant. (YI, 15-9-1927, p. 313) 
 
I am working for winning Swaraj...for those soiling and unemployed millions 
who do not get even a square meal a day and have to scratch along with a 
piece of stale roti and a pinch of salt. (YI, 26-3-1931, p. 53) 
 
 
Message of God 
I dare not take before them the message of God. I may as well place before the 
dog over there the message of God as before those hungry millions, who have 
no luster in their eyes and whose only God is their bread. I can take before 
them a message of God only by taking the message of sacred work before them. 
It is good enough to talk of God whilst we are sitting here after a nice breakfast 
and looking forward to a nicer luncheon. But how am I to talk of God to the 
millions who have to go without two meals a day? To them God can only appear 
as bread and butter. Well, the peasants of India were getting their bread from 
their soil. I offered them the spinning wheel in order that they may get butter 
and, if I appear today...in my loin-cloth, it is because I come as the sole 
representative of those half-starved, half-naked dumb millions. (YI, 15-10-1931, 
p. 310) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195  I claim to know my millions. All the 24 hours of the day I am with them. They 
are my first care and last because I recognize no God except that God that is to 
be found in the hearts of the dumb millions. They do not recognize His 
presence; I do. And I worship the God that is Truth or Truth which is God 
through the service of these millions. (H, 11-3-1939, p. 44) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196   
40. THE GOSPEL OF BREAD LABOUR 
 
Divin
e Law 
GOD CREATED man to work for his food, and said that th ose who ate without 
work were thieves. (YI, 13-10-1921, p. 325) 
 
The great Nature has intended us to earn our bread in the sweat of our brow. 
Every one, therefore, who idles away a single minute becomes to that extent a 
burden upon his neighbours, and to do so is to commit a breach of the very first 
lesson of ahimsa. Ahimsa is nothing if not a well-balance, exquisite 
consideration for one's neighbour, and an idle man is wanting in that 
elementary consideration. (YI, 11-4-1929, p. 144-15) 
 
The law, that to live man must work, first came home to me upon reading 
Tolstoy's writing on bread labour. But, even before that I had begun to pay 
homage to it after reading Ruskin's Unto This Last. The divine law, that man 
must earn his bread by labouring with his own hands, was first stressed by a 
Russian writer named T.M. Bondaref. Tolstoy advertised it and gave it wider 
publicity. In my view, the same principle has been set forth in the third chapter 
of the Gita where we are told that he who eats without offering sacrifice eats 
stolen food. Sacrifice here can only mean bread labour. (FYM, p. 35) 
 
 
Rule of Reason 
Reason too leads to an identical conclusion. How can a  man who does not do 
body labour have the right to eat? 'In the sweat of thy brow salt thou eat thy 
bread', says the Bible. A millionaire cannot carry on for long, and will soon get 
tired of his life, if he rolls in bed all day long, and is even helped to his food. 
He, therefore, induces hunger by exercise and helps himself to the food he 
eats. 
If everyone, whether rich or poor, has thus to take exercise in some shape or 
form, why should it not assume the form of productive, i.e., bread labour? No 
one asks the cultivator to take breathing exercise or to work his muscles. And 
more than nine-tenths of humanity lives by tilling the soil. How much happier, 
healthier and more peaceful would the world become if the remaining tenth 
followed the example of the overwhelming majority, at least to the extent of 
labouring enough for their food! 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197   
Social Revolution 
...There is a world-wide conflict between capital and l abour, and the poor envy 
the rich. If all worked for their bread, distinctions of rank would be 
obliterated; the rich would still be there, but they would deem themselves only 
trustees of their property, and would use it mainly in the public interest. (ibid, 
pp. 35-36) 
 
God never creates more than what is strictly needed for the moment, with the 
result that if any one appropriates more than he really needs, he reduces his 
neighbour to destitution. The starvation of people in several parts of the world 
is due to many of us seizing very much more than they need. We may utilize 
the gifts of nature just as we choose, but in her books the debits are always 
equal to the credits. There is no balance in either column. (AOA, pp.62-63) 
 
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts 
have. And since every right carries with it a corresponding duty and the 
corresponding remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is merely a matter of 
finding out the corresponding duties and remedies to vindicate the elementary 
fundamental equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs and 
the corresponding remedy is to non-co-operate with him who deprives me of 
the fruit of my labour. (YI, 26-3-1931, p. 49) 
 
 
True Service 
Intelligent bread labour is any day the highest form o f social service. For what 
can be better than that a man should by his personal labour add to the useful 
wealth of the country? 'Being' is 'doing'. 
The adjective 'intelligent' has been prefixed to labour in order to show that 
labour to be social service must have that definite purpose behind it. Otherwise 
every laborer can be said to render social service. He does in a way, but what is 
meant here is something much more than that. A person who labours for the 
general good of all serves society and is worthy of his hire. Therefore, such 
bread labour is not different from social service. (H, 1-6-1935, p. 125) 
 
Obedience to the law of bread labour will bring about a silent revolution in the 
structure of society. Men's triumph will consist in substituting the struggle for 
existence by the struggle for mutual service. The law of the brute will be 
replaced by the law of man. (H, 29-6-1935, p. 156) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198  If everybody lives by the sweat of his brow, the earth will become a paradise. 
The question of the use of special talents hardly needs separate consideration. 
If everyone labours physically for his bread, it follows that poets, doctors, 
lawyers, etc., will regard it their duty to use those talents gratis for the service 
of humanity. Their output will be all the better and richer for their selfless 
devotion to duty. (H, 2-3-1947, p. 47) 
 
 
Field of Application 
Bread labour is a veritable blessing to one who would o bserve non-violence, 
worship Truth and make the observance of brahmacharya a natural act. This 
labour can truly be related to agriculture alone. But at present at any rate. 
everybody is not in a position to take to it. A person can therefore, spin or 
weave, or take up carpentry or smithery, instead of tilling the soil, always 
regarding agriculture, however, to be the ideal. 
Everyone must be his own scavenger. Evacuation is as necessary as eating; and 
the best thing would be for everyone to dispose of his own waste. If this is 
impossible, each family should see to its own scavenging. 
I have felt for years that there must be something radically wrong where 
scavenging has been made the concern of a separate class in society. We have 
no historical record of the man who first assigned the lowest status to this 
essential sanitary service. Whoever he was, he by no means did us a good. 
We should, from our very childhood, have the idea impressed upon our minds 
that we are all scavengers, and the easiest way of doing so is for everyone who 
has realized this to commence bread labour as a scavenger. Scavenging, thus 
intelligently taken up, will help to a true appreciation of the equality of man. 
(FYM, pp. 36-37) 
 
 
Voluntary Recognition 
Return to the villages means a definite, voluntary rec ognition of the duty of 
bread labour and not it connotes. But says the critic, "Millions of India's children 
are today living in the villages and yet they are living a life of semi-starvation." 
This, alas, is but too true. Fortunately, we know that theirs is not voluntary 
obedience. They would perhaps shirk body labour if they could, and even rush 
to the nearest city if they could be accommodated in it. 
Compulsory obedience to a master is a state of slavery, willing obedience to 
one's father is the glory of sonship. Similarly, compulsory obedience to the law 
of bread labour breeds poverty, disease and discontent. It is a state of slavery. 
Willing obedience to it must bring contentment and health. And it is health The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199  which is real wealth, not pieces of silver and gold. (H, 29-6-1935, p. 156) 
 
 
Division of Labour 
I believe in the division of labour or work. But I do insist on equality of wages. 
The lawyer, the doctor or the teacher is entitled to no more than the bhangi. 
Then only will division of work uplift the nation or the earth. There is no other 
royal road to true civilization or happiness. (H, 23-3-1947, p. 78) 
 
The economics of bread labour are the living way of life. It means that every 
man has to labour with his body for his food and clothing. If I can convince the 
people of the value and necessity of bread labour, there never will be any want 
of bread and cloth. I shall have no hesitation in saying to the people with 
confidence that they must starve and go naked if they will neither work on the 
land nor spin and weave. (H, 7-9-1947, p. 316) 
 
I adhere to what I had said in 1925, viz., that all adults above a certain age, 
male or female, who would contribute some body-labour to the State would be 
entitled to the vote. (H, 2-3-1947, p. 46) 
 
 
Work as Worship 
I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national tha n  that for, say, one hour 
in the day, we should all do the labour that the poor must do, and thus identify 
ourselves with them and through them with all mankind. I cannot imagine 
better worship of God than that in His name I should labour for the poor even 
as they do. (YI, 20-10-1921, p. 329) 
 
No work that is done in His name and dedicated to Him is small. All work when 
so done assumes equal merit. A scavenger who works in His service shares equal 
distinction with a king who uses his gifts in His name and as a mere trustee. (YI, 
25-11-1926, p. 414) 
 
...Service is not possible unless it is rooted in love or ahimsa...True love is 
boundless like the ocean and, rising and swelling within one, spreads itself out 
and crossing all boundaries and frontiers, envelops the whole world. This 
service is again impossible without bread labour, otherwise described in the 
Gita as Yajna. It is only when a man or woman has done bodily labour for the 
sake of service that he or she has the right to life. (YI, 20-9-1928, p. 320) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200   
Duty of Sacrifice 
"Brahma created His people, with the duty of sacrifice  laid upon them, and 
said: 'By this do you flourish. Let it be the fulfiller of all your desire.' He who 
eats without performing this sacrifice, eats stolen bread," - thus says the Gita. 
"Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow," says the Bible. Sacrifices may be of 
many kinds. One of them may well be bread labour. If all laboured for their 
bread and no more, then there would be enough food and enough leisure for 
all. Then there would be no cry of overpopulation, no disease, and no such 
misery as we see around. Such labour will be the highest form of sacrifice. Men 
will no doubt do many other things, either through their bodies or through their 
minds, but all this will be no rich and no poor, none high and none low, no 
touchable and no untouchable. 
This may be an unattainable ideal. But we need not, therefore, cease to strive 
for it. Even if, without fulfilling the whole law of sacrifice, that is, the law of 
our being, we perform physical labour enough for our daily bread, we should go 
a long way towards the ideal. If we did so, our wants would be minimized, our 
food would be simple. We should then eat to live, not live to eat. Let anyone 
who doubts the accuracy of this proposition try to sweat for his bread, he will 
derive the greatest relish from the productions of his labour, improve his health 
and discover that many things he took were superfluities. (H, 29-6-1935, p. 
156) 
 
 
Gospel of work 
There can never be too much emphasis placed on work. I am simply repeating 
the gospel taught by the Gita, where the Lord says: 'If I did not remain ever at 
work sleeplessly, I should set a wrong example to mankind.' 
...If I had the good fortune to be face to face with one like him [the Buddha], I 
should not hesitate to ask him why he did not teach the gospel of work, in 
preference to one of contemplation. I should do the same thing if I were to 
med...these saints (like Tukaram and Dhyandev, etc.). (H, 2-11-1935, p. 298) 
 
God created man to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, and I dread the 
prospect of our being able to produce all that we want, including our food-
stuffs, out of a conjuror's hat. (H, 16-5-1936, p. 111) 
 
We should be ashamed of resting, or having a square meal, so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food. (YI, 6-10-1921, p. 314) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201  I have indeed wept to see the stark poverty and unemployment in our country, 
but I must confess our own negligence and ignorance are largely responsible for 
it. We do not know the dignity of labour as such. Thus, a shoemaker will not do 
anything beyond making his shoes, he will think that all other labour is below 
his dignity. That wring notion must go.  
There is enough employment in India for all who will work with their hands and 
feet honestly. God has given everyone the capacity to work and earn more than 
his daily bread, and whoever is ready to use that capacity is sure to find work. 
No labour is too mean for one who wants to earn an honest penny. The only 
thing is the readiness to use the hands and feet that God has given us. (H, 19-
12-1936, p. 356) 
 
...It is surely the duty of a Government to ensure bread labour for all 
unemployed men and women, no matter how many they are. (H, 11-1-1948, p. 
507) 
 
 
Intellectual Labour 
Let me not be misunderstood. I do not discount the val ue of intellectual labour, 
but no amount of it is any compensation for bodily labour which every one of us 
is born to give for the common good of all. It may be, often is, infinitely 
superior to bodily labour, but it never is or can be a substitute for it, even as 
intellectual food, though far superior to the grains we eat, never can be a 
substitute for them. Indeed, without the products of the earth, those of the 
intellect would be an impossibility. (YI, 15-10-1925, pp. 355-6) 
 
May not men earn their bread by intellectual labour? No. The needs of the body 
must be supplied by the body. "Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's" 
perhaps applies here well. Mere mental, that is, intellectual labour is for the 
soul and is its own satisfaction. It should never demand payment. In the ideal 
state, doctors, lawyers and the like will work solely for the benefit of society, 
not for self. (H, 29-6-1935, p. 156) 
 
Intellectual work is important and has an undoubted place in the scheme of 
life. But what I insist is the necessity of physical labour. No man, I claim, ought 
to be free from that obligation. It will serve to improve even the quality of his 
intellectual output. (H, 23-2-1947, p. 36) 
 
A laborer cannot sit at the table and write, but a man who has worked at the 
table all his life can certainly take to physical labour. (H, 18-1-1948, p. 520) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202   
41. LABOUR AND CAPITAL 
 
Har
mony of Relations 
I HAVE always said that my ideal is that capital and l abour should supplement 
and help each other. They should be a great family living in unity and harmony, 
capital not only looking to the material welfare of the labourers, but their 
moral welfare also-capitalists being trustees for the welfare of the labouring 
classes under them. (YI, 20-8-1925, p. 285) 
 
I do not fight shy of capital. I fight capitalism. The West teaches one to avoid 
concentration of capital, to avoid a racial war in another and deadlier form. 
Capital and labour need not be antagonistic to each other. (YI, 7-10-1926, p. 
348) 
 
 
Conversion of Capitalist 
…….If I would recognize the fundamental equality, as I must, of the capitalist 
and the labourer, I must not aim at his destruction. I must strive for his 
conversion. My non-co-operation with him will open his eyes to the wrong he 
may be doing....It can be easily demonstrated that destruction of the capitalist 
must mean in the end destruction of the worker, and as no human being is so 
bad as to be beyond redemption, no human being is so perfect as to warrant his 
destroying him whom he wrongly considers to be wholly evil. (YI, 26-3-1931, p. 
49) 
 
Exploitation of the poor can be extinguished not by effecting the destruction of 
a few millionaires, but by removing the ignorance of the poor and teaching 
them to non-co-operate with their exploiters. That will convert the exploiters 
also. I have even suggested that ultimately it will lead to both being equal 
partners. Capital as such is not evil; it is the wrong use that is evil. Capital in 
some form or other will always be needed. (H, 28-7-1940, p. 219) 
 
 
Labour's Duties, Rights 
It is my universal experience that, as a rule, labour discharges its obligations 
more effectively and more conscientiously than the master who has 
corresponding obligations towards the labourers. It, therefore, becomes The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203  necessary for labour to find out how far labour can impose its will on the 
masters. 
If we find that we are not adequately paid or housed, how are we to receive 
enough wages, and good accommodation? Who is to determine the standard of 
comfort required by the labourers? The best way, no doubt, is that you 
labourers understand your won rights, understand the method of enforcing your 
rights and enforce them. But for that you required a little previous training... 
education. (SW, p. 1046) 
 
But there is no right in the world that does not presuppose a duty. An owner 
never spoils his property. When you know that the mill is as much yours as of 
the mill-owners, you will never damage your property. You will never angrily 
destroy cloth or machinery with a view to squaring your quarrel with the mill-
owners. 
Fight, if you must, on the path of righteousness and God will be with you. 
There is no royal road, I repeat, to gaining your rights, except self-purification 
and suffering. (YI, 4-8-1927, p. 248) 
 
 
Labour's Power 
In my humble opinion, labour can always vindicate itse lf if labour is sufficiently 
united and self-sacrificing. No matter how oppressive the capitalists may be, I 
am convinced that those who are connected with labour and guide the labour 
movement have themselves no idea of the resources that labour can command 
and which capital can never command. If labour would only understand and 
recognize that capital is perfectly helpless without labour, labour will 
immediately come to its own. 
We have unfortunately come under the hypnotic suggestion and the hypnotic 
influence of capital, so that we have come to believe that capital is all in all on 
this earth. But a moment's thought would show that labour has at its disposal 
capital which the capitalists will never possess. Ruskin taught in his age that 
labour had unrivalled opportunities. But he spoke above our head. 
There is in English a very potent word, and you have it in French also, all the 
languages of the world have it--it is "No", and the secret that we have hit upon 
is that when capital wants labour to say "Yes", labour roars out "No", if it means 
"No". And immediately labour comes to recognize that it has got the choice 
before it of saying "Yes", when it wants to say "Yes", and "No", when it wants to 
say" No", labour is free of capital and capital has to woo labour. 
And it would not matter in the slightest degree that capital has guns and even 
poison gas at its disposal. Capital would still be perfectly helpless if labour The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204  would assert its dignity by making good its "No". Then, labour does not need to 
retaliate, but labour stands defiant receiving the bullets and poison gas and 
still insists upon its" No". 
The whole reason why labour so often fails is that, instead of sterilizing capital 
as I have suggested, labour, (I am speaking as a labourer myself) wants to seize 
that capital and become capitalist itself in the worst sense of the term. And the 
capitalist, therefore, who is properly entrenched and organized, finding among 
the labourers also candidates for the same office, makes use of a portion of 
these to suppress labour. If we really were not under this hypnotic spell, 
everyone of us, men and women, would recognize this rick-bottom truth 
without the slightest difficulty. 
Having proved it for myself, through a series of experiments carried on in 
different departments of life, I am speaking to you with authority (you will 
pardon me for saying so) that, when I put this scheme before you, it was not as 
something superhuman but as something within the grasp of every labourer, 
man or woman. 
Again, you will see that what labour is called upon to do under this scheme of 
non-violence is nothing more than...the ordinary soldier who is armed from top 
to toe is called upon to do. Whilst he undoubtedly seeks to inflict death and 
destruction upon his adversary, he always carries his own life in his pocket. I 
want labour, then, to copy the courage of the soldier without copying the brute 
in the soldier, namely, the ability to inflict death, and I suggest to you that a 
labourer who courts death and has the courage to die without even carrying 
arms, with no weapons of self-defense, shows a courage of a much higher 
degree than a man who is armed from top to toe. (YI, 14-1-1932, p. 17-18) 
 
 
Gift of Intelligence 
The moment labour recognizes its own dignity, money wi ll find its rightful 
place, i.e., it will be held in trust for labour. For labour is more than money. 
(H, 19-10-1935, p. 285) 
 
I hold that a working knowledge of a variety of occupations is to the working 
class what metal is to the capitalist. A labourer's skill is his capital. Just as the 
capitalist cannot make his capital fructify without the co-operation of labour, 
even so the working man cannot make his labour fructify without the co-
operation of capital. 
And, if both labour and capital have the gift of intelligence equally developed 
in them and have confidence in their capacity to secure a fair deal, each at the 
hands of the other, they would get to respect and appreciate each other as The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205  equal partners in a common enterprise. They need not regard each other as 
inherently irreconcilable antagonists. 
 
 
Organization 
But the difficulty is that, whilst today capital is or ganized and seems to be 
securely entrenched, labour is not. The intelligence of the working man is 
cramped by his soulless, mechanical occupation which leaves him little scope or 
chance to develop his mind. It has prevented him from realizing the power and 
the full dignity of his status. 
He has been taught to believe that his wages have to be dictated by capitalists 
instead of his demanding his own terms. Let him only be organized along right 
lines and have his intelligence quickened, let him learn a variety of 
occupations, and he will be able to go about with his head erect and never be 
afraid of being without means of sustenance. (H, 3-7-1937, p. 161) 
 
I am not opposed to organization of labour, but as in everything else, I want its 
organization along Indian lines, or if you will, my lines. I am doing it. The Indian 
labourer knows it instinctively. I do not regard capital to be the enemy of 
labour. I hold their co-ordination to be perfectly possible. 
The organization of labour that I undertook in South Africa, Chanmaran or 
Ahmedabad was in no spirit of hostility to the capitalists. The resistance in 
each case and to the extent it was thought necessary was wholly successful. 
(YI, 17-3-1927, p. 86) 
 
The labourer has to realize that labour is also capital. As soon as labourers are 
properly educated and organized and they realize their strength, no amount of 
capital can subdue them. Organized and enlightened labour can dictate its own 
terms. It is no use vowing vengeance against a party because we are weak. We 
have to get strong. Strong hearts, enlightened minds and willing hands can 
brave all odds and remove all obstacles. (H, 1-3-1935, p. 23) 
 
 
Conflict Not Inevitable 
I do not think there need be any clash between capital  and labour. Each is 
dependent on the other. What is essential today is that the capitalist should not 
lord it over the labourer. In my opinion, the mill-hands are as much the 
proprietors of their mills as the shareholders, and when the mill-owners realize 
that the mill-hands are as much mill-owners as they, there will be no quarrel 
between them. (YI, 4-8-1927, p. 248) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206   
The masses do not see in landlords and other profiteers their enemy. But the 
consciousness of the wrong done to them by these classes has to be created in 
them. I do not teach the masses to regard the capitalists as their enemies, but I 
teach them that they are their own enemies. (YI, 26-11-1931, p. 369) 
 
There is a conflict of interest between capital and labour, but we have to 
resolve it by doing our own duty. Just as pure blood is proof against poisonous 
germs, so will labour, when it is pure, be proof against exploitation. 
I never said that there should be co-operation between the exploiter and the 
exploited so long as exploitation and the will to exploit persist. Only I do not 
believe that the capitalists and landlords are exploiters by an inherent 
necessity or that there is a basic or irreconcilable antagonism between their 
interests and those of the masses. 
The idea of class war does not appeal to me. In India a class war is not only not 
inevitable, it is avoidable if we have understood the message of non-violence. 
Those who talk about class war as being inevitable have not understood the 
implications of non-violence or have understood them only skin-deep.  
(ABP, 3-8-1934) 
 
 
Constructive Use 
Have I not said that, if they [labour] know their pow e r and use it wisely and 
constructively, they will become the real rulers and the employers will be their 
trustees and friends in need and deed? This happy state of things will come only 
when they know that labour is more real capital than the capital in the shape 
of gold and silver which labour extracts from the bowels of the earth. (H, 28-9-
1947, p. 350) 
 
If every right flows from duty well performed, then it is unassailable. Thus, I 
have a right to my wage only when I have fully performed the duty undertaken 
by me. If I took the wage without doing my work, it becomes theft. I cannot 
associate myself with continuous insistence on rights without reference to the 
performance of duty on which the rights depend and from which they flow. (H, 
30-11-1947, p. 448) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207   
42. STRIKES : LEGITIMATE AND ILLEGITIMATE 
 
Arbitration First 
I KNOW that strikes are an inherent right of the worki ng men for the purpose of 
securing justice, but they must be considered a crime immediately the 
capitalists accept the principle of arbitration. (YI, 5-5-1920, p. 6) 
 
 
Strikes and Politics 
Strikes are the order of the day. They are a symptom o f the existing unrest. All 
kinds of vague ideas are floating in the air. A vague hope inspires all, and great 
will be the disappointment if that vague hope does not take definite shape. The 
labour world in the India, as elsewhere, is at the mercy of those who set up as 
advisers and guides. The latter are not always scrupulous, and not always wise 
even when they are scrupulous. The labourers are dissatisfied with their lot. 
They have every reason for dissatisfaction. they are being taught, and justly, to 
regard themselves as being chiefly instrumental in enriching their employers. 
And so it requires little effort to make them lay down their tools. The political 
situation, too is beginning to affect the labourers of India. And there are not 
wanting labour leaders who consider that strikes may be engineered for 
political purpose. 
In my opinion, it will be a most serious mistake to make use of labour strikes 
for such a purpose. I don't deny that such strikes can serve political ends. But 
they do not fall within the plan of non-violent non-co-operation. It does not 
require much effort of the intellect to perceive that it is a most dangerous 
thing to make political use of labour until labourers understand the political 
condition of the country and are prepared to work for the common good. This is 
hardly to be expected of them all of a sudden and until they have bettered 
their own condition so as to enable them to keep body and soul together in a 
decent manner. 
The greatest political contribution, therefore, that labourers can make is to 
improve their own condition, to become better informed, to insist on their 
rights, and even to demand proper use by their employers of the manufactures 
in which they have had such an important hand. The proper evolution, 
therefore, would be for the labourers to raise themselves to the status of part 
proprietors. Strikes, therefore, for the present should only take place for the 
direct betterment of the labourer's lot, and, when they have acquired the spirit 
of patriotism, for the regulation of prices of their manufactures. 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208   
Conditions for Success 
The conditions of a successful strike are simple. And w hen they are fulfilled, a 
strike need never fail: 
The cause of the strike must be just. 
There should be practical unanimity among the strikers. 
There should be no violence used against non-strikers. 
Strikers should be able to maintain themselves during the strike period without 
falling back upon union funds and should, therefore, occupy themselves in some 
useful and productive temporary occupation. 
A strike is no remedy when there is enough other labour to replace strikers. In 
that case, in the event of unjust treatment or inadequate wages or the like, 
resignation is the remedy. 
Successful strikes have taken place even when all the above conditions have 
not been fulfilled, but that merely proves that the employers were weak and 
had a guilty conscience. We often make terrible mistakes by copying bad 
examples. The safest thing is not to copy examples of which we have rarely 
complete knowledge, but to follow the conditions which we know and 
recognize to be essential for success. (YI, 16-2-1921, pp. 52-53) 
 
 
Political Strikes 
Obviously, there should be no strike which is not jus t ifiable on merits. No 
unjust strike should succeed. All public sympathy must be withheld from such 
strikes. 
The public has no means of judging the merits of a strike unless it is backed by 
impartial persons enjoying public confidence. Interested men cannot judge the 
merits of their own case. Hence, there must be an arbitration accepted by the 
parties or a judicial adjudication. 
As a rule, the matter does not come before the public when there is accepted 
arbitration or adjudication. Cases have, however, happened when haughty 
employers have ignored awards, or misguided employees, conscious of their 
power to assert themselves, have done likewise and have decided upon forcible 
extortion. 
Strikes for economic betterment should never have a political end as an ulterior 
motive. Such a mixture never advances the political end and generally brings 
trouble upon strikers, even when they do not dislocate public life, as in the 
case of public utility services, such as the postal strike. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209  The Government may suffer some inconvenience, but will not come to a 
standstill. Rich persons will put up expensive postal services, but the vast mass 
of the poor people will be deprived, during such a strike, of a convenience of 
primary importance to which they have become used for generations. Such 
strikes can only take place when every other legitimate means has been 
adopted and [has] failed. 
Sympathetic strikes must be taboo until it is conclusively proved that the 
affected men have exhausted all the legitimate means at their disposal. 
It follows from the foregoing that political strikes must be treated on their own 
merits and must never be mixed with or related to economic strikes. Political 
strikes have a definite place in non-violent action. They are never taken up 
haphazard. They must be open, never led by goondaism. They are calculated 
never to lead to violence. (H, 11-8-1946, p. 256) 
 
 
Non-violent Strikes 
A pacific strike must be limited to those who are labou ring under the grievance 
to be redressed. Thus, if the match manufacturers, say, of Timbuctoo, who are 
quite satisfied with their lot, strike out of sympathy for its mill-hands who are 
getting starvation wages, the match manufacturer's strike would be a species of 
violence. They may and should help in a most effective manner by withdrawing 
their custom from the mill-owners of Timbuctoo without laying themselves 
open to the charge of violence. 
But it is possible to conceive occasions when those who are not directly 
suffering may be under an obligation to cease work. Thus, if in the instance 
imagined, the masters in the match-factory combine with the mill-owners of 
Timbuctoo, it will clearly be the duty of the workers in the match-factory to 
make common cause with the mill-hands. But I have suggested the addition 
purely by way of illustration. In the last resort, every case has to be judge on 
its own merits. Violence is a subtle force. It is not easy always to detect its 
presence though you may feel it all the same. (YI, 18-11-1926, 400) 
 
A strike should be spontaneous and not manipulated. If it is organized without 
any compulsion, there would be no chance for goondaism and looting. Such a 
strike would be characterized by perfect co-operation amongst the strikers. It 
should be peaceful and there should be no show of force. 
The strikers should take up some work either singly or in co-operation with 
each other, in order to earn their bread. The nature of such work should have 
been thought out beforehand. It goes without saying that in a peaceful, 
effective and firm strike of this character, there will be no room for rowdyism The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  or looting. I have known of such strikes. I have not presented a Utopian picture. 
(H, 2-6-1946, p. 258) 
 
In no case can I be party, irrespective of non-violence, to a universal strike and 
capture of power. (H, H, 28-7-1946, p. 237) 
 
 
Capitalism and Strikes 
How should capital behave when labour strikes? This qu e stion is in the air and 
has great importance at the present moment. One way is that of suppression, 
named or nicknamed 'American'. It consists in suppression of labour through 
organized goondaism. Everybody would consider this as wrong and destructive. 
The other way, right and honourable, consists in considering every strike on its 
merits and giving labour its due--not what capital considers as due, but what 
labour itself would so consider and enlightened public opinion acclaim as 
just.... 
As time progresses, the labour world is getting more insistent in its demands 
which are daily increasing, and it does not hesitate to resort to violence in its 
impatient enforcement of those demands. New methods of enforcing them are 
being employed. Workers do not hesitate to injure the property of the 
employers, dislocate machinery, harass old men and women who would not join 
the strike, and forcibly keep out blacklegs. In these circumstances, how are the 
employers to behave? 
...My advice to the employers would be that they should willingly regard 
workers as the real owners of the concerns which they fancy they have created. 
They should further regard it as their duty to equip the employees with sound 
education that would draw out the intelligence dormant in them and gladly 
promote and welcome the power that this combination of the workers gives 
them. 
This noble work cannot be done in a day by the employers. Meanwhile, what 
should those who have to face the destruction wrought by strikers in their 
concerns? I would unhesitatingly advice such employers that they should at 
once offer the striker's as their. They will vacate their premises not in a huff 
but because it is right, and to show their good-will, they would offer the 
employees the assistance of their engineers and other skilled staff. 
The employers will find in the end that they will lose nothing. Indeed, their 
right action will disarm opposition and they will earn the blessing of their men. 
They will have made proper use of their capital. I would not consider such 
action as benevolent. It would be an intelligent use by the capitalists of their 
resources and honest dealing in regard to the employees whom they would have The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211  converted into honourable partners. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 60) 
 
 
Sympathetic Strikes 
Any premature precipitation of sympathetic strikes mus t...result in infinite 
harm to our cause. In the programme of non-violence, we must rigidly exclude 
the idea of gaining anything by embarrassing the Government. If our activity is 
pure and that of the Government is impure, the latter is embarrassed by our 
purity, if it does not itself become pure. Thus, a movement of purification 
benefits both parties, whereas a movement of mere destruction leaves the 
destroyer unpurified, and brings him down to the level of those whom he seeks 
to destroy. 
Even our sympathetic strikes have to be strikes for self-purification, i.e., non-
co-operation. And so, when we declare a strike to redress a wrong, we really 
cease to take part in the wrong, and thus leave the wrong-doer to his own 
resources, in other words, enable him to see the folly of continuing the wrong. 
Such a strike can only succeed when behind it is the fixed determination not to 
revert to service.... 
A strike may fail in spite of a just grievance and the ability of strikers to hold 
out indefinitely, if there are workers to replace them. A wise man, therefore, 
will not strike for increase of wages or other comforts if he feels that he can be 
easily replaced. But a philanthropic or patriotic man will strike in spite of 
supply being greater than the demand, when he feels for and wishes to 
associate himself with his neighbour's distress. Needless to say, there is no 
room in a civil strike of the nature described by me for violence in the shape of 
intimidation, incendiarism or otherwise. (YI, 22-9-1921, p. 298) 
 
...What about the blacklegs, you may ask. Blacklegs unfortunately there will 
be. But I would urge you not to fight them, but to plead with them, to tell 
them that theirs is a narrow policy and that yours has the interest of the whole 
labour at heart. It is likely that they may not listen to you. In that case you will 
tolerate them, but not fight them. (H, 7-11-1936, p. 311) 
 
The fundamentals reason for this spreading strike fever is that life here, as 
elsewhere, is today uprooted from its basis, the basis of religion, and what an 
English writer has called 'cash nexus' has taken its place. And that is precarious 
bond. But even when the religious basis is there, there will be strikes, because 
is scarcely conceivable that religion will have become for all the basis for life. 
So, there will be attempts at exploitation, on the one hand, and strikes, on the 
other. But these strikes will then be of a purely non-violent character. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212  Such strikes never do harm to anyone. It was such a strike perhaps that brought 
General Smuts to his knees. "If you had hurt an Englishman," said Jan Smuts, "I 
would have shot you, even deported your people. As it is, I have put you in 
prison and tried to subdue you and your people in every way. But how long can 
I go on like this when you do not retaliate?" And so he had to come to terms 
with a mere 'coolie' on behalf of 'coolies', as all Indians were then called in 
South Africa. (H, 22-9-1946, p. 321) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213   
43. TILLER OF THE SOIL 
 
Rec
ognition of the Ryot 
IF INDIAN society is to make real progress along peace ful lines, there must be a 
definite recognition on the part of the moneyed class that the ryot possesses 
the same soul that they do, and that their wealth gives them no superiority 
over the poor. They must regard themselves, even as the Japanese nobles did, 
as trustees holding their wealth for the good of their wards, the ryots. Then 
they would take no more than a reasonable amount as commission for their 
labours. 
At present, there is no proportion between the wholly unnecessary pomp and 
extravagance of the moneyed class and the squalid surroundings and the 
grinding pauperism of the ryots in whose midst the former are living.... 
If only the capitalist class will read the signs of the times, revise their notions 
of God-given right to all they possess, in an incredibly short space of time, the 
seven hundred thousand dung-heaps which today pass muster as villages can be 
turned into abodes of peace, health and comfort. 
I am convinced that the capitalist, if he follows the Samurai of Japan, has 
nothing really to lose and everything to gain. There is no other choice than 
between voluntary surrender on the part of the capitalist of superfluities and 
consequent acquisition of the real happiness of all, on the one hand and, one 
the other, tee impeding chaos into which, if the capitalist does not wake up 
betimes, awakened but ignorant, famishing millions will plunge the country and 
which not even the armed force that a powerful Government can bring into 
play can avert. I have hoped that India will successfully avert the disaster.  
(YI, 5-12-1929, p. 396) 
 
The dream I want to realize is not spoliation of the property of private owners, 
but to restrict its enjoyment so as to avoid all pauperism, consequent 
discontent and the hideously ugly contrast that exists today between the lives 
and surroundings of the rich and the poor. The latter must be enabled to feel 
that they are co-partners with their zamindars and not their slaves, to be made 
to labour at the latter's sweet will and to be made to pay all kinds of exactions 
on all conceivable occasions. (YI, 2-11-1929, p. 384) 
 
I would like to use the landlords and the capitalists for the service of the 
masses. We must not sacrifice the interest of the masses to the capitalists. We 
must not play their game. We must trust them to the measure of their ability to 
surrender their gains to the service of the masses. They are not insusceptible to The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214  the higher appeal. It has been my invariable experience that a kind word 
uttered goes home to them. If we gain their confidence and put them at their 
ease, we will find that they are not averse to progressively sharing their riches 
with the masses. (ABP, 3-8-1934) 
 
 
Conversion of Zamindars 
I do not want to destroy the zamindar, but neither do I feel the zamindar is 
inevitable....I expect to convert the zamindars and other capitalists by the non-
violent method, and, therefore, there is for me nothing like an inevitability of 
class conflict. For it is an essential part of non-violence to go along the line of 
least resistance. 
The moment the cultivators of the soil realize their power, the zamindari evil 
will be sterilized. What can the poor zamindar do when they say that they will 
simply not work the land unless they are paid enough to feed and clothe and 
educate themselves and their children in a decent manner? In reality, the 
toilers is the owner of what he produces. If the toilers intelligently combine, 
they will become an irresistible power. That is how I do not see the necessity of 
class conflict. It I thought it inevitable, I should not hesitate to preach it and 
teach it. (H, 5-12-1936, pp. 338, 339) 
 
I do not want the power of a Hitler, I want the power of a free peasant. I have 
been trying to identify myself with the peasants all these years, but have not 
succeeded in doing so. What, however, differentiates me from the kisan today 
is that he is a kisan and a labourer not by choice but by force of circumstances. 
I want to be a kisan and a labourer by choice, and when I can make him also a 
kisan and a labourer by choice, I can also enable him to throw off the shackles 
that keep him bound today and that compel him to do the master's bidding. (H, 
7-6-1942, p. 184) 
 
 
The Kisans 
The kisan or the peasant, whether as a landless labour er or a labouring 
proprietor, comes first. He is the salt of the earth which rightly belongs or 
should belong to him, not to the absentee landlord or zamindar. But, in the 
non-violent way, the labourer cannot forcibly eject the absentee landlord. He 
has so to work as to make it impossible for the landlord to exploit him. 
Closest co-operation amongst the peasants is absolutely necessary. To this end 
special organizing bodies or committees should be formed where there are 
none and those already in existence should be reformed where necessary. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  The kisans are for the most part illiterate. Both adults and young persons of 
school-going age should be educated. This applies to men and women. Where 
they are landless labourers, their wages should be brought to a level that would 
ensure a decent living, which should mean balanced food, dwelling houses and 
clothing, which should satisfy health requirements. (BC, 28-10-1944) 
 
 
Non-violence, Not Legislation 
If Swaraj is attained by the effort of the whole peopl e , as it must be under non-
violence, the kisans must come into their own and have the uppermost voice. 
But if it is not so and there is a sort of a workable compromise between the 
people and the Government on the basis of a limited franchise, the interests of 
the tiller of the soil will need close watching. If the legislature proves itself to 
be incapable of safeguarding Kisan's interests, they will, of course, always have 
the sovereign remedy of civil disobedience and non-co-operation. 
But...ultimately it is not paper legislation nor brave words nor fiery speeches, 
but the power of non-violent organization, discipline and sacrifice that 
constitutes the real bulwark of the people against injustice or oppression. 
I have no doubt that if we have democratic Swaraj, as it must be if the freedom 
is won through non-violence, the kisan must hold power in all its phase 
including political power. (BC, 12-1-1945) 
 
Years ago I read a poem in which the peasant is described as the father of the 
world. If God is the Provider, the cultivator is His hand. What are we going to 
do to discharge the debt we owe to him? So long we have only lived on the 
sweat of his brow. (H, 25-8-1946, p. 281) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216   
44. CHOICE BEFORE LABOUR 
 
TWO PATHS are open before India today, either to intro duce the Western 
principle of "Might is Right" or to uphold the Eastern principle that truth alone 
conquers, that truth knows no mishap, that the strong and he weak have alike a 
right to secure justice. 
The choice is to begin with the labouring class. Should the labourers obtain an 
increment in their wages by violence, even if that be possible? They cannot 
resort to anything like violence howsoever legitimate may be their claims. 
To use violence for securing rights may seem an easy path, but it proves to be 
thorny in the long run. Those who live by the sword die also by the sword. The 
swimmer often dies by drowning. Look at Europe. On one seems to be happy 
there, for not one is contented. The labourer does not trust the capitalist and 
the capitalist has no faith in the labourer. Both have sort of vigour and 
strength, but even the bulls have it. They fight to the very bitter end. 
All motion is not progress. We have got no reason to believe that the people of 
Europe are progressing. Their possession of wealth does not argue the 
possession of any moral or spiritual qualities. King Duryodhana was a master of 
untold wealth, but with all that he was a pauper in comparison with Vidura and 
Sudama. Today the world adores Vidura and Sudama, whereas Duryodhana's 
name is remembered only as a by-word for the evil qualities one should shun... 
 
Labour's Strength 
In the struggle between capital and labour, it may be generally said that, more 
often than not, the capitalists are in the wrong box. But when labour comes 
fully to realize its strength, I know it can become more tyrannical than capital. 
The mill-owners will have to work on the terms dictated by labour if the latter 
could command the intelligence of the former. It is clear, however, that labour 
will never attain to that intelligence. It is does, labour will cease to be labour 
and become itself the master. The capitalists do not fight on the strength of 
money alone. They possess intelligence and tact.... 
A third party has sprung up between these two parties. It has become the 
labourer's friend. There is need for such a party. Only to the extent to which 
this party has disinterested friendship for the labourers can it befriend them. 
A time has come now when attempts will be made to use labour as a pawn in 
more ways than one. The occasion demands consideration at the hands of those 
that would take part in politics. What will they choose? Their own interest or 
the service of labour and the nation? Labour stands in sore need of friends. It The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217  cannot proceed without a lead. What sort of men give this lead will decide the 
conditions of labour. 
Strikes, cessation of work and hartal are wonderful things no doubt, but it is 
not difficult to abuse them. Workmen ought to organize themselves into strong 
labour unions, and on no account shall they strike work without the consent of 
these unions. 
Strikes should not be risked without negotiation with the mill-owners. If the 
mill-owners resort to arbitration, the principle of Panchayat should be 
accepted. And once the panch are appointed, their decision must be accepted 
by both the parties alike, whether they like or not. (YI, 11-2-1920, p. 7-8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218   
45. THE GOSPEL OF SARVODAYA 
 
Unity of Man   
I D
O not believe...that an individual may gain spiritu ally and those who 
surround him suffer. I believe in advaita, I believe in the essential unity of man 
and, for that matter, of all that life's. Therefore, I believe that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if one man falls, the whole 
world falls to that extent. (YI, 4-12-1924, p. 398) 
 
I do not believe that the spiritual law works on a field of its own. On the 
contrary, it expresses itself only through the ordinary activities of life. It thus 
affects the economic, the social and the political fields. (YI, 3-9-1925, p. 304) 
 
If we would serve Him or become one with Him, our activity must be as 
unwearied as His. There may be momentary rest in store for the drop which is 
separated from the ocean, but not for the drop in the ocean, which knows no 
rest. The same is the case with ourselves. 
As soon as we become one with the ocean in the shape of God, there is no more 
rest for us, nor indeed do we need rest any longer. Our very sleep is action. For 
we sleep with the thought of God in our hearts. This restlessness constitutes 
true rest. This never-ceasing agitation holds the key to peace ineffable. This 
supreme state of total surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond the 
bounds of human experience. It has been attained by many dedicated souls, 
and may be attained by ourselves as well. (FYM, p. 47) 
 
 
Identification with Poor 
I cannot imagine anything nobler or more national than  that for, say, one hour 
in the day, we should all do the labour that the poor must do, and thus identify 
ourselves with them and through them with all mankind. I cannot imagine 
better worship of God than that, in His name, I should labour for the poor even 
as they do. (YI, 20-10-1921, p. 329) 
 
God demands nothing less than self-surrender as the price for the only real 
freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself, he 
immediately finds himself in the service of God's creation. (YI, 20-12-1928, p. 
420) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  All our activity should be centered in Truth. Truth should be the very breath of 
our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's progress is reached, all other 
rules of correct living will come without effort, and obedience to them will be 
instinctive. But without Truth it is impossible to observe any principles or rules 
in life. (FYM, p. 2) 
 
 
Faith in Providence 
A seeker after Truth, a follower of the Law of Love, c annot hold anything 
against tomorrow. God never provides for the morrow; He never creates more 
than what is strictly needed from day to day. If, therefore, we repose faith in 
His Providence, we should rest assured that He will give us every day our daily 
bread, supplying enough that we require. (YI, 4-9-1930, p. 1) 
 
 
Service of Man 
Man's ultimate aim is the realization of God, and all his activities, social, 
political, religious, have to be guided by the ultimate aim of the vision of God. 
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a necessary part of the 
endeavour simply because the only way to find God is to see Him in His creation 
and be one with it. This can only be done by service of all. I am a part and 
parcel of the whole and I cannot find Him apart from the rest of humanity. 
My countrymen are my nearest neighbours. They have become so helpless, so 
resourceless, so inert that I must concentrate myself on serving them. If I could 
persuade myself that I could find Him in a Himalayan cave, I would proceed 
there immediately. But I know that I cannot find Him apart from humanity.  
(H, 29-8-1936, p. 226) 
 
My God is myriad-formed and, while sometimes I see Him in the spinning-wheel, 
at other times I see Him in communal unity; then again in the removal of 
untouchability and that is how I establish communion with Him according as the 
spirit moves me. (H, 8-5-1937, p. 99) 
 
 
Charkha a Means 
He who spins before the poor, inviting them to do like wise, serves God as no 
one else does. 'He who gives me even a trifle as a fruit or a flower or even a 
leaf in the spirit of bhakti is my servant', says the Lord in the Bhagavadgita. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220  And He hath His footstool where live the humble, the lowliest and the lost. 
Spinning, therefore, for such is the greatest prayer, the greatest worship, the 
greatest sacrifice. (YI, 24-9-1925, pp. 331-2) 
 
The world is weary of the after-effects of the War. Even as the Charkha is 
India's comforter today, it may be the world's tomorrow, because it stands, not 
for the greatest good of the greatest number, but for the greatest good of all. 
(YI, 10-2-1927, pp. 43-44) 
 
I stand by what is implied in the phrase, 'Unto This Last'. That book marked the 
turning in my life. We must do even unto this last as we would have the world 
do by us. All must have equal opportunity. Given the opportunity, every human 
being has the same possibility for spiritual growth. That is what the spinning 
wheelsymbolizes. (H, 17-11-1946, p. 404) 
 
 
Self-purification 
Identification with everything that lives is impossible  without self-purification; 
without self-purification the observance of the law of ahimsa must remain an 
empty dream; God can never be realized by one who is not pure of heart. Self-
purification, therefore, must mean purification in all the walks of life. And 
purification being highly infectious, purification of oneself necessarily leads to 
the purification of one's surroundings. 
But the path of purification is hard and steep. To attain to perfect purity one 
has to become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech and action; to rise 
above the opposing currents of love and hatred, attachment and repulsion. I 
know that I have not in me as yet that triple purity, in spite of constant 
ceaseless striving for it. That is why the world's praise fails to move me, 
indeed, it very often stings me. 
To conquer the subtle passions seems to me to be harder far than the physical 
conquest of the world by the force of arms. 
...I have had experiences of the dormant passions lying hidden within me. The 
knowledge of them has made me feel humiliated, though not defeated. The 
experiences and experiments have sustained me and given me great joy. But I 
know that I have still before me a difficult path to traverse. I must reduce 
myself to zero. So long as a man does not of his own free will put himself last 
among his fellow-creatures, there is no salvation for him. Ahimsa is the farthest 
limit of humility. (A, p. 371) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221  Ends and Means 
Means and ends are convertible terms in my philosophy of life. (YI, 26-12-1946, 
p. 424) 
 
The means may be likened to a seed, the end to a tree; and there is just the 
same inviolable connection between the means and the end as there is 
between the seed and the tree. (HS, p. 71) 
 
 
No Separation 
They say, 'means are after all means'. I would say, ' m eans are after all 
everything'. As the means so the end.... There is no wall of separation between 
the means and the end. Indeed, the Creator has given us control (and that, too, 
very limited) over means, none over the end. Realization of the goal is in exact 
proportion to that of the means. This is a proposition that admits of no 
exception. (YI, 17-7-1924, p. 236-7) 
 
Providence has its appointed hour for everything. We cannot command results; 
we can only strive. And so far as I am concerned, it is enough satisfaction for 
me to know that I have striven my utmost to discharge the duty that rested on 
me. (H, 6-5-1939, p. 112) 
 
 
Rights and Duties 
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discharg e  our duties, rights will not 
be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we run after rights, they will 
escape us like a will-o'-the-wisp. The more we pursue them, the farther will 
they fly. The same teaching has been embodied by Krishna in the immortal 
words: 'Action alone is thine. Leave thou the fruit severely alone.' Action is 
duty; fruit is the right. (YI, 8-1-1925, pp.15-16) 
 
Rights accrue automatically to him who duly performs his duties. In fact, the 
right to perform one's duties is the only right that is worth living for the dying 
for. It covers all legitimate rights. All the rest is grab under one guise or 
another and contains in it seeds of himsa. 
The capitalist and the zamindar talk of their rights, the labourer on the other 
hand of his, the prince of his divine right to rule, the ryot of his to resist it. If 
all simply insist on rights and no duties, there will be utter confusion and 
chaos. (H, 27-5-1939, p. 143) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222  If, instead of insisting on rights, everyone does his duty, there will immediately 
be the rule of order established among mankind....I venture to suggest that 
rights that do not flow directly from duty well performed are not worth having. 
They will be usurpations, sooner discarded the better. A wretched parent who 
claims obedience from his children without first doing his duty by them excites 
nothing but contempt. 
It is distortion of religious precepts for a dissolute husband to expect 
compliance in every respect from his dutiful wife. But the children who flout 
their parent who is ever ready to do his duty towards them would be considered 
ungrateful and would harm themselves more than their parent. The same can 
be said about husband and wife. 
If you apply this simple and universal rule to employers and labourers, landlords 
and tenants, the princes and their subjects or the Hindus and the Muslims, you 
will find that the happiest relations can be established in all walks of life 
without creating disturbances in and dislocation of life and business which you 
see in India as in other parts of the world. What I call the law of Satyagraha is 
to be deduced from an appreciation of duties and the rights flowing therefore. 
(H, 6-7-1947, p. 217) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223   
46. THE PHILOSOPHY OF YAJNA 
 
Mea
ning of Yajna 
YAJNA MEANS an act directed to the welfare of others, done without desiring 
any return for it, whether of a temporal or spiritual nature. 'Act' here must be 
taken in its widest sense, and includes thought and word, as well as deed. 
'Others" embraces not only humanity, but all life.... 
Again, a primary sacrifice must be an act which conduces the most to the 
welfare of the greatest number in the widest area, and which can be performed 
by the largest number of men and women with the least trouble. It will not, 
therefore, be a yajna, much less a mahayajna, to wish or to do ill to anyone 
else, even in the order to serve a so-called higher interest. And the Gita 
teaches and experience testifies that all action that cannot come under the 
category of yajna promotes bondage. 
The world cannot subsist for a single moment without yajna in this sense, and 
therefore, the Gita, after having dealt with true wisdom in the second chapter, 
takes up in the third the means of attaining it, and declares in so many words 
that yajna came with the Creation itself. This body, therefore, has been given 
us only in order that we may serve all Creation with it. And therefore, says the 
Gita, he who eats without offering yajna eats stolen food. Every single act of 
one who would lead a life of purity should be in the nature of yajna. 
Yajna having come to us with our birth, we are debtors all our lives, and thus 
for ever bound to serve the universe. And even as a bond slave receives food, 
clothing and so on from the master whom he serves, so should we gratefully 
accept such gifts as may be assigned to us by the Lord of the universe. What we 
receive must be called a gift; for as debtors we are entitled to no consideration 
for the discharge of our obligations. Therefore, we may not blame the Master, 
if we fail to get it. Our body is His to be cherished or cast away according to His 
will. 
This is not a matter for complaint or even pity; on the contrary, it is a natural 
and even a pleasant and desirable state if only we realize our proper place in 
God's scheme. We do, indeed, need strong faith if we would experience this 
supreme bliss. "Do not worry in the least about yourself, leave all worry to 
God,"- this appears to be the commandment in all religions. 
This need not frighten anyone. He who devotes himself to service with a clear 
conscience will day by day grasp the necessity for it in greater measure, and 
will continually grow richer in faith. The path of service can hardly be trodden 
by one who is not prepared to renounce self-interest, and to recognize the 
conditions of his birth. Consciously or unconsciously, every one of us does The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224  render some service or other. If we cultivate the habit of doing this service 
deliberately, our desire for service will steadily grow stronger, and will make 
not only for our own happiness, but that of the world at large. (FYM, pp. 53-56) 
 
 
Yajna in Practice 
Yajna is duty to be performed, or service to be render ed, all the twenty-four 
hours of the day....To serve without desire is to favour not others, but 
ourselves, even as in discharging a debt we serve only ourselves, lighten our 
burden and fulfill our duty. Again, not only the good, but all of us are bound to 
place our resources at the disposal of humanity. And if such is the law, as 
evidently it is, indulgence cease to hold a place in life and gives way to 
renunciation. The duty of renunciation differentiates mankind from the 
beast.... 
But renunciation here does not means abandoning the world and retiring into 
the forest. The spirit of renunciation should rule all the activities of life. A 
householder does not cease to be one if he regards life as a dirty rather than as 
an indulgence. A merchant, who operates in the sacrificial spirit, will have 
cores passing through his hands, but he will, if he follows the law, use his 
abilities for service. He will, therefore, not cheat or speculate, will lead a 
simple life, will not injure a living soul and will lose millions rather than harm 
anybody. 
Let no one run away with the idea that this type of merchant exists only in my 
imagination. Fortunately for the world, it does exist in the West as well as in 
the East. It is true such merchants may be counted on one's finger's ends, but 
the type cease to be imaginary as soon as even one living specimen can be 
found to answer to it....And if we go deeply into the matter, we shall come 
across men in every walk of life who lead dedicated lives. No doubt these 
sacrifices obtain their livelihood by their work. But livelihood is not their 
objective, but only a by-product of their vocation... 
A life of sacrifice is the pinnacle of art, and is full of true joy. Yajna is not 
yajna if one feels is to be burdensome or annoying. Self-indulgence leads to 
destruction, and renunciation to immortality. Joy has no independent 
existence. It depends upon our attitude of life. One man will enjoy theatrical 
scenery, another the ever-new scenes which unfold themselves in the sky. Joy, 
therefore, is a matter of individual and national education. We shall delight in 
things which we have been taught to delight in as children. And illustrations 
can be easily cited of different national tastes.... 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225  Voluntary Service 
One who would serve will not waste a thought upon his own comforts, which he 
leaves to be attended to or neglected by his Master on high. He will not, 
therefore, encumber himself with everything that comes his way; he will take 
only what he strictly needs and leave the rest. He will be calm, free from anger 
and unruffled in mind even if he finds himself inconvenienced. His service, like 
virtue, is its own reward, and he will rest content with it. 
Again, one dare not be negligent in service, or be behindhand with it. He who 
thinks that he must be diligent only in his personal business, and unpaid public 
business may be done in any way and at any time he chooses, has still to learn 
the very rudiments of the science of sacrifice. Voluntary service of others 
demands the best of which one is capable, and must take precedence over 
service of self. In fact, the pure devotee consecrates himself to the service of 
humanity without any reservation whatever. (ibid, pp. 57-60) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226   
47. THIS SATANIC CIVILIZATION 
 
IT IS my firm belief that Europe today represents not the spirit of God or 
Christianity but the spirit of Satan. And Satan's successes are the greatest when 
he appears with the name of God on his lips. Europe is today only nominally 
Christian. In reality, it is worshipping Mammon. (YI, 8-9-1920, pp. 2-3) 
 
I am not aiming at destroying railways or hospitals, though I would certainly 
welcome their natural destruction. Neither railways nor hospitals are a test of a 
high and pure civilization. At best they are a necessary evil. Neither adds one 
inch to the moral stature of a nation. 
Nor am I aiming at a permanent destruction of law courts, much as I regard it 
as a 'consummation devoutly to be wished'. Still less am I trying to destroy all 
machinery and mills. It requires a higher simplicity and renunciation than the 
people are today prepared for. (YI, 26-1-1921, p. 27) 
 
 
Status of Soul 
I do want growth, I do want self, determination, I do want freedom, but I want 
all these for the soul. I doubt if the steel age is an advance upon the flint age. I 
am indifferent. It is the evolution of the soul to which the intellect and all our 
faculties have to be devoted. (YI, 13-10-1921, p. 325) 
 
 
India's Way 
I would have our leaders teach us to be morally suprem e in the world. This land 
of ours was once, we are told, the abode of the gods. It is not possible to 
conceive gods inhabiting a land which is made hideous by the smoke and the 
din of mill chimneys and factories and whose roadways are traversed by rushing 
engines, dragging numerous cars crowded with men who know not for the most 
part what they are after, who are often absentminded, and whose tempers do 
not improve by being uncomfortably packed like sardines in boxes and finding 
themselves in the midst of utter strangers who would oust them if they could 
and whom they would, in their turn, oust similarly. I refer to these things 
because they are held to be symbolical of material progress. But they add not 
an atom to our happiness. (SW, pp. 354-5) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227  Modern Civilization 
Formerly, when people wanted to fight with one another , they measured 
between them their bodily strength; now, it is possible to take away thousands 
of lives by one man working behind a gun from a hill. This is civilization. 
Formerly, men worked in open air only as much as they liked. Now thousands of 
workmen meet together and, for the sake of maintenance, work in factories or 
mines. Their condition is worse than that of beasts. They are obliged to work, 
at the risk of their lives, at most dangerous occupations, for the sake of 
millionaires....This civilization is such that one has only to be patient and it will 
be self-destroyed. (HS, pp. 36-37) 
 
Is the world any the better for quick instruments of locomotion? How do these 
instruments advance man's spiritual progress? Do they not in the last resort 
hamper it? And is there any limit to man's ambition? Once we were satisfied 
with traveling a few miles an hour; today we want to negotiate hundreds of 
miles an hour; one day we might desire to fly through space. What will be the 
result? Chaos. (YI, 21-1-1926, p. 31) 
 
I wholeheartedly detest this mad desire to destroy distance and time, to 
increase animal appetites and go to the ends of the earth in search of their 
satisfaction. If modern civilization stands for all this, and I have understood it 
to do so, I call it satanic.... (YI, 17-3-1927, p. 85) 
 
 
Nemesis of Industrialization 
This industrially civilization is a disease because i t  is all evil. Let us not be 
deceived by catchwords and phrases. I have no quarrel with steamships or 
telegraphs. They may stay, if they can, without the support of industrialism and 
all that it connotes. They are not an end. We must not suffer exploitation for 
the sake of steamships and telegraphs. They are in no way indispensable for the 
permanent welfare of the human race. Now that we know the use of steam and 
electricity, we should be able to use them on due occasion and after we have 
learnt to avoid industrialism. Our concern is, therefore, to destroy industrialism 
at any cost. (YI, 7-10-1926, p. 348) 
 
A time is coming when those, who are in the mad rush today of multiplying 
their wants, vainly thinking that they add to the real substance, real knowledge 
of the world, will retrace their steps and say: 'What have we done?' 
Civilizations have come and gone, and in spite of all our vaunted progress, I am 
tempted to ask again and again, 'To what purpose?' Wallace, a contemporary of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228  Darwin, has said the same thing. Fifty years of brilliant inventions and 
discoveries, he has said, have not added one inch to the moral height of 
mankind. So said a dreamer and visionary if you will--Tolstoy. So said Jesus, 
and the Buddha, and Mahomed, whose religion is being denied and falsified in 
my own country today. 
 
 
God and Mammon 
By all means drink deep of the fountains that are give n  to you in the Sermon on 
the Mount, but then you will have to take sackcloth and ashes. The teaching of 
the Sermon was meant for each and every one of us. You cannot serve both God 
and Mammon. God the Compassionate and the Merciful, Tolerance incarnate, 
allows Mammon to have his nine day's wonder. But I say to you...fly from that 
self-destroying but destructive show of Mammon. (YI, 8-12-1927, p. 414) 
 
I would destroy the system today, if I had the power. I would use the most 
deadly weapons, if I believed that they would destroy it. I refrain only because 
the use of such weapons would only perpetuate the system though it may 
destroy its present administrators. (YI, 17-3-1927, p. 85) 
 
 
The West 
I am humble enough to admit that there is much that w e  can profitably 
assimilate from the West. Wisdom is no monopoly of one continent or one race. 
My resistance to Western civilization is really a resistance to its indiscriminate 
and thoughtless imitation based on the assumption that Asiatics are fit only to 
copy everything that comes from the West. 
I do believe, that if India has patience enough to go through the fire of 
suffering and to resist any unlawful encroachment upon her own civilization 
which, imperfect though it undoubtedly is, has hitherto stood the ravages of 
time, she can make a lasting contribution to the peace and solid progress of the 
world. (YI, 11-8-1927, p. 253) 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229   
48. MAN V. MACHINE 
 
I w
ould not weep over the disappearance of machinery or consider it a 
calamity. But I have no design upon machinery as such. (YI, 19-1-1921, p. 21) 
 
 
Reinstatement of Man 
The supreme consideration is man. The machine should n ot tend to make 
atrophied the limbs of man. (YI, 13-11-1924, p. 378) 
 
I have the conviction within me that, when all these achievements of the 
machine age will have disappeared, these our handicrafts will remain; when all 
exploitation will have ceased, service and honest labour will remain. It is 
because this faith sustains me that I am going on with my work…. Indomitable 
faith in their work sustained men like Stephenson and Columbus. Faith in my 
work sustains me. (H, 30-11-1935, p. 329) 
 
Faith in my work sustains me, but there is also added to it the conviction that 
all the other things that seem to challenge my faith are doomed…. I am clear 
that, whilst this machine age aims at converting men into machines, I am 
aiming at reinstating man turned machine into his original estate.  
(H, 29-8-1936, p. 228) 
 
Ideally … I would rule out all machinery, even as I would reject this very body, 
which is not helpful to salvation, and seek the absolute liberation of the soul. 
From that point of view, I would reject all machinery, but machines will remain 
because, like the body, they are inevitable. The body itself…is the purest piece 
of mechanism; but if it is a hindrance to the highest flights of the soul, it has to 
be rejected. (YI, 20-11-1924, p. 386) 
 
 
Evil of Machinery 
Machinery is like a snake-hole which may contain from one to a hundred 
snakes. Where there is machinery, there are large cities; where there are large 
cities, there are tram-cars and railways. And there only does one see electric 
light. Honest physician will tell you that where means of artificial locomotion 
have increased, the health of the people has suffered. I remember that, when 
in a European town there was scarcity of money, the receipts of the tramway The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230  company, of the lawyers and of the doctors went down, and the people were 
less unhealthy. I cannot recall a single good point in connection with 
machinery. (HS, p. 96) 
 
 
Saving of Labour 
What I object to is the craze for machinery, not machi nery as such. The craze is 
for what they call labour-saving money. Men go on ‘saving labour’ till thousands 
are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of starvation. I want to 
save time and labour, not for a fraction of mankind, but for all. 
The saving of labour of the individual should be the object, and not human 
greed the motive. Thus, for instance, I would welcome any day a machine to 
straighten crooked spindles. Not that blacksmiths will cease to make spindles; 
they will continue to provide spindles, but when the spindle goes wrong, every 
spinner will have a machine to get it straight. Therefore, replace greed by love 
and everything will be all right. (YI, 13-11-1924, p. 378) 
 
I can have no consideration for machinery which is meant either to enrich the 
few at the expense of the many, of without cause to displace the useful labour 
of many. (H, 22-6-1935, p. 146) 
 
Mechanization is good when hands are too few for the work intended to be 
accomplished. It is an evil where there are more hands than required for the 
work, as is the case of India. The problem with us is not how to find leisure for 
the teeming millions inhabiting our villages. The problem is how to utilize their 
idle hours, which are equal to the working days of six months in the year. (H, 
16-11-1934, p. 316) 
 
But why not, it is asked, save the labours of millions, and give them more 
leisure for intellectual pursuits? Leisure is good and necessary up to a point 
only. God created man to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, and I dread te 
prospect of our being able to produce all that we want, including our food-
stuffs, out of a conjuror’s hat. 
A factory employs a few hundreds and renders thousands unemployed. I may 
produce tons of oil from an oil-mill, but I also drive thousands of oil-men out of 
employment. I call this destructive energy, whereas production by the labour of 
millions of hands is constructive and conducive to the common good. Mass-
production through power-driven machinery, even when State-owned, will be 
of no avail. (H, 16-5-1936, p. 111) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  My opposition to machinery is much misunderstood. I am not opposed to 
machinery as such. I am opposed to machinery which displaces labour and 
leaves it idle. (H, 15-9-1946, p. 310) 
 
I refuse to be dazzled by the seeming triumph of machinery. I am 
uncompromisingly against all destructive machinery. But simple tools and 
instruments and such machinery as saves individual labour and lightens the 
burden of the millions of cottage I should welcome. (YI, 17-6-1926, p. 218) 
 
I hold that the machinery method is harmful when the same thing can be done 
easily by millions of hands not otherwise occupied. It is any day better and 
safer for the millions, spread in the seven hundred thousand villages of India, 
scattered over an area nineteen hundred miles long and fifteen hundred broad, 
that they manufacture their clothing in their own villages, even as they prepare 
their own food. These villages cannot retain the freedom they have enjoyed 
from time immemorial if they do not control the production of prime 
necessaries of life. (YI, 2-7-1931, p. 161) 
 
 
Mass-production 
Mass-production takes no note of the real requirement of the consumer. If 
mass-production were in itself a virtue, it should be capable of indefinite 
multiplication. But it can be definitely shown that mass-production carries 
within it its own limitations. If all countries adopted the system of mass-
production, there would not be a big enough market for their products. Mass-
production must then come to a stop. (H, 2-11-1934, p. 301) 
 
I would categorically state my conviction that the mania for mass-production is 
responsible for the world crises. Granting for the moment that machinery may 
supply all the needs of humanity, still it would concentrate production in 
particular areas, so that you would have to go in a roundabout way to regulate 
distribution, whereas, if there is production and distribution both in the 
respective areas where things are required, it is automatically regulated and 
there is less chance for fraud, non for speculation. 
[I envisage] mass-production, certainly, but not based on force. After all, the 
message of the spinning-wheel is that. It is mass-production, but mass-
production in people’s own homes. If you multiply individual production to 
millions of times, would it not give you mass-production of a tremendous 
scale? (ibid, pp. 301, 302) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232  Concentration of Wealth 
I want the concentration of wealth, not in the hands o f a few, but in the hands 
of all. Today machinery merely helps a few to ride on the backs of millions. The 
impetus behind it all is not the philanthropy to save labour, but greed. It is 
against this constitution of things that I am fighting with all my might…  
(YI, 13-11-1924, p. 378) 
 
Organization of machinery for the purpose of concentrating wealth and power 
in the hands of a few and for the exploitation of many I hold to be altogether 
wrong. Much of the organization of machinery of the present age is of that 
type. The movement of the spinning-wheel is an organized attempt to displace 
machinery from that state of exclusiveness and exploitation and to place it in 
its proper state. Under my scheme, therefore, men in change of machinery will 
think not of themselves or even of the nation to which they belong, but of the 
whole human race. (YI, 17-9-1925, p. 321) 
 
Dead machinery must not be pitted against the millions of living machines 
represented by the villagers scattered in the seven hundred thousand villages of 
India. Machinery to be well used has to help and ease human effort. The 
present use of machinery tends more and more to concentrate wealth in the 
hands of a few in total disregard of millions of men and women whose bread is 
snatched by it out of their mouths. (H, 14-9-1935, p. 244) 
 
 
Decentralization 
When production and consumption both become localized,  the temptation to 
speed up production, indefinitely and at any price, disappears. All the endless 
difficulties and problems that our present-day economic system present, too, 
would then come to an end….. There would be no unnatural accumulation of 
hoards in the pockets of the few and want in the midst of plenty in regard to 
the rest…. 
Under my system, again, it is labour which is the current coin, not metal. Any 
person who can use his labour has that coin, has wealth. He converts his labour 
into cloth, he converts his labour grain. If he wants paraffin oil, which he 
cannot himself produce, he uses his surplus grain for getting the oil. It is 
exchange of labour on free, fair and equal terms—hence it is no robbery. You 
may object that this is a reversion to the primitive system of barter. But is not 
all international trade based on the barter system? (H, 2-11-1934, p.302) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233  I am personally opposed to great trusts and concentration of industries by 
means of elaborate machinery…. If India takes to Khaddar and all it means, I do 
not lose the hope of India taking only as much of the modern machinery system 
as may be considered necessary for the amenities of life and labour-saving 
devices. (YI, 24-7-1924, p. 246) 
 
 
No Exploitation 
Thus Lancashire men will cease to use their machinery  for exploiting India and 
other countries, but on the contrary they will devise means of enabling India to 
convert in her own villages her cotton into cloth. Not will Americans under my 
scheme seek to enrich themselves by exploiting the other races of the earth 
through their inventive skill. (YI, 27-9-1925, p. 321) 
 
What is the cause of the present chaos? It is exploitation, I will not say of the 
weaker nations by the stronger, but of sister nations by sister nations. And my 
fundamental objection to machinery rests on the fact that it is machinery that 
has enabled these nations to exploit others. In itself it is a wooden thing and 
can be turned to good purpose or bad. But it is easily turned to a bad purpose 
as we know. (YI, 22-10-1931, p. 318) 
 
 
Place of Machinery 
Machinery has its place; it has come to stay. But it m ust not be allowed to 
displace necessary human labour…. 
An improved plough is a good thing. But if by some chance, one man who could 
plough up by some mechanical invention of his the whole of the land of India, 
and control all the agricultural produce, and if the millions had no other 
occupation, they would starve, and being idle, they would become dunces, as 
many have already become. There is hourly danger of many more being 
reduced to that unenviable state. 
I would welcome every improvement in the cottage machine, but I know that it 
is criminal to displace hand labour by the introduction of power-driven spindles 
unless one is, at the same time, ready to give millions of farmers some other 
occupation in their homes. (YI, 5-1-1925, p. 377) 
 
I would prize every invention of science made for the benefit of all. There is a 
difference between invention and invention. I should not care for the 
asphyxiating gases capable of killing masses of men at a time. The heavy 
machinery for work of public utility, which cannot be undertaken by human The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234  labour, has its inevitable place, but all that would be owned by the State and 
used entirely for the benefit of the people. (H, 22-6-1935, p. 146) 
 
 
Challenge of Machine Age 
Ours has been described as the machine age because the  machine dominates 
our economy. ‘Now, what is machine?’ one may ask. In a sense, man is the most 
wonderful machine in creation. It can neither be duplicated nor copied. I have, 
however, used the word not in its wider sense, but in the sense of an appliance 
that tends to displace human or animal labour instead of supplementing it or 
merely increasing its efficiency. 
This is the first differential characteristic of the machine. The second 
characteristic is that there is no limit to its growth or evolution. This cannot be 
said of human labour. There is a limit beyond which its capacity or mechanical 
efficiency cannot go. Out of this circumstance arises the characteristic of the 
machine. 
It seems to be possessed of a will or genius of its own. It is antagonistic to 
man’s labour. Thus it tends more to displace man, one machine doing the work 
of hundred, if not a thousand, who go to swell the army of the unemployed and 
the under-employed, not because it is desirable but because that is its law. In 
America it has perhaps reached the extreme limit. 
I have been opposed to it not from today, but even before 1908, when I was in 
South Africa, surrounded by machines. Their onward march had not only not 
impressed me but had repelled me. It then dawned on me that to suppress and 
exploit the millions, the machine is the devil par excellence, it had no place in 
man’s economy if, as social units, all men were to be equal. It is my belief that 
the machine has not added to man’s stature and it will not serve the world but 
disrupt it, unless it is put in its proper place. 
Then I read Ruskin’s Unto This Last during a train journey to Durban and it 
gripped me immediately. I saw clearly that, if mankind was to progress and to 
realize the ideal of equality and brotherhood, it must adopt and act on the 
principle of Unto This Last. It must take along with it even the dumb, the halt 
and the lame. Did not Yudhishthira, the Prince of Righteousness, refuse to 
enter heaven without his faithful dog? (H, 25-8-1946, p. 281) 
 
Today there is such an onslaught on India of Western machinery that for India 
to withstand it successfully would be nothing short of a miracle. (H, 17-11-
1946, p. 485) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235   
49. THE CURSE OF INDUSTRIALIZATION 
 
It is good to have faith in human nature. I live becau se I have that faith. But 
that faith does not blind me to the fact of history that, whilst in the ultimate 
all is well, individuals and groups called nations have before now perished. 
Rome, Greece, Babylon, Egypt and many others are a standing testimony in 
proof of the fact that nations have perished before now because of their 
misdeeds. 
What may be hoped for is that Europe, on account of her fine and scientific 
intellect, will realize the obvious and retrace her steps and, from the 
demoralizing industrialism, she will find a way out. It will not necessarily be a 
return to the old absolute simplicity. But it will have to be a reorganization in 
which village life will predominate, and in which brute and material force will 
be subordinated to the spiritual force. (YI, 6-8-1925, p. 273) 
 
The future of industrialism is dark. England has got successful competitors in 
America, Japan, France and Germany. It has competitors in the handful of mills 
in India, and as there has been an awakening in India, even so there will be an 
awakening in South Africa with its vastly richer resources—natural, mineral and 
human. 
The mighty English look quite pigmies before the mighty race of Africa. They 
are noble savages after all, you will say. They are certainly noble, but no 
savages; and in the course of a few years, the Western nations may cease to 
find in Africa a dumping ground for their wares. And if the future of 
industrialism is dark for the West, would it not be darker still for India? (YI, 12-
11-1931, p. 355) 
 
Industrialism is, I am afraid, going to be a curse for mankind. Exploitation of 
one nation by another cannot go on for all time. Industrialism depends entirely 
on your capacity to exploit, on foreign markets being open to you, and on the 
absence of competitors…. (YI, 12-11-1931, p. 355) 
 
As I look to Russia, where the apotheosis of industrialization has been reached, 
the life there does not appeal to me. To use the language of the Bible, ‘What 
shall it avail a man if he gain the whole world and lose his soul?’ In modern 
terms, it is beneath human dignity to lose one’s individuality and become a 
mere cog in the machine. I want every individual to become a full-blooded, 
full-developed member of the society. (H, 28-1-1939, p. 438) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236   
God forbid that India should ever take to industrialism after the manner of the 
West. If an entire nation of 300 millions took to similar economic exploitation, 
it would strip of the world bare like locusts. Unless the capitalists of India help 
to avert that tragedy by becoming trustees of the welfare of the masses, and 
by devoting their talents not to amassing wealth for themselves but to the 
service of the masses in an altruistic spirit, they will end either by destroying 
the masses or being destroyed by them. (YI, 20-12-1928, p. 422) 
 
India, when it begins to exploit other nations—as it must if it become 
industrialized—will be a curse for other nations, a menace to the world. And 
why should I think of industrializing India to exploit other nations? Don’t you 
see the tragedy of the situation, viz., that we can find work for our 300 million 
unemployed, but England and find none for its three million and is faced with a 
problem that baffles the greatest intellects of England. (YI, 21-11-1931, p. 355) 
 
 
Alternative to Industrialization 
I do not believe that industrialization is necessary i n any case for any country. 
It is much less so for India. Indeed, I believe that Independent India can only 
discharge her duty towards a groaning world by adopting a simple but ennobled 
life by developing her thousands of cottages and living at peace with the world. 
High thinking is inconsistent with complicated material life based on high speed 
imposed on us by Mammon worship. All the graces of life are possible only when 
we learn the art of living nobly…. 
Whether such plain living is possible for an isolated nation, however large 
geographically and numerically, in the face of a world armed to the teeth and 
in the midst of pomp and circumstance is a question open to the doubt of a 
sceptic. The answer is straight and simple. If plain life is worth living, then the 
attempt is worth making, even though only an individual or group makes the 
effort. 
 
 
State Control 
At the same time, I believe that some key industries a re necessary. I do not 
believe in arm-chair or armed socialism. I believe inaction according to my 
belief, without waiting for wholesale conversion. Hence, without having to 
enumerate key industries, I would have State ownership, where a large number 
of people have to work together. The ownership of the products of their labour, 
whether skilled or unskilled, will vest in them through the State. But as I can The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237  conceive such a State only based on non-violence, I would not dispossess 
moneyed men by force, but would invite their co-operation in the process of 
conversion to State ownership. There are no pariahs of society, whether they 
are millionaires or paupers. The two are sores of the same disease. And all are 
men "for a’ that". (H, 1-9-1946, p. 285) 
 
 
Revival of Rural Industries 
In seeking to revive such village industries as are c a pable of being revived… I 
am trying to do what every lover of village life, everyone who realizes the 
tragic meaning of the disintegration of villages is doing or trying to do. Why am 
I turning back the course of modern civilization, when I ask the villager to grind 
his own meal, eat it whole, including the nourishment bran, or when I ask him 
to turn his sugarcane into gur for his own requirements, if not for sale? Am I 
turning back the course of modern civilization when I ask the villagers not 
merely to grow raw produce, but to turn it into marketable products and 
thereby add a few more pies to their daily income? (H, 4-1-1935, p. 372) 
 
The revival of the village is possible only when it is no more exploited. 
Industrialization on a mass scale will necessarily lead to passive or active 
exploitation of the villagers as the problems of competition and marketing 
come in. Therefore we have to concentrate on the village being self-contained, 
manufacturing mainly for use. Provided this character of the village industry is 
maintained, there would be no objection to villagers using even the modern 
machines and tools that they can make and can afford to use. Only, they should 
not be used as a means of exploitations of others. (H, 28-1-1946, p. 226) 
 
 
Real Planning 
I heartily endorse the proposition that any plan which  exploits the raw 
materials of a country and neglects the potentially more powerful man-power is 
lopsided and can never tend to establish human equality…. 
Real planning consists in the best utilization of the whole man-power of India 
and the distribution of the raw products of India in her numerous villages 
instead of sending them outside and re-buying finished articles at fabulous 
prices. (H, 23-3-1947, p. 79) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238   
50. SOCIALISM 
 
Soc
ialism 
Real socialism has been handed down to us by our ances tors who taught: ‘All 
land belongs to Gopal, where then is the boundary line? Man is the maker of 
that line and he can therefore unmake it.’ Gopal literally means shepherd; it 
also means God. In modern language it means the State, i.e., the People. That 
the land today does not belong to the people is too true. But the fault is not in 
the teaching. It is in us who have not lived up to it.  
I have no doubt that we can make as good an approach to it as is possible for 
any nation, not excluding Russia, and that without violence. (H, 2-1-1937, p. 
375) 
 
No man should have more land than he needs for dignified sustenance. Who can 
dispute the fact that the grinding poverty of the masses is due to their having 
no land that they can call their own? (H, 20-4-1940, p. 97) 
 
 
Western Socialism 
I have been a sympathetic student of the Western socia l order and I have 
discovered that, underlying the fever that fills the soul of the West, there is a 
restless search for truth. I value that spirit. Let us study our Eastern institutions 
in that spirit of scientific inquiry and we shall evolve a truer socialism and a 
truer communism than the world has yet dreamed of. It is surely wrong to 
presume that Western socialism or communism is the last word on the question 
of mass poverty. (ABP, 3-8-1934) 
 
Socialism was not born with the discovery of the misuse of capital by 
capitalists. As I have contended, socialism, even communism, is explicit in the 
first verse of Ishopanishad. What is true is that when some reformers lost faith 
in the method of conversion, the technique of what is known as scientific 
socialism was born. I am engaged in solving the same problem that faces 
scientific socialists. 
It is true, however, that my approach is always and only through unadulterated 
non-violence. I may fail. If it does, it will be because of my ignorance of the 
technique of non-violence. I may be a bad exponent of the doctrine in which 
my faith is daily increasing. (H, 20-2-1937, p. 12) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239   
My Socialism 
I have claimed that I was a socialist long before thos e I know in India had 
avowed their creed. But my socialism was natural to me and not adopted from 
any books. It came out of my unshakable belief in non-violence. No man could 
be actively non-violent and not rise against social injustice, no matter where it 
occurred. Unfortunately, Western socialists have, so far as I know, believed in 
the necessity of violence for enforcing socialistic doctrines. 
I have always held that social justice, even unto the least and the lowliest, is 
impossible of attainment by force. I have further believed that it is possible by 
proper training of the lowliest by non-violent means to secure redress of the 
wrongs suffered by them. That means non-violent non-co-operation.  
(H, 20-4-1940, p. 97) 
 
Whilst I have the greatest admiration for the self-denial and spirit of sacrifice 
of our Socialists friends, I have never concealed the sharp difference between 
their method and mine. They frankly believe in violence and all that is in its 
bosom. I believe in non-violence through and through…. 
My socialism means ‘even unto this last’. I do not want to rise on the ashes of 
the blind, the deaf and the dumb. In their (i.e., Indian) socialism, probably 
these have no place. Their one aim is material progress. 
For instance, America aims at having a car for every citizen. I do not. I want 
freedom for full expression of my personality. I must be free to build a 
staircase to Sirius if I want to. That does not mean that I want to do any such 
thing. Under the other socialism, there is no individual freedom. You own 
nothing, not even your body. (H, 4-8-1946, p. 246) 
 
 
Equality in Socialism 
Socialism is a beautiful word and, so far as I am awar e, in socialism all the 
members of society are equal—none low, none high. In the individual body, the 
head is not high because it is the top of the body, nor are the soles of the feet 
low because they touch the earth. Even as members of the individual body are 
equal, so are the members of society. This is socialism. 
In it the prince and the peasant, the wealthy and the poor, the employer and 
employee are all on the same level. In terms of religion there is no duality in 
socialism. It is all unity. 
Looking at society all the world over, there is nothing but duality or plurality. 
Unity is conspicuous by its absence. This man is high, that one is low, that is a 
Hindu, that a Muslim, third a Christian, fourth a Parsi, fifth a Sikh, sixth a Jew. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240  Even among these there are sub-divisions. In the unity of my conception there 
is perfect unity in the plurality of designs. 
In order to reach this state we may not look on things philosophically and say 
that we need not make a move until all are converted to socialism. Without 
changing our life, we may go on giving addresses, forming parties and, hawk-
like, seize the game when it comes our way. This is no socialism. The more we 
treat it as game to be seized, the further it must recede from us. 
 
 
The Means 
Socialism begins with the first convert. If there is o ne such, you can add zeros 
to the one and the first zero will count for ten and every addition will count for 
ten times the previous number. If, however, the beginner is zero in other 
words, no one makes the beginning, multiplicity of zeros will also produce zero 
value. Time and paper and occupied in writing zeros will be so much waste. 
This socialism is as pure as crystal. It, therefore, requires crystal-like means to 
achieve it. Impure means result in an impure end. Hence the prince and the 
peasant will not be equalized by cutting off the prince’s head, nor can the 
process of cutting off equalize the employer and the employed. 
One cannot reach truth by untruthfulness. Truthful conduct alone can reach 
truth. Are not non-violence and truth twins? The answer is an emphatic ‘no’. 
Non-violence is embedded in truth and vice versa. Hence has it been said that 
they are faces of the same coin. Either is inseparable from the other. Read the 
coin either way. The spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. 
This blessed state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbour impurity of 
mind or body and you have untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore, only truthful, non-violent and pure-hearted socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the world. To my knowledge there is 
no country in the world, which is purely socialistic. Without the means 
described above, the existence of such a society is impossible.  
(H, 13-7-1946, p. 232) 
 
The Socialists and Communists say they can do nothing to bring about economic 
equality today. They will just carry on propaganda in its favour and to that end 
they believe in generating and accentuating hatred. They say, ‘When they get 
control over the State, they will enforce equality. ’ 
…I claim to be a foremost Communist although I make use of cars and other 
facilities offered to me by the rich. They have no hold on me and I can shed 
them at a moment’s notice, if the interests of the masses demand it. (H, 31-3-The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  1946, p. 64) 
 
 
By Education 
But it must be realized that the reform cannot be rush ed. If it is to be brought 
about by non-violent means, it can only be done by education both of the 
‘haves’ and the ‘have-nots’. The former should be assured that there never 
would be force used against them. The ‘have-nots’ must be educated to know 
that no one can really compel them to do anything against their will, and that 
they can secure their freedom by learning the art of non-violence, i.e., self-
suffering. 
If the end in view is to be achieved, the education I have adumbrated has to be 
commenced now. An atmosphere of mutual respect and trust has to be 
established as the preliminary step. There can then be no violent conflict 
between the classes and the masses. (H, 20-4-1940, p. 97) 
 
 
Faith in God 
Truth and ahimsa must incarnate in socialism. In order  that they can, the 
votary must have a living faith in God. Mere mechanical adherence to truth and 
ahimsa is likely to break down at the critical moment. Hence I have said that 
Truth is God. 
This God is a living Force. Our life is of that Force. That Force resides in but is 
not the body. He who denies the existence of that great Force denies to himself 
the use of that inexhaustible Power and thus remains impotent. He is like a 
rudderless ship which, tossed about here and there, perishes without making 
any headway. The socialism of such takes them nowhere, what to say of the 
society in which they live. 
If such be the case, does it mean that no socialist believes in God? If there be 
any, why have they not made any visible progress? Then, again, many godly 
persons have lived before now; why have they not succeeded in founding a 
socialistic state? 
It is difficult completely to silence these two doubts. Nevertheless, it is 
possible to say that it has perhaps never occurred to a believing socialist that 
there is any connection between his socialism and belief in God. It is equally 
safe to say that godly men as a rule never commended socialism to the masses. 
Superstitions have flourished in world in spite of godly men and women. In 
Hinduism itself untouchability has, till of late, held undoubted sway. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242  The fact is that it has always been a matter of strenuous research to know this 
great Force and its hidden possibilities. 
 
 
Satyagraha Sure Method 
My claim is that in the pursuit of that search lies th e discovery of Satyagraha. It 
is not, claimed that all the laws of Satyagraha have been laid down or found. 
This I do say, fearlessly and firmly, that every worthy object can be achieved 
by the use of Satyagraha. It is the highest and infallible means, the greatest 
force. Socialism will not be reached by any other means. Satyagraha can rid 
society of all evils, political, economic and moral. (H, 20-7-1947, p. 240) 
 
I believe in private enterprise and also in planned production. If you have only 
State production, men will become moral and intellectual paupers. They will 
forget their responsibilities. I would therefore allow the capitalist and zamindar 
to keep their factory and their land, but I would make them consider 
themselves trustees of their property. (ibid, p. 12) 
 
 
Nationalization 
I believe in the nationalization of key and principal industries as is laid down in 
the resolution of the Karachi Congress. More than that I cannot at present 
visualize. Nor do I want all the means of production to be nationalized. Is even 
Rabindranath Tagore to be nationalized? These are day dreams. (MS, p. 10) 
 
I believe in private enterprise and also in planned production. If you have only 
State production, men will become moral and intellectual paupers. They will 
forget their responsibilities. I would therefore allow the capitalist and the 
zamindar to keep their factory and their land, but I would make them consider 
themselves trustees of their property. 
Even without control of the State there can be nationalization. I can start a mill 
for the benefit of the workers. (ibid, p.13) 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243   
51. A SOCIALIST PATTERN OF SOCIETY 
 
Soc
ialist Order 
If I can convert the country to my point of view, the social order of the future 
will be based predominantly on the Charkha and all it implies. It will include 
everything that promotes the well being of the villagers. It will not exclude the 
industries…so long as they do not smother the villages and village life. 
I do visualize electricity, ship-building, iron works, machine making and the like 
existing side by side with village handicrafts. But the order of dependence will 
be reversed. Hitherto the industrialization has been so planned as to destroy 
the villages and village crafts. In the State of the future, it will sub serve the 
villages and their crafts. 
 
 
Non-violent Basis 
I do not share the socialist belief that centralizatio n of the necessaries of life 
will conduce to the common welfare, when the centralized industries are 
planned and owned by the State. The socialistic conception of the West was 
born in an environment reeking with violence. The motive lying behind the 
Western type and the Eastern is the same—the greatest welfare of the whole 
society and the abolition of the hideous inequalities resulting in the existence 
of millions of ‘have-notes’ and a handful of ‘haves’. I believe that this end can 
be achieved only when non-violence is accepted by the best mind of the world 
as the basis on which a just social order is to be constructed. I hold that the 
coming into power of the proletariat through violence is bound to fail in the 
end. What is gained by violence must be lost before superior violence. 
(H, 27-1-940, p. 428) 
 
Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every village will be a republic 
or panchayat having full powers. It follows, therefore, that every village has to 
be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs even to the extent of 
defending itself against the whole world. It will be trained and prepared to 
perish in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaught from without. 
Thus, ultimately, it is the individual who is the unit. This does not exclude 
dependence on and willing help from neighbours or from the world. It will be 
free and voluntary play of mutual forces. Such a society is necessarily highly 
cultured in which every man and woman knows what he or she wants and what The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244  is more, knows that no one should want anything that others cannot have with 
equal labour. 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages, there will be ever-
widening, never-ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid with the apex 
sustained by the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be 
the individual always ready to perish for the village, the latter ready to perish 
for the circle of villages, till at last the whole becomes one life composed of 
individuals, never aggressive in their arrogance, but ever humble, sharing the 
majesty of the oceanic circle of which they are integral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wield power to crush the inner 
circle, but will give strength to all within and derive its own strength from it. I 
may be taunted with the retort that this is all Utopian and, therefore, not 
worth a single thought. If Euclid’s point, though incapable of being drawn by 
human agency, has an imperishable value, my picture has its own for mankind 
to live. Let India live for this true picture, though never realizable in its 
completeness. We must have a proper picture of what we want before we can 
have something approaching it. If there ever is to be a republic of every village 
in India, then I claim verity for my picture in which the last is equal to the first 
or, in other words, no one is to be the first and none the last. (H, 28-7-1946, p. 
236) 
 
 
Belief in Divinity 
This society must naturally be based on truth and non - violence which, in my 
opinion, are not possible without a living belief in God, meaning a self-existent, 
all-knowing Living Force which inheres every other force known to the world, 
and which depends on none and which will live when all other forces may 
conceivably perish or cease to act. I am unable to account for my life without 
belief in this all-embracing living Light. 
In this picture every religion has its full and equal place. We are all leaves of 
majestic tree whose trunk cannot be shaken off its roots which are deep down 
in the bowels of the earth. The mightiest wind cannot move it. 
In this there is no room for machines that would displace human labour and 
that would concentrate power in a few hands. Labour has its unique place in 
the cultured human family. Every machine that helps every individual has a 
place. But I must confess that I have never sat down to think out what that 
machine can be. I have thought of Singer’s sewing machine. But even that is 
perfunctory. I do not need it to fill in my picture. (ibid) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245   
52. THE COMMUNIST CREED 
 
Bas
ic Issue 
I do not believe in short violent cuts to success…. Ho wever much I may 
sympathize with and admire worthy motives, I am an uncompromising opponent 
of violent methods even to serve the noblest of causes. There is, therefore, 
really no meeting-ground between the school of violence and myself. 
But my creed of non-violence not only does not preclude me but compels me 
even to associate with anarchists and all those who believe in violence. But 
that association is always with the sole object of weaning them from what 
appears to me to be their error. For experience convinces me that permanent 
good can never be the outcome of untruth and violence. Even if my belief is a 
fond delusion, it will be admitted that it is a fascinating delusion. (YI, 11-12-
1924, p. 406) 
 
I must confess that I have not yet been able to fully understand the meaning of 
Bolshevism. All that I know is that it aims at the abolition of the institution of 
private property. This is only an application of the ethical ideal of non-
possession in the realm of economics and if the people adopted this ideal of 
their own accord or could be made to accept it by means of peaceful 
persuasion, there would be nothing like it. 
But from what I know of Bolshevism, it not only does not preclude the use of 
force, but freely sanctions it for the expropriation of private property and 
maintaining the Collective State ownership of the same. And if that is so, I have 
no hesitation in saying that the Bolshevik regime in its present form cannot last 
for long. For it is my firm conviction that nothing enduring can be built on 
violence. 
But, be that as it may, there is no questioning the fact that the Bolshevik ideal 
has behind it the purest sacrifice of countless men and women who have given 
up their all for its sake, and an ideal that is sanctified by the sacrifices of such 
master spirits as Lenin cannot go in vain; the noble example of their 
renunciation will be emblazoned forever and quicken and purify the ideal as 
time passes. (YI, 15-11-1928, p. 381) 
 
Socialism and communism of the West are based on certain conceptions, which 
are fundamentally different from ours. One such conception is their belief in 
the essential selfishness of human nature. I do not subscribe to it, for I know 
that the essential difference between man and the brute is that the former can The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246  respond to the call of the spirit in him, can rise superior to the passions that he 
owns in common with the brute and, therefore, superior to selfishness and 
violence, which belong to the brute nature and not to the immortal spirit of 
man. 
That is the fundamental conception of Hinduism, which has years of penance 
and austerity at the back of the discovery of this truth. That is why, whilst we 
have had saints who have worn out their bodies and laid down their lives in 
order to explore the secrets of the soul, we have had none, as in the West, who 
laid down their lives in exploring the remotest or the highest regions of the 
earth. Our socialism or communism should, therefore, be based on non-violence 
and on harmonious co-operation of labour and capital, landlord and tenant. 
(ABP, 2-8-1934) 
 
 
Meaning of Communism 
Communism of the Russian type, that is communism which  is imposed on a 
people, would be repugnant to India. If communism came without any violence, 
it would be welcome. For then no property would be held by anybody except on 
behalf of the people and for the people. A millionaire may have his millions, 
but he will hold them for the people. The State could take charge of them, 
whenever they would need them for the common cause. (H, 13-2-1937, p. 6) 
 
What does communism mean in the last analysis? It means a classless society—
an ideal that is worth striving for. Only I part company with it when force is 
called to aid for achieving it. We are all born equal, but we have all these 
centuries resisted the will of God. The idea of inequality, of ‘high and low’, is 
an evil, but I do not believe in eradicating evil from the human breast at the 
point of the bayonet. The human breast does not lend itself to the means. (H, 
13-3-1937, p. 40) 
 
I cannot accept benevolent or any other dictatorship. Neither will the rich 
vanish nor will the poor be protected. Some rich men will certainly be killed 
out and some poor men will be spoon-fed. As a class the rich will remain and 
the poor also, in spite of dictatorship labeled benevolent. The real remedy is 
non-violent democracy, otherwise spelt true education of all. The rich should 
be taught the doctrine of stewardship and the poor that of self-help. (H, 8-6-
1940, p. 159) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247  Classless society is the ideal, not merely to be aimed at but to be worked for 
and, in such society, there is no room for classes or communities. (H, 17-2-
1946, p. 10) 
 
I call myself a communist also….My communism is not very different from 
socialism. It is a harmonious blending of the two. Communism as I have 
understood is a natural corollary of socialism. (H, 4-8-1946, p. 246) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248   
53. THE GOSPEL OF TRUSTEESHIP 
 
Leveling Up, Down 
Economic equality is the master key to nonviolent indepe ndence. Working for 
economic equality means abolishing the eternal conflict between capital and 
labour. It means the leveling down of the few rich in whose hands is 
concentrated the bulk of the nation’s wealth on the one hand, and the leveling 
up of the semi-starved naked millions on the other. 
A nonviolent system of government is clearly an impossibility, so long as the 
wide gulf between the rich and the hungry millions persists. The contrast 
between the palaces of New Delhi and the miserable hovels of the poor, 
labouring class nearby cannot last one day in a free India in which the poor will 
enjoy the same power as the richest in the land. 
A violent and bloody revolution is a certainty one day unless there is a 
voluntary abdication of riches and the power that riches give and sharing them 
for the common good. (CP, pp. 20-21) 
 
I adhere to my doctrine of trusteeship in spite of the ridicule that has been 
poured upon it. It is true that it is difficult to reach. So is non-violence. But we 
made up our minds in 1920 to negotiate that steep ascent. We have found it 
worth the effort. (ibid, p. 21) 
 
 
Non-violent Way 
By the non-violent method, we seek not to destroy the capitalist, we seek to 
destroy capitalism. We invite the capitalist to regard himself as a trustee for 
those on whom he depends for the making, the retention and the increase of 
his capital. Nor need the worker wait for his conversion. If capital is power, so 
is work. Either is dependent on the other. Immediately the worker realizes his 
strength, he is din a position to become a co-sharer with the capitalist instead 
of remaining his slave. 
If he aims at becoming the sole owner, he will most likely be killing the goose 
that lays the golden eggs. Not need I be afraid of someone else taking my place 
when I have non-co-operated. For I expect to influence my co-workers so as not 
to help the wrong-doing of my employer. This kind of education of the mass of 
workers is no doubt a slow process, but as it is also the surest, it is necessarily 
the quickest. It can be easily demonstrated in the end of the worker and as no 
human being is so bad as to be beyond redemption, no human being is so The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249  perfect as to warrant his destroying him whom he wrongly considers to be 
wholly evil. (YI, 26-3-1931, p. 49) 
 
 
Community Welfare 
I am inviting those people who consider themselves as owners today to act as 
trustees, i.e., owners, not in their own right, but owners in the right of those 
whom they have exploited. (YI, 26-11-1931, p. 369) 
 
It has become the fashion these days to say that society cannot be organized or 
run on non-violent lines. I join issue on that point. In a family, when the father 
slaps his delinquent child, the latter does not think of retaliating. He obeys his 
father not because of the deterrent effect of the slap but because of the 
offended love which he senses behind it. That, in my opinion, is an epitome of 
the way in which society is or should be governed. What is true of the family 
must be true of society which is but a larger family. (H, 3-12-1938, p. 358) 
 
Supposing I have come by a fair amount of wealth—either by way of legacy, or 
by means of trade and industry—I must know that all that wealth does not 
belong to me; what belongs to me is the right to an honourable livelihood, no 
better than that enjoyed by millions of others. The rest of my wealth belongs 
to the community and must be used for the welfare of the community. 
I enunciated this theory when the socialist theory was placed before the 
country in respect to the possessions held by zamindars and ruling chiefs. They 
would do away with these privileged classes. I want them to outgrow their 
greed and sense of possession, and to come down in spite of their wealth to the 
level of those who earn their bread by labour. The labourer has to realize that 
the wealthy man is less owner of his wealth than the labourer is owner of his 
own, viz., the power to work. 
 
 
In Practice 
The question how many can be real trustees according t o this definition is 
beside the point. If the theory is true, it is immaterial whether many live up to 
it or only one man lives up to it. The question is of conviction. If you accept the 
principle of ahimsa, you have to strive to live up to it, no matter whether you 
succeed or fail. There is nothing in this theory which can be said to be beyond 
the grasp of intellect, though you may say it is difficult of practice. (H, 3-6-
1939, p. 145) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250  I am not ashamed to own that many capitalists are friendly towards me and do 
not fear me. They know that I desire to end capitalism, almost, if not quite, as 
much as the most advanced Socialist or even Communist. But our methods 
differ, our languages differ. 
 
 
No Make-shift 
My theory of ‘trusteeship’ is no make-shift, certainly  no camouflage. I am 
confident that it will survive all other theories. It has the sanction of philosophy 
and religion behind it. That possessors of wealth have not acted up to the 
theory does not prove its falsity; it proves the weakness of the wealthy. No 
other theory is compatible with non-violence. In the non-violent method wrong-
doer compasses his own end, if he does not undo the wrong. For, either through 
non-violent non-co-operation he is made to see the error, or he finds himself 
completely isolated. (H, 16-12-1939, p. 376) 
 
 
Acquisition of Wealth 
Those who own money now, are asked to behave like trus tees holding their 
riches on behalf of the poor. You may say that trusteeship is a legal fiction. But 
if people meditate over it constantly and try to act up to it, then life on earth 
would be governed far more by love than it is at present. Absolute trusteeship 
is an abstraction like Euclid’s definition of a point, and is equally unattainable. 
But if we strive for it, we shall be able to go further in realizing state of 
equality on earth than by any other method. (MR, October 1935, p. 412) 
 
It is my conviction that it is possible to acquire riches without consciously doing 
wrong. For example I may light on a gold mine in my one acre of land. But I 
accept the proposition that it is better not to desire wealth than to acquire it, 
and become its trustee. I gave up my own long ago, which should be proof 
enough of what I would like others to do. But what am I to advise those who are 
already wealthy or who would not shed the desire for wealth? I can only say to 
them that they should use their wealth for service. 
It is true that generally the rich spend more on themselves than they need. But 
this can be avoided. Jamnalalji spent far less on himself than men of his own 
economic status and even than many middle-class men. I have come across 
innumerable rich persons who are stingy on themselves. For some it is a part of 
their nature to spend next to nothing on themselves, and they do not think that 
they acquire merit in so doing. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251  The same applies to the sons of the wealthy. Personally, I do not believe in 
inherited riches. The well-to-do should educate and bring up their children so 
that they may learn how to be independent. The tragedy is that they do not do 
so. Their children do get some education, they even recite verses in praise of 
poverty, but they have no compunction about helping themselves to parental 
wealth. That being so, I exercise my common sense and advise what is 
practicable. 
Those of us, however, who consider it a duty to adopt poverty and believe in 
and desire economic equality may not be jealous of the rich, but should exhibit 
real happiness in our poverty which others may emulate. The sad fact is that 
those who are thus happy are few and far between. (H, 8-3-1942, p. 67) 
 
A trustee has no heir but the public. In a State built on the basis of non-
violence, the commission of trustees will be regulated. Princes and zamindars 
will be on a par with the other men of wealth. (H, 12-4-1942, p. 116) 
 
 
THE CHOICE 
As for the present owners of wealth, they will have to  make their choice 
between class war and voluntarily converting themselves into trustees of their 
wealth. They will be allowed to retain the stewardship of their possessions and 
to use their talent, to increase the wealth, not for their own sakes, but for the 
sake of the nation and, therefore, without exploitation. 
The State will regulate the rate of commission, which they will get 
commensurate with the service rendered, and its value to society. Their 
children will inherit the stewardship only if they prove their fitness for it. 
Supposing India becomes a free country tomorrow, all the capitalists will have 
an opportunity of becoming statutory trustees. But such a statute will not be 
imposed from above. It will have to come from below. 
When the people understand the implications of trusteeship and the 
atmosphere is ripe for it, the people themselves, beginning with gram 
panchayats, will begin to introduce such statutes. Such a thing coming from 
below is easy to swallow. Coming from above it is liable to prove a dead 
weight. (H, 31-3-1946, pp. 63-64) 
 
 
Zamindars, Kisans 
I am quite prepared to say for the sake of argument t h at the Zamindars are 
guilty of many crimes and of omissions and commissions. But that is no reason The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252  for the peasant and the labourer who are the salt of the earth to copy crime. If 
salt loses its savour, wherewith can it be salted?… 
To the landlords I say that, if what is said against you is true, I will warn you 
that your days are numbered. You can no longer continue as lords and masters. 
You have a bright future if you become trustees of the poor Kisans. I have in 
mind not trustees in name but in reality. Such trustees will take nothing for 
themselves that their labour and care do not entitle them to. They then will 
find that no law will be able to reach them. The Kisans will be their friends. (H, 
4-5-1947, p. 134) 
 
If the Zamindars really become the trustees of their Zamindari for the sake of 
the ryots, there never could be an unholy league [between the two]. There is 
the difficult Zamindari question awaiting solution…. What one would love to see 
is proper, impartial and satisfactory understanding between the Zamindars, big 
and small, the ryots and the Governments, so that when the law is passed, it 
may not be a dead letter nor need force be used against the Zamindars or the 
ryots. Would that all changes, some of which must be radical, take place 
throughout India without bloodshed and without force! (H, 21-9-1947, p. 332) 
 
 
Practical Trusteeship Formula 
Trusteeship provides a means of transforming the prese nt capitalist order of 
society into an egalitarian one. It gives no quarter to capitalism, but gives the 
present owning class a chance of reforming itself. It is based on the faith that 
human nature is never beyond redemption. 
It does not recognize any right of private ownership of property except so far as 
it may be permitted by society for its own welfare. 
It does not exclude legislative regulation of the ownership and use of wealth. 
Thus under State-regulated trusteeship, an individual will not be free to hold or 
use his wealth for selfish satisfaction or in disregard of the interests of society. 
Just as it is proposed to fix a decent minimum living wage, even so a limit 
should be fixed for the maximum income that would be allowed to any person 
in society. The difference between such minimum and maximum incomes 
should be reasonable and equitable and variable from time to time so much so 
that the tendency would be towards obliteration of the difference. 
Under the Gandhian economic order the character of production will be 
determined by social necessity and not by personal whim or greed.  
(H, 25-10-1952, p. 301; the document, it is believed, was drafted by Prof. M. L. 
Dantwala) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253   
54. NON-VIOLENT ECONOMY 
 
Eco
nomic, Ethics 
I must confess that I do not draw a sharp or any disti nction between economics 
and ethics. Economics that hurt the moral well-being of an individual or a 
nation are immoral and, therefore, sinful. Thus the economics that permit one 
country to prey upon another are immoral. It is sinful to buy and use articles 
made by sweated labour. (YI, 13-10-1921, p. 325) 
 
The economics that disregard moral and sentimental considerations are like 
wax works that, being life-like, still lack the life of the living flesh. At every 
crucial moment thus new-fangled economic laws have broken down in practice. 
And nations or individuals who accept them as guiding maxims must perish. (YI, 
27-10-1921, p. 344) 
 
That economics is untrue which ignores or disregards moral values. The 
extension of the law of non-violence in the domain of economics means nothing 
less than the introduction of moral values as a factor to be considered in 
regulating international commerce. (YI, 26-10-1924, p.421) 
 
 
Ideal Economy 
According to me the economic constitution of India an d,  for the matter of that, 
the world should be such that no one under should suffer from want of food and 
clothing. In other words, everybody should be able to get sufficient work to 
enable him to make the two ends meet. 
And this ideal can universally realized only if the means of production of the 
elementary necessaries of life remain in the control of the masses. These 
should be freely available to all as God’s air and water are or ought to be; they 
should not be made vehicle of traffic for the exploitation of others. This 
monopolization by any country, nation or group of persons would be unjust. The 
neglect of this simple principle is the cause of destitution that we witness 
today not only in this unhappy land but other parts of the world too. (YI, 15-11-
1928, p. 381) 
 
True economics never militates against the highest ethical standard, just as all 
true ethics to be worth its name must at the same time be also good 
economics. An economics that inculcates Mammon worship, and enables the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254  strong to amass wealth at the expense of the weak, is a false and dismal 
science. It spells death. True economics, on the other hand, stands for social 
justice, it promotes the good of all equally including the weakest, and is 
indispensable for decent life. (H, 9-10-1937, p. 292) 
 
If we will but cleanse our houses, our palaces and temples of the attributes of 
wealth and show in them the attributes of morality, we can offer battle to any 
combinations of hostile forces without having to carry the burden of a heavy 
militia. Let us seek first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and the 
irrevocable promise is that everything will be added unto us. These are real 
economics. May you and I treasure them and enforce them in our life! (SW, p. 
355) 
 
 
Minimum Violence 
Strictly speaking, no activity and no industry is poss ible without a certain 
amount of violence, no matter how little. Even the very process of living is 
impossible without a certain amount of violence. What we have to do is to 
minimize it to the greatest extent possible. Indeed the very word non-violence, 
a negative word, means that it is an effort to abandon the violence that is 
inevitable in life. Therefore, whoever believes in ahimsa will engage himself in 
occupations that involve the least possible violence. 
Thus, for instance, one cannot conceive of a man believing in non-violence 
carrying on the occupation of a butcher. Not that a meat-eater cannot be non-
violent… but even a meat-eater believing in non-violence will not go in for 
shikar, and he will not engage in war or war preparations. Thus there are many 
activities and occupations which necessarily involve violence and must be 
eschewed by a non-violent man. 
But there is agriculture without which life is impossible, and which does involve 
a certain amount of violence. The determining factor therefore is—is the 
occupation founded on violence? But since all activity involves some measure of 
violence, all we have to do is to minimize the violence involved in it. This is not 
possible without a heart-belief in non-violence. 
Suppose there is a man who does no actual violence, who labours for his bread, 
but who is always consumed with envy at other people’s wealth or prosperity. 
He is not non-violent. A non-violent occupation is thus that occupation, which is 
fundamentally free from violence and which, involves no exploitation or envy of 
others. 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255  Rural Economics 
Now I have no historical proof, but I believe that the re was a time in India 
when village economics were organized on the basis of such non-violent 
occupations, not on the basis of rights of man but on the duties of man. Those 
who engaged themselves in such occupations did earn their living, but their 
labour contributed to the good of the community…. 
Body labour was at the core of these occupations and industries, and there was 
no large-scale machinery. For when a man is content to own only so much land 
as he can till with his own labour, he cannot exploit others. Handicrafts exclude 
exploitation and slavery. 
Large-scale machinery concentrates wealth in the hands of one man who lords 
it over the rest who slave for him. For he may be trying to create ideal 
conditions for his workmen, but it is none the less exploitation which is a form 
of violence. 
When I say that there was a time when society was based not on exploitation 
but on justice, I mean to suggest that truth and ahimsa were not virtues 
confined to individuals but were practiced by communities. To me virtue cease 
to have any value if it is cloistered or possible only for individuals. (H, 1-9-
1940, pp. 271-2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256   
55. ECONOMIC EQUALITY 
 
Inequalities in intelligence and even opportunity will  last till the end of time. A 
man living on the banks of a river has any day more opportunity of growing 
crops than one living in an arid desert. But if inequalities stare us in the face, 
the essential equality too is not to be missed. (YI, 26-3-1931, p. 49) 
 
 
My 
Idea of Society 
My idea of society is that while we are born equal, me aning that we have a 
right to equal opportunities, all have not the same capacity. It is, in the nature 
of things, impossible. For instance, all cannot have the same height, or colour 
or degree of intelligence, etc.; therefore, in the nature of things, some will 
have ability to earn more and others less. 
People with talents will have more, and they will utilize their talents for this 
purpose. If they utilize their talents kindly, they will be performing the work of 
the State. Such people exist as trustees, on no other terms. 
I would allow a man of intellect to earn more, I would not cramp his talent. But 
the bulk of his greater earnings must be used for the good of the State, just as 
the income of all earning sons of the father go to the common family fund. 
They would have their earning only as trustees. (YI, 26-11-1931, p.368) 
 
For I want to bring about an equalization of status. The working classes have all 
these centuries been isolated and relegated to a lower status. They have been 
shoodras, and the word has been interpreted to mean an inferior status. I want 
to allow no differentiation between the son of a weaver, of an agriculturist and 
of a schoolmaster. (H, 15-1-1938, p. 416) 
 
 
Removal of Disparity 
Economic equality of my conception does not mean that everyone will literally 
have the same amount. It simply means that everybody should have enough for 
his or her needs. …The real meaning of economic equality is "To each according 
to his need." That is the definition of Marx. If a single man demands as much as 
a man with wife and four children, that will be a violation of economic 
equality. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257  Let no one try to justify the glaring difference between the classes and the 
masses, the prince and the pauper, by saying that the former need more. That 
will be idle sophistry and a travesty of my argument. 
The contrast between the rich and the poor today is a painful sight. The poor 
villagers are exploited by…their own countrymen- the city-dwellers. They 
produce the food and go hungry. They produce milk and their children have to 
go without it. It is disgraceful. Everyone must have a balanced diet, a decent 
house to live in, and facilities for the education of one's children and adequate 
medical relief…. 
Under my plan the State will be there to carry out the will of the people, not to 
dictate them or force them to do its will. I shall bring about economic equality 
through non-violence, by converting the people to my point of view by 
harnessing the forces of love as against hatred. I will not wait till I have 
converted the whole society to my view, but will straightaway make a 
beginning with myself. It goes without saying that I cannot hope to bring about 
economic equality of my conception if I am the owner of fifty motor cars or 
even of ten bighas of land. For that I have to reduce myself to the level of he 
poorest of the poor. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 63) 
 
All must have equal opportunity. Given the opportunity, every human being has 
the same possibility for spiritual growth. (H, 17-11-1946, p. 404) 
 
Accumulation [of capital] by private persons is impossible except through 
violent means, but accumulation by the State in a non-violent society is not 
only possible, it is desirable and inevitable. [No man has the] moral right ['to 
use any material or moral wealth accumulated only through the help or co-
operation of other members of society mainly for personal advantage. (H, 16-2-
1947, p. 25) 
 
Today there is gross economic inequality. The basis of socialism is economic 
equality. There can be no Ramarajya in the present state of iniquitous 
inequalities in which a few rolls in riches and the masses do not get even 
enough to eat. (H, 1-6-1947, p. 172) 
 
 
Doctrine of Equal Distribution 
We want to organize our national power. This can be don e not by adopting the 
best methods of production only but by the best method of both the production 
and the distribution. (YI, 28-7-1920, p. 5) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258  What India needs is not the concentration of capital in a few hands, but its 
distribution so as to be within easy reach of the 7 1/2 lakhs of villages that 
make this continent 1900 miles long and 1500 miles broad. (YI, 23-3-1921, p. 
93) 
 
My ideal is equal distribution, but so far as I can see, it is not to be realized. I 
therefore work for equitable distribution. (YI, 17-3-1927, p. 86) 
 
The real implication of equal distribution is that each man shall have the 
wherewithal to supply all his natural needs and no more. For example, if one 
man has a weak digestion and requires only a quarter of a pound of flour for his 
bread and another needs a pound, both should be in a position to satisfy their 
wants. 
 
 
New Social Order 
To bring this ideal into being the entire social order  has got to be 
reconstructed. A society based on non-violence cannot nurture any other ideal. 
We may not perhaps be able to realize the goal, but we must bear it in mind 
and work unceasingly to near it. To the same extent as we progress towards our 
goal we shall contentment and happiness, and to that extent too shall we have 
contributed towards the bringing into being of a non-violent society. 
It is perfectly possible for an individual to adopt this way of life without having 
to wait for others to do so. And if an individual can observe a certain rule of 
conduct, if follows that a group of individuals can do like wise. It is necessary 
for me to emphasize the fact that no one need wait for anyone else in order to 
adopt a right course. Men generally hesitate to make a beginning if they feel 
that the objective cannot be had in its entirety. Such an attitude of mind is in 
reality a bar to progress. 
 
 
Through Nonviolence 
Now let us consider how equal distribution can be brou ght about through non-
violence. The first step towards it for him who has made this ideal part of his 
being is to bring about the necessary changes in his personal life. He would 
reduce his wants to a minimum, bearing in mind the poverty of India. His 
earnings would be free of dishonesty. The desire for speculation would be 
renounced. His habitation would be in keeping with his new mode of life. There 
would be self-restraint exercised in every sphere of life. When he has done all 
that is possible to preach this ideal among his associates and neighbour. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259  Indeed, at the root of this doctrine of equal distribution must lie that of the 
trusteeship of the wealthy for superfluous wealth possessed by them. For 
according to the doctrine they may not possess a rupee more than their 
neighbours. 
How is this to be brought about? Non-violently? Or should the wealthy be 
dispossessed of their possessions? To do this we would naturally have to resort 
to violence. This violent action cannot benefit society. Society will be the 
poorer, for it will lose the gifts of a man who knows how to accumulate wealth. 
Therefore the non-violent way is evidently superior. The rich man will be left in 
possession of his wealth, of which he will use what he reasonably requires for 
his personal needs and will act as a trustee for the remainder to be used for the 
society. In this argument, honesty on the part of the trustee is assumed. 
 
 
Change in Human Nature 
As soon as a man looks upon himself as a servant of so ciety, earns for its sake, 
spends for its benefit, then purity enters into his earnings and there is ahimsa 
in his venture. Moreover, if men's minds turn towards this way of life, there will 
come about a peaceful revolution in society and that without any bitterness. 
It may be asked whether history at any time records such a change in human 
nature. Such changes have certainly taken place in individuals. One may not 
perhaps be able to point to them in a whole society. But this only means that 
up till now there has never been an experiment on a large scale on non-
violence. 
 
 
Applicability of Ahimsa 
Somehow or other the wrong belief has taken possession  of us that ahimsa is 
pre-eminently a weapon for individuals and its use should, therefore, be limited 
to that sphere. In fact this is not the case. Ahimsa is definitely an attribute of 
society. To convince people of this truth is at once my effort and my 
experiment. 
In this age of wonders no one will say that a thing or idea is worthless because 
it is new. To say it is impossible because it is difficult is again not in 
consonance with the spirit of the age. Things undreamed of are daily being 
seen, the impossible is ever becoming possible. We are constantly being 
astonished these days at the amazing discoveries in the field of violence. But I 
maintain that far more undreamed of and seemingly impossible discoveries will 
be made in the field of non-violence. The history of religion is full of such 
examples…. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260  If, however, in spite of the utmost effort, the rich do not become guardians of 
the poor in the true sense of the term and the latter are more and more 
crushed and die of hunger, what is to be done? In trying to find out the solution 
of this riddle, I have lighted on non-violent non-co-operation and civil 
disobedience as the right and infallible means. The rich cannot accumulate 
wealth without the co-operation of the poor in society. 
Man has been conversant with violence from the beginning, for he has inherited 
this strength from the animal in his nature. It was only when he rose from the 
state of a quadruped (animal) to that of a biped (man) that the knowledge of 
the strength of ahimsa entered into his soul. This knowledge has grown within 
him slowly but surely. If this knowledge were to penetrated to and spread 
amongst the poor, they would become strong and would learn how to free 
themselves by means of non-violence from the crushing inequalities which have 
brought them to the verge of starvation. (H, 25-8-1940, pp. 260-1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261   
56. THE GOSPEL OF BRAHMACHARYA 
 
Sel
f-restraint 
Human society is a ceaseless growth, an unfoldment in terms of spirituality. If 
so, it must be based on ever-increasing restraint upon the demands of the 
flesh. Thus, marriage must be considered to be a sacrament imposing discipline 
upon the partners, restricting them to the physical union only among 
themselves and for the purpose only of procreation when both the partners 
desire and the prepared for it. (YI, 16-9-1926, p. 324) 
 
What chiefly distinguishes man from the beast is that man from his age of 
discretion begins to practice a life of continual self-restraint. God has enabled 
man to distinguish between his sister, his, mother, his daughter and his wife. 
(WGC, p. 84) 
 
 
Need for Brahmacharya 
A large part of the miseries of today can be avoided i f we look at the relations 
between the sexes in a healthy and pure light, and regard ourselves as trustees 
for the moral welfare of the future generations. (YI, 27-9-1928, p. 324) 
 
Life without Brahmacharya appears to me to be insipid and animal-like. The 
brute by nature knows to self-restraint. Man is man because he is capable of, 
and only in so far as he exercises, self-restraint. What formerly appeared to me 
to be extravagant praise of Brahmacharya in our religious books seems now, 
with increasing clearness every day, to be absolutely proper and founded on 
experience. (A, p. 234) 
 
I hold that a life of perfect continence in thought, speech and action is 
necessary for reaching spiritual perfection. And a nation that does not possess 
such men is poorer for the want. (YI, 13-10-1920, p. 3) 
 
 
Faith in God 
I must confess that the observance of the law of conti nence is impossible 
without a living faith in God, which is living Truth. It is the fashion nowadays to 
dismiss God altogether and insist on the possibility of reaching the highest kind 
of life without the necessity of a living faith in a living God. I must confess my The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262  inability to drive the truth of the law home to those who have no faith in and 
no need for a Power infinitely higher than themselves. My own experience has 
led me to the knowledge that fullest life is impossible without an immovable 
belief in a living law in obedience to which the whole universe moves.  
(H, 25-4-1936, p. 84) 
 
The laving force, which we call God, can… be found if we know and follow His 
law leading to the discovery of Him in us. But it is self-evident that to find out 
God's law requires far harder labour. The law may, in one word, be termed 
Brahmacharya. The straight way to cultivate Brahmacharya is Ramanama.  
(H, 22-6-1947, p. 200) 
 
 
Proper Meaning 
The full and proper meaning of Brahmacharya is search of Brahman. Brahman 
pervades every being and can therefore be searched by diving into and realizing 
the inner self. This realization is impossible without complete control of the 
senses. Brahmacharya thus means control in thought, word and action, of all 
the senses at all times and in all places. 
A man or woman completely practicing Brahmacharya is absolutely free from 
passion. Such a one therefore lives high unto God, is Godlike. I have no doubt 
that it is possible to practice such Brahmacharya in thought, word and action to 
the fullest extent. (YI, 5-6-1924, p. 186) 
 
What is Brahmacharya? It is the way of life which leads us to Brahma (God). It 
includes full control over the process of reproduction. The control must be in 
thought, word and deed. If the thought is not under control, the other two have 
no value. There is a saying in Hindustani: "He whose heart is pure has the all-
purifying waters of the Ganga in his house." For one whose thought is under 
control the other is mere child's play. The Brahmachari of my conception will 
be healthy and will easily live long. He will not even suffer from so much as a 
headache. Mental and physical work will not cause fatigue. He is ever bright, 
never slothful. Outward neatness will be an exact reflection of the inner. He 
will exhibit all the attributes of the steadfast one described in the Gita. It need 
cause no worry if not one person is met with answering the description. 
Is it strange that one who is able completely to conserve and sublimate the 
vital fluid which has the potentiality of creating human beings should exhibit all 
the attributes described above? Who can measure the creative strength of such 
sublimation, one drop of which has the potentiality of bringing into being a The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263  human life? (H, 8-6-1947, p. 180) 
 
 
Definition 
So long as thought is not under complete control of th e will, Brahmacharya in 
its fullness is absent. Involuntary thought is an affection of the mind; and 
curbing of thought, therefore, means curbing of the mind which is more 
difficult to curb than the wind. Nevertheless the existence of God within makes 
even control of the mind possible. Let no one think that it is impossible because 
it is difficult. It is the highest goal, and it is no wonder that the highest effort 
should be necessary to attain it. (A, p. 153) 
 
 
The Mind 
Brahmacharya, like all other observances, must be obse rved in thought, word 
and deed. We are told in the Gita, and experience will corroborate the 
statement, that the foolish man, who appears to control his body, but is nursing 
evil thoughts in his mind, makes a vain effort. It may be harmful to suppress 
the body, if the mind is at the same time allowed to go astray. Where the mind 
wanders, the body must follow sooner or later…. 
…It is one thing to allow the mind to harbour impure thoughts; it is a different 
thing altogether if it strays among them in spite of ourselves. Victory will be 
ours in the end, if we non-co-operate with the mind in its evil wanderings. 
(FYM, pp. 12-13) 
 
 
Inner Condition 
Brahmacharya is a mental condition. The outward behavio r of a man is at once 
the sign and proof of the inner state. He who has killed the sexual urge in him 
will never be guilty of it in any shape or form. However attractive a woman 
may be, her attraction will produce no effect on the man without the urge. The 
same rule applies to woman …… 
Brahmacharya is not a virtue that can be cultivated by outward restraints . He 
who runs away from a necessary contact with a woman does not understand the 
full meaning of brahmacharya…… 
The true brahmachari will shun false restraints. He must create his own fences 
according to his limitations, breaking them down when he feels that they are 
unnecessary. The first thing is to know what true brahmacharya is, then to 
realize its value and lastly to try to cultivate this priceless virtue. I hold that The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264  true service of the country demands this observance. (H, 15-6-1947, p. 192) 
 
 
Control of Sense 
Mere control of animal passion has been thought to be tantamount to observing 
brahmacharya. I feel that this conception is incomplete and wrong. 
Brahmacharya means control of all the organ of sense. He who attempts to 
control only one organ and allows all others free play is bound to find his effort 
futile. 
To hear suggestive stories with the ears, to see suggestive sights with the eyes, 
to taste stimulating food with the tongue, to touch exciting things with the 
hands, and then at the same time, expect to control the only remaining organ 
is like putting one’s hand in the fire, and expecting to escape being burnt. He, 
therefore, who is resolved to control the one must be likewise determined to 
control the rest. 
I have always felt that much harm has been done by the narrow definition of 
brahmacharya. If we practice simultaneous control in all directions, the 
attempt will be scientific and possible of success. Perhaps the palate is the 
chief sinner. (FYM, pp. 13-14) 
 
 
The sthitaprajna 
What ….are the characteristics of a Sthitaprajna? He i s one who withdraws his 
senses from the objects of the senses behind the shield of the spirit, as a 
tortoise does its limbs under its shell. A man whose wisdom is not steady is 
liable to be betrayed into anger, evil thoughts or abuse. On the contrary, the 
man with steady wisdom will remain equally unaffected by adulation or abuse. 
He will realize that abuse fouls only the tongue that utters it, never the person 
against whom it is hurled. A man of steady wisdom will, therefore, never wish 
ill to anyone, but will pray even for his enemy with his last breath.  
(H, 28-4-1946, pp. 110-11) 
 
 
My Brahmacharya 
For me the observance of even bodily brahmacharya has been full of 
difficulties. Today I may that I feel myself fairly safe, but I have yet to achieve 
complete mastery over thought, which is so essential. Not that the will or 
effort is lacking, but it is yet a problem to me where from undesirable thoughts 
spring their insidious invasions. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265  I have no doubt that there is a key to lock out undesirable thoughts, but 
everyone has to find it out for himself. Saints and seers have left their 
experiences for us, but they have given us no infallible and universal 
prescription. For, perfection or freedom from error comes only from grace, and 
so seekers after God have left us mantras such as Ramanama, hallowed by their 
own austerities and charged with their purity. 
Without an unreserved surrender to His grace, complete mastery over thought 
is impossible. This is the teaching of every great book of religion, and I am 
realizing the truth of it every moment of my striving after that perfect 
brahmacharya. (A, p. 234) 
 
 
I have practiced brahmacharya for over thirty years with considerable success 
though living in the midst of activities. After the decision to lead the life of a 
brahmachari, there was little change in my outward practice, except with my 
wife….. 
My brahmacharya was not derived from books. I evolved my own rules for my 
guidance and that of those who, at my invitation, had joined me in the 
experiment. If I have not followed the prescribed restrictions, much less have I 
accepted the description found even in religious literature of woman as the 
source of all evil and temptations. Owing as I do all the good there may be in 
me to my mother, I have looked upon woman, never as an object for 
satisfaction of sexual desire, but always with the veneration due to my own 
mother. Man is the tempter and aggressor. It is not woman whose touch defiles 
man, but he is often himself too impure to touch her …… 
I am experimenting. I have never claimed to have been a perfect brahmachari 
of my definition. I have not acquired that control over my thoughts that I need 
for my researches in non–violence is to be contagious and infectious, I must 
acquire greater control over my thoughts. (H, 23-7-1938, p. 193) 
 
From that day when I began brahmacharya, our freedom began. My wife 
became a free woman, free from my authority as her lord and master, and I 
became free from the slavery to my own appetite, which she had to satisfy. No 
other woman had any attraction for me in the same sense that my wife had. I 
was too loyal to her as husband and too loyal to the vow I had taken before my 
mother to be slave to any other woman. But the manner in which my 
brahmacharya came to me irresistibly drew me to woman as the mother of 
man. She became too sacred for sexual love. And so every woman at once 
became sister or daughter to me. (H, 4-11-1939, p. 326) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266  If I were sexually attracted towards women, I have courage enough, even at 
this time of life, to become a polygamist. I do not believe in free love –secret 
or open, Free, open love I have looked upon as dog’s love, secret love is, 
besides, cowardly. (ibid) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267   
57. THE MARRIAGE DEAL 
 
THE ideal that marriage aims at is that of spiritual u nion through the physical. 
The human love that it incarnates is intended to serve as a stepping–stone to 
divine or universal love. (YI, 21-5-1931, p. 115) 
 
Absolute renunciation, absolute brahmacharya, is the ideal state. If you dare 
not think of it, marry by all means, but even then live a life of self-control. (H, 
7-9-1935, p. 234) 
 
The idea of absolute brahmacharya or of married brahmacharya is for those 
who aspire to spiritual or higher life; it is the sine qua non of such life. (H, 5-6-
1937, p. 134) 
 
Marriage is a natural thing in life, and to consider it derogatory in any sense is 
wholly wrong….. The idea is to look upon marriage as a sacrament, and 
therefore, to lead a life of self-restraint in the married estate. (H, 22-3-1942, 
p. 38) 
 
Marriage for the satisfaction of sexual appetite is no marriage. It is 
uyabhichara-concupiscence.  
(H, 24-4-1937, p. 82) 
 
Manu has described the first child as dharmaja-born out of a sense of duty, and 
children born after the first as kamaja –carnally born. That gives in a nutshell 
the law of sexual relations. And what is God but the Law? And to obey god is to 
perform the Law. (ibid, p. 83) 
 
Sexual intercourse for the purpose of carnal satisfaction is reversion to 
animality, and it should, therefore, be man’s endeavour to rise above it. But 
failure to do so as between husband and wife cannot be regarded as a sin or a 
matter of obloquy. Millions in this world eat for the satisfaction of their palate; 
similarly, millions of the husbands and wives indulge in the sexual act for their 
carnal satisfaction and will continue to do so and also pay the inexorable 
penalty in the shape of numberless ills with which nature visits all violations of 
its order. (H, 5-6-1937, p. 134) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268  Undefiled love between husband and wife takes one nearer God than any other 
love. When sex is mixed with the undefiled love, it takes one away from one’s 
Maker. Hence, if there be no sex consciousness and sexual contact, it is a 
question whether there is an occasion for marriage. (H, 19-10-1947, p. 374) 
 
 
Aim of Marriage   
Th
ose marriages which are undertaken for the sake of j oint service carry their 
own blessings. Those entered upon for self-satisfaction are wholly unworthy of 
any. (H, 19-5-1946, p. 133) 
 
Rightly speaking, the true purpose of marriage should be and is intimate 
friendship and companionship between man and woman. There is in it no room 
for sexual satisfaction. That marriage is no marriage which takes place for the 
satisfaction of the sex desire. That satisfaction is a denial of true friendship. 
I know of English marriages undertaken for the sake of companionship and 
mutual service. If a reference to my own married life is not considered 
irrelevant, I may say that my wife and I tasted the real bliss o married life 
when we renounced sexual contact, and that in the heyday of youth. It was 
then that our companionship blossomed and both of us were enabled to render 
real service to India and humanity in general…… Indeed, this self-denial was 
born out of our great desire for service. 
Of course, innumerable marriages take place in the natural course of events 
and such will continue. The physical side of married life is given pre-eminence 
in these. 
Innumerable persons eat in order to satisfy the palate, but such indulgence 
does not, therefore, became one’s duty. Very few eat to live, but they are the 
one who really know the law of eating. Similarly, those only really marry who 
marry in order to experience the purity and sanctity of the marriage tie and 
thereby realize the divinity within. (ibid) 
 
 
Connubial Relations 
The wife is not the husband’s bondslave, but his compan ion and his help-mate, 
and an equal partner in all his joys and sorrows- as free as the husband to 
choose her own path. (A, p. 18) 
 
For me, the married state is as much a state of discipline as any other. life is 
duty, a probation. Married life is intended to promote mutual good, both here 
and here after. It is meant also to serve humanity. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269  When one partner breaks the law of discipline, the right accrues to the other of 
breaking the bond. The breach here is moral and not physical. It precludes 
divorce. The wife or the husband separates but to serve the end for which they 
have united. 
Hinduism regards each as absolute equal of the other. No doubt a different 
practice has grown up, no one knows since when. But we have many other evils 
crept into it. This, however, I do know – that Hinduism leaves the individual 
absolutely free to do what he or she likes for the sake of self-realization for 
which and which alone he or she is born. (Yi, 21-10-1926, p.365) 
 
My ideal of a wife is Sita and of a husband Rama. But Sita was no slave of 
Rama. Or each was slave of the other. Rama is ever considerate to Sita. (ibid, 
p. 364) 
 
You will guard your wife's honour and be not her master, but her true friend. 
You will hold her body and your soul as sacred as I trust she will hold her body 
and your soul. To that end you will have to live a life of prayerful toil, and 
simplicity and self-restraint. Let not either of you regard another as the object 
of his or her lust. (YI, 2-2-1928, p. 35) 
 
I admit that between husband and wife there should be no secret from one 
another. I hold that husband and wife merge in each other. They are one in two 
or two in one. (H, 9-3-1940, p. 30) 
 
 
Forced Marriage 
It is wholly wrong of parents to force marriage on the ir daughters. It is also 
wrong to keep their daughters unfit for earning their living. No father has a 
right to turn a daughter out on to the streets for refusal to marry. (H, 15-9-
1946, p.311-12) 
 
 
Civil Marriage 
I do not believe in them (civil marriage), but I welco me the institution of civil 
marriage as a much–needed reform. (H, 16-31947, p. 68) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270   
58. CHILDREN 
 
IF 
I am to identify myself with the grief of the least in India, aye, if I have the 
power, the least in the world, let me identify myself with the sins of the little 
ones who are under my care. And so doing in all humility, I hope someday to 
see God-Truth-face to face. (YI, 3-12-1925, p. 422) 
 
 
Character 
Children inherit the qualities of their parents, no le ss than their physical 
features. Environment does play an important part, part, but the original 
capital on which a child starts life is inherited from its ancestors. I have always 
seen children successfully surmounting the effect of evil inheritance. That is 
due to purity being an inherent attribute of the soul. (A, p. 230) 
 
Children wrapped up in cotton wool are not always proof against all temptation 
or contamination. (ibid, p. 252) 
 
The real property that a parent can transmit to all equally is his or her 
character and educational facilities. Parents should seek to make their sons and 
daughters self reliant. Well able to earn an honest livelihood by the sweat of 
the brow. (YI, 17-10-1929, p. 340) 
 
 
Lesson From Children 
It is perfectly true, I must admit it in all humility,  that however indifferently it 
may be, I endeavour to represent love in every fibre of my being. I am 
impatient to realize the presence of my Maker, who to me embodies Truth, 
and, in the early part of my career, I discovered that, if I was to realize Truth, I 
must obey, even at the cost of my life, the law of Love could be best 
understood and learned through little children. 
I believe implicitly that the child is not born mischievous in the bad sense of 
the term. if parents would behave themselves whilst the child is growing, 
before it is born and after, it is a well-known fact that the child would 
instinctively obey the law of Truth and law of Love. And when I understood this 
lesson in the early part of my life, I began a gradual but distinct change in 
life…… The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271  And believe me, from my experience of hundreds, I was going to say thousands, 
of children, I know that they have perhaps a finer sense of honour than you and 
I have. The greatest lessons in life, if we would but stop and humble ourselves, 
we would learn not from grownup learned men, but from the so-called ignorant 
children. 
Jesus never uttered a loftier or a grander truth than when he said that wisdom 
cometh out of the mouths of babes. I believe it. I have noticed it in my own 
experience that, if we would approach babes in humility and innocence, we 
would learn wisdom from them…… 
If we are to reach real peace in this world and if we are to carry on a real war 
against war, we shall have to begin with children; and if they will grow up in 
their natural innocence, we won’t have to struggle, we won’t have to pass 
fruitless idle resolutions. But we shall go from love to love and peace to peace, 
until at last all the corners of the world are covered with that peace and love 
for which, consciously or unconsciously, the whole world is hungering. (YI, 19-
11-1931, p. 361) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 272   
59. BIRTH CONTROL 
 
Fun
ction of Generation 
I think it is the height of ignorance to believe that the sexual act is an 
independent function, necessary like sleeping or eating. The world depends for 
its existence on the act of generation, and as the world is the playground of 
God and a reflection of His glory, the act of generation should be controlled for 
the growth of the world. He who realizes this will control his lust at any cost, 
equip himself with the knowledge necessary for the physical, mental and 
spiritual well-being of his progeny, and give the benefit of that knowledge to 
posterity. (A, p. 148) 
 
The union is meant not for pleasure, but for bringing forth progeny . and union 
is a crime when the desire for progeny is absent. (YI, 12-3-1925, p. 88) 
 
Once the idea that the only and grand function of the sexual organ is 
generation possesses man and woman , union for any other purpose they will 
hold as criminal waste of the vital fluid and the consequent excitement caused 
to man and woman as an equally criminal waste of energy. (H, 21-3-1936, p.48) 
 
It is dinned into one’s ears that gratification of the sex urge is a solemn 
obligation like the obligation of discharging debts lawfully incurred, and that 
not to do so would involve the penalty of intellectual decay. This sexes urge 
has been isolated from the desire for progeny and it is said by the protagonists 
of the use of contraceptives that conception is an accident to be prevented 
except when the parties desire to have children. I venture to suggest that this 
is a most dangerous doctrine to preach. 
Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothing to be ashamed of in it. But 
it is meant only for the act of creation. Any other use of it is a sin against God 
and humanity. (H, 28-3-1936, p. 53) 
 
 
Artistic Approach 
Man is undoubtedly an artist and creator. Undoubtedly,  he must have beauty 
and, therefore, colour. His artistic and creative nature at its best taught him to 
discriminate, and to know that any conglomeration of colours was no mark of 
beauty, not every sense of enjoyment gook in itself. His eye for art taught man 
to seek enjoyment in usefulness. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 273  Thus, he learnt at an early stage of his evolution that he was to eat not for its 
own sake, as some of us still do but he should eat to enable him to live. At a 
later stage, he learnt further that there was neither beauty not joy in living for 
its own sake , but that he must live to serve his fellow creatures and through 
them his Maker. 
Similarly, when he pondered over the phenomenon of the pleasurableness of 
sexual union, he discovered that, like every other organ of sense, this one of 
ge3neration had its use and abuse. and he saw that its true function, its right 
use, was to restrict it to generation had its use he saw was ugly, and he saw 
further that it was fraught with very serious consequences, as well to the 
individual as to the race. (H, 4-4-1936, p. 61) 
 
 
Need for Birth-control 
There can be no two opinions about the necessity of bir th –control. But the only 
method handed down from ages past is self-control or brahmacharya. It is an 
infallible, sovereign remedy doing good to those who practise it and medical 
men will earn the gratitude of mankind if , instead of devising artificial means 
of birth-control, they will find out the means of self-control … 
Artificial methods are like putting a premium upon vice. They make man and 
woman reckless. And the respectability that is being given to the methods must 
hasten the dissolution of the restraints that public opinion puts upon one. 
Adoption of artificial methods must result in imbecility and nervous prostration. 
The remedy will be found to be worse than the disease. 
It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the consequences of one’s acts. It is 
good for a person who overeats to have an ache and a fast. It is bad for him to 
indulge his appetite and then escape the consequence by taking tonics or other 
medicine. It is still worse for a person to indulge in his animal passions and 
escape the consequences of his acts. Nature is relentless and will have full 
revenge for any such violation of her laws. Moral results can only be produced 
by moral restraints. All other restraints defeat the very purpose for which they 
are intended. (YI, 12-3-1925, pp.88-89) 
 
 
Over-population  
If it is contended that birth–control is necessary for  the nation because of over-
population, I dispute the proposition. It has never been proved. In my opinion, 
by a proper land system, better agriculture and a supplementary industry, this 
country is capable of supporting twice as many people as there are in it today. 
(YI, 2-4-1925, p. 118) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 274   
 
The bogey of increasing birth-rate is not a new thing. It has been often trotted 
out. Increase in population is not and ought not to be regarded as a calamity to 
be avoided. Its regulation or restriction by artificial methods is a calamity of 
the first grade, whether we know it or not. It is bound to degrade the race if it 
becomes universal, which, thank God, it is never likely to be. Pestilence, wars 
and famines are cursed antidotes against cursed just which is responsible for 
unwanted children. If we would avoid this three-fold curse, we would avoid too 
the curse of unwanted children by the sovereign remedy of self–control. The 
evil consequences of artificial methods are being seen by discerning men even 
now. Without, however, encroaching upon the moral domain, let me say that 
propagation of the race rabbit-wise must undoubtedly be stopped; but not so as 
to bring greater evils in its train. It should be stopped by methods which in 
themselves ennoble the race. In other words, it is all a matter of proper 
education which would embrace every department of life; and dealing with one 
curse will take in its orbit all the others. A way is not to be avoided because it 
is upward and therefore uphill. Man’s upward progress means ever-increasing 
difficulty, which is to be welcomed. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 66) 
 
Man must choose either of the two courses, the upward or the downward; but 
as he has the brute in him he will more easily choose the down ward course 
than the upward, especially when the down ward course is presented to him in 
a beautiful garb. Man easily capitulates when sin is presented in the garb of 
virtue, and that is what Marie Stopes and others are doing. (H, 1-2-1935, p. 
410) 
 
I am afraid that advocates of birth-control take it for granted that indulgence 
in animal passion is a necessity of life and in itself a desirable thing. the 
solicitude shown for the fair sex is most pathetic. In my opinion, it is an insult 
to the fair sex to put up her case in support of birth–control by artificial 
methods. As it is, man has sufficiently degraded her for his lust, and artificial 
methods, no matter how well-meaning the advocates may be, will still further 
degrade her. 
I urge the advocates of artificial methods to consider the consequences. Any 
large use of the methods is likely to result in the dissolution of the marriage 
bond and in free love. If man may indulge in animal passion for the sake of it, 
what is he to do whilst he is, say, away from his home for any length of time, 
or when he is engaged as a soldier in a protracted war, or when he is widowed, 
or when his wife is too ill to permit him the indulgence without injury to her 
health, notwithstanding the use of artificial methods. (YI, 2-4-1925, p. 118) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 275   
Birth-control to me is a dismal abyss. It amounts to playing with unknown 
forces. Assuming that birth-control by artificial aids is justifiable under certain 
conditions, it seems to be utterly impracticable of application among the 
millions. It seems to me to be easier to induce them to practise self control 
than control by contraceptives. 
This little globe of ours is not a toy of yesterday. It has not suffered from the 
weight of over-population through its age of countless millions. How can it be 
that the truth has suddenly dawned upon some people that it is in danger of 
perishing of shortage of food unless the birth-rate is checked through the use of 
contraceptives. (H, 14-9-1935, p. 244) 
 
 
Greater Sin 
It is a sin to bring forth unwanted children, but I th ink it is a greater sin to 
avoid the consequences of one’s own action. It simply unmans man. 
(H, 7-9-1935, p. 234) 
 
God has blessed man with seed that has the highest potency and woman with a 
field richer than the richest earth to be found anywhere on this globe. Surely it 
is criminal folly for man to allow his most precious possession to run to waste. 
He must guard it with a care greater than he will bestow upon the richest 
pearls in his possession. 
And so is a woman guilty of criminal folly who will receive the seed in her life-
producing field with the deliberate intention of letting it run to waste. Both he 
and she will be judged guilty of misuse of the talent given to them and they 
will be dispossessed of what they have been given. (H, 28-3-1936, p. 53) 
 
I suggest that it is cowardly to refuse to face the consequences of one’s acts . 
persons who use contraceptives will never learn the virtue of self–restraint. 
They will not need it. Self-indulgence with contraceptives may prevent the 
coming of children but will sap the vitality of both men and women-perhaps, 
more of men than of women. It is unmanly to refuse battle with the devil. (H, 
17-4-1937, p. 84) 
 
 
Social Vice 
I know what havoc secret vice has played among school  boys and school girls. 
The introduction of contraceptives under the name of science and the 
imprimatur of known leaders of society has intensified the complication and The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 276  made the task of reformers who work for purity of social life well-nigh 
impossible…….. (H, 28-3-1936, p. 53) 
 
 
Insult to Womanhood  
I know that there are modern women who advocate these methods. But I have 
little doubt that the vast majority of women will reject them as inconsistent 
with their dignity. If man means well by her, let him exercise control over 
himself. It is not she who tempts. In reality, man being the aggressor is the real 
culprit and the tempter. (YI, 2-4-1925, p. 118) 
 
I take it that the wisest among the protagonists of contraceptives restrict their 
use to married women who desire to satisfy their husband‘s sexual appetite 
without wanting children. I hold this desire as unnatural in the human species 
and its satisfaction detrimental to the spiritual progress of the human family. 
(H, 2-5-1936, p. 92) 
 
I take it that the wisest among the protagonists of contraceptives restrict their 
use to married women who desire to satisfy their husband‘s sexual appetite 
without wanting children. I hold this desire as unnatural in the human species 
and its satisfaction detrimental to the spiritual progress of the human family. 
(H, 2-5-1936, p. 92) 
 
Contraceptives are an insult to woman hood. The difference between a 
prostitute and a woman using contraceptives is only this that the former sells 
her body to several men, the latter sells it to one man. Man has no right to 
touch his wife so long as she does not wish to have a child, and the woman 
should have the will-power to resist even her own husband. (H, 5-5-1946, p. 
118) 
 
It is the philanthropic motive that no doubt impels many birth-control 
reformers to a whirlwind campaign in favour of the use of contraceptives. I 
invite them to contemplate the ruinous consequences of their misplaced 
philanthropy. Those whom they want to reach will never use them in any 
appreciable numbers. Those who ought not to use them will, without doubt, 
use them to the undoing of themselves and their partners. This would not 
matter in the least if the use of contraceptives was incontestably proved to be 
right physically and morally. (H, 12-9-1936, p. 244) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 277  Abstinence  
Ever
y husband and wife can make the fixed resolve never to share the same 
room or the same bed at night and to avoid sexual contact except for the one 
purpose for which it is intended for both man and beast. the beast observes the 
law invariably. Man, having got the choice, has grievously erred in making 
wrong choice. …Both man and woman should know that abstention from 
satisfaction of sexual appetite results not in disease but in health and vigour, 
provided the mind co-operates with the body. (YI, 27-9-1925, p. 324) 
 
 
Courage to say ‘NO’ 
Woman should have to resist their husbands. If contrac eptives are resorted to, 
frightful results will follow. Men and woman will be living for sex alone. They 
will become soft-brained, unhinged, in fact, mental and moral wrecks. (ABP, 
12-1-1935) 
 
I have felt that, during the years still left to me, if I can drive home to women’s 
minds the truth that they are free, we shall have no birth–control problem in 
India. If they will only learn to say ‘no’ to their husbands when they approach 
them carnally…..all will be well….The real problem is that they do not want to 
resist them. It boils down to education. I want woman to learn the primary 
right of resistance. She thinks now that she has not got it. (AA, November 1935) 
 
I do not believe that woman is prey to sexual desire to the same extent as man. 
It is easier for her than for man to exercise self-restraint. (H, 2-5-1936, p. 93) 
 
 
Self-control   
If 
we begin to believe that indulgence in animal passi on is necessary, harmless 
and sinless, we shall want to give reins to it and shall be powerless to resist it. 
Whereas if we educate ourselves to believe that such indulgence is harmful, 
sinful, unnecessary, and can be controlled, we shall discover that self-restraint 
is perfectly possible. (YI, 19-8-1926, p. 289) 
 
My quarrel with the advocates of contraceptives lies in their taking it for, 
granted that ordinary mortals cannot exercise self-control. Some of them even 
go so far as to say that even if they can, they ought not to do so. To them, no 
matter how eminent they may be in their own spheres, I say, in all humility but 
with utmost confidence, that they are talking without experience of the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 278  possibilities of self-control. They have no right to limit the capacity of the 
human soul. 
And my plea, based on positive experience, is that even as truth and ahimsa 
are not merely for the chosen few but for the whole of humanity, to be 
practiced in daily life, so exactly is self –control not merely for a few 
‘Mahatmas’, but for the whole of humanity. And even as, because many people 
will be untruthful and violent, humanity may not lower its standard, so also, 
though many, even the majority, may not respond to the message of self–
control, we may not lower out standard. (H, 30-5-1936, p. 126) 
 
 
Sterilization  
I consider it inhuman to impose sterilization law on t he people. but in cases of 
individuals with chronic diseases, it is desirable to have them sterilized if they 
are agreeable to it. Sterilization is a sort of contraceptive and though I am 
against the use of contraceptive in case of women, I do not mind voluntary 
sterilization in case of man, since hi is the aggressor. (ABP, 12-1-1935) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 279   
60. WOMAN'S STATUS AND ROLE IN SOCIETY 
 
OF 
ALL the evils for which man has made himself responsible, none is so 
degrading, so shocking or so brutal as his abuse of the better half of humanity 
to me, the female sex, not the weaker sex. It is the nobler of the two, for it is 
even today the embodiment of sacrifice, silent suffering, humility, faith and 
knowledge. (YI, 15-9-1921, p. 292) 
 
Woman must cease to consider herself the object of man’s lust. The remedy is 
more in her hands than man’s. She must refuse to adorn herself for men, 
including her husband, if she will be an equal partner with man. I cannot 
imagine Sita even wasting a single moment on pleasing Rama by physical 
charms. (YI, 21-7-1921, p. 229) 
 
If I was born a woman, I would rise in rebellion against any pretension on the 
part of man that woman is born to be his plaything. I have mentally become a 
woman in order to steal into her heart. I could not steal into my wife’s heart 
until I decided to treat her differently than I used to do, and so I restored to 
her all her rights by dispossessing myself of all my so-called rights as her 
husband. And you see her today as simple as myself. 
You find no necklaces, no fineries on her. I want you to be like that. Refuse to 
be the slaves of your own whims and fancies, and the slaves of men. Refuse to 
decorate yourselves, and don’t go in for scents and lavender waters; if you 
[woman] want to give out the proper scent, it must come out of your heart, 
and then you will captivate not man, but humanity. It is your birth-right. Man is 
born of woman, he is flesh of her flesh and bone of her bone. Come to your own 
and deliver your message again. (YI, 8-12-1927, p. 406) 
 
 
Not Weaker Sex  
To call woman the weaker sex is a libel; it is man’s i njustice to woman. If by 
strength is meant brute strength, then, indeed, is woman less brute than man. 
If by strength is meant moral power, then woman is immeasurably man’s 
superior. Has she not greater intuition, is she not more self-sacrificing, has she 
not greater courage? Without her man could not be. If non-violence is the law 
of our being, the future is with woman… Who can make a more effective appeal 
to he heart than woman? (YI, 10-4-1930, p. 121) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 280  Had not man in his blind selfishness crushed woman’s soul as he has done or 
had she not succumbed to ‘the enjoyments’ she would have given the world an 
exhibition of the infinite strength that is latent in her. The world shall see it in 
all its wonder and glory when woman has secured an equal opportunity for 
herself with man and fully developed her powers of mutual aid and 
combination. (YI, 7-5-1931, p. 96) 
 
Woman, I hold, is the personification of self-sacrifice, but unfortunately today 
she does not realize what a tremendous advantage she has over man. As Tolstoy 
used to say, they are labouring under the hypnotic influence of man. If they 
would realize the strength of non-violence they would not consent to be called 
the weaker sex. (YI, 14-1-1932, p. 19) 
 
 
Perversion of Place  
Woman is the companion of man, gifted with equal menta l capacities. She has 
the right to participate in very minutest detail in the activities of man and she 
has an equal right of freedom and liberty with him. 
She is entitled to a supreme place in her own sphere of activity as man is in his. 
This ought to be the natural condition of things and not as a result only of 
learning to read and write. 
By sheer force of a vicious custom, even the most ignorant and worthless men 
have been enjoying a superiority over woman which they do not deserve and 
ought not to have. Many of our movements stop half way because of the 
condition of our women. (SW, p. 425) 
 
Man the law-giver will have to pay a dreadful penalty for the degradation he 
has imposed upon the so-called weaker sex. When woman, freed from man’s 
snares, rises to the full height and rebels against man’s legislation and 
institutions designed by him, her rebellion, no doubt non-violent, will be none 
the less effective. (YI, 16-4-1925, p. 133) 
 
Woman has circumvented man in a variety of ways in her unconsciously subtle 
ways, as man has vainly and equally unconsciously struggled to thwart woman 
in gaining ascendancy over him. The result is a stalemate. Thus viewed, it is a 
serious problem the enlightened daughters of Bharat Mata are called upon to 
solve. They may not ape the manner of the West, which may be suited to its 
environment. They must apply methods suited to the Indian genius and Indian 
environment. Theirs must be the strong, controlling, purifying, steadying hand, 
conserving what is best in our culture and unhesitatingly rejecting what is base The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 281  and degrading. This is the work of Sitas, Draupadis, Savitris, and Damayantis, 
not of amazons and prudes. (YI, 17-10-1929, p. 340) 
 
Man has regarded woman as his tool. She has learnt to be his tool, and in the 
end found it easy and pleasurable to be such because when one drags another 
in his fall the descent is easy. (H, 25-1-1936, p. 396) 
 
I hold that the right education in this country is to teach woman the art of 
saying ‘no’ even to her husband, to teach her that it is no part of her duty to 
become a mere tool or a doll in her husband’s hands. She has rights as well as 
duties. (H, 2-5-1936, p. 93) 
 
 
Right Education 
I believe in the proper education of woman. But I do be lieve that woman will 
not make her contribution to the world by mimicking or running a race with 
men. She can run the race, but she will not rise to the great heights she is 
capable of by mimicking man. She has to be the complement of man. (H, 27-2-
1937, p. 19) 
 
 
Self-protection 
Those who see in Sita a willing slave under Rama do n o t realize the loftiness of 
either her independence or Rama’s consideration for her in everything. Sita was 
no helpless, weak woman incapable of protecting herself or her honour. (H, 2-
5-1936, p. 93) 
 
I have a fear that the modern girl loves to be Juliet to half a dozen Romeos. 
She loves adventure… The modern girl dresses not to protect herself from wind, 
rain and sun, but to attract attention. She improves upon nature by painting 
herself and looking extraordinary. The non-violent way is not for such girls.  
(H, 31-12-1938, p. 409) 
 
Woman may not look for protection to men. They must rely on their own 
strength and purity of character and on God as did Draupadi of old. (H, 15-9-
1946, p. 312) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 282  Rightful Place 
Women are special custodians of all that is pure and r eligious in life. 
Conservative by nature, if they are slow to shed superstitious habits, they are 
also slow to give up all that is pure and noble in life. (H, 25-3-1933, p. 2) 
 
I do not envisage the wife, as a rule, following an avocation independently of 
her husband. The care of the children, and the upkeep of the household are 
quite enough to fully engage all her energy. 
In a well-ordered society, the additional burden of maintaining the family ought 
not to fall on her. The man should look to the maintenance of the family, the 
woman to house-hold management, the two thus supplementing and 
complementing each other’s labours. 
Nor do I see in this any invasion of woman’s rights or suppression of her 
freedom…. The epithets used in our literatures to describe a wife are 
Ardhangana, ‘the better half’ and sahadharmini, ‘the helpmate’. The husband 
addressing the wife as devi or goddess does not show any disparagement. 
… The woman who knows and fulfils her duty realizes her dignified status. She 
is the queen, not the slave, of the household over which she presides. (H, 12-
10-1934, pp. 267-7) 
 
But somehow or other man has dominated woman from ages past, and so 
woman has developed an inferiority complex. She has believed in the truth of 
man’s interested teaching that she is inferior to him. But the seers among men 
have recognized her equal status. 
Nevertheless there is no doubt that at some point there is bifurcation. Whilst 
both are fundamentally one, it is also equally true that in the form there is a 
vital difference between the two. Hence the vocations of the two must also be 
different. (H, 24-2-1940, p. 13) 
 
 
Woman and Ahimsa 
I do believe that it is woman’s mission to exhibit ahi msa at its highest and 
best…For woman is more fitted than man to make explorations and take bolder 
action in ahimsa… For the courage of self-sacrifice woman is any- day superior 
to man, as I believe man is to woman for the courage of the brute.  
(H, 5-11-1938, p. 317) 
 
My own opinion is that, just as fundamentally man and woman are one, their 
problem must be one in essence. The soul in both is the same. The two live the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 283  same life, have the same feelings. Each is a complement of the other. The one 
cannot live without the other’s active help. (H, 24-2-1940, p. 13) 
 
I have suggested…that woman is the incarnation of ahimsa. Ahimsa means 
infinite love, which again means infinite capacity for suffering. Who but 
woman, the mother of man, shows this capacity in the largest measure? She 
shows it as she carries the infant and feeds it during nine months and derives 
joy in the suffering involved. What can beat the suffering caused by the pangs 
of labour? But she forgets them in the joy of creation. 
Who, again, suffers daily so that her babe may wax from day to day? Let her 
transfer that love to the whole of humanity, let her forget that she ever was or 
can be the object of man’s lust. And she will occupy her proud position by the 
side of man as his mother, maker and silent leader. It is given to her to teach 
the art of peace to the warring world thirsting for that nectar. (ibid, pp. 13-14) 
 
 
Special Mission 
The duty of motherhood, which the vast majority of wom en will always 
undertake, requires qualities which man need not possess. She is passive, he is 
active. She is essentially mistress of the house. He is the bread-winner, she is 
the keeper and distributor of the bread. She is the care-taker in every sense of 
the term. The art of bringing up the infants of the race is her special and sole 
prerogative. Without her care the race must become extinct. 
In my opinion, it is degrading both for man and woman that woman should be 
called upon or induced to forsake hearth and shoulder the rifle for the 
protection of that hearth. It is a reversion to barbarity and the beginning of the 
end. In trying to ride the horse that man rides, she brings herself and him 
down. 
The sin will be on man’s head for tempting or compelling his companion to 
desert her special calling. There is as much bravery in keeping one’s home in 
good order and condition as there is fin defending it against attack from 
without… 
My contribution to the great problem lies in my presenting for acceptance truth 
and ahimsa in every walk of life, whether for individuals or nations. I have 
hugged the hope that in this woman will be the unquestioned leader and, 
having thus found her place in human evolution, she will shed her inferiority 
complex. 
If she is able to do this successfully, she must resolutely refuse to believe in the 
modern teaching that everything is determined and regulated by the sex 
impulse ... (ibid, p. 13) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 284   
Woman is naturally more self-suffering. Non-violence therefore comes more 
easily to her. (H, 5-5-1946, p. 118) 
 
I expect love and toleration in a higher degree from women than from men. I 
wonder where they are drifting and what women will or can teach their 
children if their hearts are permeated with hate. (H, 18-5-1947, p. 155) 
 
 
Equality of Sexes  
I am uncompromising in the matter of women’s rights. In  my opinion, she 
should labour under no legal disability not suffered by men. I should treat the 
daughters and sons on a footing or perfect equality. (H, 17-10-1929, p. 340) 
 
Equality of sexes does not mean equality of occupations. There may be no legal 
bar against a woman hunting or wielding a lance. But she instinctively recoils 
from a function that belongs to man, nature has created sexes as complements 
of each other. Their functions are defined as are their forms. (H, 2-12-1939, p. 
359) 
 
Legislation has been mostly the handiwork of men; and man has not always 
been fair and discriminate in performing that self–appointed task. The largest 
part of our effort in promoting the regeneration of women should be directed 
towards removing those blemishes which are represented in our Shastras as the 
necessary and ingrained characteristics of women. Who will attempt this and 
how? 
In my humble opinion, in order to make the attempt, we will have to produce 
women, pure , firm and self-controlled as Sita, Damayanti and Draupadi. If we 
do produce them, such modern sisters will receive the same homage from 
Hindu society as is being paid to their prototypes of yore. Their words will have 
the same authority as the Shastras. We will feel ashamed of the stray 
reflections on them in our Smritis, and will soon forget them. Such revolutions 
have occurred in Hinduism in the past, and will still take place in the future, 
leading to the stability of our faith. (SW, p. 424) 
 
I make no distinction between man and woman. Woman should feel just as 
independent as men. Bravery is not man’s monopoly. (H, 5-1-1947, p. 478) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 285  Today few women take part in politics and most of these do not do 
independent thinking. They are content to carry out their parents’ or their 
husbands’ behests. Realizing their dependence, they cry out for women’s 
rights. Instead of doing this, however, women worker should enroll women as 
voters, impart or have import or have imparted to them practical education, 
teach them to think independently, release them from the chains of caste that 
bind them, so as to bring about a change in them which will compel men to 
realize woman’s strength and capacity for sacrifice and give her places of 
honour. (H, 21-4-1946, p. 96) 
 
There is no occasion for women to consider themselves subordinate or inferior 
to men. Languages proclaim that woman is half of man and, by parity of 
reasoning, man is half of woman. They are not two separate entities, but halves 
of one. The English language goes further and calls woman the better half of 
man. 
Therefore, I advise women to resort to civil rebellion against all undesirable 
and unworthy restraints. All restraints to be beneficial must be voluntary. 
There is no possibility of harm resulting from civil rebellion. It presupposes 
purity and reasoned resistance. (H, 23-3-1947, p. 80) 
 
Man should learn to give place to woman and a country or community in which 
women are not honoured cannot be considered as civilized. (YI, 25-11-1926, p. 
415) 
 
 
The Purdah 
And why is there all this morbid anxiety about female purity? Have women any 
say in the matter of male purity? We hear nothing of women’s anxiety about 
men’s chastity. Why should men arrogate to themselves the right to regulate 
female purity? It cannot be superimposed from without. It is a matter of 
evolution from within and, therefore, of individual self-effort. (YI, 3-2-1927, p. 
37) 
 
Chastity is not a hot-house growth. It cannot be protected by the surrounding 
wall of the purdah. It must grow from within and, to be worth anything, it must 
be capable of withstanding every unsought temptation. (H,23-5-1936, p. 117) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 286   
Dowry System 
The system has to go. Marriage must cease to be a matt er of arrangement made 
by parents for money. The system is intimately connected with caste. So long 
as the choice is restricted to a few hundred young men or young women of a 
particular caste, the system will persist no matter what is said against it. The 
girls or boys or their parents will have to break the bonds of caste if the evil is 
to be eradicated. All this means education of a character that will revolutionize 
the mentality of the youth of the nation. (YI, 21-6-1929, p.207) 
 
Any young man who makes dowry a condition of marriage discredits his 
education and his country and dishonours womanhood. 
…..A strong public opinion should be created in condemnation of the degrading 
practice of dowry and young men who soil their fingers with such ill-gotten gold 
should be ex-communicated from society. Parents of girls should cease to be 
dazzled by English degrees and should not hesitate to travel outside their little 
castes and provinces to secure true gallant young men for their daughters. 
 
 
Widow Re-marriage 
Voluntary widowhood consciously adopted by woman who h as felt the affection 
of a partner adds grace and dignity to life, sanctifies the home and uplifts 
religion itself. Widowhood imposed by religion or custom is an unbearable yoke 
and defiles the home by secret vice and degrades religion. 
If we would be pure, if we would save Hinduism, we must rid ourselves of this 
poison of enforced widowhood. The reform must begin by those who have girl-
widows taking courage in both their hands and seeing that the child-widows in 
their charge are duly and well married-not remarried. They were never really 
married. (YI, 5-8-1926, p. 276) 
 
 
Divorce 
Marriage confirms the right of union between two partn ers to the exclusion of 
all the others when, in their joint opinion, they consider such union to be 
desirable, but it confers no right upon one partner to demand obedience of the 
other to one’s wish for union. What should be done when one partner on moral 
or other grounds cannot conform to the wishes of the other is a separate 
question. Personally, if divorce was the only alternative, I should not hesitate 
to accept it, rather than interrupt my moral progress, assuming that I want to 
restrain myself on purely moral grounds. (YI, 8-10-1925, p. 346) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 287   
61. SEX EDUCATION 
 
WHA
T PLACE has... instruction in sexual science in our educational system, or 
has it any place there at all? Sexual science is of two kinds-that which is used 
for controlling or overcoming the sexual passion, and that which is used to 
stimulate and feed it. Instruction in the former is as necessary a part of child's 
education as the latter is harmful and dangerous and fit therefore only to be 
shunned. All great religions have rightly regarded kama as the arch-enemy of 
man, anger or hatred coming only in the second place. According to the Gita, 
the latter is an offspring of the former. The Gita, of course, uses the word 
kama in its wider sense of desire. But the same holds good of the narrow sense 
in which it is used here. 
This, however, still leaves unanswered the question, i.e., whether it is 
desirable to impart to young pupils a knowledge about the use and function of 
generative organs. It seems to me that it is necessary to impart such knowledge 
to a certain extent. At present they are often left to pick up such knowledge 
anyhow with the result that they are misled into abusive practices. We cannot 
properly control or conquer the sexual passion by turning a blind eye to it; I 
am, therefore, strongly in favour of teaching young boys and girls, the 
significance and right use of their generative organs. And, in my own way, I 
have tried to impart this knowledge to young children of both sexes for whose 
training I was responsible. 
But the sex education that I stand for must have for its object the conquest and 
sublimation of the sex passion. Such education should automatically serve to 
bring home to children the essential distinction between man and brute, to 
make them realize that it is man's special privilege and pride to be gifted with 
the faculties of head and heart both, that he is a thinking no less than a feeling 
animal as the very derivation of the word shows, and to renounce the 
sovereignty of reason over the blind instincts is, therefore to renounce a man's 
estate. In main reason quickens and guides the feeling. In brute the soul lies 
ever dormant. To awaken the heart is to awaken the dormant soul, to awaken 
reason, and to inculcate discrimination between good and evil. 
Who should teach this true science of sex? Clearly, he who has attained mastery 
over his passions. To teach astronomy and kindred sciences we have teachers 
who have gone through a course of training in them and are masters of their 
art. Even so must we have as teachers of sexual science, i.e., the science of 
sex-control, those who have studied it and have acquired mastery over self. 
Even a lofty utterance that has not the backing of sincerity and experience will 
be inert and lifeless, and will utterly fail to penetrate and quicken the hearts of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 288  men, while the speech that springs from self-realization and genuine 
experience is always fruitful. 
Today our entire environment-our reading, our thinking, our social behaviour-is 
generally calculated to subserve and cater for the sex-urge. To break through 
its coils is no easy task. But it is a task worthy of our highest endeavour. Even if 
there are a handful of teachers endowed with practical experience, who accept 
the ideal of attaining self-control as the highest , duty of man and are fired by 
a genuine ad undying faith in their mission, and are sleeplessly vigilant and 
active, their labour will light the path of the children...., save the unwary from 
falling into the mire of sexuality, and rescue those who might be already 
engulfed in it. (H, 21-11-1936, p. 322) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 289   
62. CRIMES AGAINST WOMEN 
 
Women's Honour  
I H
AVE always held that it is physically impossible to violate a woman against 
her will. The outrage takes place only when she gives way to fear or does not 
realize her moral strength. If she cannot meet the assailant’s physical might, 
her purity will give her the strength to die before he succeeds in violating her. 
Take the case of Sita. Physically she was a weakling before Ravana, but her 
purity was more than a match even for his giant might. He tried to win her with 
all kinds of allurements, but could not carnally touch her without her own 
physical strength or upon a weapon she possesses, she is sure to be discomfited 
whenever her strength is exhausted. (H, 1-9-1940, p. 266) 
 
It is my firm conviction that a fearless woman, who knows that her purity is her 
best shield can never be dishonoured. However beastly the man, he will bow in 
shame before the flame of her dazzling purity. …… 
I therefore recommend women…to try to cultivate this courage. They will 
become wholly fearless if they can and cease to tremble as they do today at 
the thought of assaults…. Parents and husbands should instruct women in the 
art of becoming fearless. It can best be learnt from a living faith in God. 
Though He is invisible, He is one’s unfailing protector. He who has this faith is 
the most fearless of all…. 
When a woman is assaulted she may not stoop to think in terms of himsa or 
ahimsa. Her primary duty is self-protection. She is at liberty to employ every 
method or means that come to her mind in order to defend her honour. God 
has given her nails and teeth. She must use them with all her strength and, if 
need be, die in the effort. The man or woman who has shed all fear of death 
will be able not only to protect himself or herself but others also through laying 
down hi (or her) life. (H, 1-3-1942, p. 60) 
 
In the society in the midst of which we are living, such outrages take place…. A 
non-violent man or woman will and should die without retaliation, anger or 
malice, in self-defence or in defending the honour of his womenfolk. This is the 
highest form of bravery. (H, 15-9-1946, p. 312) 
 
The art of dying bravely and with honour does not need any special training, 
save a living faith in God. (H, 5-10-1947, p. 334) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 290   
Prostitution  
Prostitution is as sold as the world, but I wonder if it was ever a regular feature 
of town-life that is today. In any case, the time must come when humanity will 
rise against the curse and make prostitution a thing of the past, as it has got rid 
of many evil customs, however time-honoured they might have been.  
(YI, 28-5-1925, p. 187) 
 
The proper method of dealing with brothels is for the women to carry on a 
double propaganda, (a) amongst women who sell their honour for a livelihood, 
and (b) amongst men whom they must same into behaving better towards their 
sisters whom they ignorantly or insolently call the weaker sex. 
I remember years and years ago in the early nineties when the brave salvation 
Army people, at the risk of their own lives, used to carry on picketing at the 
corners of the notorious streets of Bombay which were filled with houses of ill-
fame. There is no reason why some such thing should not be organized on a 
large scale. (H, 4-9-1937, p. 233) 
 
"Prostitutes" is commonly supposed to apply to women of lewd character. But 
the men who indulge in vice are just as much, if not more, prostitutes than the 
women, who, in many instances, have to sell their bodies for the sake of 
earning a livelihood. The evil practice should be declared illegal. But the law 
can only help to a point. The evil exists clandestinely in every country in spite 
of the law. Vigorous public opinion can help the law as it also hinders. (H, 15-9-
1946, p. 310) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 291   
63. THE ASHRAM VOWS 
 
Thi
s is the maxim of life which I have accepted, namely, that no work done by 
any man, no matter how great he is, will really prosper unless he has religious 
backing. But what is religion?…. I for one would answer; not the religion which 
you will get after reading all the scriptures of the world; it is not really a grasp 
by the brain, but it is a heart grasp. It is a thing which is not alien to us but it is 
a thing which has to be evolved out of us. It is always within us; with some 
consciously so; with the other quite unconsciously. But it is [always] there; and 
whether we wake up this religious instinct in us through outside assistance or 
by inward growth, no matter how it is done, it has got to be done if we want to 
do any thing in the right manner and anything that is going to persist. 
Our scriptures have laid down certain rules as maxims of life and as axioms 
which we have to take for granted as self-demonstrated truths… believing in 
these implicitly for all these ling years and having actually endeavoured to 
reduce to practice these injunctions…, I have deemed it necessary to seek the 
association of those who think with me in founding this institution… the rules 
that have been drawn up and that have to be observed by everyone who seeks 
to be a member of that Ashram [are as follows]: 
 
 
The Vow Of Truth 
Not truth simply as we ordinarily understand it, not t ruth which merely answers 
the saying, ‘Honesty is the best policy,’ implying that, if it is not the best 
policy, we may depart from it. But here Truth as it is conceived means that we 
have to rule our life buy this flaw of Truth at any cost; and in order to satisfy 
the definition, I have drawn upon the celebrated illustration of the life of 
Prahlad. For the sake to Truth as he knew it, he was prepared to die without 
caring to return the blows that he had received from his father, or from those 
who were charged with his father’s instructions. Not only that, he would not in 
any way even parry the blows; on the contrary, width a smile on his lips, he 
underwent the innumerable tortures to which he was subjected, with the result 
that at last Truth. That fact was there; but if he had died in the midst of 
tortures, he would still have adhered to Truth. that is the truth which I would 
like to follow … in our Ashram we make it a rule that we must say ‘No’ when we 
mean ‘No’ regardless of consequences. 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 292  The Doctrine Of Ahimsa  
Literally speaking, ahimsa means ‘non-killing’. But to  me it has a world of 
meaning, and takes me into the realms much higher, infinitely higher…. Ahimsa 
really means that you may not offend anybody; you may not harbour an 
uncharitable thought, even in connection with one who may consider himself to 
be your enemy. For one who follows this doctrine there is no room for an 
enemy…. But there are people who consider themselves to be his enemies…. So 
it is held that we may not harbour an evil thought even in connection with such 
persons. If we return blow for blow, we depart from the doctrine of ahimsa. 
But when I say that we should not resent, I do not say that we should 
acquiesce; but by ‘resenting’ I mean wishing that some harm should be done to 
the enemy; or that he should be put out of the way, not even by any action of 
ours, but by the action of somebody else, or, say, buy divine agency. If we 
harbour even this thought, we depart from this doctrine of I ahimsa. Those who 
join the Ashram have literally to accept that meaning. 
That does not mean that we practise that doctrine in its entirety. Far from it. It 
is an ideal which we have to reach, and it is an ideal to be reached even at this 
very moment, if we are capable of doing so. But is not a proposition in 
geometry; it is not even like solving difficult problems in higher mathematics-it 
is infinitely more difficult than solving those problems. Many of you have burnt 
the midnight oil in solving those problems. If you want to follow out this 
doctrine, you will have to do much more than burn the midnight oil . you will 
have to pass many a sleepless night, and go through many a mental torture and 
agony, before you can even be within measurable distance of this goal. It is the 
goal, it is the goal, and no-thing less than that, which you and I have to reach if 
we want to understand what a religious life means. 
…. A man who believed in the efficacy of this doctrine find s in the ultimate 
stage, when he is about to reach the goal, the whole world at his feet… if you 
express your love – ahimsa- in such a manner that it impresses itself indelibly 
upon your so-called enemy, he must return that love…… under this rule there is 
no room for organized assassinations, or for murders openly committed, or…. 
For any violence for the sake of your country or even for guarding the honour of 
precious ones that may be under your charge. After all, that would be a poor 
defence of their honour. This doctrine tells us that we may guard the honour of 
those under our charge by delivering ourselves into the hand s of the man who 
would commit he sacrilege. And that requires far greater physical and mental 
courage than the delivering of blows. …. If you do not retaliate, but stand your 
ground between your charge and the opponent, simply receiving the blows 
without retaliating, what happens? I give you my promise that the whole of his 
violence will be expended on you, and your friend will not left unscathed. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 293  Under this plan of life there is no conception of patriotism which justifies such 
wars as you witness today in Europe. 
 
 
The
 Vow Of Celibacy 
Those who want to perform national service, or to have a gleam of the real 
religious life, must lead a celibate life, whether married or unmarried. Marriage 
only brings a woman closer to man, and they become friends in a special sense, 
never to be parted either in this life or in the lives to come. But I do not think 
that, in our conception of marriage, our lusts should enter. Be that as it may, 
this is what is placed before those who come to the Ashram. I do not deal with 
that at any length. 
 
 
The
 Vow Of The Control Of The Palate 
A man who wants to control his animal passions easily does so if he controls his 
palate. I fear this is one of the most difficult vows to follow …. Unless we are 
prepared to rid ourselves of stimulating, heating, able to control the over-
abundant, unnecessary, and exciting stimulation of the animal passions…. If we 
do not do that …., we are likely to abuse the sacred trust of our bodies that has 
been given us , and to become less than animals and brutes, eating, drinking 
and indulging in passions which we share in common with the animals. But have 
you ever seen a horse or cow indulging in the abuse of the palate as we do? Do 
you suppose that it is a sign of civilization, a sign of real life, that we should 
multiply our eatables so far that we do not even know where we are; and seek 
dishes until, at last, we have become absolutely mad and run after the 
newspaper sheets which give us advertisements about these dishes? 
 
 
The Vow Of Non-Thieving 
I suggest that we are thieves in a way. If I take anyt hing that I do not need for 
my own immediate use and deep it, I thieve it from somebody else. It is the 
fundamental law of Nature, without exception, that Nature produces enough 
for our wants from day to day; and if only everybody took enough for himself 
and nothing more, there would be no pauperism in this world, there would be 
no man dying of starvation. I am no Socialist, and I do not want to dispossess 
those who have got possessions; but I do say that personally those of us who 
want to see light out of darkness have to follow this rule. I do not want to 
dispossess anybody; I should then be departing from the rule of non-violence. If 
somebody else possesses more than I do , let him. But so far as my own life has The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 294  to be regulated, I dare not possess anything which I do not want. In India, we 
have got many millions of people who have to be satisfied with one meal a day, 
and that meal consisting of a chapatti containing no fat in it and a pinch of salt. 
You and I have no right to anything that we really have until these many million 
are clothed and fed. You and I, who ought to know better, must adjust our 
wants, and even undergo voluntary privation in order that they may be nursed, 
fed and clothed. 
 
 
The Vow Of Non-Possession  
This follows as a matter of course. 
 
 
The Vow Of Swadeshi 
The vow of swadeshi is a necessary vow. We are departi ng from one of the 
sacred laws of our being when we leave our neighbourhood and go out 
somewhere else in order to satisfy our wants. If a man comes from Bombay and 
offers you wares, you are not justified in supporting the Bombay merchant so 
long as you have got a merchant at your very door, born and bred in Madras. 
This is my view of swadeshi. In your village you are bound to support your 
village barber to the exclusion of the finished barber who may come to you 
from Madras. If you find it necessary that your village barber should reach the 
attainments of the barber from Madras, you may train him to that. Send him to 
Madras by all means, if you wish, in order that he may learn his calling. Until 
you do that you are not justified in going to another barber. That is Swadeshi. 
So when we find that there are many things that we cannot get in India, we 
must try to do without them. We may have to do without many things; but 
believe me, when you have that frame of mind, you will find a great burden 
taken off your shoulders, even as the Pilgrim was a carrying unconsciously 
dropped from him and he get a freer man than he was when he started on the 
journey. So will you feel freer men than you are now, if immediately you adopt 
this Swadeshi life. 
 
 
The Vow Of Fearlessness 
I found through my wanderings in India that my country  is seized with a 
paralyzing rear. We may not open our lips in public; we may only talk about our 
opinions secretly. We may do anything we like within the four walls of our 
house; but those things are not for public consumption. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 295  If we had taken a vow of silence, I would have nothing to say. I suggest to you 
that there is only one whom we have to fear, that is God. When we fear God, 
then we shall fear no man, however high –placed he may be; and if you want to 
follows the vow of Truth, then fearlessness is absolutely necessary. Before we 
can aspire to guide the destinies of India, we shall have to adopt this habit of 
fearlessness. 
 
 
The Vow Regarding The ‘Untouchables’ 
There is an ineffaceable blot that Hinduism today car r ies with it. I have 
declined to believe that it has been handed down to us from immemorial times. 
I think that this miserable, wretched, enslaving spirit of ‘untouchableness’ 
must have come to us when we were at our lowest ebb. this evil has stuck to us 
and still remains with us. It is, to my mind, a curse that has come to us; and as 
long as the curse remains with us, so long I think we are bound to consider that 
every affliction in this sacred land is a proper punishment for the indelible 
crime that we are committing. That any person should be considered 
untouchable because of his calling passes my comprehension; and you, the 
student world, who receive all this modern education, if you become a party to 
this crime, it were better that you received no education whatsoever. 
 
 
Education Through The Vernaculars 
In Europe, every cultured man learns not only his own  language but also other 
language in India. 
In order to solve the problem of language in India, we in this Ashram must make 
it a point to learn as many Indian vernaculars as possible. The trouble of 
learning these languages is nothing compared to that of mastering English. How 
dare we rub off from our memory all the years of our infancy? But that is 
precisely what we do when we commence our higher life through the medium 
of a foreign tongue. This creates a breach for which we shall have to pay 
dearly. And you will see now the connection between this education and 
untouchability- this persistence of the latter in spite of the spread of 
knowledge and education. Education enables us to se the horrible crime, but 
we are seized with fear, and, therefore, we cannot take this doctrine to our 
homes. 
 
The Vow Of Khaddar 
You may ask, ‘Why should we use our hand?’ You may sa y , ‘Manual work has got 
to be done by those who are illiterate. I can only occupy myself with reading The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 296  literature and political essays.’ We have to realize the dignity of labour. If a 
barber or shoe-maker attends a college, he ought not to abandon his 
profession. I consider that such professions are just as good as the profession of 
medicine. 
Last of all, when you have conformed to these rules, you may come to; 
 
 
The Religious Use Of Politics 
Politics, divorced from religion, have absolutely no m eaning. If the student 
world crowd the political platforms of this country, that is not necessarily a 
healthy sign of national growth ; but this does not mean that you, in your 
student life, ought not to study politics. Politics are a part of our being; we 
ought to understand our national institutions. We may do this from our infancy. 
So, in our Ashram every child is taught to understand the political institutions 
of our country and to know how the country is vibrating with new emotions, 
with new aspirations, with new life. But we want also the steady light, the 
infallible light of religious faith; not a faith which merely appeals to the 
intelligence, but a faith which is indelibly inscribed on the heart. First we want 
to realize our religious consciousness, and immediately we have done that, the 
whole department of life is open to us; and it should then be a sacred privilege 
of all, so that, when young men grow to manhood, they may do so properly 
equipped to battle with life. Today what happens is this ; much of the political 
life is confined to the students, but immediately they cease to be students, 
they sink into oblivion, seeking miserable employments, knowing nothing about 
God, nothing of fresh air or bright light, or of real vigorous independence, such 
as comes out of obedience to those laws that I have placed before you …….. 
(Address at YMCA Auditorium, Madras, February 16, 1916; SW, pp. 377-90) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 297   
64. THE GOSPEL OF FREEDOM 
 
THE
RE IS no such thing as slow freedom. Freedom is like a birth. Till we are 
fully free, we are slaves. All birth takes place in a moment. 
(YI, 9-3-1922, p. 148) 
 
 
Gilded Slavery 
Golden fetter are no less galling to a self-respectin g  man than iron ones. The 
sting lies in the fetters, not in the metal. (YI, 6-6-1929, p. 188) 
 
To my mind golden shackles are far worse than iron ones, for one easily feels 
the irksome and galling nature of the latter, and is prone to forget the former. 
If, therefore, India must be in chains, I would they were of iron rather than of 
gold or other precious metals. (YI, 16-1-1930, p. 17) 
 
 
Right To Freedom 
Freedom is not worth having if it does not connote fre edom to err and even to 
sin. If God Almighty has given the humblest of His creatures the freedom to err, 
it passes my comprehension how human beings, be they ever so experienced 
and able, can delight in depriving other human Beings of that precious right.  
(YI, 12-3-1931, p. 31) 
 
As every country is fit to eat, to drink and to breathe, even so is every nation 
fit to manage its own affairs, no matter how badly. (YI, 15-10-1931, p. 305) 
 
Superimposed control is bad any day….. When this control is removed, the 
nation will breathe free, it will have the right to make mistakes. This ancient 
method, of progressing be making mistakes and correcting them, is the proper 
way. (H, 21-12-1947, p. 477) 
 
 
Individual Freedom 
It is my certain conviction that no man loses his free dom except through his 
own weakness. (ICS, p. 209) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 298  I value individual freedom, but you must not forger that man is essentially a 
social being. He has risen to his present status by learning to adjust his 
individualism to the requirements of social progress. Unrestricted individualism 
is the law of the beast of the jungle. We have to learn to strike the mean 
between individual freedom and social restraint. Willing submission to social 
restraint for the sake of the well-being of the whole society enriches both the 
individual and the society of which one is a member. (H, 27-5-1939, p. 144) 
 
If this [individual liberty] goes, then surely all is list, for, if the individual 
ceases to count, what is left of society? Individual freedom alone can make a 
man voluntarily surrender himself completely to the service of society. If it is 
wrested from him, he becomes an automaton and society is ruined. No society 
can possible be built on a denial of individual freedom. It is contrary to the 
very nature of man. Just as a man will not grow horns or tail, so he will not 
exist as man if he has no mind of his own. In reality, even those who do not 
believe in the liberty of the individual believe in their own. Modern editions of 
chenghiz khan retain their own. (H, 1-9-1942, p. 27) 
 
 
Concept Of Freedom 
My conception of freedom is no narrow conception. It i s co-extensive width the 
freedom of man in all his majesty. (H, 7-6-1942, p. 183) 
 
Every individual must have the fullest liberty to use his talents consistently 
with equal use by neighbours, but no one is entitled to the arbitrary use of the 
gains from the talents. He is part of the nation or, say, the social structure 
surrounding him. Therefore, he can use his talents not for self only but for the 
social structure of which he is but a part and on whose sufferance he lives. (H, 
2-8-1942, p. 249) 
 
 
Will To Be Free 
No tyrant has ever yet succeeded in his purpose withou t carrying the victim 
with him, it may be, as it often is, by force. Most people choose rather to yield 
to the will of the tyrant than to suffer for the consequence of resistance. 
Hence does terrorism form part of the stock-in-trade of the tyrant. But we have 
instances in history where terrorism has failed to impose the terrorist’s will 
upon his victim. (YI, 9-6-1920, p. 3) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 299  Even the most despotic government cannot stand except for the consent of the 
governed, which consent is often forcibly procured by the despot. Immediately 
the subject ceases to fear the despotic force, his power is gone. (YI, 30-6-1920, 
p. 3) 
 
The moment the slave resolves that he will no longer be a slave, his fetters fall. 
He frees himself and shows the way to others. Freedom and slavery are mental 
states. Therefore, the first thing is to say to yourself; ‘I shall no longer accept 
the role of a slave. I shall not obey orders as such, but shall disobey them when 
they are in conflict with my conscience.’ 
The so-called master may lash you and try to force you to serve him. You will 
say; ‘No, I will not serve you for your money or under a threat.’ This may mean 
suffering. Your readiness to suffer will light the torch of freedom which can 
never be put out. (H, 24-2-1946, p. 18)  
 
 
Pric
e Of Freedom 
Whether we are one or many, we must refuse to purchase  freedom at the cost 
of our self-respect or our cherished convictions. I have known even little 
children become unbending when an attempt has been made to cross their 
declared purpose, be it ever so flimsy in the estimation of their parents.  
(YI, 15-2-1921, p. 418) 
 
We must be content to die if we cannot live as free men and women. (YI, 5-1-
1922, p. 5) 
 
Man has to thank himself for his dependence. He can be independent as soon as 
he wills it. (H, 11-1-193.6, p. 380) 
 
Freedom is never dear at any price. It is the breath of life. What would a man 
not pay for living? (H, 10-12-1938, p. 368) 
 
 
Freedom For Lowliest  
It gives me both pain and surprise when I find people feeling anxious about 
their future under a freed India. For me an India which does not guarantee 
freedom to the lowliest of those born, not merely within an artificial boundary 
but within its natural boundary, is not free India. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 300  Our fear paralyses our thinking powers, or we should at once know that 
freedom means a state, at any rate somewhat better than the present for every 
honest man or woman. It is exploiters, money-grabbers, pirates and the like 
who have to fear the advent of freedom. (YI, 26-12-1929, p. 421) 
 
I shall strive for a constitution which will release India from all thralldom and 
patronage, and give her, if need be, the right to sin. I shall work for an India in 
which the poorest shall feel that it is their country, in whose making they have 
an effective voice; an India in which there shall be no high class and low class 
of people; an India in which all communities shall live in perfect harmony. 
There can be no room in such an India for the curse of untouchability, or the 
curse of the intoxicating drinks and drugs. Women will enjoy the same rights as 
men. 
Since we shall be at peace with all the rest of the world, neither exploiting, nor 
being exploited, we should have the smallest army imaginable. All interests not 
in conflict with the interests of the dumb millions will be scrupulously 
respected, whether foreign or indigenous. Personally, I hate distinction 
between foreign and indigenous. This is the India of my dreams… I shall be 
satisfied with nothing else. (YI, 10-9-1931, p. 255) 
 
 
No Exploitation 
If I want freedom for my country, believe me, if I can  possibly help it, I do not 
want that freedom in order that I, belonging to a nation which counts on-fifth 
of the human race, may exploit any other race upon earth, or any single 
individual. If I want that freedom for my country, I would not be deserving of 
that freedom if I did not cherish and treasure the equal right of every other 
race, weak or strong, to the same freedom. (YI, 1-10-1931, p. 278) 
 
Men aspiring to be free can hardly think of enslaving others. If they try to do 
so, they will only be binding their own chains of slavery tighter. (H, 13-4-1947, 
p. 106) 
 
Independence of my conception means nothing less than the realization the 
"Kingdom of God" within you and on this earth. I would rather work for and die 
in the pursuit of this dream, though it may never be realized. That means 
infinite patience and perseverance. If India is satisfied with the mere 
attainment of political independence and there is nothing better for me to do 
you will find me retiring to the Himalayas leaving those who wish to listen to 
me to seek me out there. (HSt, 1-4-1940) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 301   
In concrete terms, ….The independence should be political, economic and 
moral. 
‘Political’ necessarily means the removal of the control of the British army in 
every shape and form. ‘Economic’ means entire freedom from British capitalists 
and capital, as also their Indian counterpart. In other words, the humblest must 
feel equal to the tallest. This can take place only by capital or capitalists 
sharing their skill and capital with the lowliest and the least. 
‘Moral’ means freedom from armed defence forces. (H, 5-5-1946, p. 116) 
 
 
Means Of Peace 
India has never waged war against any nation. She has put up, sometimes, ill-
organized or half-organized resistance in self-defence pure and simple. She has, 
therefore, not got to develop the will for peace. She has that in abundance 
whether she knows it or not. 
The way she can promote peace is to offer successful resistance to her 
exploitation by peaceful means. That is to say, she has to achieve her 
independence. … by peaceful means. If she can do this, it will be the largest 
contribution that any single nation will have made towards world peace. (YI, 4-
7-1929, p. 218) 
 
I personally would wait, if need be, for ages rather than seek to attain the 
freedom of my country through bloody means. I feel in the innermost recesses 
of my heart, after a political experience extending over an unbroken period of 
close upon thirty-five years, that the world is sick unto death of blood-spilling. 
The world is seeking a way out, and I flatter myself with the belief that perhaps 
it will be the privilege of the ancient land of India to show that way out to the 
hungering world. 
I have, therefore, no hesitation whatsoever in inviting all the great nation of 
the earth to give their hearty co-operation to India in her mighty struggle. It 
must be a sight worth contemplating and treasuring that millions of people 
have given themselves to suffering without retaliation in order that they might 
vindicate the dignity and honour of the nation. (ICS, p. 209) 
 
I would far rather that India perished than that she won freedom at the 
sacrifice of truth. (YI, 1-10-1931, p. 281) 
 
It would not satisfy my soul to gain freedom for India and not to help in the 
peace of the world. I have the conviction in me that, when England ceases to The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 302  prey upon India, she will also cease to prey upon other nations. At any rate, 
India will have no part in the blood-guilt. (YI, 3-12-1931, p. 380) 
 
 
Mea
ning Of India's Independence 
….India’s freedom must revolutionize the world’s outlo ok upon Peace and War. 
Her impotence affects the whole of mankind. (YI, 17-9-1925, p. 322) 
 
My ambition is much higher than independence. Through the deliverance of 
India I seek to deliver the so-called weaker races of the earth from the crushing 
heels o Western exploitation…. (YI, 12-1-1928, p. 13) 
 
National independence is not a fiction. It is as necessary as individual 
independence. But neither, if it is based on non-violence, may ever be a 
menace to the equal independence of the nation or the individual as the case 
may be. As with individual and national independence, so with the 
international. The legal maxim is equally moral. Sic utere tuo ut alienum non 
laedas*. It has been well said that the universe is compressed in the atom. 
There is not one law for the atom and another for the universe.  
(YI, 30-1-1930, p. 37) 
 
 
International Co-operation 
I want co-operation between nations for the salvaging  of civilization, but co-
operation presupposes free nations worthy of co-operation. (YI, 12-11-1931, p. 
353) 
 
 
Freedom Of Exploited Races  
When I am gone India will be free and, not only India,  but the whole world will 
be free. I do not believe that the Americans or English are free. They will not 
be free so long as they have the power to hold the coloured nations in 
subjection. I know my purpose and I know what freedom is. English teachers 
taught me its meaning, and I must interpret that freedom according to what I 
see and have experienced.  
(BC, 9-8-1942) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 303  Freedom of India will demonstrate to all the exploited races of the earth that 
their freedom is very near and that in no case will they, henceforth, be 
exploited. (BC, 18-4-1942) 
 
 * ‘So use your own property as not to injure the rights of another’. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 304   
65. WHAT SWARAJ MEANS TO ME 
 
Swaraj for me means freedom for the meanest of our cou ntrymen... I am not 
interested n freeing India merely from the English yoke. I am bent upon freeing 
India from any yoke whatsoever. I have no desire to exchange ‘king log for king 
stork. (YI, 12-6-1924, p. 195) 
 
By Swaraj I mean the government of India by the consent of the people as 
ascertained by the largest number of the adult population, male or female, 
native-born or domiciled, who have contributed by manual labour to the service 
of the State and who have taken the trouble of having their names registered as 
voters. 
Real Swaraj will come, not by the acquisition of authority by a few, but by the 
acquisition of the capacity by all to resist authority when it is abused. In other 
words, Swaraj is to be attained by educating the masses to a sense of their 
capacity to regulate and control authority. (YI, 29-1-1925, p. 41) 
 
Self-government means continuous effort to be independent of government 
control, whether it is foreign government or whether it is national. (YI, 6-8-
1925, p. 276) 
 
The word Swaraj is a sacred word, a Vedic word, meaning self-rule and self-
restraint, and not freedom from all restraint which ‘independence’ often 
means. (YI, 19-3-1931, p. 38) 
 
 
Swaraj For The Poor   
Th
e Swaraj of my-our-dream recognizes no race or relig ious distinctions. Not is 
it to be the monopoly of the lettered persons or yet of moneyed men. Swaraj is 
to be for all, including the former, but emphatically including the maimed, the 
blind, the starving, toiling millions. (YI, 1-5-1930, p. 149) 
 
The Swaraj of my dream is the poor man’s Swaraj. The necessaries of life 
should be enjoyed by you in common with those enjoyed by the princes and the 
moneyed men. But that does not mean that they should have palaces like 
theirs. They are not necessary for happiness. You or I would be lost in them. 
But you ought to get all the ordinary amenities of life that a rich man enjoys. I The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 305  have not the slightest doubt that Swaraj is not Poorna Swaraj until these 
amenities are guaranteed to you under it. (YI, 26-3-1931, p. 46) 
 
…What we mean and want through Poorna Swaraj …is an awakening among the 
masses, a knowledge among them of their true interest and ability to serve that 
interest against the whole world, …harmony, freedom from aggression from 
within or without, and a progressive improvement in the economic condition of 
the masses… (YI, 18-6-1931, p. 147) 
 
Real Swaraj must be felt by all-man, woman and child. To labour for that 
consummation is true revolution,. India has become a pattern for all exploited 
races of the earth, because India’s has been an open, unarmed effort which 
demands sacrifice from all without inflicting injury on the usurper. The millions 
in India would not have been awakened but for the open, unarmed struggle. 
Every deviation from the straight path has meant a temporary arrest of the 
evolutionary revolution. (H, 3-3-1946, p. 31) 
 
 
No Majority Rule 
It has been said that Indian Swaraj will be the rule o f the majority community, 
i.e., the Hindus. There could not be a greater mistakes than that. If it were to 
be true, I for one would refuse to call it Swaraj and would fight it with all the 
strength at my command, for to me Hind Swaraj is the rule of all people, is the 
rule of justice. Whether, under rule, the ministers were Hindus or Musalmans or 
Sikhs and whether legislatures were exclusively filled by the Hindus or 
Musalmans or any other community, they would have to do even-handed 
justice. (YI, 16-4-1931, p. 78) 
 
Today our minds are clouded by delusion. In our ignorance, we quarrel with one 
another and indulge in rowdyism against our own brethren. For such as these 
there is neither salvation not Swaraj. Self-discipline or rule over self is the first 
condition of self-rule or Swaraj. (H, 28-4-1946, p. 111) 
 
 
Freedom Of Expression 
In a vast country like this, there must be room for al l schools of honest thought. 
And the least, therefore, that we owe to ourselves, as to others, is to try to 
understand the opponent’s view-point and, if we cannot accept it, respect is as 
fully as we expect him to respect ours. It is one of the indispensable tests of a 
healthy public life and, therefore, fitness for Swaraj. (YI, 17-4-1924, p. 170) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 306   
Freedom of speech and pen is the foundation of Swaraj. If the foundation stone 
is in danger, you have to exert the whole of your might in order to defend that 
single stone. (H, 29-9-1940, p. 306) 
 
 
Achievement Of Swaraj 
I have had the hardhood to say that Swaraj could not be  granted even by God. 
We would have to earn it ourselves. Swaraj from its very nature is not in the 
giving of anybody. (YI, 25-5-1921, p. 164) 
 
Swaraj is the abandonment of the fear of death. A nation which allows itself to 
be influenced by the fear of death cannot attain Swaraj, and cannot retain it if 
some-how attained. (YI, 13-10-1921, p. 326) 
 
Swaraj can never be a free gift by one nation to another. It is a treasure to be 
purchased with a nation’s best blood. It will cease to be a gift when we have 
paid dearly for it. … Swaraj will be a fruit of incessant labour, suffering beyond 
measure. (YI, 5-1-1922, p. 4) 
 
Surely Swaraj will not drop from the clouds. It will be the fruit of patience, 
perseverance, ceaseless toil, courage and intelligent appreciation of the 
environment. (YI, 27-8-1925, p. 297) 
 
For me the only training in Swaraj we need is the ability to defend ourselves 
against the whole world and to live our natural life in perfect freedom, even 
though it may be full of defects. Good government is no substitute for self-
government. (YI, 22-9-1920, p. 1) 
 
The pilgrimage to Swaraj is a painful climb. It requires attention to details. It 
means vast organizing ability, it means penetration into the villages solely for 
the service of the villagers. In other words, it means national education, i.e., 
education of the masse. It means an awakening of national consciousness 
among the masses. It will not spring like the magician’s mango. It will grow 
almost unperceived like the banyan tree. A bloody revolution will never 
perform the trick. Haste here is most certainly waste. (YI, 21-5-1925, p. 178) 
 
One sometimes hears it said: ‘Let us get the government of India in our own 
hands and everything will be all right.. There could be no greater superstition The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 307  than this. No nation has thus gained its independence. The splendor of the 
spring is reflected in every tree, the whole earth is then filled with the 
freshness of youth. Similarly, when the Swaraj spirit has really permeated 
society, a stranger suddenly come upon us will observe energy in every walk of 
life, he will find national servants engaged, each according to his own abilities, 
in a variety of public activities. (SW, p. 146) 
 
 
Basis In Self-Sacrifice 
Swaraj can be maintained only where there is a majori t y of loyal and patriotic 
people to whom the good of the nation is paramount above all other 
considerations what-ever including their personal profit.  
(YI, 28-7-1921, p.238) 
 
My Swaraj will be… not a result of murder of others but a voluntary act of 
continuous self-sacrifice. My Swaraj will not be bloody usurpation of rights, but 
the acquisition of power will be a beautiful land natural fruit of duty well and 
truly performed. It will…provide amplest excitement of the Chaitanya type, not 
of the Nero type…. It can come often does come, when the horizon is the 
blackest. But I know that it will be preceded by the rise of a class of young men 
and women who will find full excitement in work, work and nothing but work 
for the nation. (YI, 27-8-1925, p. 297) 
 
Without a large, very large, army of self-sacrificing and determined workers, 
real progress of the masses I hold to be an impossibility. And without that 
progress, there is no such thing as Swaraj. Progress towards Swaraj will be in 
exact proportion to the increase in the number of workers who will dare to 
sacrifice their all for the cause of the poor. (YI, 24-6-1926, p. 226) 
 
Without a large, very large, army of self-sacrificing and determined workers, 
real progress of the masses I hold to be an impossibility. And without that 
progress, there is no such thing as Swaraj. Progress towards Swaraj will be in 
exact proportion to the increase in the number of workers who will dare to 
sacrifice their all for the cause of the poor. (YI, 24-6-1926, p. 226) 
 
 
Through Truth And Nonviolence 
If we wish to achieve Swaraj through truth and non-vi o lence, gradual but 
steady building-up from the bottom upwards by constructive effort is the only 
way. This rules out the deliberate creation of an anarchical state for the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 308  overthrow of the established order in the hope of throwing up from within a 
dictator who would rule with a rod of iron and produce order out disorder. (H, 
18-1-1942, p. 4) 
 
We have all-rulers and ruled-been living so long in a stifling, unnatural 
atmosphere that we might well feel, in the beginning, that we have lost the 
lungs for breathing the invigorating ozone of freedom. If the reality comes in an 
orderly, that is, a non-violent manner, because the parties feel that it is right, 
it will be a revealing lesson for the world. (H, 7-4-1946, p. 70) 
 
 
Genius Of Our Civilization 
My Swaraj is to keep intact the genius of our civiliza tion. I want to write many 
new thing but they must be all written on the Indian slate. I would gladly 
borrow from the West when I can return the amount with decent interest. (YI, 
26-6-1924, p. 210) 
 
If Swaraj was not meant to civilize us, and to purify and stabilize our 
civilization, it would be nothing worth. The very essence of our civilization is 
that we give a paramount place to morality in all our affairs, public or private. 
(YI, 23-1-1930, p. 26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 309   
66. I AM NOT ANTI-BRITISH 
 
MY FAITH in human nature is irrepressible and, even un der the circumstances of 
a most adverse character I have found Englishmen amenable to reason and 
persuasion, and as they always wish to appear to be just even when they are in 
reality unjust, it is easier to shame them then others into doing the right thing.  
(YI, 7-1-1920, p. 2) 
 
My personal religion… enables me to serve my countrymen without hurting 
Englishmen or, for that matter, anybody else. What I am not prepared to do to 
my blood-brother I would not do to an Englishmen. I would not injure him to 
gain a kingdom. But I would withdraw co-operation from him if it became 
necessary, as I had withdrawn from my own brother (now deceased) when it 
became necessary. I serve the Empire by refusing to par-take in its wrong.  
(YI, 5-5-1920, p. 4) 
 
I am not anti-English; I am not anti-British; I am not anti-any Government; but I 
am anti-untruth, anti-humbug, and anti-injustice. So long as the Government 
spells injustice, it may regard me as its enemy, implacable enemy. (SW, p. 523) 
 
No one will accuse me of any anti-English tendency. Indeed, I pride myself on 
my discrimination. I have thankfully copied many things from them. 
Punctuality, reticence, public hygiene, independent thinking and exercise of 
judgment and several other things I owe to my association with them. (YI, 6-3-
1930, p. 80) 
 
My nationalism is not so narrow that I should not feel for ….[Englishmen’s] 
distress or gloat over it. I do not want my country’s happiness at the sacrifice 
of other country’s happiness. (YI, 15-10-1931) 
 
There is no bitterness in me. I claim fellowship with the lowest of animals. Why 
not, then, with Englishmen with whom we have been bound, for good or ill, for 
over a century and amongst whom I claim some of my dearest friends? You 
[Englishmen] will find me an easy pro-position, but if you will repel my 
advances, I shall go away, not in bitterness, but with a sense that I was not 
pure enough to find a lodgment in your hearts. (ibid, p. 310) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 310  My love of the British is equal to that of my own people. I claim no merit for it, 
for I have equal love for all mankind without exception. It demands no 
reciprocity. I own no enemy on earth. That is my creed. (BC, 9-8-1942) 
 
…No Indian has co-operated with the British Government more than I have for 
an unbroken period of twenty-nine years of public life, in the face of 
circumstances that might well have turned any other man into a rebel…… 
I put my life in peril four times for the sake of the Empire; at the time to the 
Boer War, when I was in charge of the Ambulance corps whose work was 
mentioned in general Buller’s dispatches; at the time of the Zulu Revolt in 
Natal, when I was in charge of a similar corps; at the time of the 
commencement of the late war, when I raised an Ambulance corps and, as a 
result of the strenuous training had a severe attack of pleurisy; and lastly, in 
fulfillment of my promise to Lord Chelmsford at the War Conference in Delhi, I 
threw myself in such an active recruiting campaign in Kaira District, involving 
long and trying marches, that I had an attack of dysentery which proved almost 
fatal. I did all this in the full belief that acts such as mine must gain for my 
country an equal status in the Empire. (YI, 27-10-1920, p. 1) 
 
 
Autocratic Rule  
Originality there could be none in a close monopoly or ganization like the 
Government of India*. it is the largest autocracy the world has known. 
Democracy has been reserved only for great Britain. And when it rules and 
exploits millions belonging to other races, it becomes an unmitigated evil. It 
corrupts the whole island with the idea that such exploitation is the best thing 
for an enlightened democracy to do. It would be well to remember this 
fundamental fact, if I have correctly estimated it. If we recognize this, while 
dealing with the immediate problem, we shall be patient with the present 
actors. There is no call here for patience with the evil. (H, 17-2-1946, p. 12) 
 
Any friend, who is a real friend, and who comes in a spirit of service, not as a 
superior, is bound to be welcome. India, when she has come into her own, will 
need all such assistance. The distrust of Englishmen… is there. It won’t 
disappear even by transporting Indian students to England. You have got to 
understand it and live it down. It has its roots in history. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 60) 
 
… So far Indians have known Englishmen only as members of the ruling race-
supercilious, when they are not patronizing. The man in the street makes no 
distinction between such an Englishmen and a good, humble European, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 311  between the Empire-builder Englishman of the old type that he has known and 
the new type that is now coming into being, burning to make reparation for 
what his fore-fathers did. (ibid, p.61) 
 
 
A New Chapter 
I can’t forget that the story of Britain’s connection with India is a tragedy of 
unfulfilled promises and disappointed hopes. We must deep an open mind. A 
seeker of truth will never begin by discounting his opponent’s statement as 
unworthy of trust. So I am hopeful, and indeed, no responsible Indian feels 
otherwise. This time I believe that the British mean business. But the offer [of 
independence] has come suddenly….. 
…The tide of bitterness had risen high and that is not good or the soul…. This is 
milestone not only in India’s history and Britain’s but in the history of the 
whole world…. (H, 14-4-1946, p. 90) 
 
 
Commonwealth Of Nations 
India’s greatest glory will consist not in regarding E nglishmen as her implacable 
enemies fit only to be turned out of India at the first available opportunity, but 
in turning them into friends and partners in a new commonwealth of nations in 
the place of an Empire based upon exploitation of the weaker or undeveloped 
nations and races of the earth and, therefore, finally [based] upon force. (YI, 5-
1-1922, p. 4) 
 
Andrews made me understand the significance of the King-Emperor’s role. The 
British King is King also in the Dominions, but he is the Emperor of India. India 
alone makes the Empire. The Dominions are peopled by your [the Britisher’s] 
cousins. But we Indians, with our different culture and traditions, can never 
belong to the British family. We may belong to a world-wide family of nations, 
but first we must cease to be underdogs. So, I set myself to win 
independence……. 
Englishmen must learn to be the Brahmins, not Banias. The bania, I should 
explain, is the trader, or as Napoleon put it, the shopkeeper. The Brahmin is 
the man who is intelligent enough to rank the moral above the material values 
of life…. Englishmen have still to evolve the British Brahminical spirit …. 
If India feels the glow of independence, she probably would enter into such a 
treaty [of defensive alliance with Britain] of her own free will. The spontaneous 
friendship between India and Britain would then be extended to other Powers 
and, among them, they would hold the balance, since they alone would possess The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 312  moral force. To see that vision realized, I want to live for 125 years. (H, 14-4-
1946, p. 91) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 313   
67. RAMRAJYA 
 
BY 
RAMARAJYA I do not mean Hindu Raj. I mean by Ramarajya Divine Raj, the 
Kingdom of God. For me Rama and Rahim are one and the same deity. I 
acknowledge no other God but the one God of truth and righteousness. 
Whether Rama of my imagination ever lived or not on this earth, the ancient 
ideal of Ramarajya is undoubtedly one of true democracy in which the meanest 
citizen could be sure of swift justice without an elaborate and costly 
procedure. Even the dog is described by the poet to have received justice 
under Ramarajya. (YI, 19-9-1929, p. 305) 
 
Ramarajya of my dream ensures equal rights alike of prince and pauper. (ABP, 
2-8-1934)  
 
 
Definition Of Independence  
By political independence I do not mean an imitation t o the British House of 
commons, or the soviet rule of Russia or the Fascist rule of Italy or the Nazi rule 
of Germany. They have systems suited to their genius. We must have ours 
suited to ours. What that can be is more than I can tell. I have described it as 
Ramarajya i.e., sovereignty of the people based on pure moral authority. (H, 2-
1-1937, p. 374) 
 
Friends have repeatedly challenged me to define independence. At the risk of 
repetition, I must say that independence of my dream means Ramarajya i.e., 
the Kingdom of God on earth. I do not know it will be like in Heaven. I have no 
desire to know the distant scene. If the present is attractive enough, the future 
cannot be very unlike. (H, 5-5-1946, p. 116)  
 
 
No Coercion 
My conception of Ramarajya excludes the replacement of  the British army by a 
national army of occupation. A country that is governed by even its national 
army can never be morally free and, therefore, its so-called weakest member 
can never rise to his fullest moral height. (ibid) 
 
There can be no Ramarajya in the present state of iniquitous inequalities in 
which a few roll in riches and the masses do not get even enough to eat … my The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 314  opposition to the Socialists and other consists in attacking violence as a means 
of effecting any lasting reform. (H, 1-6-1947, p. 172) 
 
I compare nirvana to Ramarajya or the Kingdom of Heaven on earth…. The 
withdrawal of British power does not mean Ramarajya. How can it happen 
when we have all along been nursing violence in our hearts under the garb of 
non-violence?  (H, 3-8-1947, p. 262) 
 
 
Respect For Others 
My Hinduism teaches me to respect all religions. In t h is lies the secret of 
Ramarajya.  
(H, 19-10-1947, p. 378) 
 
If you want to see God in the form of Ramarajya, the first requisite is self-
introspection. You have to magnify your own faults a thousand fold and shut 
your eyes to the faults of your neighbours. That is the only way to real 
progress. (H, 26-10-1947, p. 387) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 315   
68. KASHMIR 
 
Pro
blem And Solution 
WHAT IS the situation? It is stated that a rebel army composed of Afridis and 
the like, ably officered, was advancing towards Srinagar, burning and looting 
villages along the route, destroying even the electric power house, thus leaving 
Srinagar in darkness. It is difficult to believe that this entry could take place 
without some kind of encouragement from the Pakistan Government. I have not 
enough data to come to a judgment as to the merits of the case. Nor is it 
necessary for my purpose. All I know is that it was right for the Union 
Government to rush troops, even a handful, to Srinagar. That must save the 
situation to the extent of giving confidence to the Kashmiries….. 
The result is in the hands of God. Men can but do or die. I shall not shed a tear 
if the little Union force is wiped out, like the Spartans, bravely defending 
Kashmir nor shall I mind….. Muslim, Hindus and Sikh comrades, men and 
women, dying at their post in defence of Kashmir, that will be a glorious 
example to the rest of India. Such heroic defence will infect the whole of India 
and we will forget that the Hindus, the Muslim and the Sikhs were ever 
enemies. (H, 9-11-1947, p. 406) 
 
I am amazed to see that the Government of Pakistan disputes the veracity of 
the Union’s representation to the UNO, and the charge that Pakistan has a hand 
in the invasion of Kashmir by the raiders. Mere denials cut no ice. It was 
incumbent upon the Indian union to go to the rescue of Kashmir when the latter 
sought its help in expelling the raiders, and it was the duty of Pakistan to co-
operate with the Union. But while Pakistan professed its willingness to operate, 
it took no concrete steps in that direction….. 
A war will bring both the Dominions under the sway of a third power and 
nothing can be worse. I plead for amity and goodwill….. The understanding 
should however be genuine. To harbour internal hatred may be even worse than 
war. (H, 12-1-1948, p.509) 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 316   
69. FOREIGN SETTLEMENTS IN INDIA 
 
(a)
 GOA 
Time For Change 
THE LITTLE Portuguese Settlement which merely exists o n the sufferance of the 
British Government can ill afford to ape its bad manners. In free India, Goa 
cannot be allowed to exist as a separate entity in opposition to the laws of the 
free State. Without a shot being fired, the people of Goa will be able to claim 
and receive the rights of citizenship of the free State. The present Portuguese 
Government will no longer be able to rely upon the protection of British arms 
to isolate and keep under subjection the inhabitants of Goa against their will. I 
would venture to advise the Portuguese Government of Goa to recognize the 
signs of the times and come to honourable terms with the inhabitants, rather 
than function on any treaty that might exist between them and the British 
Government. (H, 30-6-1946, p. 208) 
 
 
Rule Of Terror 
… I have visited Mozambique, Delagoa and Inhambane. I di d not notice there 
any government for philanthropic purposes. Indeed, I was astonished to see the 
distinction that the Government made between Indians and the Portuguese and 
between the Africans and themselves. Nor does the history of the Portuguese 
settlement in India prove the claim [of benevolent rule]. Indeed, what I see and 
know of the conditions of things in Goa is hardly edifying. That the Indians in 
Goa have been speechless is proof, not of the innocence or the philanthropic 
nature of the Portuguese Government, but of the rule of terror. (H, 11-8-1946, 
p. 260) 
 
… It is ridiculous ….To write of Portugal as the Motherland of the Indians of 
Goa. Their mother country is as much India as mine. Goa is outside British 
India, but it is within geographical India as a whole. And there is very little, if 
anything, in common between the Portuguese and the Indians in Goa.  
(H, 8-9-1946, p. 305) 
 
 
Civil Liberty 
To the inhabitants of Goa I will say that they should s hed fear of the Portuguese 
Government, as the people of other parts of India have shed fear of the mighty The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 317  British Government, and assert their fundamental right of civil liberty and all it 
means. (H, 30-6-1946, p. 208) 
 
It is ….most essential for the success of the movement that it should be 
conducted by the Gomantakas on the clearest possible issue, i.e., civil liberty. 
The larger question of Swaraj should await the attainment by the whole of 
India unless, of course, the Portuguese Government wisely come to terms with 
the inhabitants of the Settlement through friendly negotiations. It cannot be 
attained by any direct action of the citizens, whether violent or non-violent. In 
non-violent action success is assured where every inhabitant is a hero ready to 
lay down his or her life. It is less to be thought of in Goa than in the more 
numerous and better seasoned and awakened British India. Therefore, the 
clearest possible issue of civil liberty must be kept steadily in view. 
The second condition of success is that the fight must be through non-violent 
and, therefore, also entirely open means. 
Thirdly, there should be no parties struggling for power and position. Where the 
goal is common, different parties have no meaning. (H, 28-7-1946, p. 235) 
 
Every account received by me personally and seen in the papers here in this 
part of India confirms the contrary view [that there is no civil liberty in Goa]. I 
suppose, the report of the sentence by ….. Court Martial of eight years on Dr. 
Braganza and his contemplated exile to a far off Portuguese Settlement is by 
itself a striking corroboration of the fact that civil liberty is a rare article in 
Goa. Why should a law-abiding citizen like Dr. Braganza be considered so 
dangerous as to be singled out for exile?…… 
Inhabitants of Goa can afford to wait for independence, until much greater 
India has regained it. But no person or group can thus remain without civil 
liberty without losing self-respect. (H, 11-8-1946, p. 260) 
 
….. The game of hunting lovers of civil liberty is going on merrily in Goa. A 
small power, because of its smallness, often acts with impunity where a great 
power cannot….. What of the Portuguese power which boasts of Philanthropy 
and alliance with the Roman Catholic Church? That power will have to justify 
itself before man and God. The blood of the innocents… will cry out from their 
tombs or their ashes. It is more potent than the voice of the living, however 
powerful and eloquent. (H, 1-9-1946, p. 286) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 318  (b) FRENCH INDIA 
 
….The hands of imperialism are always dyed red. The so oner imperialistic 
powers shed their imperialism like Ashoka the good, the better it will be for the 
groaning world. One may be pardoned for giving credit to France, where credit 
is deserved as it is in the case of French India…. (H, 8-9-1946, p. 305) 
 
I undoubtedly hold the view that the Indians in these possessions are bound to 
merge in independent India in good time. Only, the Indians in these territories 
should not take the law in their own hands. They have constitutional means 
open to them and then, there is our Chief Minister [Jawaharlal Nehru] who has 
vindicated the freedom of Indonesia. Surely, he is not gong to neglect his own 
kith and kin in the two possessions. (H, 24-8-1947, p. 295) 
 
…. After all the French are a great people, lovers of liberty. They must not be 
subjected to any stain by India which has come in possession of liberty. (H, 31-
8-1947, p. 298) 
 
…… My opinion is quite emphatic. It is not possible that the inhabitants of these 
small Foreign Settlement would be forced to remain under servility in the face 
of the million of their countrymen who have become free from British rule. I 
could [never] countenance an inferior status in the little Foreign Settlement in 
India. I hope… that the great French nation would never identify itself with the 
suppression of people whether black or brown in India or elsewhere. (H, 16-11-
1947, p. 416) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 319   
70. INDIA AND PAKISTAN 
 
Par
tition Un-Islamic 
I AM firmly convinced that the Pakistan demand as put forth by the Muslim 
League is un-Islamic and I have not hesitated to call it sinful. Islam stands for 
the unity and brotherhood of mankind, not for disrupting the oneness of the 
human family. Therefore, those who want to divide India into possibly warring 
groups are enemies alike of India and Islam. (H, 6-10-1946, p. 339) 
 
 
Two-Nations’ Theory Untrue 
There may be arguable grounds for maintaining that Mus lims in India are a 
separate nation. But I have never heard it said that there are as many nations 
as there are religions on earth. (H, 11-11-1939, p. 336) 
 
The ‘two-nations’ theory is an untruth. The vast majority of Muslims of India 
are converts to Islam or descendants of converts. They did not become a 
separate nation as soon as they became converts. (H, 6-4-1940, p. 76) 
 
I have always held that there is no distinction between the two [Hindus and 
Muslims]. Even though their observances differ, these do not separate them. 
They undoubtedly profess different religious, but they, like others, come from 
the same root. (H, 9-11-1947, p. 400) 
 
 
No Forcible Resistance To Partition 
As a man of non-violence, I cannot forcibly resist the  proposed partition if the 
Muslims of India really insist upon it. But is can never be a willing party to the 
vivisection. (H, 13-4-1940, p. 92) 
 
My life is made up of compromises, but they have been compromises that have 
brought me nearer the goal …. If God so desires it, I may have to become a 
helpless witness to the undoing of my dream. (H, 4-5-1940, p. 115) 
 
…. If the eight cores of Muslim desire it, no power on earth can prevent it, 
notwithstanding opposition violent or non-violent. (ibid, p. 117) 
 
To undo Pakistan by force will be to undo Swaraj. (H, 5-10-1947, p. 355) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 320   
It is possible to turn Pakistan, which I have declared an evil, into unadulterated 
good, if all the forebodings are dispelled and enmities are turned into 
friendship and mutual distrust gives place to trust. (H, 13-7-1947, p. 236) 
 
 
Protection Of Minorities  
I cannot understand a Pakistan where no non-Muslims ca n live in peace and 
security, nor a Hindustan where the Muslims are unsafe. (H, 27-4-1947, p. 123) 
 
I am working to this end. I am working in such a manner that the majority 
community in each State should go forward and create the necessary conditions 
of freedom. (H, 14-9-1947, p. 323) 
 
My non-violence bids me dedicate myself to the service of the minorities. It 
would be like a new birth and give me additional strength if the Hindus and the 
Mussalmans of both these places began to live at peace with each other and 
shed their animosity. (H, 11-5-1947, p. 146) 
 
It is the bounden duty of the majority in Pakistan, as of the majority in the 
Union, to protect the small minority whose honour and life and property are in 
their hands…. 
To drive every Muslim from India and to drive every Hindu and Sikhs from 
Pakistan will mean war and eternal ruin for the country. (H, 28-9-1947, p. 352) 
 
 
Settlement Of Difference: No War 
India and Pakistan should settle their differences by mutual consultations and, 
failing that, fall back upon arbitration. (H, 5-10-1947, p. 363) 
 
If Pakistan persists in wrong doing, there is bound to be war between India and 
Pakistan. (H, 28-9-1947, p. 349) 
 
If India and Pakistan are to be perpetual enemies and go to war against each 
other, it will ruin both the Dominions and their hard-won freedom will be soon 
lost. I do not wish to live to see that day. (ibid, p. 339) 
 
It is true that there should be no war between the two Dominions. They have to 
live as friends or die as such. The two will have to work in close co-operation. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 321  In spite of being independent of each other, they will have many things in 
common. If they are enemies, they can have nothing in common. If there is 
genuine friendship, the people of both the States can be loyal to both. They are 
both members of the same commonwealth of nations. How can they become 
enemies of each other? (H, 5-10-1947, p. 356) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 322   
71. INDIA'S MISSION 
 
Res
ort To Soul Force 
I feel that India’s mission is different from that of the others. India if fitted of 
the religious supremacy of the world. There is no parallel in the world for the 
process of purification that this country has voluntarily undergone. India is less 
in need of steel weapons, it has fought with divine weapons; it can still do so. 
Other nations have been votaries of brute force. The terrible war going on in 
Europe furnishes a forcible illustration of the truth. India can win all by soul 
force. 
History supplies numerous instances to prove that brute force is as nothing 
before soul force. Poets have sung about it and seers have described their 
experiences. (SW, p. 405) 
 
That Indians are not a nation of cowards is proved by the personal bravery and 
daring of her martial races, whether Hindus, Mussalman, Sikh or Gurkha. My 
point is that the spirit of fighting is foreign to India’s soil and that probably she 
has a higher part to play in the evolution of the world. Time alone can show 
what is to be her destiny. (YI, 22-6-1921, p. 199) 
 
I want to see God face to face. God, I know, is Truth. For me the only certain 
means of knowing God is non-violence—AHIMSA-love. I live for India’s freedom 
and would die for it, because it is part of Truth. Only a free India can worship 
the true God. 
I work for India’s freedom because my SWADESHI teaches me that, being in it 
and having inherited her culture, I am fittest to serve her and she has a prior 
claim to my service. But my patriotism is not exclusive, it is calculated not only 
not to hurt any other nation, but to benefit all in the true sense of the word. 
India’s freedom as conceived by me can never be menace to the world. (YI, 3-
4-1924, p. 109) 
 
India’s destiny lies not along the bloody way of the West, of which she shows 
signs of tiredness, but along the bloodless way of peace that comes from a 
simple and godly life. India is in danger of losing her soul. She cannot lose it 
and live. She must not therefore lazily and helplessly say, ‘I cannot escape the 
onrush from the West’. She must be strong enough to resist it for her own sake 
and that of the world. (YI, 7-10-1926, p. 348) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 323  India has an unbroken tradition of non-violence from times immemorial. But at 
no time in her ancient history, as far as I know, has it had complete non-
violence in action pervading the whole land. Nevertheless, it is my unshakable 
belief that her destiny is to deliver the message of non-violence to mankind. It 
may take ages to come to fruition. But so far as I judge, no other country will 
precede her in the fulfillment of that mission. (H, 12-10-1935, p. 276) 
 
On India rests the burden of pointing the way to all the exploited races of the 
earth. She won’t be able to bear that burden today if non-violence does not 
permeate her more than [it does] today. I have been trying to fit ourselves for 
that mission by giving a wider bend to our struggle. India will become a torch-
bearer to the oppressed and exploited races only if she can vindicate the 
principle of non-violence in her own case, not jettison it as soon as 
independence of foreign control is achieved. (H, 19-5-1946, p. 134) 
 
 
Land Of Duty  
...India is essentially KARMBHUMI (land of duty) in co ntradiction to 
BHOGABHUMI (land of enjoyment). (YI, 5-2-1925, p. 45) 
 
…. Everything in India attracts me. It has everything that a human being with 
the highest possible aspirations can want. (YI, 21-2-1929, p. 60) 
 
 
India And The World 
An India prostrate at the feel of Europe can give no h ope to humanity. An India 
awakened and free has a message of peace and goodwill to groaning world. (YI, 
1-6-1921, p. 173) 
 
India must learn to live before she can aspire to die for humanity. (YI, 13-10-
1921, p. 326) 
 
...My ambition is nothing less than to see international affairs placed on a 
moral basis through India’s efforts. (YI, 26-12-1924, p. 421) 
 
I want India’s rise so that the whole world may benefit, I do not want India to 
rise on the ruin of other nations. If, therefore, India was strong and able, India 
would send out to the world her treasures of art and health-giving spices, but The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 324  will refuse to send out opium or intoxicating liquors although the traffic may 
bring much material benefit to India. (YI, 12-3-1925, p. 88) 
 
I would like to see India free and strong so that she may offer herself as a 
willing and pure sacrifice for the betterment of the world. The individual, being 
pure, sacrifices himself for the family, the latter for the village, the village for 
the district, the district for the province, the province for the nation, the 
nation for all. (YI, 17-9-1925, p. 321) 
 
I am humble enough to admit that there is much that we can profitably 
assimilate from the West. Wisdom is no monopoly of one race. My resistance to 
Western civilization is really a resistance to its indiscriminate and thoughtless 
imitation based on the assumption that Asiatics are fit only to copy everything 
that comes from the West. 
I do believe that, if India has patience enough to go through the fire of 
suffering and to resist any unlawful encroachment upon her own civilization 
which, imperfect though it undoubtedly is, has hitherto stood the ravages of 
time, she can make lasting contribution to the peace and solid progress of the 
world. (YI, 11-8-1927, p. 253) 
 
India has a far nobler mission viz., to establish friendship and peace in the 
world. Peace cannot be established and peace in the world. Peace is being 
broken, as we all see, even while conferences are being held. (H, 17-11-1946, 
p. 404) 
 
 
Lesson Of Tolerance 
Decency and toleration to be of value must be capable of standing the severest 
strain. If they cannot, it will be a sad day for India ….. (H, 5-10-1947, p. 354) 
 
Is the [Indian] Union to be a theocratic State and are the tenets of Hinduism to 
be imposed on non-Hindus? I hope and promise, a land to which all Asiatic and 
African races look, indeed, the whole world. 
The world expects not littleness and fanaticism from India… It expects 
greatness and goodness from which the whole world can derive a lesson and 
light in its prevailing darkness. (H, 16-11-1947, p. 411) 
 
A truly independent Free India is bound to run to the help of its neighbours in 
distress, for instance, Afghanistan, Ceylon and Burma. The rule also applies to 
the neighbours of these three and thus by implication they become India’s The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 325  neighbours too. And thus, if individual sacrifice is a living sacrifice, it embraces 
the whole of humanity. (H, 23-3-1947, p. 78) 
 
 
India And Asia 
If India fails, Asia dies. It has been aptly called th e nursery of many blended 
cultures and civilizations. Let India be and remain the hope of all the exploited 
race of the world. (H, 5-10-1947, p. 354) 
 
All eyes rest on India, which has become the hope of Asia and Africa, nay, of 
the whole world. If India is to realize the hope, it has to stop the fratricide and 
all Indians have to live like friend and brothers. Clean hearts are the first 
condition to that happy state. (H, 26-10-1947, p. 388) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 326   
72. ESSENCE OF DEMOCRACY 
 
The
 spirit of democracy is not a mechanical thing to be adjusted by abolition of 
forms. It requires change of the heart….. [It] requires the inculcation of the 
spirit of brotherhood.... (YI, 8-12-1920, p. 3) 
 
Democracy must in essence … mean the art and science of mobilizing the entire 
physical, economic and spiritual resources of all the various sections of the 
people in the service of the common good of all. (H, 27-5-1939, p. 143) 
 
 
Discipline 
The
 highest form of freedom carries with it the greatest measure of discipline 
and humility. Freedom that comes from discipline and humility cannot be 
denied; unbridled license is a sign of vulgarity injurious alike to self and one’s 
neighbours. (YI, 3-6-1926, p. 203) 
 
Democracy disciplined and enlightened is the finest thing in the world. A 
democracy prejudiced, ignorant, superstitious, will land itself in chaos and may 
be self-destroyed. (YI, 30-7-1931, p. 199) 
 
 
Responsibility Of Individual 
In true democracy every man and woman is taught to th i nk for himself or 
herself. How this real revolution can be brought about I do not know except 
that every reform, like charity must begin at home. (H, 14-7-1946, p. 220) 
 
In democracy, the individual will is government and limited by the social will 
which is the State, which is government by and for democracy. If every 
individual takes the law into his own hands, there is no State. it becomes 
anarchy, i.e., absence of social law or State, that way lies destruction of 
liberty. Therefore, you should subdue your anger and let the State secure 
justice. (H, 28-9-1947, p. 350) 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 327  The Test 
The truest test of democracy is in the ability of anyo ne to act as he likes, so 
long as he does not injure the life or property of anyone else. It is impossible to 
control public morals by hooliganism. (YI, 1-8-1920, p. 4) 
 
A born democrat is a born disciplinarian. Democracy comes naturally to him 
who is habituated normally to yield willing obedience to all laws, human or 
divine…. Let those who are ambitious to serve democracy qualify themselves by 
satisfying first this acid test of democracy. More over, a democrat must be 
utterly selfless. He must think and dream not in terms of self or party but only 
of democracy. Only then does he acquire the right of civil disobedience. 
I do not want anybody to give up his convictions or to suppress himself. I do not 
believe that a healthy and honest difference of opinion will injure our cause. 
But opportunism, camouflage or patched-up compromises certainly will. If you 
must dissent, you should take care that your opinion voices your innermost 
convictions and are not intended merely as a convenient party cry. (H, 27-5-
1939, p. 136) 
 
Democracy will break under the strain of apron strings. It can exist only on 
trust. (H, 16-11-1947, p. 409) 
 
Capital exploits the labour of a few to multiply itself. The sum total of the 
labour of the cores, wisely realized, automatically increases the wealth of the 
cores, therein lays true democracy, true Panchayat Raj. (H, 28-12-1947, p. 488) 
 
 
Representation In Democracy 
I hold it to be an utter delusion to believe that a la rge number of delegates is 
in any way a help to the better conduct of business, or that it safeguards the 
principle of democracy. Fifteen hundred delegates, jealous of the interests of 
the people, broad-minded and truthful, would any day be a better safeguard 
for democracy for democracy than six thousand irresponsible men chosen 
anyhow. To safeguard democracy the people must have a keen sense of 
independence, self-respect and their oneness, and should insist on choosing as 
their representatives only such persons as are good and true. (A, p. 369) 
 
True democracy is not inconsistent with a few persons representing the spirit, 
the hope and the aspirations of those whom they claim to represent. I hold that 
democracy cannot be evolved by forcible methods. The spirit of democracy 
cannot be imposed from without. It has to come from within. (BC, 18-9-1934) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 328   
The very essence of democracy is that every person represents all the varied 
interests which compose the nation. It is true that it does not exclude and 
should not exclude special representation of special interests, but such 
representation is not its test. It is a sign of its imperfection. (H, 22-4-1939, p. 
99) 
 
In the true democracy of India the unit is the village, …True democracy cannot 
be worked by twenty men sitting at the centre. It has to be worked from below 
by the people of every village. (H, 18-1-1948, p. 519) 
 
Surely, timidity has no place in democracy, where people in general believe in 
and want a particular thing. Their representatives have but to give shape to 
their demand and make it feasible. A favorable mental attitude of the 
multitude has been found to go a long way in winning battles. (ibid, p. 518) 
 
 
The People  
The voice of the people may be said to be God's voice,  the voice of the 
Panchayat. But how can there be the voice of God where the people 
themselves are the exploiters…? Ii the voice of the people is the voice of God, 
they will be above party. His scales will be ever evenly weighted with truth and 
non-violence. (H, 29-9-1946, p. 332) 
 
I have repeated times without number that, for national work, it is not 
necessary that national workers should have political power. But it is necessary 
for the people to deep in constant touch with those whom they put in power. 
These can easily be counted. They are too few. But if the people were to 
realize their power and use it wisely and well, things would right themselves. 
(H, 14-9-1947, p. 321) 
 
People in a democracy should be satisfied with drawing the Government's 
attention to mistakes, if any. They could remove the Government if they 
wished to. But they should not obstruct them by agitating against them. Ours is 
not a foreign Government having a mighty army and navy to support them. 
They have to derive their strength from the people. (H, 26-10-1947, p. 382) 
 
In democracy the people's will must rule…. (H, 14-12-1947, p. 471) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 329  If the majority of the people are selfish and untrust-worthy, how can 
democracy, Panchayat Raj, work? (H, 28-12-1947, p. 486) 
 
 
Majority And Minority   
In 
matters of conscience the law of majority has no pla ce. (YI, 4-8-1920, p. 4) 
 
Let us not push the mandate theory to ridiculous extremes and become slaves 
to resolutions of majorities. That would be a revival to brute force in a more 
virulent form. If rights of minorities are to be respected, the majority must 
tolerate and respect their opinion and action…. It will be the duty of the 
majority to see to it that the minorities receive a proper hearing and are not 
otherwise exposed to insults. (YI, 8-12-1921, p. 403) 
 
Claiming the right of free opinion and free action as we do, we must extend the 
same to others. The rule of majority, when it becomes coercive, is as 
intolerable as that of a bureaucratic minority. We must patiently try to bring 
round the minority to our view by gentle persuasion and argument.  
(YI, 26-1-1922, p. 54) 
 
The rule of majority has a narrow application, i.e., one should yield to the 
majority in matters of detail. But it is slavery to be amenable to the majority, 
no matter what its decisions are…. Democracy is not a state in which people act 
like sheep. Under democracy, individual liberty of opinion and action is 
jealously guarded. I, therefore, believe that the minority has a perfect right to 
act differently from the majority. (YI, 2-3-1922, p. 129) 
 
A living faith cannot be manufactured by the rule of majority. (YI, 16-3-1922, 
p. 161) 
 
 
Intolerance  
If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we  cannot afford to be 
intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause. (YI, 2-2-1921, p. 
33) 
 
I have repeatedly observed that no school of thought can claim a monopoly of 
right judgment. We are all liable to err and are often obliged to revise our 
judgments. In a vast country like this, there must be room for all schools of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 330  honest thought. And the least, therefore, that we owe to ourselves as to others 
is to try to understand the opponent's view-point and, if we cannot accept it, 
respect it as fully as we expect him to respect ours. It is one of the 
indispensable tests of a healthy public life and, therefore fitness for Swaraj. 
If we have no charity, and no tolerance, we shall never settle our differences 
amicably and must, therefore, always submit to the arbitration of a third party, 
i.e., to foreign domination. (YI, 17-4-1924, p. 130) 
 
Intolerance, discourtesy and harshness..... are taboo in all good society and are 
surely contrary to the spirit of democracy. (H, 14-8-1937, p. 209) 
 
Evolution of democracy is not possible if we are not prepared to hear the other 
side. We shut the doors of reason when we refuse to listen to our opponents or, 
having listened, make fun of them. If intolerance becomes a habit, we run the 
risk of mission the truth. Whilst with the limits that nature has put upon our 
understanding, we must act fearlessly according to the light vouchsafed to us, 
we must always keep an open mind and be ever ready to find that what we 
believed to be truth was, after all, untruth. This openness of mind strengthens 
the truth in us and removes the cross from it if there is any. (H, 31-5-1942, p. 
172) 
 
 
Quality, Not Quantity   
I a
ttach the highest importance to quality irrespecti ve  almost of quantity…. In 
the midst of suspicion, discord, antagonistic interests, superstition, fear, 
distrust and the like, there is not only no safety in numbers but there may be 
even danger in them. … Numbers become irresistible when they act as one man 
under exact discipline. They are a self-destroying force when each pulls his own 
way or when no one knows which way to pull. (YI, 30-4-1925, p. 152) 
 
I would only ask a candidate, 'How much of a man or woman you are? Have you 
got the ability to rise to the occasion'? Provided her or she passes these tests, I 
would select first the one who belongs to the least numerical section. I would 
thus give preference to all minorities along just lines, consistent with the 
welfare of India…. Welfare of India means welfare or India as a whole, not of 
Hindus and Mussalmans or of a particular community. (YI, 13-8-1925, p. 278) 
 
I ask you not to be cowed down by the thought of a small minority. It is 
sometimes a privilege. I have so often said that I would love to be in the 
minority of one, because this artificial majority, which is the result of the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 331  masses, reverence for me, is a clog in my progress. But for the clog I would hurl 
defiance…. (ibid, p. 279) 
 
My implicit faith in non-violence does mean yielding to minorities when they 
are really weak. The best way to weaken communities is to yield to them. 
Resistance will only rouse their suspicion and strengthen their opposition. (YI, 
2-7-1931, p. 162) 
 
 
Public Opinion 
Public opinion alone can keep a society pure and heal t hy. (YI, 1-12-1920, p. 4) 
 
A popular State can never act in advance of public opinion. If it goes against it, 
it will be destroyed. (H, 30-7-1931, p. 199) 
 
Healthy, well-informed and balanced criticism is the ozone of public life. (H, 
13-11-1937, p. 332) 
 
Democracy can only represent the average, if not less than the average. 
Therefore, a democratic institution to be pure has to attend to the all-round 
education of the humblest and the lowest. It must take in its sweep all 
superstition and social abuse. In such a society there will be no Christian and 
non-Christian; there will be no distinction of sex. (H, 5-5-1946, p. 24) 
 
What is really needed to make democracy function is not knowledge of facts 
but right education. (H, 29-9-1946, p. 334) 
 
Healthy public opinion has an influence of which we have not realized the full 
significance…. Public opinion becomes intolerable when it becomes violent and 
aggressive. (YI, 7-5-1931, p. 103) 
 
The only force at the disposal of democracy is that of public opinion. 
Satyagraha, civil disobedience and fasts have nothing in common with the use 
of force, veiled or open. But even these have restricted use in democracy. (H, 
7-9-1947, p. 316) 
 
 
Legislation 
Legislation in advance of public opinion is often wor s e than useless. Non-co-The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 332  operation is the quickest method of creating public opinion. (YI, 29-9-1921, p. 
208) 
 
Democracy demands patient instruction on it before legislation. (H, 16-6-1946, 
p. 181) 
 
 
Political Work 
….. I felt compelled to come into the political field be cause I found that I could 
not do even social work without touching politics. I feel that political work 
must be looked upon in terms of social and moral progress. In democracy no 
part of life is untouched by politics. (H, 6-10-1946, p. 341) 
 
 
Nature Of Power  
Possession of power makes men blind and deaf, they can not see things which 
are under their very nose and cannot hear things which invade their ears. There 
is thus no knowing what power-intoxicated government may not do. 
So...patriotic men ought to be prepared for death, imprisonment and similar 
eventualities. (YI, 13-10-1921, p. 327) 
 
Power that comes from service faithfully rendered ennobles. Power that is 
sought in the name of service and can only be obtained by a majority of votes is 
a delusion and a snare to be avoided… (YI, 11-9-1924, p. 301) 
 
Power is of two kinds. One is obtained by the fear of punishment and the other 
by arts of love. Power based on love is a thousand times more effective and 
permanent than the one derived from fear of punishment. (YI, 8-1-1925, p. 15) 
 
To me political power is not an end but one of the means of enabling people to 
better their condition in every department of life. Political power means 
capacity to regulate national life through national representatives. If national 
life becomes so perfect as to become self-regulated, no representation 
becomes necessary. There is then a state of enlightened anarchy. In such a 
state everyone is this own ruler. He rules himself in such a manner that he is 
never a hindrance to his neighbour. In the ideal state, therefore, there is no 
political power because there is no state. but the ideal is never fully realized in 
life. Hence the classical statement of Thoreau that that government is best 
which governs the least.  (YI, 2-1-1937, p. 162) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 333   
Whilst power, superimposed, always needs the help of police ad military, 
power generated from within should have little or no use for them. (H, 4-9-
1937, p. 233) 
 
Democracy is an impossible thing until the power is shared by all, but let not 
democracy degenerate into mobocracy. Even a pariah, a labourer, who makes it 
possible for you to earn you living, will have his share in self-government. But 
you will have to touch their lives, go to them, see their hovels where they live 
packed like sardines. It is up to you to look after this part of humanity. It is 
possible for you to make their lives or mar their lives. (YI, 1-12-1927, p. 404) 
 
There is no human institution but has its dangers. The greater the institution 
the greater the chances of abuse. Democracy is a great institution and, 
therefore, it is liable to be greatly abused. The remedy, therefore, is not 
avoidance of democracy, but reduction of possibility of abuse to a minimum.  
(YI, 7-5-1931, p. 99) 
 
… When people come into possession of political power, the interference with 
the freedom of the people is reduced to a minimum. In other words, a nation 
that runs its affairs smoothly and effectively without such State interference is 
truly democratic. Where such a condition is absent, the form of government is 
democratic in name. (H, 11-1-1936, p. 380) 
 
 
Dictatorship 
The rule of one man over many is intolerable. It must end. "How" is the 
question. The way is for the many to begin to live. To cut off the head of one 
ruler is easy enough. Remember the legend of Ravana. He had ten heads. As 
soon as one was cut off, another popped up in its place. The moral is that no 
cutting off heads becomes necessary in the presence of living demos. (H, 6-10-
1946, p. 341) 
 
Government of the people, by the people and for the people cannot be 
conducted at the bidding of one man, however great he may be. (H, 14-9-1947, 
p. 320) 
 
Personally, I do not mind Government fury as I mind mob fury. The latter is a 
sign of national distemper and, therefore, more difficult to deal with than the 
former which is confined to a small corporation. It is easier to oust a The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 334  Government that has rendered itself unfit to govern than it is to cure unknown 
people in a mob of their madness. (YI, 28-7-1920, p. 3) 
 
 
Mobocracy 
… Nothing is so easy as to train mobs, for the simple reason that they have no 
mind, no premeditation. They act in frenzy. They repent quickly…. Non-co-
operation I am using in order to evolve democracy. (YI, 8-9-1920, p.5) 
 
… We must train these masses o men who have a heart of gold, who feel for the 
country, who want to b taught and led. But a few intelligent, sincere, local 
workers are needed, and the whole nation can be evolved out of mobocracy. 
(YI, 22-9-1920, p. 3) 
 
A democratic organization has to dare to do the right at all cost. He who 
panders to the weaknesses of a people degrades both himself and the people, 
and leads them not to democratic but mob rule. The line of demarcation 
between democracy and mobocracy is often thin, but rigid and stronger than 
steel unbreakable. 
The one leads to life and progress, the other is death pure and simple. In the 
ultimate analysis, the cause of our fall is to be sought from within, and not 
from without. All the empires of the world could not have bent us, if as a 
people, we have been above suspicion and temptation. This may not be 
regarded as a mere truism. If we recognize the fundamental facts, we would be 
true and patient and able to deal with whatever difficulty that may face us 
whether from within or without. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 66) 
 
 
Militarism 
…Democracy and dependence on the military and the poli ce are incompatible. 
You cannot say it is good in one place and bad in another. Military help will 
degrade you. In a democracy, if the electorate sets up a hooligan as the head 
of the Government, they then lie in the bed they have made or else convert the 
electorate through Satyagraha if necessary. That is democracy. (H, 12-1-1947, 
pp. 488-9) 
 
Democracy and the military spirit I hold to be a contradiction in terms. A 
democrat relies upon the force not of the arms his State can flaunt in the face 
of the world, but on the moral force his state can put at the disposal of the 
world. (H, 13-7-1947, p. 233) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 335   
The spirit of democracy cannot be established in the midst of terrorism, 
whether governmental or popular. In some respects popular terrorism is more 
antagonistic to the growth of the democratic spirit than the governmental. For 
the latter strengthens the spirit of democracy, whereas the former kills it. 
(YI, 23-2-1921, p. 59) 
 
 
Democracy And Nonviolence 
Democracy and violence can ill go together. The state s  that are today 
nominally democratic have either to become frankly totalitarian or, if they are 
to become truly democratic, they must become courageously non-violent. It is 
a blasphemy to say that non-violence can only be practiced by individuals and 
never by nations which are composed of individuals. (H, 12-11-1938, p. 328) 
 
The true democrat is he who with purely non-violent means defends his liberty 
and, therefore, his country's and ultimately that of the whole of mankind. (H, 
15-4-1939, p. 90) 
 
True democracy or the Swaraj of the masses can never come through untruthful 
and violent means, for the simple reason that the natural corollary to their use 
would be to remove all opposition through the suppression or extermination of 
the antagonists. That does not make for individual freedom. Individual freedom 
can have the fullest play only under a regime of unadulterated AHIMSA. (H, 27-
5-1939, p. 143) 
 
My nation of democracy is that under it the weakest should have the same 
opportunity as the strongest. That can never happen except through non-
violence. No country in the world today shows any but patronizing regard for 
the weak.…. Western democracy, as it functions today, is diluted Nazism or 
Fascism. At best it is merely a cloak to hide the Nazi and the Fascist tendencies 
of imperialism…. (H, 18-5-1940, p. 129) 
 
I believe that true democracy can only be an outcome of non-violence. (GCG, 
1942-44, p. 143) 
 
….. No perfect democracy is possible without perfect non-violence at the back 
of it. (H, 2-3-1947, p. 44) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 336  Democracy: East And West  
Western democracy is on its trial, if it has not alrea dy proved a failure. May it 
not be reserved to India to evolve the true science of democracy by giving a 
visible demonstration of its fitness? Corruption and hypocrisy ought not to be 
inevitable products of democracy as they undoubtedly are today; nor bulk a 
true test of democracy. (Press Statement, 17-9-1934) 
 
Democracy of the West is, in my opinion, only so-called. It has germs in it, 
certainly, of the true type. But it can only come when all violence is eschewed 
and malpractices disappear. The two go hand in hand. Indeed, malpractice is a 
species of violence. If India is to evolve the true type, there should be no 
compromise with violence or untruth. (H, 3-9-1938, p. 24) 
 
India is tying to evolve true democracy, i.e., without violence. Our weapons are 
those of Satyagraha expressed through the Charkha, the village industries, 
removal of untouchability, communal harmony, prohibition and non-violent 
organization of labour as in Ahmedabad. These mean mass effort and mass 
education. We have big agencies for conducting these activities. They are 
purely voluntary and their only sanction is service of the lowliest. (H, 18-5-
1940, p.129) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 337   
73. THE INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS 
 
Dec
ay Of Congress 
THE CONGRESS will die a natural and deserved death if and when it substitutes 
reason and when it substitutes reason and moral influence by GOONDAISM. (H, 
18-6-1938, p.149) 
 
All that is wanted is the will to clear the Congress of Augean stables. But if the 
heads of Congress committees are indifferent or supine, the corruption cannot 
be dealt with." If the salt loses its savour, wherewith shall it be salted?" (H, 22-
10-1938, p. 299) 
 
Rome's decline began long before it fell. The Congress, which has been nursed 
for over fifty years by the best brains of the country, will not fall at all, if the 
corruption is handled in time. (H, 28-1-1939, p. 444) 
 
 
Congress And Nonviolence 
The congress influence can be effectively exercised on ly if it retains its non-
violence. Its only capital is its moral authority. Any other position may lead to 
internecine feud and bloodshed. (H, 29-7-1939, p.218) 
 
To take the name of non-violence when there is the sword in your heart is not 
only hypocritical and dishonest but cowardly. Our non-violence VIS-A VIS the 
British Government has been the non-violence of the weak. Otherwise, why 
should there be all these wrangles among ourselves? 
There is nothing more demoralizing than fake non-violence of the weak and 
impotent. If we had the requisite non-violence in us, our public life would be 
characterized by utmost toleration. There will then be room for as many 
parties as there are opinions. Differences of opinion would be an indication of 
healthy independence of mind which is the law of life, not party intrigues and 
party strife. The latter are incompatible with independence. (H, 6-10-1946, p. 
338) 
 
 
Basic Aim 
The congress will cease to be popular if it cannot de s erve popularity in times of 
stress. If it cannot provide work for the workless and hungry, I it cannot protect The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 338  the people from depredations or teach them how to face them, if it cannot 
help them in the face of danger, it will lose its prestige and popularity.  
(H, 18-1-1942, p. 4) 
 
 
One Party 
There can be only one party in the Congress, i.e., tha t of congressmen and no 
other. That is not to say that there is no room in the Congress for individuals or 
groups holding different opinions. I do not believe in dead uniformity. "All men 
are born equal and free" is not Nature's law in the literal sense. All men are 
born equal in intellect, for instance, but the doctrine of equality will be 
vindicated if those who have superior intellect will use it not for self-
advancement at the expense of others, but for the service of those who are less 
favoured in that respect than they. Today there are all sorts in the Congress….. 
(H, 6-10-1946, p. 338) 
 
…With the advent of power, Congressmen have begun to think that everything 
belongs to them. In a way it is true. But this does not imply that all sense of 
discipline should be thrown to t he winds. Discipline and true humility should 
be a matter of pride for Congressmen. (H, 1-6-1947, p. 176) 
 
The Congress shall be above party intrigues and be a symbol of unity and 
service of the whole of India. (ibid, p. 175) 
 
 
Goal Of Poorna Swaraj 
The Indian National Congress, which is the oldest nati onal political organization 
and which has after many battles fought her non-violent way to freedom, 
cannot be allowed to die. It can only die with the nation. A living organism ever 
grows or it dies. The Congress has won political freedom, but it has yet to win 
economic freedom, social and moral freedom. These freedoms are harder than 
the political, if only because they are constructive, less exciting and not 
spectacular. All-embracing constructive work evokes the energy of all the units 
of the millions. 
The Congress has got the preliminary and necessary part of her freedom. The 
hardest has yet to come. In its difficult ascent to democracy, it has inevitably 
created rotten boroughs leading to corruption and creation of institutions, 
popular and democratic only in name. How to get out of the weedy and 
unwieldy growth? 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 339   
Composition 
The Congress must do away with its special register of  members, at no time 
exceeding one cores, not even then easily identifiable. It had an unknown 
register of millions who could never be wanted. Its register should now be co-
extensive with all the men and women on the voters' rolls in the country. The 
Congress business should be to see that no faked name gets in and no 
legitimate name is left out. On its own register it will have a body of servants 
of the nation who would be workers doing the work allotted to them from time 
to time. 
Unfortunately for the country, they will be drawn chiefly, for the time being, 
from the city dwellers, most of whom would be required to work for and in the 
villages of India. The ranks must be filled in increasing numbers from villagers. 
 
 
Servants Of The People 
 These servants will be expected to operate upon and s erve the voters 
registered according to law in their own surroundings. Many persons and parties 
will woo them. The very best will win. Thus and in no other way can the 
Congress regain its fast ebbing, unique position in the country. But yesterday 
the Congress was unwittingly the servant of the nation, it was KHUDA-I-
KHIDMATGAR-God's servant. Let it now proclaim to itself and the world that it is 
only God's servant-nothing more, nothing less. If it engages in the ungainly 
skirmish for power, it will find one fine morning that it is no more. Thank God, 
it is now no longer in sole possession of the field. (H, 1-2-1948, p. 4) 
 
 
Lok Sevak Sangh* 
Though split into two, India having attained political  independence through 
means provided by the Indian National Congress, the Congress in its present 
shape and form, i.e., as a propaganda vehicle and parliamentary machine, has 
outlived its use. India has still to attain social, moral and economic 
independence in terms of its seven hundred thousand villages as distinguished 
from its cities and towns. The struggle for the ascendancy of civil over military 
power is bound to take place in India's progress towards its democratic goal. It 
must be kept out of unhealthy competition with political parties and communal 
bodies. For these and other similar reasons, the A. I. C .C. resolves to disband 
the existing Congress organization and flower into a Lok Sevak Sangh under the 
following rules, with power to alter them as occasion may demand. 
(*Gandhiji's idea of a transformed Congress was published in Harijan under the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 340  title "His Last Will and Testament".)
 
 
Panchayat 
Every Panchayat of five adult men or women being villa gers or village-minded 
shall form a unit. 
Two such contiguous Panchayat shall form a working party under a leader 
elected from among themselves. When there are one hundred such Panchayat, 
the fifty grade leaders shall elect from among themselves a second grade 
leader and so on, the first grade leaders meanwhile working under the second 
grade leader. parallel groups of two hundred Panchayats shall continue to be 
formed till they cover the whole of India, each succeeding group of Panchayats 
electing second grade leader after the manner of the first. All second grade 
leaders shall serve jointly for the whole of India and severally for their 
respective areas. The second grade leaders may elect, whenever they deem 
necessary, from among themselves a chief who will, during pleasure, regulate 
and command all the groups. 
(As the final formation of provinces or districts is still in a state of flux, no 
attempt has been made to divide this group of servants into Provincial or 
District Councils and jurisdiction over the whole of India has been vested in the 
group or groups that may have been formed at any given time. It should be 
noted that this body of servants derive their authority or power from service 
ungrudgingly and wisely done to their master, the whole of India.) 
 
 
Qualifications Of Workers 
Every worker shall be a habitual wearer of Khadi made from self-spun yarn or 
certified by the A. I. S. A., and must be a teetotaler. If a Hindu, he must have 
abjured untouchability in any shape or form in his own person or in his family 
and must be a believer in the ideal of inter-communal unity, equal respect and 
regard for all religions and equality of opportunity and status for all 
irrespective or race, creed or sex. He shall come in personal contact with every 
villager within his jurisdiction. He shall enroll and train workers from amongst 
the villagers and shall keep a register of all these. He shall keep a record of his 
work from day to day. He shall organize the villagers so as to make them self-
contained and self-supporting through their agriculture and handicrafts. He 
shall educate the village folk in sanitation and hygiene and take all measures 
for prevention of ill health and disease among them. He shall organize the 
education to the village folk from birth to death along the lines NAYI TALIM, in 
accordance with the policy laid down by the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. He shall The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 341  see that those whose names are missing on the statutory voters' roll are duly 
entered therein. He shall encourage those who have not yet acquired the legal 
qualification to acquire it for getting the right of franchise. For the above 
purposes and others to be added from time to time, he shall train and fit 
himself in accordance with the rules laid down by the Sangh for the due 
performance of duty. 
 
 
Constructive Organizations 
The Sangh shall affiliate the following autonomous bo di es: A.I.S.A., A.I.V.I.A., 
Hindustani Talimi Sangh, Harijan Sevak Sangh, Goseva Sangh. 
 
 
Finance 
The Sangh shall raise finances for the fulfillment of its mission from among the 
villagers and others, special stress being laid on the collection of poor man's 
pice. (H 15-2-1948, p. 32) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 342   
74. POPULAR MINISTRIES 
 
Cre
ation Of Ministries   
It would be decidedly wrong to create minister ships f or the sake of conciliating 
interests. If I was a Prime Minister and I was pestered with such claims, I should 
tell my electors to choose another leader. These offices have to be held lightly, 
not tightly. They are or should be crowns of thorns, never of renown. Offices 
have to be taken in order to see if they enable us to quicken the pace at which 
we are moving towards our goal. It would be tragic if self-seekers or misguided 
zealots were allowed to impede the progress by imposing themselves on Prime 
Ministers. If it was necessary to have assurance from those who have ultimately 
to clothe ministers with authority, it is doubly necessary to have assurances of 
understanding, of loyalty beyond suspicion and of willing obedience to 
discipline. And lastly, the acid test is that the choice must commend itself to 
the members of the party to whom the Prime Ministers owe their nomination. 
No Prime Minister can for one moment impose a man or woman of his choice on 
the party. He is chief because he enjoys the full confidence of his party as to 
ability, knowledge of persons and other qualities that mark out one for 
leadership. (H, 7-8-1937, p. 204) 
 
The ministers and the legislators of the Congress ticket have to be fearless in 
the performance of their duty. They must always be ready to risk the loss of 
their seats or offices. Offices and seats in the legislatures have no merit outside 
their ability to raise the prestige and power of the Congress. And since both 
depend wholly upon the possession of morals, both public and private, any 
moral lapse means a blow to the Congress. This is the necessary implication of 
non-violence. (H, 23-4-1938, p. 88) 
 
A minister no doubt advances his own party, but never at the expense of the 
nation as a whole. Indeed, he advances the Congress only so far as he advances 
the nation. For he knows that, if he has no sword to give battle to the foreign 
ruler, he has it not to give battle to his adversary within the nation itself. And 
since the Assembly is the place where all communities meet willy-nilly, it is the 
place where, by winning over his opponents, he expects to forge sanctions 
which can be made irresistible. All the problems that affect the body politic, 
including communal unity, can be solved if the Assembly is regarded ….as an 
instrument to be used for solving questions…… (H, 16-7-1938, p. 184) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 343  There is a beauty and an art in simplicity which she who runs may see. It does 
not require money to be neat, clean and dignified. Pomp and pageantry are 
often synonymous with vulgarity. (H, 17-7-1937, p. 180) 
 
This office-holding is a step towards either greater prestige or its total loss. If it 
is not to be a total loss, the ministers and the legislators have to be watchful of 
their own personal and public conduct. They have to be, like Caesar's wife, 
above suspicion in everything. They may not make private gains either for 
themselves or for their relatives or friends. If the relatives or friends get any 
appointment, it must be only because they are the best amongst the 
candidates, and their market value is always greater than what they get under 
the Government. (H, 23-4-1938, p. 88) 
 
 
Code For Ministers 
The holding of any office in the Congress Government m ust be in the spirit of 
service without the slightest expectation of personal gain. (H, 3-9-1938, p. 242) 
 
 If the Congress wants to continue as people's organization, the ministers 
cannot live as SAHIB LOG nor use for private work facilities provided by 
Government for official duties. (H, 29-9-1946, p. 333) 
 
Ministers should not be sensitive [to public criticism. They would take in good 
part even carping criticism…. The critics expect much more from these chosen 
servants of the people than from others in the way of simplicity, courage, 
honesty and industry…. (H, 21-9-1947, p.325) 
 
Our ministers are of the people, from the people. Let them not arrogate to 
themselves greater knowledge than those experienced men who do not happen 
to occupy ministerial chairs. (H, 16-11-1947, p. 409) 
 
The leaders have the reins of Government and the disposal of millions of rupees 
is in their hands. They have to be vigilant. They must be humble. People often 
think nothing of not keeping their word. They should never promise what they 
cannot do. Once a promise is made, it must be kept at all cost.  
(H, 14-12-1947, p. 467) 
 
The ministers are [the people's] servants. They can do nothing against the 
express wishes of the people. They will not stay in office a day longer than the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 344  people wish. (H, 4-1-1948, p. 495) 
 
 
Legislatures  
Let us examine the utility value of legislatures. The legislatures can expose the 
Government, but that is the least service. He who can tell the people why they 
become victims of the Government in spite of knowing its faults and can teach 
them how to stand up against Government wrongs renders a real service. The 
members cannot do this essential service, for their business is to make people 
look to them for the redress of wrongs. The other use of legislatures is to 
prevent undesirable legislation and bring in laws which are useful for the 
public, so that as much help as possible can be given to the constructive 
programme. 
Legislatures are supposed to carry out the popular will. For the moment 
eloquence may be of some use in these bodies. Ultimately that will no be the 
need. Experts with practical knowledge and those who can give to these few 
their support will be required. In an organization which exists for the sake of 
service and which has boycotted titled and other such paltry things, the 
sentiment that to be selected as candidates for the legislatures is a mark of 
honour is harmful. If such a sentiment takes root, it will bring down the name 
of the Congress and finally prove its ruin. If Congressmen are to be reduced to 
such degradation, who will put flesh and blood into India's millions of skeletons? 
On whom will India and the world rely? (H, 17-2-1946, p. 13) 
 
A popular ministry is responsible to the legislatures and cannot do anything 
without their consent. Every elected member in a popular legislature is 
responsible to his voters. Therefore, the voter who represents the public should 
ponder well before embarking on any criticism of the government of his 
creation. 
Moreover, one bad habit of the people should be borne in mind. They do not 
like and tax whatsoever. Where there is good government, the tax-payer gets 
full return for his money as, for example, the water tax in cities. No tax-payer 
could get water on his own for the same payment. But even so, and in spite of 
the fact that the tax is levied by the popular will, tax-payers always resent 
even paying such taxes. It is, of course, true that one cannot prove the benefit 
of all taxes as easily as the one I have cited as an example. But as society grows 
in size and complexity and the field of service also grows, it is difficult to 
explain to the individual tax-payer how he gets his return for any particular 
tax. This much, however, is clear that taxes as a whole should stand for the 
general benefit of society. If this were not so, the argument that the taxes 
were levied by popular will would not hold. (H, 8-9-1946, p. 293) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 345   
75. INDIA OF MY DREAMS 
 
INDIA, BY finding true independence and self-expressio n through Hindu-Muslim 
unity and through non-violent means, i.e., unadulterated self-sacrifice, can 
point a way out of the prevailing darkness. (YI, 6-10-1920, p. 4) 
 
If VOX POPULI is to be VOX DEVI, it must be the voice of honesty, bravery, 
gentleness, humility and complete self-sacrifice. (YI, 19-11-1925, p. 400) 
 
I believe that nothing remains static. Human nature either goes up or goes 
down. Let us hope in India, it is going up. Otherwise, there is nothing but 
deluge for India and, probably, for the whole world….. Will a free India present 
to the world a lesson of peace, or of hatred and violence, of which the world is 
already sick unto death? (H, 8-6-1947, p. 177) 
 
If the whole of India accepted this [eternal law of love], India will become the 
unquestioned leader of the whole world….. I merely wish to suggest that there 
should be no surrender except to reason. (ibid, p. 181) 
 
 
New India 
I am only hoping and praying..… [that there] will ris e  a new and robust India, 
not warlike, basely imitating the West in all its hideousness, but a new India 
learning the best that the West has to give and becoming the hope, not only of 
Asia and Africa, but the whole of the aching world. 
I must confess that this is hoping against hope, for we are today swearing by 
the military and all that naked physical force implies….. in spite, however, of 
the madness and the vain imitation of the tinsel of the West, the hope lingers 
in me and many others that India shall survive its death dance and occupy the 
moral height that should belong to her after the training, however imperfect, 
in non-violence for an unbroken period of thirty-two years since 1915. (H, 7-12-
1947, p. 453) 
 
 
Paradise On Earth 
I remember to have read, I forgot whether in the Delh i  or the Agra Fort, when I 
visited them in 1896, a verse on one of the gates, which when translated, 
reads: ' If there is paradise on early, it is here, it is here, it is here.' That Fort, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 346  with all its magnificence at its best, was no paradise in my estimation. But I 
should love to see that verse with justice inscribed on the gates of Pakistan at 
all the entrances. In such paradise, whether it is in the Union or in Pakistan, 
there will be neither paupers not beggars, nor high nor low, neither millionaire 
employers nor half-starved employees, nor intoxicating drinks nor drugs. There 
will be the same respect for woman as vouchsafed to men, and the chastity and 
purity of men and women will be jealously guarded, where every woman, 
except one's wife, will be treated by men of all religions, as mother, sister or 
daughter according to her age, where there will be not untouchability and 
where there will be equal respect for all faiths. They will be all proudly, 
joyously and voluntarily brad labourers. (H, 18-1-1948, p.526) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 347   
76. BACK TO THE VILLAGE 
 
Real India 
I HAVE believe and repeated times without number that India is to be found not 
in its few cities but in its 7,00,000 villages. We town-dwellers have believed 
that India is to be found in its towns and the villages were created to minister 
to our needs. We have hardly ever paused to inquire if those poor folk get 
sufficient to eat and clothe themselves with and whether they have a roof to 
shelter themselves from sun and rain. (H, 4-4-1936, p. 63) 
 
Hitherto the villagers gave died in their thousand so that we might live. Now we 
might have to die so that they may live. The difference will be fundamental. 
The former have died unknowingly and involuntarily. Their enforced sacrifice 
has degraded us. If now we die knowingly, our sacrifice will ennoble us and the 
whole nation. Let us not flinch from the necessary sacrifice, if we will live as 
an independent, self-respecting nation. (YI, 17-4-1924, p. 130) 
 
 
Villages And Cities   
Th
e cities are capable of taking care of themselves. It  is the villages we have to 
turn to. We have to disabuse them of their prejudices, their superstitions, their 
narrow outlook, and we can do so in no other manner than that of staying 
amongst them and sharing their joys and sorrows and spreading education and 
intelligent information among them. (YI, 30-4-1931, p. 94) 
 
I have found that the town-dweller has generally exploited the villager, in fact 
he has lived on the poor villager's subsistence. Many a British official has 
written about the condition of the people of India. No one has, to my 
knowledge, said that the Indian villager has enough to keep body and soul 
together. On the contrary, they have admitted that the bulk of the population 
lives on the verge of starvation and ten per cent are semi-starved, and that 
millions have to rest content with a pinch of dirty salt and chilies and polished 
rice or parched grain. 
You may be sure that, if any of us were to be asked to live on that diet, we 
should not expect to survive it longer than a month or should be afraid of losing 
our mental faculties. And yet our villagers go through that state from day to 
day. (H, 4-4-1936, p. 63-64) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 348   
The Peasants 
The moment you talk to them [the Indian peasants] and t hey begin to speak, 
you will find wisdom drops from their lips. Behind the crude exterior you will 
find a deep reservoir of spirituality. I call this culture-you will not find such a 
thing in the West. You try to engage a European peasant in conversation and 
you will find that he is uninterested in things spiritual. 
In the case of the Indian village, an age-old culture is hidden under an 
entrustment of crudeness. Take away the encrustation, remove his chronic 
poverty and his illiteracy and you will find the finest specimen of what a 
cultured, cultivated, free citizen should be. (H, 28-1-1939, p. 439) 
 
Over 75 per cent of the population is agriculturists…. But there cannot be much 
spirit of self-government about us if we take away or allow others to take away 
from them almost the whole of the result of their labour. (SW, p. 323) 
 
It is only when the cities realize the duty of making an adequate return to the 
villages for the strength and sustenance which they derive from them, instead 
of selfishly exploiting them, that a healthy and moral relationship between the 
two will spring up. And if the city children are to play their part in this great 
and noble work of social reconstruction, the vocations through which they are 
to receive their education ought to be directly related to the requirements of 
the villages. (H, 9-10-1937, p. 293) 
 
I regard the growth of cities as an evil thing, unfortunate for mankind and the 
world, unfortunate for England and certainly unfortunate for India. The British 
have exploited India through its cities. The latter have exploited the villages. 
The blood of the villages is the cement with which the edifice of the cities is 
built. I want the blood that is today inflating the arteries of the cities to run 
once again tin the blood vessels of the villagers. (H, 23-6-1946, p. 198) 
 
…. I know that, if India is to be the leader in clean action based on clean 
thought, God will confound the wisdom of….. big men and will provide the 
villages with the power to express themselves as they should. (H, 28-7-1946, p. 
236) 
 
India is made of villages, but our intelligentsia has neglected them… village life 
must not become a copy or appendage of city life. The cities have to adopt the 
pattern of village life and subsist for the villages. (H, 3-11-1946, p. 381) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 349   
Our Duty 
We must identify ourselves with the villagers who toil  under the hot sun beating 
on their bent backs and see how we would like to drinks water from the pool in 
which the villagers bathe, wash their clothes and pots, and in which their cattle 
drink and roll. Then and not till then shall we truly represent the masses and 
they will as surely as I am writing this, respond to every call. (YI, 11-9-1924, p. 
300) 
 
We have got to be ideal villagers, not the villagers with their queer ideas or 
absence of ideas about sanitation and giving no thought to how they eat and 
what they eat. Let us not, like most of them, cook anyhow, eat anyhow, live 
anyhow. Let us show them the ideal diet. Let us not go by mere likes and 
dislikes, but get at the root of these likes and dislikes…… 
We have got to show them that they can grow their vegetables, without much 
expense, and keep good health. We have also to show that most of the vitamins 
are lost when they cook the leaves….. 
We have to teach them how to economize time, health and money…. Lionel 
Curtis described our villages ass dung-heaps. We have to turn them into model 
villages. Our village-folk do not get fresh air though they are surrounded by 
fresh air; they don't get fresh food though they are surrounded by the freshest 
foods. I am talking like a missionary in this matter of food, because my mission 
is to make villages a thing of beauty. (H, 1-3-1935, p. 21) 
 
The only way is to sit down in their midst and work away in steadfast faith, as 
their scavengers, their nurses, their servants, not as their patrons, and to 
forget all our prejudices and prepossessions. Let us for a moment forget even 
Swaraj, and certainly forget the 'haves' whose presence oppresses us at every 
step. They are there. There are many who are dealing with these big problems. 
Let us tackle humbler work of the village which is necessary now and would be, 
even after we have reached our goal. Indeed, the village work when it becomes 
successful will itself bring us nearer the goal. (H, 16-5-1936, p. 112) 
 
 
Village Movement 
The village movement is as much an education of the ci ty people as of the 
villagers. Workers drawn from cities have to develop village mentality and learn 
the art of living after the manner of villagers. This does not mean that they 
have to starve like the villagers. But it does mean that there must be a radical 
change in the old style of life. (H, 11-4-1936, p. 68) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 350   
In [my picture of independence], the unit is the village community. The 
superstructure of independence is not to be built at the village unit, so that the 
top weighs down on and crushes the forty cores of people who constitute the 
base…. 
A village unit as conceived by me is as strong as the strongest. My imaginary 
village consists of 1,000 souls. Such a unit can give a good account of itself if it 
is well organized on a basis of self-sufficiency. (H, 4-8-1946, pp. 251, 252) 
 
We stand today in danger of forgetting how to use our hands. To forget how to 
dig the earth and tend the soil is to forget ourselves. To think that your 
occupation of the Ministerial chair will be vindicated if you serve the cities only 
would be to forget that India really resides in her 7,00,000 village units. What 
would it profit a man if he gained the world but lost his soul into the bargain. 
(H, 25-8-1946, p. 282) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 351   
77. ALL-ROUND VILLAGE SERVICE 
 
THE
 REAL India lies in the 7,00,000 villages. If Indian civilization is to make its 
full contribution to the building up of a stable world order, it is this vast mass 
of humanity that has….to be made to live again. (H, 27-4-1947, p. 122) 
 
We have to tackle the triple malady which holds our villages fast in its grip : (I) 
want of corporate sanitation ; (ii) deficient diet; (iii) inertia . . . They 
[villagers] are not interested in their own welfare. They don't appreciate 
modern sanitary methods. They don't want to exert themselves beyond 
scratching their farms or doing such labour as they are used to. These 
difficulties are real and serious. But they must not baffle us… 
We must have an unquenchable faith in our mission. We must be patient with 
the people. We are ourselves novices in village work. We have to deal with a 
chronic disease. Patience and perseverance, if we have them, overcome 
mountains of difficulties. We are like nurses who may not leave their patients 
because they are reported to have an incurable disease.  
(H, 16-5-1936, pp. 111-12) 
 
Villages have suffered long from neglect by those who have had the benefit of 
education. They have chosen the city life. The village movement is an attempt 
to establish healthy contact with the villages by inducing those who are fired 
with the spirit of service to settle in them and find self-expression in the 
service of villagers…. Those who have settled in villages in the spirit of service 
are not dismayed by the difficulties facing them. They knew before they went 
that they would have to contend against many difficulties, including even 
sullenness on the part of villagers. Only those, therefore, who have faith in 
themselves and in their mission will serve the villagers and influence their lives. 
 
 
Workers 
A true life lived amongst the people is in itself an o bject lesson that must 
produce its own effect upon immediate surroundings. The difficulty with the 
young is, perhaps, that he has gone to the village merely to earn a living 
without the spirit of service behind it. 
I admit that village life does not offer attractions to those who go there in 
search of money. Without the incentive of service village life would jar after 
the novelty has worn out. No young man having gone to a village may abandon The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 352  the pursuit on the slightest contact with difficulty. Patient effort will show that 
villagers are not very different from city-dwellers and that they will respond to 
kindness and attention. 
It is no doubt true that one does not have in the villages the opportunity of 
contact with the great ones of the land. With the growth of village mentality 
the leaders will find it necessary to tour in the villages and establish a living 
touch with them. Moreover, the companionship of the great and the good is 
available to all through the works of saints like Chaitanya, Ramakrishana, 
Tulsidas, Kabir, Nanak, Dadu, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, and others too numerous 
to mention, though equally known and pious. 
 
 
Literature 
The difficulty is to get the mind tuned to the recepti on of permanent values. If 
it is modern thought-political, social, economic, scientific-that is meant, it is 
possible to procure literature that will satisfy curiosity. I admit, however, that 
one does not find such as easily as one finds religious literature. Saints wrote 
and spoke for the masses. The vogue for translating modern thought to the 
masses in an acceptable manner has not yet quite set in. but it must come in 
time. 
I would, therefore, advise young men…. Not to give in, but persist in their 
effort and by their presence make the villages more livable and lovable. That 
they will do by serving the villages in a manner acceptable to the villagers. 
Everyone can make a beginning by making the villages cleaner by their own 
labour and removing illiteracy to the extent of their ability. And if their lives 
are clean, methodical and industrious, there is no doubt that the infection will 
spread in the villages in which they may be working. (H, 20-2-1937, p. 16) 
 
 
Samagra Gramaseva   
A 
Samagra GRAM SEVAK must know everybody living in the  village and render 
them such service as he can. That does not mean that the worker will be able 
to do everything single-handed. He will show them the way of helping 
themselves and procure for them such help and materials as they require. He 
will train up his own helpers. He will so win over the villagers that they will 
seek and follow his advice. 
Supposing I go and settle down in a village with a GHANI (village oil press), I 
won't be an ordinary GHANCHI (oil presser) earning 15-20 rupees a month. I will 
be a Mahatma GHANCHI. I will be a Mahatma GHANCHI. I have used the word 
'Mahatma' in fun, but what I mean to say is that as a GHANCHI I will become a The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 353  model for the villagers to follow. I will be a GHANCHI who knows the Gita and 
the Quran. I will be learned enough to teach their children. I may not be able 
to do so for lack of time. The villagers will come to me and ask me: "Please 
make arrangements for our children's education". I will tell them: "I can find 
you a teacher, but you will have to bear the expenses". And they will be 
prepared to do so most willingly. 
I will teach them spinning and when they come and ask me for the services of a 
weaver, I will find them a weaver on the same terms as I found them a teacher. 
And the weaver will teach them how to weave their own cloth. I will inculcate 
in them the importance of hygiene and sanitation, and when they come and ask 
me for a sweeper, I will tell them: "I will be your sweeper and I will train you 
all in the job." 
This is my conception of Samagra Gramaseva. You may tell me that I will never 
find a GHANCHI of this description in this age. Then I will say that we cannot 
hope to improve our villages in this age. . . . After all, the man who runs an oil 
mill is a GHANCHI. He has money but his strength does not lie in his money. 
Real strength lies in knowledge. True knowledge gives a moral standing and 
moral strength. Everyone seeks the advice of such a man. (H, 17-3-1946, p. 42) 
 
 
Economic Survey 
The villages will be surveyed and a list prepared of t hings that can be 
manufactured locally with little or no help which may be required for village 
use or for sale outside, such for instance as GHANI-pressed oil and cakes, 
burning oil prepared through GHANIS, hand-pounded rice, TADGUD, honey, 
toys, mats, hand-made paper, village soap, etc. if enough care is thus taken, 
the villages, most of them as good as dead or dying, will hum with life and 
exhibit the immense possibilities they have of supplying most of their wants 
themselves and of the cities and towns of India. (H, 28-4-1946, p. 104) 
 
 
Arts And Crafts   
Th
e villagers should develop such a high degree of ski ll that articles prepared 
by them should command a ready market outside. When our villages are fully 
developed, there will be no dearth in them of men with a high degree of skill 
and artistic talent. There will be village poets, village artists, village 
architects, linguists and research workers. In shout, there will be nothing in life 
worth having which will not be had in the villages. 
Today the villages are dung heaps. Tomorrow they will be like tiny gardens of 
Eden where dwell highly intelligent folk whom no one can deceive or exploit. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 354  The reconstruction of the villages along these lines should begin right now….. 
The reconstruction of the villages should not be organized on a temporary but 
permanent basis. (H, 10-11-1946, p. 394) 
 
 
Economic Reorganization 
In my writing on cent per cent Swadeshi. I have shown how some aspects of it 
can be tackled immediately with benefit to the starving millions both 
economically and hygienically. The richest in the land can share the benefit. 
thus, if rice can be pounded in the villages after the old fashion, the wages will 
fill the pockets of the rice-pounding sisters had the rice-eating millions will get 
some sustenance from the unpolished rice instead of pure starch which the 
polished rice provides. Human greed, which takes no account of the health or 
the wealth of the people who come under its heels, is responsible for the 
hideous rice-mills one sees in all the rice-producing tracts. If public opinion was 
strong, it will make rice-mills impossibility by simply insisting on unpolished 
rice and appealing to the owner of rice-mills to stop a traffic that undermines 
the health of a whole nation and robs the poor of an honest means of 
livelihood. (H, 26-10-1934, p. 292) 
 
…..I would say that, if the village perishes, India will perish too. India will be no 
more India. Her own mission in the world will get lost. The revival of the village 
is possible only when it is no more exploited. Industrialization on a mass scale 
will necessarily lead to passive or active exploitation of the villagers as the 
problems of competition and marketing come in. Therefore, we have to 
concentrate on the village being self-contained, manufacturing mainly for use. 
Provided this character of the village industry is maintained, there would be no 
objection to villagers using even the modern machines and tools that they can 
make and can afford to use. Only, they should not be used as a means of 
exploitation of others. (H, 29-8-1936, p. 226) 
 
 
Nonviolent Economy 
You cannot build non-violence on a factory civilizatio n, but it can be built on 
self-contained villages..... Rural economy as I have conceived it, eschews 
exploitation altogether, and exploitation is the essence of violence. You have, 
therefore, to be rural-minded before you can be non-violent, and to be rural-
minded you have to have faith in the spinning wheel. (H, 4-11-1939, p. 331) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 355  We have to make a choice between India of the villages that are as ancient as 
herself and India of the cities which are a creation of foreign domination. 
Today the cities dominate and drain the villages so that they are crumbling to 
ruin. My Khadi mentality tells me that cities must sub serve villages when that 
domination goes. Exploiting of villages is itself organized violence. If we want 
Swaraj to be built on non-violence, we will have to give the villages their 
proper place. (H, 20-1-1940, p. 423) 
 
 
Food Reform 
Since the economic reorganization of the villages has been commenced with 
food reform, it is necessary to find out the simplest and cheapest foods that 
would enable the villagers to regain the lost health. The addition of green 
leaves to their meals will enable the villagers to avoid many diseases from 
which they are now suffering. 
The villagers' food is deficient in vitamins; many of them can be supplied by 
fresh green leaves. An eminent doctor told me a proper use of green leaves is 
calculated to revolutionize the customary notions of food and much of what 
was today being supplied by mild may be supplied by green leaves.  
(H, 15-2-1935, p. 1) 
 
 
Power Machinery 
If we could have electricity in every village home, I s hould not mind villagers 
plying their implements and tools, with the help of electricity. But then the 
village communities or the State would own power-houses just as they have 
their grazing pastures. But where there is no electricity and no machinery, 
what are idle hands to do. (H, 22-6-1935, p. 146) 
 
I regard the existence of power wheels for the grinding of corn in thousands of 
villages as the limit of our helplessness. I suppose India does not produce all the 
engines or grinding machines. . . . The planting of such machinery and engines 
on a large scale in villages is also a sign of greed. Is it proper to fill one's pocket 
in this manner at the expense of the poor? Every such machinery puts thousands 
of hand-CHAKKIS out of work and takes away employment from thousand of 
housewives and artisans who make these CHAKKIS. Moreover, the process is 
infective and will spread to every village industry. The decay of the latter 
spells too the decay of art. If it meant replacement of old crafts by new ones, 
one might not have much to say against it. But this is not what is happening. In 
the thousands of villages where power machinery exists, one misses the sweet 
music, in the early morning, of the grinders at work. (H, 10-3-1946, p. 34) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 356   
78. PANCHAYAT RAJ 
 
Village Republics 
INDIA HAS had experience of..... village republics, as  they were called by 
Mayne. I fancy that they were unconsciously governed by non-violence..... An 
effort has now to be made to revive them under a deliberate non-violent plan. 
(H, 4-8-1940, p. 240) 
 
The best, quickest and most efficient way is to build up from the bottom..... 
Every village has to become a self-sufficient republic. This does not require 
brave resolutions. It requires brave, corporate, intelligent work..... (H, 18-1-
1922, p. 4) 
 
Independence must begin at the bottom. Thus, every village will be a republic 
or Panchayat having full powers. It follows, therefore, that every village has to 
be self-sustained and capable of managing its affairs even to the extent of 
defending itself against the whole world. It will be trained and prepared to 
perish in the attempt to defend itself against any onslaught from without. Thus, 
ultimately, it is the individual who is the unit. 
This does not exclude dependence on and willing help from neighbours or from 
the world. It will be free and voluntary play of mutual forces. Such a society is 
necessarily highly cultured in which every man and woman knows what he or 
she wants and, what is more, knows that no one should want anything that 
others cannot have with equal labour. 
This society must naturally be based on truth and non-violence which, in my 
opinion, are not possible without a living belief in God, meaning a self-existent, 
All-knowing living Force which inheres every other force known to the world 
and which depends on none and which will live when all other forces may 
conceivably perish or cease to act. I am unable to account for my life without 
belief in this all-embracing living light. 
 
 
Widening Circles 
In this structure composed of innumerable villages the re will be ever-widening, 
never-ascending circles. Life will not be a pyramid with the apex sustained by 
the bottom. But it will be an oceanic circle whose centre will be the individual 
always ready to perish for the village, till at last the whole becomes one life 
composed of individuals, never aggressive in their arrogance, but ever humble, The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 357  sharing the majesty of the oceanic circle of which they are integral units. 
Therefore, the outermost circumference will not wield power to crush the inner 
circle, but will give strength to all within and derive its own strength from it. I 
may be taunted with the retort that this is all Utopian and, therefore, not 
worth a single thought. If Euclid's point, though incapable of being drawn by 
human agency has an imperishable value, my picture has its own for mankind to 
live. 
 
 
The Ideal 
Let India live for this true picture, though never re a lizable in its completeness. 
We must have a proper picture of what we want before we can have something 
approaching it. If there ever is to be a republic of every village in India, then I 
claim verity for my picture in which the last is equal to the first or, in other 
words, none is to be the first and none the last. In this picture every religion 
has its full and equal place. We are all leaves of a majestic tree whose trunk 
cannot be shaken off its roots which are deep down in the bowels of the earth. 
The mightiest wind cannot move it. In this there is no room for machines that 
would displaces human labour and would concentrate power in a few hands. 
Labour has its unique place in a cultured human family. Every machine that 
helps every individual has a place. But I must confess that I have never sat 
down to think out what that machine can be. I have thought of Singer's sewing 
machine. But even that is perfunctory. I do not need it to fill in my picture. 
(28-7-1946, p. 236) 
 
I know that the work [of making an ideal village] is as difficult as to make of 
India an ideal country. But, while it is possible for one man to fulfill his 
ambition with respect to a single village some day, one man's lifetime is too 
short to overtake the whole of India. But if one man can produce one ideal 
village, he will have provided a pattern not only for the whole country, but 
perhaps for the whole world. More than this a seeker may not aspire after. (H, 
4-8-1940, p. 235) 
 
 
Under Village Republics 
I have not pictured a poverty-stricken India containin g ignorant millions. I have 
pictured to myself an India continually progressing along the lines best suited to 
her genius. I do not, however, picture it as a third-class or even a first-class 
copy of the dying civilization of the West. If my dream is fulfilled, and every 
one of the seven lakhs of villages becomes a well-living republic in which there The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 358  are no illiterates, in which no one is idle for want of work, in which everyone is 
usefully occupied and has nourishing food, well-ventilated dwellings, and 
sufficient Khadi for covering the body, and in which all the villagers know and 
observe the laws of hygiene and sanitation such a State must have varied and 
increasing needs, which it must supply unless it would stagnate. (H, 30-7-1938, 
p. 200) 
 
 
Village Swaraj 
My idea of village Swaraj is that it is a complete re pu blic, independent of its 
neighbours for its own vita wants and yet interdependent for many others in 
which dependence is necessary. Thus, every village's first concern will be to 
grow its own food crops, and cotton for its cloth. It should have a reserve for its 
cattle, recreation and playground for adults and children. Then, if there is 
more land available, it will grow useful money crops, thus excluding GANJA, 
tobacco, opium and the like. The village will maintain a village theatre, school 
and public hall. It will have its own waterworks ensuring clean water supply. 
This can be done through controlled wells or tanks. Education will be 
compulsory up to the final basic course. As far as possible, every activity will 
be conducted on the co-operative basis. There will be no castes such as we 
have today with their graded untouchability. Non-violence with its technique of 
Satyagraha and non-co-operation will be the sanction of the village community. 
There will be a compulsory service of village guards who will be selected by 
rotation from the register maintained by the village. 
 
 
Government Of Village 
The Government of the village will be conducted by the  Panchayat of five 
persons, annually elected by the adult villagers, male and female, possessing 
minimum prescribed qualifications. These will have all the authority and 
jurisdiction required. Since there will be no system of punishments in the 
accepted sense, this Panchayat will be the legislature, judiciary and executive 
combined to operate for its year of office….. I have not examined here the 
question of relations with the neighbouring villages and the centre if any. My 
purpose is to present an outline of village government. Here there is perfect 
democracy based upon individual freedom. The individual is the architect of his 
own government. The law of non-violence rules him and his government. He 
and his village are able to defy the might of a word. For the law governing 
every villager is that he will suffer death in the defense of his and his village's 
honour..... There is nothing inherently impossible in the picture drawn here. To 
model such a village may be the work of a lifetime. Any lover of true The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 359  democracy and village life can take up a village, treat it as his world and sole 
work, and he will find good results. (H, 26-7-1942, p. 238) 
 
 
Public Opinion 
When Panchayat Raj is established, public opinion will  do what violence can 
never do. The present power of the zamindars, the capitalists and the rajas can 
hold sway so long as the common people do not realize their own strength. If 
the people non-co-operate with the evil of zamindari or capitalism, it must die 
of inanition. In Panchayat Raj, only the Panchayat will be obeyed and the 
Panchayat can only work through the law of their making. (H, 1-6-1947, p. 172) 
 
The real rulers are the toiling millions. (H, 15-6-1947, p. 193) 
 
 
Kisan-The Backbone 
In Panchayat Raj , the man who should count most in Indi a is naturally the 
kisan. How to advance him is the question. (H, 7-12-1947, p. 458) 
 
The greater the power of the Panchayat the better for the people. Moreover, 
Panchayat to be effective and efficient, the level of people's education has to 
be considerably raised. I do not conceive the increase in the power of the 
people in military, but in moral terms. Naturally, I swear by NAI TALIM in this 
connection. (H, 21-12-1947, p. 473) 
 
 
Function Of Panchayat 
It is the function of the Panchayat to revive honesty and industry…. It is the 
function of the Panchayats to teach the villagers to avoid disputes, if they have 
to settle them. This will ensure speedy justice without any expenditure. You 
will need neither the police nor the military… Then the Panchayat should see to 
cattle improvement. They should show steady increase in the mild yield….. The 
Panchayat should also see to an increase in the quantity of foodstuff grown in 
their village. This is to be accomplished by properly maturing the soil. You have 
your indigenous games. You should banish intoxicating drinks and drugs from 
your midst. I hope you will eradicate untouchability if there is any trace of it 
still in you village. The Hindus, the Muslims, the Sikhs, the Parsees and the 
Christians should all live as brothers and sisters. If you achieve all I have 
mentioned, you will demonstrate real independence, and people from all over 
India will come to see your model village and take inspiration from it. (H, 4-1-The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 360  1948, p. 500) 
 
 
State Of Panchayat 
If we would see our dream of Panchayat Raj, i.e., true  democracy realized, we 
would regard the humblest and lowest Indian as being equally the ruler of India 
with the tallest in the land. This presupposes that all are pure or will become 
pure if they are not. And purity must go hand-in-hand with wisdom. No one 
would then harbour any distinction between community, caste and out-caste. 
Everybody would regard all as equal with oneself and hold them together in the 
silken net of love. No one would regard another as untouchable. We would hold 
as equal the toiling labourer and the rich capitalist. Everybody would know how 
to earn an honest living by the sweat of one's brow and make no distinction 
between intellectual and physical labour. To hasten this consummation, we 
would voluntarily turn ourselves into scavengers. No one who has wisdom will 
ever touch opium, liquor or any intoxicants. Everybody would observe Swadeshi 
as the rule of life and man would regard every woman, not being his wife, as 
his mother, sister or daughter according to her age, never lust after her in his 
heart. He would be ready to lay down his life when occasion demands it, never 
want to take another's life… H, 18-1-1948, p. 517) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 361   
79. EDUCATION 
 
THE ANCIENT aphorism, 'Education is that which liberat es' is a true today as it 
was before. Education here does not mean mere spiritual knowledge, nor does 
liberation signify only spiritual liberation after death. Knowledge includes all 
training that is useful for the service of mankind and liberation means freedom 
from all manner of servitude even in the present life. Servitude is of two kinds: 
slavery to domination from outside and to one's own artificial needs. The 
knowledge acquired in the pursuit of this ideal alone constitutes true study. (H, 
10-3-1946, p. 38) 
 
 
Knowledge Of Living   
To
day pure water, good earth, fresh air is unknown to us. We do not know the 
inestimable value of ether and the sun. If we make wise use of these five 
powers and if we eat the proper and the balanced diet, we shall have done the 
work of the ages. For acquiring this knowledge, we need neither degrees nor 
cores of money. What we need are a living faith in God, a zeal for service, an 
acquaintance with the five powers of nature* and a knowledge of dietetics. All 
this can be acquired without wasting time in schools and colleges. (H, 1-9-1946, 
p. 286) 
 
Persistent questioning and healthy inquisitiveness are the first requisite for 
acquiring learning of any kind. Inquisitiveness should be tempered by humility 
and respectful regard for the teacher. It must not degenerate into impudence. 
The latter is the enemy of the receptivity of mind. There can be no knowledge 
without humility and the will to learn. (H, 8-9-1946, p. 306) 
 
Education must be of a new type for the sake of the creation of a new world. 
(H, 19-1-1947, p. 494) 
 
It is not literacy or learning which makes a man, but education for real life. (H, 
2-2-1947, p. 3) 
 
Side by side with adult franchise, or even before it, I plead for universal 
education, not necessarily literary except as, perhaps, an aid. English 
education. I am convinced, has starved our minds, enervated them and never 
prepared them for brave citizenship. I would give them all sufficient knowledge The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 362  in the rich languages of which any country will be proud. Education in the 
understanding of citizenship is a short-term affair if we are honest and earnest. 
(H, 2-3-1947, p. 46) 
 
 
Dignity Of Labour 
I hold that, as the largest part of our time is devote d to labour for earning our 
bread, our children must from their infancy be taught the dignity of such 
labour. Our children should not be so taught as to despise labour. There is no 
reason why a peasant's son, after having gone to school, should become useless, 
as he does become, as an agricultural labourer. (YI, 1-9-1921, p. 277) 
 
Literary education should follow the education of the hand-the one gift that 
visibly distinguishes man from beast. It is a superstition to think that the fullest 
development of man is impossible without a knowledge undoubtedly adds grace 
to life, but it is in no way indispensable for man's moral physical, or material 
growth. (H, 8-3-1935, p. 28) 
 
I hold that true education of the intellect can only come through a proper 
exercise and training of the bodily organs, e.g., hands, feet, eyes, ears, nose, 
etc. In other words, an intelligent use of the bodily organs in a child provides 
the best and quickest way of developing his intellect. But unless the 
development of the mind and body goes hand in hand with a corresponding 
awakening of the soul, the former alone would prove to be a poor lopsided 
affair. By spiritual training I mean education of the heart. A proper and all-
round development of the mind, therefore, can take place only when it 
proceeds PARI PASSU with the education of the physical and spiritual faculties 
of the child. They constitute an indivisible whole. According to this theory, 
therefore, it would be a gross fallacy to suppose that they can be developed 
piecemeal or independently of one another. 
 
 
Har
monious Blend 
The baneful effects of absence of proper co-ordination  and harmony among the 
various faculties of body, mind and soul respectively are obvious. They are all 
around us; only we have lost perception of them owing to our present perverse 
associations..... (H, 8-5-1937, p. 104) 
 
Man is neither mere intellect, nor the gross animal body, nor the heart or soul 
alone. A proper and harmonious combination of all three is required for the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 363  making of the whole man and constitutes the true economics of education. 
(ibid) 
 
By education I mean an all-round drawing out of the best in the child and man-
body, mind and spirit. Literacy is not the end of education nor even the 
beginning. It is only one of the means whereby man and woman can be 
educated. Literacy in itself is no education. I would therefore begin the child's 
education by teaching it a useful handicraft and enabling it to produce from the 
moment it begins its training..... I hold that the highest development of the 
mind and the soul is possible under such a system of education. Only every 
handicraft has to be taught not merely mechanically as is done today, but 
scientifically, i.e., the child should know the why and the wherefore of every 
process. (H, 31-7-1937, p. 197) 
 
I attach far more importance to the cultural aspect of education than to the 
literary.  
(H, 5-5-1946, p. 120) 
 
Useful manual labour, intelligently performed is the means PAR EXCELLENCE for 
developing the intellect….. A balanced intellect presupposes a harmonious 
growth of body, mind and soul. . . An intellect that is developed through the 
medium of socially useful labour will be an instrument for service and will not 
easily be led astray or fall into devious paths. (H, 8-9-1946, p. 306) 
 
 
Nai Talim 
Any basic craft to serve as a medium for education mus t answer the test of 
universality. (H, 25-8-1946, p. 283) 
 
Craft, art, health and education should all be integrated into one scheme. NAI 
TALIM is a beautiful blend of all the four and covers the whole education of the 
individual from the time of conception to the moment of death….. Instead of 
regarding craft and industry as different from education, I will regard the 
former as the medium for the latter. (H, 10-11-1946, p. 394) 
 
My NAI TALIM is not dependent on money. The running expenses should come 
from the educational process itself. Whatever the criticisms may be, I know 
that the only education is that which is 'self-supporting'. (H, 2-3-1947, p. 48) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 364   It is called the new method of education, for it is not a foreign importation or 
imposition, but is consistent with the environment in India which is 
predominantly made up of villages. It believes in establishing equilibrium 
between the body, the mind and the spirit of which man is made. It is unlike 
the Western type which is predominantly militarist, in which the mind and the 
body are the primary care of education to the subordination of the spirit. This 
is best done when education is given through handicrafts. The other specialty is 
that it is designed to be wholly self-supporting. It does not, therefore, demand 
an expenditure of millions on education. (H, 11-5-1947, p. 147) 
 
The teachers earn what they take. It stands for the art of living. Therefore, 
both the teacher and the pupil have to produce in the very act of teaching and 
learning. It enriches life from the commencement. It makes the nation 
independent of the search for employment. (ibid, p. 145) 
 
Our system of education leads to the development of the mind, body and soul. 
The ordinary system cares only for the mind. (H, 9-11-1947, p. 401) 
 
It is popularly and correctly described as education through handicrafts. This is 
part of the truth. The root of this new education goes much deeper. It lies in 
the application of truth and love in every variety of human activity, whether in 
individual life or a corporate one. The notion of education through handicrafts 
rises from the contemplation of truth and love permeating life's activities. Love 
requires that true education should be easily accessible to all, and should be of 
use to every villager in his daily life. Such education is not derived from, nor 
does it depend upon books. It has no relation to sectional religion. If it can be 
called religious, it is universal religion. If it can be called religious, it is 
universal religion from which all sectional religions are derived. Therefore, it is 
learnt from the Book of life which costs nothing and which cannot be taken 
away from one by any force on earth. (H, 21-12-1947, p. 480) 
 
 
University Education 
The aim of university education should be to turn out true servants of the 
people who will live and die for the country's freedom. I am therefore of 
opinion that university education should be co-ordinate and brought into line 
with basic education. . . . (H, 25-8-1946, P. 283) 
 
As for women's education, I am not sure whether it should be different from 
men's and when it should have begun. But I am strongly of opinion that women The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 365  should have the same facilities as men and even special facilities where 
necessary. (h, 5-8-1950, P. 195, Ashram Activities (1932) Tr. V. G. Desai) 
 
I have never been an advocate of our students going abroad. My experience 
tells me that such, on return, find themselves to be square pegs in round holes. 
That experience is the richest and contributes most to growth which springs 
from the soil. (H, 8-9-1946, p. 308) 
 
 
Code For Students   
Ag
itation is only for those who have completed their s tudies. While studying, 
the only occupation of students must be to increase their knowledge... All 
education in a country has got to be demonstrably in promotion of the progress 
of the country in which it is given. (H, 7-9-1947, p. 312) 
 
The students should be, above all, humble and correct…… The greatest to be 
great has to be the lowliest by choice. If I can speak from my knowledge of 
Hindu belief, the life of a student is to correspond to the life of a SANNYASI up 
to the time his studies end. He is to under the strictest discipline. He cannot 
marry, nor indulge in dissipation. He cannot indulge in drinks and the like. His 
behaviour is to be a pattern of exemplary self-restraint. (ibid, p. 314) 
 
 
Medium Of Instruction   
I f
ind daily proof of the increasing and continuing wrong being done to the 
millions by our false de-Indianizing education..... We seem to have come to 
think that no one can hope to be like a Bose unless he knows English. I cannot 
conceive a grosser superstition than this. No Japanese feels so helpless as we 
seem to do….The medium of instruction should be altered at once and at any 
cost, the provincial languages being given their rightful place. I would prefer 
temporary chaos in higher education to the criminal waste that is daily 
accumulating. In order to enhance the status and the marker-value of the 
provincial languages, I would have the language of the law courts to be the 
language of the province where the court is situated. The proceedings of the 
provincial Legislatures must be in the language, or even the languages, of the 
province where a province has more than one language, within its borders…At 
the centre Hindustani must rule supreme. In my opinion, this is not a question 
to be decided by academicians..... When this country becomes really free, the 
question of medium will be settled only one way. The academicians will frame 
the syllabus and prepare text-books accordingly. And the products of the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 366  education of a free India will answer the requirements of the country.…So long 
as we, the educated classes, play with this question, I very much fear we shall 
not produce the free and healthy India of our dream. We have to grow by 
strenuous effort out of our bondage, whether it is educational, economic, 
social or political. The effort itself is three-fourths of the battle. (H, 9-7-1938, 
pp. 177-8) 
 
I have no doubt whatsoever that, if those who have the education of the youth 
in their hands will but make up their minds, they will discover that the mother 
tongue is as natural for the development of man's mind as mother's milk is for 
the development of the infant's body. How can it be otherwise? The babe takes 
its first lesson from its mother. I, therefore, regard it as a sin against the 
motherland to inflict upon her children a tongue other than their mother's for 
their mental development. (MI, p. 8) 
 
 
National Language 
The interprovincial language..... can only be Hindusta ni written in Nagari or 
Urdu script… My plea is for banishing English as a cultural usurper, as we 
successfully banished the political rule of the English usurper. The rich English 
language will ever retain its natural place as the international speech of 
commerce and diplomacy. (H, 21-9-1947, p. 332) 
 
The re-distribution of provinces on a linguistic basis is necessary if provincial 
languages are to grow to their full height. Hindustani is to be the lingua franca 
-Rashtra Bhasha-of India, but it cannot take the place of the provincial tongues. 
It cannot be the medium of instruction in the provinces-much less English. Its 
function is to make them realize their organic relationship with India. (H, 1-2-
1948, p. 14) 
 
 
English Language 
The highest development of the Indian mind must be pos sible without 
knowledge of English. (YI, 2-2-1921, p. 34) 
 
It is my considered opinion that English education in the manner it has been has 
emasculated the English-educated Indians, it has put a severe strain upon the 
Indian students' nervous energy, and has made of us imitators..... No country 
can become a nation by producing a race of translators. (YI, 27-4-1921, p. 130) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 367  English is today admittedly the world language. I would therefore accord it a 
place as a second, optional language, not in the school, but in the university 
course. That can only be for the select few-not for the millions..... It is our 
mental slavery that makes us feel that we cannot do without English. O can 
never subscribe to that defeatist creed. (H, 25-8-1946, p.284) 
 
 
Literature 
I must not be understood to decry English or its nobl e  literature. The columns 
of the HARIJAN are sufficient evidence of my love of English. But the nobility of 
its literature cannot avail the Indian nation any more than the temperate 
climate or the scenery of England can avail her. India has to flourish in her own 
climate, and scenery, and her own literature, even though all the three may be 
inferior to the English climate, scenery and literature. We and our children 
must build on our own heritage. If we borrow another, we impoverish our own. 
We can never grow on foreign victuals. I want the nation to have the treasures 
contained in that language and, for that matter, in other languages of the 
world, through its own vernaculars. I do not need to learn Bengali in order to 
know the beauties of Rabindranath's matchless productions. I get them through 
good translations. Gujarati boys and girls do not need to learn Russian to 
appreciate Tolstoy's short stories. They learn them through good translations. It 
is the boast of Englishmen that the best of the world's literary output is in the 
hands of that nation in simple English inside of a week of its publication. Why 
need I learn English to get at the best of what Shakespeare and Milton thought 
and wrote? (H, 9-7-1938, p. 177) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 368   
80. LINGUISTIC PROVINCES 
 
I W
AS principally instrumental in securing from the Congress the recognition of 
the redistribution of the provinces for Congress purposes, on a linguistic basis. I 
have always agitated for the acceptance by the government of such 
redistribution. (H, 29-3-1942, p. 97) 
 
I believe that the linguistic basis is the correct basis for demarcating provinces. 
I should not mind two provinces speaking the same language, if they are not 
contiguous. If Kerala and Karnataka were speaking the same language, I would 
treat them as two distinct provinces. (H, 19-4-1942, p.118) 
 
 
Provincial Universities 
I do believe that there should be such universities if …. Rich provincial languages 
and the people who speak them are to attain their full height. At the same 
time I fear that we betray ourselves into undue haste in accomplishing the 
object. The first step should be linguistic political redistribution of provinces.  
(H, 2-11-1947, p. 392) 
 
The exclusive spirit is eve uppermost. Everyone thinks of himself and his family. 
No one thinks of the whole of India. The centripetal force is undoubtedly there, 
but it is not vocal, never boisterous; whereas the centrifugal is on the surface, 
and in its very nature makes the loudest noise, demanding the attention of all. 
It manifests itself in matters communal. This has given rise to fear in other 
fields… 
Even zealous reformers would postpone controversial issues to a more hopeful 
time when, in the interest of the country, the virtue of 'give and take' would be 
freely recognized and all sectional interests would be subordinate to the one 
interest of the good of India, which will include the good of all. 
Therefore, those who, like me, want constructive suggestions to come into play 
at this very moment, have to work to bring about a healthy atmosphere, 
promoting concord in the place of discord, peace in the place of strife, progress 
in the place of retrogression and life in the place of death.  
(H, 30-11-1947, p. 436) 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 369  No Exclusive Provincialism 
I hold that the people of all the provinces belong to India and India belong to 
all. The only condition is that no one can go and settle in another province to 
exploit it or rule it or to injure its interest in any way. All are servants of India 
and they live only in the spirit of service. (H, 7-9-1947, p. 311) 
 
The bane of our life is our exclusive provincialism, whereas my province must 
be co-extensive with the Indian boundary so that ultimately it extends to the 
boundary of the earth. Else it perishes. (H, 21-9-1947, p.333) 
 
 
Unity Of India 
The congress has already adopted that principle [of re constitution of provinces 
on a linguistic basis] and has declared its intention to give effect to it 
constitutionally as soon as they came to power; as such, redistribution will be 
conducive to the cultural advancement of the country. But such redistribution 
should not militate against the organic unity of India. Autonomy does not and 
should not mean disruption, or that hereafter provinces could go the way they 
chose, independent of one another and of the Centre. If each province begins 
to look upon it-self as a separate, sovereign unit, India's independence will lose 
its meaning and with it will vanish the freedom of the various units as well..... 
The world outside does not know us as Gujaratis, Maharashtri[an]s. Tamilians 
etc., but only as Indians. We must, therefore, resolutely discourage all 
fissiparous tendencies and feel and behave as Indians. Subject to this 
paramount consideration, a linguistic redistribution of provinces should give an 
impetus to education and trade. (H, 1-2-1948,p.14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 370   
81. COW PROTECTION 
 
Pla
ce Of The Cow  
THE
 COW is a poem of pity. One reads pity in the gentle animal. She is the 
mother to millions of Indian mankind. Protection of the cow means protection 
of the whole dumb creation of God. The ancient seer, whoever he was, began 
with the cow. The appeal of the lower order of creation is all the more forcible 
because it is speechless. (YI, 6-10-1921, p. 36) 
 
…The cow is the purest type of sub-human life. She pleads before us on behalf 
of the whole of the sub-human species for justice to it at the hands of man, the 
first among all that lives. She seems to speak to us through her eyes: 'you are 
not appointed over us to kill us and eat our flesh or otherwise ill-treat us, but 
to be our friend and guardian'. (YI, 26-6-1924, p. 214) 
 
I worship it and I shall defend its worship against the whole world. (YI, 1-1-
1925, p. 8) 
 
Mother cow is in many ways better than the mother who gave us birth. Our 
mother gives us milk for a couple of years and then expects us to serve her 
when we grow up. Mother cow expects from us nothing but grass and grain. Our 
mother often falls ill and expects service from us. Mother cow rarely falls ill. 
Here is an unbroken record of service which does not end with her death. Our 
mother, when she dies, means expenses of burial or cremation. Mother cow is 
as useful dead as when she is alive. We can make use of every part of her body-
her flesh, her bones, her intestines, her horns and her skin. Well, I say this not 
to disparage the mother who gives us birth, but in order to show you the 
substantial reasons for my worshipping the cow. (H, 15-9-1940, p. 281) 
 
 
The Cow In Hinduism 
The central fact of Hinduism is cow protection. Cow pr otection to me is one of 
the most wonderful phenomena in human evolution. It takes the human being 
beyond this species. The cow to me means the entire sub-human world. Man 
through the cow is enjoined to realize his identity with all that lives. Why the 
cow was selected for apotheosis is obvious to me. The cow was in India the best 
companion. She was the giver of plenty. Not only did she give milk, but she also 
made agriculture possible…..... The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 371  Cow protection is the gift of Hinduism to the world. And Hinduism will live so 
long as there are Hindus to protect the cow…… Hindus will be judged not by 
their TILAKS, not by the correct chanting of MANTRAS, not by their pilgrimages, 
not by their most punctilious observances of caste rules, but their ability to 
protect the cow. (YI, 6-10-1921, p. 36) 
 
 
Cow-Slaughter  
I would not kill a human being for protection a cow, a s I will not kill a cow for 
saving a human life, be it ever so precious. (YI, 18-5-1921, p. 156) 
 
My religion teaches me that I should by personal conduct instill into the minds 
of those who might hold different views, the conviction that cow-killing is a sin 
and that, therefore, it ought to be abandoned. (YI, 29-1-1925, p. 38) 
 
Cow slaughter can never be stopped by law. Knowledge, education, and the 
spirit of kindliness towards her alone can put and end to it. It will not be 
possible to save those animals that are a burden on the land or, perhaps, even 
man if he is a burden. (H, 15-9-1946, p. 310) 
 
My ambition is no less than to see the principle of cow protection established 
throughout the world. But that requires that I should set my own house 
thoroughly in order first. (YI, 29-1-1925, p. 38) 
 
Cow protection to me is not mere protection of the cow. It means protection of 
that lives and is helpless and weak in the world. (YI, 7-5-1925, p. 160) 
 
But lit me reiterate….that legislative prohibition is the smallest part of any 
programme of cow protection. …People seem to think that, when a law is 
passed against any evil, it will die without any further effort. There never was 
a grosser self-deception. Legislation is intended and is effective against an 
ignorant or a small, evil-minded minority; but no legislation which is opposed 
by an intelligent and organized public opinion, or under cover of religion by a 
fanatical minority, can ever succeed. The more I study the question of cow 
protection, the stronger the conviction grows upon me that protection of the 
cow and her progeny can be attained only if there is continuous and sustained 
constructive effort along the lines suggested by me. (YI, 7-7-1927, p. 219) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 372  Goseva 
Preservation of cattle is a vital part of GOSEVA. It i s a vital question for India . . 
. There is urgent need for deep study and the spirit of sacrifice. To amass 
money and dole out charity does not connote real business capacity. To know 
how to preserve cattle, to impart this knowledge to the millions, to live up to 
the ideal oneself, and to spend money on this endeavor is real business. (H, 17-
2-1946, p.11) 
 
In so far as the pure economic necessity of cow protection is concerned, it can 
be easily secured if the question was considered on that ground alone. In that 
event all t he dry cattle, the cows who give less mild than their keep, and the 
aged and unfit cattle would be slaughtered without a second thought. This 
soulless economy has no place in India, although the inhabitants of this land of 
paradoxes may be, indeed are, guilty of many soulless acts. 
 
 
Positive Measures 
Then, how can the cow be save without having to kill h er off when she ceases 
to give the economic quantity of milk or when one becomes otherwise an 
uneconomic burden? The answer to the question can be summed up as follows: 
1. By the Hindus performing their duty towards the cow and her progeny. If 
they did so, our cattle would be the pride of India and the world. The contrary 
is the case today. 
2. By learning the science of cattle-breeding. Today there is perfect anarchy in 
this work. 
3. By replacing the present cruel method of castration by the humane method 
practiced in the West. 
4. By thorough reform of the pinjrapoles  [institutions for aged cows] of India 
which are today, as a rule, managed ignorantly and without any plan by men 
who do not know their work. 
5. When these primary things are done, it will be found that the Muslims will, 
of their own accord, recognize the necessity, if only for the sake of their 
Hindus brethren, of not slaughtering cattle for beef or otherwise. 
The reader will observe that behind the foregoing requirements lies one thing 
and that is ahimsa , otherwise known as universal compassion. If that supreme 
thing is realized, everything else becomes easy. Where there is ahimsa, there 
is infinite patience, inner calm, discrimination, self-sacrifice and true 
knowledge. (H, 31-8-1947, p. 300) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 373   
82. CO-OPERATIVE CATTLE FARMING 
 
IT 
IS quite impossible for an individual farmer to look after the welfare of his 
cattle in his own home in a proper and scientific manner. Amongst other 
causes, lack of collective effort has been a principal cause of the deterioration 
of the cow and hence of cattle in general. The world today is moving towards 
the ideal of collective or co-operative effort in every department of life. Much 
in this line has been and is being accomplished. It has come into our country 
also, but in such a distorted form that our poor have not been able to reap its 
benefits. PARI PASSU with the increase in our population, land holdings of the 
average farmer are daily decreasing. Moreover, what the individual possesses is 
often fragmentary. For such farmers to keep cattle in their home is a suicidal 
policy; and yet this is their condition today. Those who give the first place to 
economics and pay scant attention to religious, ethical or humanitarian 
considerations proclaim from the house-tops that the farmer is being devoured 
by his cattle due to the cost of their feed which is out of all proportion to what 
they yield. They say it is folly not to slaughter wholesale all useless animals. 
What then should be done by humanitarians is the question. The answer 
obviously is to find a way whereby we may not only save the lives of our cattle, 
but also see that they do not become a burden. I am sure that co-operative 
effort can help us in a large measure. The following comparison may be 
helpful: Under the collective system, no farmer can keep cattle in his house as 
he does today. They foul the air, and dirty the surroundings. There is neither 
intelligence nor humanitarianism in living with animals. Man was not meant to 
do so. The space taken up by the cattle today would be spared to the farmer 
and his family if the collective system were adopted. As the number of cattle 
increases, life becomes impossible to the farmer in his home. Hence he is 
obliged to sell the calves and kill the male buffaloes or else turn them out to 
starve and die. This inhumanity would be averted if the care of the cattle were 
undertaken on a co-operative basis. Collective cattle farming would ensure the 
supply of veterinary treatment to animals when they are ill. No ordinary farmer 
can afford this on his own. Similarly, one selected bull can be easily kept for 
the need of several cows under the collective system. This is impossible 
otherwise except for charity. Common grazing ground or land for exercising the 
animals will be easily available under the co-operative system, whereas today, 
generally, there is nothing of the kind for individual farmers. The expense on 
fodder will be comparatively far less under the collective system. The sale of 
mild at good prices will be greatly facilitated and there will be no need or 
temptation for the farmer to adulterate it as he does as an individual. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 374  It is impossible to carry out tests of the fitness of every head of cattle 
individually, but this could easily be done for the cattle of a whole village and 
would thus make it easier to improve the breed. The foregoing advantages 
should be sufficient argument in favour of co-operative cattle farming. The 
strongest argument in its favour is that the individualistic system has been the 
means of making our own condition as well as that of our cattle pitiable. We 
can only save ourselves and them by making this essential change. I firmly 
believe too that we shall not derive the full benefits of agriculture until we 
take to co-operative farming. Does it not stand to reason that it is far better 
for a hundred families in a village to cultivate their lands collectively and 
divide the income therefore than to divide the land anyhow into a hundred 
portions? And what applies to land applied equally to cattle. It is quite another 
matter that it may be difficult to convert people to adopt this way of life 
straightaway. The straight and narrow road is always hard to traverse. Every 
step in the programme of cow service is strewn with thorny problems. But only 
by surmounting difficulties can we hope to make the path easier. My purpose 
for the time being is to show the great superiority of collective cattle farming 
over the individual effort. I hold further that the latter is wrong and the former 
only is right. In reality, even the individual can only safeguard his independence 
through co-operation. In cattle farming, the individual effort has led to 
selfishness and inhumanity, whereas the collective effort can abate both the 
evils, if it does not remove them altogether. (H, 5-2-1942, p. 39) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 375   
83. NATURE CURE  
I BELIEVE that man has little need to drug himself. 99 9 cases out of a thousand 
can be brought round by means of a well-regulated diet, water and earth 
treatment and similar household remedies. (A, p. 199) 
 
I hold that where the rules of personal, domestic and public sanitation are 
strictly observed and due care is taken in the matter of diet and exercise, there 
should be no occasion for illness or disease. Where there is absolute purity, 
inner and outer, illness becomes impossible. If the village people could but 
understand this, they would not need doctors, HAKIMS OR VAIDYAS……. (H, 26-
5-1946, p. 153) 
 
 
Better Life 
Nature cure implies an ideal mode of life and that in its turn presupposes ideal 
living conditions in towns and villages. The name of God is, of course, the hub 
round which the nature cure system revolves. (ibid) 
 
Nature cure implies that the treatment should be the cheapest and the simplest 
possible. The ideal is that such treatment should be carried out in the villages. 
The villagers should be able to provide the necessary means and equipment. 
What cannot be had in the villages should be procured. Nature cure does mean 
a change for the better in one's outlook on life itself. It means regulation of 
one's life in accordance with the laws of health. It is not a matter of taking the 
free medicine from the hospital or for fees. A man who takes free treatment 
from the hospital accepts charity. The man who accepts nature cure never 
begs. Self-help enhances self-respect. He takes steps to cure himself by 
eliminating poisons from the system and takes precautions against falling ill in 
the future..... (H, 2-6-1946, p. 165) 
 
 
Right Diet 
Right diet and balanced diet are necessary. Today our villages are as bankrupt 
as we are ourselves. To produce enough vegetables, fruits and milk in the 
villages is an essential part of the nature cure scheme. Time spent on this 
should not be considered a waste. It is bound to benefit all the villagers and, 
ultimately, the whole of India. (ibid) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 376  The essence of nature cure is that we learn the principles of hygiene and 
sanitation and abide by those laws as well as the laws relating to proper 
nutrition. Thus does every one become his own doctor. 
The man who eats to live, who is friends with the five power-earth, water, 
ether, sun and air and who is a servant of God, the Creator of all these, ought 
not to fall ill. If he does, he will remain calm relying on God and die in peace, 
if need be. If there are any medicinal herbs in the fields of his village, he may 
make use of them. Cores live and die like this without a murmur. They have not 
so much as heard of a doctor, much less seen one face to face.  
(H, 1-9-1946, pp. 285-6) 
 
 
Disease 
Disease springs from a willful or ignorant breach of t he laws of nature. It 
follows, therefore, that timely return to those laws should mean restoration. A 
person who has tried nature beyond endurance, must either suffer the 
punishment inflicted by nature or in order to avoid it, seek the assistance of 
the physician or the surgeon as the case may be. Every submission to merited 
punishment strengthens the mind of man, every avoidance saps it.  
(H, 15-9-21946, p. 311) 
 
My love of nature cure and of indigenous system does not blind me to the 
advance that Western medicine has made in spite of the fact that I have 
stigmatized it as black magic. I have used the harsh term, and I do not 
withdraw it, because of the fact that it has countenanced vivisection and all 
the awfulness it means and because it will stop at no practice, however bad it 
may be, if it prolongs the life of the body and because it ignores the immortal 
soul which resides in the body. I cling to nature cure in spite of its great 
limitations and in spite of the lazy pretensions of nature curists. (H, 11-8-1946, 
p. 259) 
 
 
Meant For Villages 
My nature cure is designed solely for villagers and vil lages. Therefore, there is 
no place in it for the microscope, X-rays and similar things. Nor is there room in 
nature cure for medicines such as quinine, emetine and penicillin. Personal 
hygiene and healthy living are of primary importance. And these should suffice. 
If everyone could achieve perfection in this art, there could be no disease. And, 
while obeying all the laws of nature in order to cure illness, if it does come, the 
sovereign remedy ever lies in RAMANAMA. But this cures though RAMANAMA The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 377  cannot become universal in the twinkling of an eye. To carry conviction to the 
patient, the physician has to be a living embodiment of the power of 
RAMANAMA. (ibid, p. 260) 
 
Let us become really village-minded. Village children and adults come to us. 
Let us teach them how to live truly. Doctors aver that 99% of disease springs 
from insanitation, from eating the wrong food and from under-nourishment. If 
we can teach this 99% the art of living, we can afford to forger the 1%..... to 
look after them. We need not worry about them. (H, 1-9-1946, p. 286) 
 
I would like to know what the medical men and scientists are doing for the 
country. One finds them readily going to foreign lands to learn new modes of 
treating special diseases. I suggest that they should turn their attention 
towards the seven lakhs of the villages of India. They would immediately 
discover that all the qualified men and women are required for village service, 
not after the manner of the West, but after the manner of the East. They will 
adapt themselves to many indigenous systems. 
India does not need imported drugs from the West when she has an 
inexhaustible stock of a variety of drugs grown in the villages themselves. But 
more than drugs they have to teach the people the right mode of living. (H, 15-
6-1947, pp. 184-5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 378   
84. CORPORATE SANITATION 
 
Civil
 Conscience 
CORPORATE CLEANLINESS can only be ensured if there is a corporate 
conscience and a corporate insistence on cleanliness in public places. 
Untouchability has a great deal to answer for the insanitation of our streets and 
our latrines, whether private or public. 
In its inception, untouchability was a rule of sanitation, and still is in all parts 
of the world outside India. That is to say, an unclean person or thing is 
untouchable, but immediately his or its uncleanliness is shed, he or it is no 
linger untouchable. Therefore, a person who is to attend to scavenging, 
whether it is a paid BHANGI or an unpaid mother, they are unclean until they 
have washed themselves clean of their unclean work. (H, 11-2-1933, p.8) 
 
 
Municipalities  
No municipality can cope with insanitation and congest ion by the simple 
process of taxation and paid services. This vital reform is possible only by 
wholesale and voluntary co-operation of the people, both rich and poor. 
(YI, 26-11-1925, p. 416) 
 
If I were a taxpayer within the jurisdiction of a local board or a municipality, I 
would refuse to pay a single pie by way of additional taxation and advise others 
to do likewise unless the money we pay is returned fourfold. Those who enter 
local boards and municipalities as representatives go there not to seek honour 
or to indulge in mutual rivalries, but to render a service of love and that does 
not depend upon money. 
Ours is a pauper country. If our municipal councilors are imbued with a real 
spirit of service, they will convert themselves into unpaid sweepers, BHANGIS 
and road makers, and take pride in doing so. They will invite their fellow-
councilors, who may not have come on the Congress ticket, to join them and if 
they have faith in themselves and their mission, their example will not fail to 
evoke response. 
This means that a municipal councilor has to be whole-timer. He should have no 
axe of his own to grind. The next step would be to map out the entire adult 
population within the jurisdiction of the municipality or the local board. All 
should be asked to make their contribution to municipal activities. A regular 
register should be maintained. Those who are too poor to make any money The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 379  contribution but are able-bodied and physically fit can be asked to give their 
free labour. (H, 18-2-1939, p. 22) 
 
 
Offences Against Nature 
Anyone who fouls the air by spitting about carelessly,  throwing refuse and 
rubbish, or otherwise dirtying the ground, sins against man and nature. Man's 
body is the temple of God. Anyone who fouls the air that is to enter that 
temple desecrates it. He takes the name of RAMA in vain. (H, 7-4-1946, p. 69) 
 
A sense of national or social sanitation is not a virtue among us. We may take a 
kind of a bath, but we do not mind dirtying the well or the tank or the river by 
whose side or in which we perform ablution. I regard this defect as a great vice 
which is responsible for the disgraceful state of our villages and the sacred 
banks of the sacred rivers and for the diseases that spring that spring from 
insanitation. (CP, p. 15) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 380   
85. COMMUNAL HARMONY 
 
IF NOT during my life-time, if know that after my deat h both Hindus and 
Mussalmans will bear witness that I had never ceased to yearn after communal 
peace. (YI, 11-5-1921, p. 148) 
 
My longing is to be able to cement the two [Hindus and Muslims] with my blood, 
if necessary. (YI, 25-9-1924, p. 314) 
 
I have the same love for the Mussalman as for the Hindu. My heart feels for the 
Mussalman as much as for the Hindu. If I could tear it open, you would discover 
there are no compartments in it, one reserved for the Hindu, another for the 
Mussalman and so on. (YI, 13-8-1921, p. 215) 
 
 
Meaning Of Unity 
[Hindu-Muslim unity] has been my passion from early yo uth. I count some of the 
noblest of Muslims as my friends. I have a devout daughter of Islam as more 
than daughter to me. She lives for that unity and would cheerfully die for it. I 
had the son of the late Muezzin of the Jama Masjid of Bombay as a staunch 
inmate of the Ashram. (H, 30-4-1938, p. 99) 
 
[Hindu-Muslim unity] consists in our having a common purpose, a common goal 
and common sorrows. It is best promoted by co-operating to reach the common 
goal by sharing of one another's sorrows and by mutual toleration.  
(YI, 25-2-1920, p. 3) 
 
Hindu-Muslim unity means not unity only between Hindus and Mussalmans, but 
between all those who believe India to be their home, no matter to what faith 
they belong. (YI, 11-5-1921, p. 148) 
 
Love is the basis of our friendship as it is of religion. I seek to gain Mussalman 
friendship by right of love. And if love persists even on the part of one 
community, unity will become a settled fact in our national life.  
(YI, 20-10-1921, p. 333) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 381  One Family 
The golden way is to be friends with the world and to regard the whole human 
family like members of one family. He who distinguishes between one's family 
and another's mis-educates the members of his own and opens the way for 
discord and irreligion. (H, 17-11-1946, p. 402) 
 
 
Communal Riots 
The lawlessness [of communalism] is a monster with ma n y faces. It hurts all in 
the end, including those who are primarily responsible for it.  
(H, 15-9-1940, p.284) 
 
If one side ceases to retaliate, the riots will not go on. (H, 14-7-1946, p. 219) 
 
To retaliate against the relatives of the co-religionists of the wrong-doer is a 
cowardly act. (H, 17-11-1946, p.408) 
 
There must arise in Islam as well as Hinduism men who, being comparatively 
pure in character, would work among such men (GOONDAS).  
(YI, 29-8-1924, p. 181) 
 
We would convert and control the hooligan elements. (H, 7-4-1946, p. 74) 
 
There is no room for GOONDAISM in any religion worth the name, be it Islam, 
Hinduism or any other. (H, 5-1-1947, p. 478) 
 
 
Respect For Religions   
Ea
ch must respect the other's religion must refrain fr om even secretly thinking 
ill of the other. (YI, 7-5-1919) 
 
No propaganda can be allowed which reviles other religions. (YI, 29-5-1924, 
p.180) 
 
To revile one another's religion, to make reckless statements, to utter untruth, 
to break the heads of innocent men, to desecrate temples or mosques is a 
denial of God. (YI, 25-9-1924, p. 313) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 382  The key to the solution of the [communal] tangle lies in every one following the 
best in this own religion and entertaining equal regard for the other religions 
and their followers. (H, 4-1-1948, p. 497) 
 
In trying to explore the hidden treasures of ancient culture, I have come upon 
this inestimable boon that all that is permanent in ancient Hindu culture is also 
to be found in the teaching of Jesus, the Buddha, Mohamed and Zoroaster. 
(WGC, p. 131) 
 
Hinduism has absorbed the best of all the faiths of the world and in that sense 
is not an exclusive religion. Hence it can have no quarrel with Islam or its 
followers. (H, 28-9-1947, p. 349) 
 
The sword is no emblem of Islam. But Islam was born in an environment where 
the sword was, and still remains, the supreme law... The sword is yet too much 
in evidence among the Mussalmans. It must be sheathed if Islam is to be what it 
means-peace. (YI, 30-12-1926, p. 458) 
 
Islam distinctive contribution….. is its unadulterated belief in the oneness of 
God and a practical application of the truth of the brotherhood of man for 
those who are nominally within its fold. (YI, 21-3-1929, p. 95) 
 
Islam means peace. The peace cannot be confined to the Muslims. It must mean 
peace for the whole world. (H, 22-8-1940, p. 294) 
 
 
Proselytization 
The days of forcible conversion are gone. (YI, 30-12-1 926, p. 148) 
 
It is the transference of allegiance from one fold to another and the mutual 
denying of rival faiths which gives rise to mutual hatred. (YI, 6-1-1927, p. 1) 
 
There is nothing in the Koran to warrant the use of force for conversion. (YI, 
29-9-1921, p. 307) 
 
Just as we do not break one another's heads in respect of civil matters, so may 
we not do even in respect of religious matters. (YI, 29-5-1924, p. 176) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 383  I am convinced that the masses do not want to fight, if the leaders do not. If 
therefore the leaders agree that mutual rows should be, as in all advanced 
countries, erased out of our public life as being barbarous and irreligious, I 
have no doubt that the masses will quietly follow them. (ibid, p.182) 
 
 
Arbitration 
It [arbitration] is an age-long method and a civilized method. 
(H, 24-5-1942, p. 166) 
 
Mutual toleration is a necessity for all time and for all races.  
(YI, 25-2-1920, p. 3) 
 
Honest public opinion should make it impossible for grieved parties to take the 
law into their own hands and every case [of dispute] must be referred to 
private arbitration or to law courts.… (YI, 5-6-1924, p. 188) 
 
 
Music Before Mosques 
Where the Hindus have long been deliberately observing  the custom to stop 
music before mosques, they must not break it. But where they have been 
playing music without interference, the practice should continue. Where 
trouble is apprehended and facts are disputed both communities ought to refer 
the matter to arbitration. (YI, 18-9-1924, p. 312) 
 
 
The Cow 
The Hindu's religion consists in saving the cow, but i t can never be his religion 
to save the cow by a resort to force towards a non-Hindu. (ibid, p. 311) 
 
… It would be unwise… and improper for a Hindu majority to coerce by 
legislation a Mussalman minority into submission to statutory prohibition of cow 
slaughter. (YI, 29-1-1925, p. 38) 
 
 
Scripts 
My advice about the adoption of the scripts (Hindi an d Urdu) by Hindus and 
Muslims is based on the unitary method. (H, 1-2-1942, p. 27) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 384   
The Services 
It will be fatal to good government if we introduce th ere [in Government 
departments] the communal spirit. (YI, 29-5-1924, p. 182) 
 
Minorities are entitled to the fullest justice. Efficiency and merit alone should 
count… (H, 27-7-1947, p. 50) 
 
 
Toleration 
The unity we desire will last only if we cultivate an  yielding and charitable 
disposition towards one another. (YI, 11-5-1921, p. 148) 
 
Toleration is the only thing that will enable persons belonging to different 
religions to live as good neighbours and friends. (H, 3-11-1946, p. 383) 
 
 
Secularism 
Nationalism is greater than sectarianism. And in that sense, we are Indians first 
and Hindus, Mussalmans, Parsis and Christians after. (YI, 26-1-1922, p.62) 
 
The state is bound to be wholly secular... All subjects will thus be equal in the 
eye of the law. But every single individual will be free to pursue a religion 
without let or hindrance so long as it does not transgress the common law. 
(H, 31-8-1947, p. 297) 
 
 
Equal Citizenship 
The minorities must be made to realize that they are a s much valued citizens of 
the State they live in as the majority to look to for justice.  
(H, 7-9-1947, p. 310) 
 
If the Hindu majority treasure their religion and duty, they will be just at all 
cost. They will overlook the limitations or mistakes of the minority who have no 
one but the majority to look to for justice. (H, 31-8-1947, p. 298) 
 
You should treat the Muslims as equal citizens. Equality of treatment demands 
respect for the Urdu script. (H, 26-10-1947, p.383) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 385  No oppression should be felt by the minorities, however small they may be. 
There is need for the gentlest handling of all such questions [as language, 
script] (ibid, p. 387) 
 
My one aim with respect to the Hindu-Muslim question is that the solution will 
be complete only when the minority, whether in the Indian Union or Pakistan, 
feels perfectly safe, even if they are in the minority of one. (H, 14-9-1947, p. 
323) 
 
Hindu and Sikh women should go to the Muslim sisters and establish friendship 
with them. They should invite them on ceremonial occasions and be invited. 
Muslim girls and boy should be attracted to common schools, not communal. 
They should mix in sports. (H, 25-1-1940, p. 536) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 386   
86. THE GOSPEL OF THE CHARKHA 
 
Unt
o The Poor 
I THINK of the poor of India every time that I draw a thread on the wheel. The 
poor of India today have lost faith in God, more so than the middle classes or 
the rich. For a person suffering from the pangs of hunger, and desiring nothing 
but to fill his belly is his God. To him any one who gives him his bread is his 
Master. Through him he may even see God. To give alms to such persons, who 
are sound in all their limbs, is to debase oneself and them. What they need is 
some kind of occupation, and the occupation that will give employment to 
millions can only be hand-spinning. 
…. I have described my spinning as a penance or sacrament. And, since I believe 
that where there is pure and active love for the poor there is God also, I see 
God in every thread that I draw on the spinning-wheel. (YI, 20-5-1926, p. 187) 
 
...The spinning-wheel enables us to identify ourselves with cores. The 
millionaires imagine that money can bring them anything in the world. But it is 
not so. At any moment death might come and snuff them out…. Losing one's 
life…is not the same thing as shedding 'self'. One has to learn to efface self or 
the ego voluntarily and as a sacrifice in order to find God. The spinning-wheel 
rules out exclusiveness. It stands for all inclusiveness. It stands for all including 
the poorest. It, therefore, requires us to be humble and to cast away pride 
completely. (H, 13-10-1946, p. 345) 
 
Revival of the cottage industry, and not cottage industries, will remove the 
growing poverty. When once we have revived the one industry, all the other 
industries will follow…. I would make the spinning-wheel the foundation on 
which to build a sound village life. I would make the wheel the centre round 
which all other activities will revolve. (YI, 21-5-1925, pp. 176, 177) 
 
 
Message Of The Charkha 
I … claim for the Charkha the honour of being able to solve the problem of 
economic distress in a most natural, simple, inexpensive and business like 
manner….. It is the symbol of the nation's prosperity and, therefore, freedom. 
It is a symbol not of commercial war but of commercial peace. (YI, 8-12-1921, 
p. 406) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 387  The message of the spinning-wheel is much wider than its circumference. Its 
message is one of simplicity, service of mankind, living so as not to hurt others, 
creating an indissoluble bond between the rich and the poor, capital and 
labour, the prince and the peasant. That larger message is naturally for all.  
(YI, 17-9-1925, p. 321) 
 
The message of the spinning-wheel is, really, to replace the spirit of 
exploitation by the spirit of service. The dominant not in the West is the note 
of exploitation. I have no desire that our country should copy that spirit or that 
note. (YI, 2-2-1928, p. 34) 
 
I do feel that it has message for the U.S.A. and the whole world. But it cannot 
be until India has demonstrated to the world that it has made the spinning-
wheel its own, which it has not done today. The fault is not of the wheel. I 
have not the slightest doubt that the saving of India and of the world lies in the 
wheel. If India becomes the slave of-the machine, then, I say, heaven save the 
world? (H, 17-11-1946, p. 404) 
 
 
Return To Simplicity 
If I preach against the modern artificial life of sens ual enjoyment, and ask men 
and women to go back to the wimple life epitomized in the Charkha, I do so 
because I know that, without an intelligent return to simplicity, there is no 
escape from our descent to a state lower than brutality. (YI, 21-7-1921, pp. 
228-9) 
 
I believe that no other path but that of non-violence will suit India. The symbol 
of that DHARMA for India is the spinning-wheel as it alone is the friend of the 
distressed and the giver of plenty for the poor. The law of love knows no 
bounds of space or time. My Swaraj, therefore, takes note of Bhangis, Dublas 
and the weakest of the weak, and except the spinning-wheel I know no other 
thing which befriends all these. (YI, 8-1-1925, p. 18) 
 
 
Wheel Of Life 
Take to spinning [to find peace of mind]. The music of  the wheel will be as 
balm to your soul. I believe that the yarn we spin is capable of mending the 
broken warp and woof of our life. The Charkha is the symbol of non-violence on 
which all life, if it is to be real life, must be based. (H, 27-4-1947, p. 122) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 388  Some will recall through the wheel the name of that Prince of Peace, Ashoka, 
the founder of an empire, who ultimately gave up the pomp and circumstance 
of power to become the undisputed Emperor of the hearts of men and became 
the representative of all the then known faiths. We would call it a legitimate 
interpretation of the wheel to seek in it he Wheel of Law ascribed to that living 
store of mercy and love. 
The spinning-wheel thus interpreted adds to its importance in the life of 
billions of mankind. To liken it to and to derive it from the Ashoka disc is to 
recognize in the insignificant-looking Charkha the necessity of obeying the 
ever-moving Wheel of the Divine Law of Love. (H, 3-8-1947, p. 266) 
 
… Spinning has become a part and parcel of the Ashram prayer. The conception 
of spinning as sacrifice has been linked with the idea of God, the reason being 
that we believe that in the Charkha and what it stands for lies the only hope of 
salvation of the poor. (H, 18-8-1946, p. 263) 
 
It is my claim that the universalization of hand-spinning with a full knowledge 
of all that it stands for alone can bring that [conquest of inertia] in a sub-
continent so vast and varied as India. I have compared spinning to the central 
sun and the other village crafts to the various constellations in the solar 
system. The former gives light and warmth to the latter and sustains them. 
Without it they would not be able to exist. (H, 31-3-1946, p. 58) 
 
 
Duty Of Spinning 
Just as every one of us must eat and drink and clothe  himself, even so everyone 
of us must spin himself. (YI, 28-5-1925, p. 182) 
 
I do not know whether I am a Karmayogi or any other Yogi. I know that I cannot 
live without work. I crave to die with my hand at the spinning-wheel. I one has 
to establish communion with God through some means, why not through the 
spinning wheel? Him who worships Me, says the Lord in the Gita, I guide along 
the right path and see to his needs. (H, 8-5-1937, p. 99) 
 
If every woman in India spins, then a silent revolution will certainly be created, 
of which a Jawaharlal [Nehru] can make full use. Unless steam generated is put 
to proper use, the engine will not run and the person generating the steam may 
himself be scalded by it even unto death. (H, 14-4-1946, p. 88) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 389  A scientific study of the spinning-wheel will lead on to Sociology. The spinning-
wheel will not become a power for the liberation of India in our hands unless 
we have made a deep study of the various sciences related to it. It will then 
not only make India free, but point the way t o the whole world.  
(H, 31-3-1946, p. 59) 
 
 
'Livery Of Freedom' 
…While Khadi is good for the poor as an honourable oc c upation for earning 
bread, it has an additional and far greater value as an instrument of winning 
Swaraj through non-violence means. (H, 28-4-1946, p. 104) 
 
In 1908, in South Africa, I conceived the idea that, if poverty-stricken India 
were to be freed form the alien yoke, India must learn to look upon the 
spinning-wheel and hand-spun yarn as the symbol, not of slavery, but of 
freedom. It should also mean butter to bread. (H, 22-9-1946, p. 320) 
 
Khadi to me is the symbol of unity of Indian humanity, of its economic freedom 
and equality and, therefore, ultimately, in the poetic expression of Jawaharlal 
Nehru, "the livery of India's freedom." 
Moreover, Khadi mentality means decentralization of the production and 
distribution of the necessaries of life. Therefore, the formula so far evolved is, 
every village to produce all its necessaries and a certain percentage in addition 
for the requirements of the cities. 
Heavy industries will needs be centralized and nationalized. But they will 
occupy the least part of the vast national activity which will mainly be in the 
villages….. 
Since the wanton destruction of this central village industry and the allied 
handicrafts, intelligence and brightness have fled from the villages, leaving 
them inane, lusterless, and reduced almost to the state of their ill-kept cattle. 
(CP, p. 12) 
 
 
Economic Regeneration 
I feel convinced that the revival of hand-spinning and hand-weaving will make 
the largest contribution to the economic and the moral regeneration of India. 
The millions must have a simple industry to supplement agriculture. Spinning 
was the cottage industry years ago, and if the millions are to be saved from The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 390  starvation, they must be enabled to introduce spinning in their homes, and 
every village must repossess its own weaver. (YI, 21-7-1920, p. 4) 
 
It bears not a message of ill-will towards t he nations of the earth but of good-
will and self-half. It will not need the protection of a navy threatening a world's 
peace and exploiting its resources, but it needs the religious determination of 
millions to spin their yarn in their own homes as today they cook their food in 
their own homes. 
I may deserve the curses of posterity for many mistakes of omission and 
commission, but I am confident of earning its blessing for suggesting a revival of 
the Charkha. I take my all on it. For every revolution of the wheel spins peace, 
good-will and love. And with all that, inasmuch as the loss of it brought about 
India's slavery. Its voluntary revival with all its implications must mean India's 
freedom. (YI, 8-12-1921, p. 406) 
 
 
Hope Of Rural Masses 
I have often said that, if the seven lakhs of the vill ages of India were to be kept 
alive, and if peace that is at the root of all civilization is to be achieved, we 
have to make the spinning-wheel the centre of all handicrafts. (H, 19-2-1938, 
p. 11) 
 
The spinning-wheel represents to me the hope of the masses. The masses lost 
their freedom, such as it was, with the loss of the Charkha. The Charkha 
supplemented the agriculture of the villagers and gave it dignity. It was the 
friend and solace of the widow. It kept the villagers from idleness. For the 
Charkha included all the anterior and posterior industries-ginning, carding, 
warping, sizing, dyeing and waving. These in their turn kept the village 
carpenter and the blacksmith busy. 
The Charkha enabled the seven hundred thousand villages to become self-
contained. With the exit of the Charkha went the other village industries, such 
as the oil press. Nothing took the place of these industries. Therefore, the 
villages were drained of their varied occupations and their creative talent and 
what little wealth these brought them…. Hence, if the villages are to come into 
their own, the most natural thing that suggests itself is the revival of the 
Charkha and all it means. (H, 13-4-1940, p. 85) 
 
I have no doubt in my mind that the wheel can serve as the instrument of 
earning one's livelihood and, at the same time, enable the worker to render 
useful service to his neighbours…. In order to ply the wheel intelligently, he The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 391  should now all the processes that precede and succeed spinning. (H,17-3-1946, 
p. 42) 
 
The conviction dawned upon me even before I came to India that the revival of 
hand-spinning alone could restore India to its pristine glory. I have since 
compared the spinning-wheel to the central sun round which the solar system 
of our village economy revolves. It provides the golden bridge between the rich 
and the poor. (H, 21-7-1946, p. 231) 
 
The Charkha is not like either the small or large machines of the West. There 
cores of watches are produced in a few special places. They are sold all over 
the world. The same tale applies to the sewing machine. These things are 
symbols of one civilization. The Charkha represents the opposite. 
We do not to universalize the Charkha through mass production in one place. 
Our idea is to make the Charkha and all its accessories in the locality where the 
spinners live. Therein lies the value of the spinning-wheel. Anything that goes 
wrong with it should be put right on the spot and the spinners should be taught 
how to do so. (H, 20-10-1946, pp. 363-4) 
 
 
Mill Industry 
Our mills cannot today spin enough for our wants, and i f they did, they will not 
keep down prices unless they were compelled. They are frankly money-makers 
and will not, therefore, regulate prices according to the needs of the nation. 
Hand-spinning is therefore designed to put millions of rupees in the hands of 
the poor villagers. Every agricultural country requires a supplementary industry 
to enable the peasants to utilize the spare hours. Such industry for India has 
always been spinning. Is it such a visionary ideal-an attempt to revive an 
ancient occupation whose destruction has brought on slavery, pauperism and 
disappearance of the inimitable artistic talent which was once all expressed in 
the wonderful fabric of India which was the envy of the world? (YI, 16-2-1921, 
pp. 50-51) 
 
Do I seek to destroy the mill-industry, I have often been asked. If I did, I should 
not have pressed for the abolition of the excise duty. I want the mill-industry to 
prosper-only I do not want it to prosper at the expense of the country. On the 
contrary, If the interests of the country demand that the industry should go, I 
should let it go without the slightest compunction. (YI, 24-2-1927, p. 58) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 392  In my opinion, the mill-hands are as much the proprietors of their mills as the 
share-holders, and when the mill-owner realize that the mill-hand are as much 
mill-owners as they, there will be no quarrel between them. (YI, 4-8-1927, p. 
248) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 393   
87. MEANING OF SWADESHI 
 
Spir
it Of Swadeshi 
SWADESHI is that spirit in us which restricts us to th e use and service of our 
immediate surroundings to the exclusion of the more remote. Thus, as for 
religion, in order to satisfy the requirements of the definition, I must restrict 
myself to my ancestral religion. That is, the use of my immediate religious 
surrounding. If I find it defective, I should serve it by purging it of its defects. 
In the domain of politics, I should make use of the indigenous institutions and 
sere them by curing them of their proved defects. In that of economics I should 
use only things that are produced by my immediate neighbours and serve those 
industries by making them efficient and complete where they might be found 
wanting. It is suggested that such Swadeshi, if reduced to practice, will lead to 
the millennium..... 
 
 
Religion 
…Hinduism has become a conservative religion and, ther efore, a mighty force 
because of the Swadeshi spirit underlying it. It is the most tolerant because it is 
non-proselytizing and it is as capable of expansion today as it has been found to 
be in the past. It has succeeded not in driving out, as I think it has been 
erroneously held, but in absorbing Buddhism. By reason of the Swadeshi spirit, 
a Hindu refuses to change his religion, not necessarily because he considers it 
to be the best, but because he knows that he can complement it by introducing 
reforms. And what I have said about Hinduism is, I suppose, true of the other 
great faiths of t he world, only it is held that it is specially so in the case of 
Hinduism. 
 
 
Education 
We have laboured under a terrible handicap owing to an  almost fatal departure 
from the Swadeshi spirit. We, the educated classes, have received our 
education through a foreign tongue. We have, therefore, not reacted upon the 
masses. We want to represent the masses, but we fail. They recognize us not 
much more than they recognize the English officers. Their hearts are an open 
book to neither. Their aspirations are not ours. Hence there is a break. And you 
witness not, in reality, failure to organize but want of correspondence between 
the representatives and the represented. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 394  If during the last fifty years we had been educated through the vernaculars, our 
elders and our servant and our neighbours would have partaken of our 
knowledge; the discoveries of Bose or a Ray would have been household 
treasures as are the RAMAYAN and the MAHABHARAT. As it is, so far as the 
masses are concerned, those great discoveries might as well have been made 
by foreigners. Had instruction in all the branches of learning been given 
through the vernaculars, I make bold to say that they would have enriched 
wonderfully…..
 
 
Economic Life 
Much of the deep poverty of the masses is due to the r uinous departure from 
Swadeshi in the economic and industrial life. If not an article of commerce had 
been brought from outside India, she would be today a land flowing with milk 
and honey. But that was not to be. We were greedy and so was England. The 
connection between England and India was based clearly upon an error…. 
If we follow the Swadeshi doctrine, it would be your duty and mine to find out 
neighbours who can supply our wants and to teach them to supply them where 
they do not know how to proceed, assuming that there are neighbours who are 
in want of healthy occupation. Then every village of India will almost be a self-
supporting and self-contained unit, exchanging only such necessary 
commodities with other villages as are not locally producible. 
This may all sound nonsensical. Well, India is a country of nonsense. It is 
nonsensical to parch one's throat with thirst when a kindly Mohammedan is 
ready to offer pure water to drink. And yet thousands of Hindus would rather 
die of thirst than drink water from a Mohammedan household. These 
nonsensical men can also, once they are convinced that their religion demands 
that they should wear garments manufactured in India only clothing or eat any 
other food…
 
 
Religious Discipline  
It 
has often been urged that India cannot adopt Swadeshi, in the economic life 
at any rate. Those who advance this objection do not look upon Swadeshi, as a 
rule of life. With them it is a mere patriotic effort-not to be made if it involved 
any self-denial. Swadeshi, as defined here, is a religious discipline to be 
undergone in utter disregard of the physical discomfort it may cause to 
individuals. Under its spell the deprivation of a pin or a needle, because these 
are not manufactured in India, need cause no terror. A Swadeshist will learn to 
do without hundreds of things which today he considers necessary…. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 395  I would urge that Swadeshi is the only doctrine consistent with the law of 
humility and love. It is arrogance to think of launching out to serve the whole 
of India when I am hardly able to serve even my own family. It was better to 
concentrate my effort upon the family and consider that through them I was 
serving the whole nation and, if you will, the whole of humanity. This is 
humility and it is love. 
The motive will determine the quality of the act. I may serve my family 
regardless of the sufferings I may cause to theirs. As, for instance, I may accept 
an employment which enables me to extort money from people. I enrich myself 
thereby and then satisfy many unlawful demands of the family. Here I am 
neither serving the family nor the State. 
Or I may recognize that God has given me hands and feet only to work with for 
my sustenance and for that of those who may be dependent upon me. I would 
then at once simplify my life and that of those whom I can directly reach. In 
this instance, I would have served the family without causing injury to anyone 
else. Supposing that every one followed this mode of life, we should have at 
once an ideal state. All will not reach that state at the same time. But those of 
us who, realizing its truth, enforce it in practice, will clearly anticipate and 
accelerate the coming of that happy day. (SW, pp.336-44) 
 
 
Service Of Neighbours 
My definition of Swadeshi is well known. I must not se rve my distant neighbour 
at the expense of the nearest. It is never vindictive or punitive. It is in no sense 
narrow, for I buy from every part of the world what is needed for my growth. I 
refuse to buy from anybody anything, however nice or beautiful, if it interferes 
with my growth or injures those whom Nature has made my first care. 
I buy useful healthy literature from every part of the world. I buy surgical 
instruments from England, pins and pencils from Austria and watches from 
Switzerland. But I will not buy and inch of the finest cotton fabric from England 
or Japan or any other part of the world because it has injured and increasingly 
injures the million of the inhabitants of India. 
I hold it to be sinful for me to refuse to buy the cloth spun and woven by the 
needy million of India's paupers and to buy foreign cloth although it may be 
superior in quality to the Indian hand-spun. My Swadeshi, therefore, chiefly 
centers round the hand-spun Khaddar and extends to everything that can be 
and is produced in India. (YI. 12-3-1925, p. 88) 
 
[The votary of Swadeshi will,] as a first duty, dedicate himself to the service of 
his immediate neighbours. This involves exclusion or even sacrifice of the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 396  interests of the rest, but the exclusion or the sacrifice would be only in 
appearance. Pure service of our neighbours can never, from its very nature, 
result in disservice to those who are far away, but rather the contrary. 
'As with the individual, so with the universe' is an unfailing principle which we 
would do well to lay to heart. On the other hand, a man who allows himself to 
be lured by 'the distant scene', and runs to the4 ends of the earth for service, is 
not only foiled in his ambition, but also fails in his duty towards his 
neighbours..... (FYM, pp. 62-63) 
 
I believe in the truth implicitly that a man can serve his neighbours and 
humanity at the same time, the condition being that the service of the 
neighbours is in no way selfish or exclusive, i.e., does not in any way involve 
the exploitation of any other human being. The neighbours will then understand 
the spirit in which such service is given. They will also know that they will be 
expected to give their services to their neighbours. Thus considered, it will 
spread like the proverbial snow-ball gathering strength n geometrical 
progression, encircling the whole earth. It follows that Swadeshi is that spirit 
which dictates man to serve his next-door neighbour to the exclusion of any 
other. The condition that I have already mentioned is that the neighbour, thus 
served, has, in his turn, to serve his own neighbour. In this sense, Swadeshi is 
never exclusive. It recognizes the scientific limitation of human capacity for 
service. (H, 23-7-1947, p. 79) 
 
 
No Chauvinism 
Under this plan of life, in seeming to serve India to  the exclusion of every other 
country, I do not harm any other country. My patriotism is both exclusive and 
inclusive. It is exclusive in the sense that, in all humility, I confine my attention 
to the land of my birth, but is inclusive in the sense that my service is not of a 
competitive or antagonistic nature. SIC UTERE TUO UT ALIENUM NON LAEDAS is 
not merely a legal maxim, but it is a grand doctrine of life. It is the key to 
proper practice of ahimsa or love. (SW, p. 344) 
 
I have never considered the exclusion of everything foreign under every 
conceivable circumstance as a part of Swadeshi. The broad definition of 
Swadeshi is the use of all home-made things to the exclusion of foreign things, 
in so far as such use is necessary for the protection of home industry, more 
especially those industries without which India will become pauperized. In my 
opinion, therefore, Swadeshi which excludes the use of everything foreign, no 
matter how beneficial it may be, and irrespective of the fact that it The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 397  impoverishes nobody, is a narrow interpretation of Swadeshi. (YI, 17-6-1926, p. 
218) 
 
Even Swadeshi, like any other good thing, can be ridden to death if it is made a 
fetish. That is a danger that must be guarded against. To reject foreign 
manufactures, merely because they are foreign and to go on wasting national 
time and money in the promotion in one's country of manufactures for which it 
is not suited would be criminal folly and a negation of the Swadeshi spirit. 
A true votary of Swadeshi will never harbour ill-will towards the foreigner; he 
will not be actuated by antagonism towards anybody on earth. Swadeshism is 
not a cult of hatred. It is a doctrine of selfless service that has its roots in the 
purest AHIMSA, i.e., love. (FYM, p. 66) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 398   
88. THE GOSPEL OF LOVE 
 
Cohesive Power 
THE FORCE of love is the same as the force of the soul  or truth. We have 
evidence of its working at every step. The universe would disappear without 
the existence of that force…. Thousands, indeed tens of thousands, depend for 
their existence on a very active working of this force. Little quarrels of millions 
of families in their daily lives disappear before the exercise of this force. 
Hundreds of nations live in peace. History does not and cannot take note of this 
fact. History is really a record of every interruption of the even working of the 
force of love or of the soul. Two brothers quarrel; one of them repents and 
reawakens the love that was lying dormant in him; the two again begin to live 
in peace; nobody takes note of this. But if the two brothers, through the 
intervention of solicitors or some other reason, take up arms or go to law-which 
is another form of the exhibition of brute force-their doings would be 
immediately noticed in the Press, they would be the talk of their neighbours 
and would probably go down to history. And what is true of families and 
communities is true of nations. There is no reason to believe that there is one 
law for families and another for nations. History, then, is a record of an 
interruption of the course of nature. Soul force, being natural, is not noted in 
history. (HS, pp. 77-79) 
 
Scientists tell us that, without the presence of the cohesive force amongst the 
atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would crumble to pieces and we 
would cease to exist; and even as there is cohesive force in blind matter, so 
must there be in all things animate, and the name for that cohesive force 
among animate beings is love. We notice it between father and son, between 
brother and sister, friend and friend. But we have to learn to use that force 
among all that lives, and in the use of it consists our knowledge of God. Where 
there is love there is love there is life; hatred leads to destruction.  
(YI, 5-5-1920, p. 7) 
 
I believe that the sum total of the energy of mankind is not to bring us down 
but to lift us up, and that is the result of the definite, if unconscious, working 
of the law of love. The fact that mankind persists shows that the cohesive force 
is greater than the disruptive force, centripetal force greater than centrifugal.  
(YI, 12-11-1931, p. 355) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 399  Law Of Our Being 
Brute force has been the ruling factor in the world fo r thousands of years, and 
mankind has been reaping its bitter harvest all along, as he who runs may read. 
There is little hope of anything good coming out of it in the future. If light can 
come out of it in the future. If light can come out of darkness, then alone can 
love emerge from hatred. (SSA, p. 188) 
 
I have found that life persists in the midst of destruction and, therefore, there 
must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only under that law would a 
well-ordered society be intelligible and life worth living. And if that is the law 
of life, we have to work it out in daily life. Wherever there are jars, wherever 
you are confronted with an opponent, conquer him with love. In this crude 
manner, I have worked it out in my life. That does not mean that all my 
difficulties are solved. Only, I have found that this law of love has answered as 
the law of destruction has never done. (YI, 1-10-1931, p.286) 
 
If love or non-violence be not the law of our being,….there is no escape from a 
periodical recrudescence of war, each succeeding one outdoing the preceding 
one in ferocity… 
All the teachers that ever lived have preached that law with more or less 
vigour. If Love was not the law of life, life would not have persisted in the 
midst of death. Life is a perpetual triumph over the grave. If there is a 
fundamental distinction between man and beast, it is the former's progressive 
recognition of the law and its application in practice to his own personal life. 
All the saints of the world, ancient and modern, were each according to his 
light and capacity a living illustration of that supreme Law of our being. That 
the brute in us seems so often to gain an easy triumph is true enough. That, 
however, does not disprove the law. It shows the difficulty of practice. How 
should it be otherwise with a law which is as high as truth itself? When the 
practice of the law becomes universal, God will reign on earth as He does in 
Heaven. I need not be reminded that earth and Heaven are in us. We know the 
earth, we are strangers to the Heaven are in us. If it is allowed that for some 
the practice of love is possible, it is arrogance not to allow even the possibility 
of its practice in all t he others. Not very remote ancestors of our4s indulged in 
cannibalism and many other practice which we would today call loathsome. No 
doubt in those days too there were Dick Sheppard's who must have been 
laughed at and possibly pilloried for preaching the (to them) strange doctrine of 
refusing to eat fellow-men. (H, 26-9-1936, p. 260) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 400  History is a record of perpetual wars, but we are trying to make new history, 
and I say this as I represent the national mind so far as non-violence is 
concerned. I have reasoned out the doctrine of the sword, I have worked out its 
possibilities and come to the conclusion that men's destiny is to replace the law 
of the jungle with the law of conscious love. (H, 3-7-1937, p.165) 
 
Where love is, there God is also. (SSA, p.360) 
 
Love never claims, it ever gives. Love ever suffers, never resents, never 
revenges itself. (YI, 9-7-1925, p. 24) 
 
 
Rule Of Service 
The safest rule of conducts to claim kinship when we w ant to do service, and 
not to insist on kinship when we want assert a right. Indeed, I have applied this 
rule of life, which I call the golden rule of conduct, even for inter provincial 
relations in India..... I know no other method of preserving sweet relations in 
human affairs and I am fortified in my conclusion by an experience extending 
over a long period of years that, wherever there is an interruption is the 
observance of this golden rule, there have been bickerings, quarrels and even 
reaking of heads….. (YI, 8-12-1927, p. 407) 
 
 
Equality Of Treatment 
[My central aim] is equal treatment for the whole of h umanity and that equal 
treatment means equality of service. (YI, 12--3-1925, p. 91) 
 
For, though they [men] are not all of the same age, the same height, the same 
skin, and the same intellect, these inequalities are temporary and superficial, 
the soul that is hidden beneath this earthly crust is one and the same for all 
men and women belonging to all climes. . . There is a real and substantial unity 
in all the variety that we see around us. The word 'inequality' has a bad dour 
about it, and it has led to arrogance and inhumanities, both in the East and the 
West. What is true about men is also true about nations, which are but groups 
of men. The false and rigid doctrine of inequality has led to the insolent 
exploitation of the nations of Asia and Africa. Who knows that the present 
ability of the West to prey upon the East is a sign of Western superiority and 
Eastern inferiority? (YI, 11-8-1927, p. 253) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 401  The forms are many, but the informing spirit is one. How can there be room for 
distinctions of high and low where there is this all-embracing fundamental unity 
underlying the outward diversity? For that is a fact meeting you at every step in 
daily life. The final goal of all religion is to realize this essential oneness?  
(H, 15-12-1933, p. 3) 
 
I believe in the sovereign rule of the law of love which makes no distinctions. 
(H, 25-5-1947, p. 165) 
 
I have known no distinction between relatives and strangers, countrymen and 
foreigners, white and coloured, Hindus and Indians of other faiths, whether 
Mussalmans, Paris, Christians or Jews. I may say that my heart has been 
incapable of making any such distinctions. I cannot claim this as a special 
virtue, as it is in my very nature, rather than a result of any effort on my part, 
whereas in the case of AHIMSA (non-violence), BRAHMACHARYA (celibacy), 
APARIGRAHA (non-possession) and other cardinal virtues, I am fully conscious of 
a continuous striving for their cultivation. (A, p. 204) 
 
We must widen the circle of our love till it embraces the whole village; the 
village in its turn must take into its fold the district, the district the province, 
and so on till the scope of our love becomes co-terminus with the world. (YI, 
27-6-1929, p. 214) 
 
We are living in times when values are undergoing quick changes. We are not 
satisfied with slow results. We are not satisfied with the welfare merely of our 
own caste-fellows, not even of our own country. We feel or want to feel for the 
whole of humanity. All this is a tremendous gain in humanity's search towards 
its goal. (H, 30-5-1936, p. 126) 
 
My appeal to you.. is to cleanse your hearts and to have charity. Make your 
hearts as broad as the ocean. … Do not judge others lest you be judged. There 
is that Supreme Judge who can hang you, but He leaves you alive. There are so 
may enemies within you and around you, but He protects and looks upon you 
with a kindly eye. (YI, 1-1-1925, p. 8) 
 
 
Mutual Toleration 
The golden rule of conduct … is mutual toleration, se e ing that we will never all 
think alike and we shall always see Truth in fragment and from different angles 
of vision. Conscience is not the same thing for all. Whilst, therefore, it is a The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 402  good guide for individual conduct, imposition of that conduct upon all will be 
an insufferable interference with everybody's freedom of conscience… Even 
amongst the most conscientious persons, there will be room enough for honest 
differences of opinion. The only possible rule of conduct in any civilized society 
is, therefore, mutual toleration. (YI, 23-9-1926, p.334) 
 
Forgiveness is a quality of the soul, and therefore, a positive quality. It is not 
negative. 'Conquer anger', says Lord Buddha, 'by non-anger'. But what is that 
'non-anger'? it is a positive quality and means the supreme virtue of charity or 
love. You must be roused to this supreme virtue which must express itself in 
your going to the angry man, ascertaining from him the cause of his anger, 
making amends if you have given and cause for offence and then bringing home 
to him to error of his way and convincing him that it is wrong to be provoked, 
this consciousness of the quality of the soul, and deliberate exercise of it. 
Elevate not only the man but the surrounding atmosphere. Of course, only he 
who has that love will exercise it. This love can certainly be cultivated by 
incessant striving. (YI, 12-1-1928, p. 11) 
 
What is true of individuals is true of nations. One cannot forgive too much. The 
weak can never forgive too much. The weak can never forgive. Forgiveness is 
the attribute of the strong. (YI, 2-4-1931, p.59) 
 
 
Trust 
I refuse to suspect human nature. It will bind to res po nd to any noble and 
friendly action. (YI, 4-8-1920, p. 5) 
 
There is no distrust of men and mankind in me. They will answer before God, so 
why should I worry? But where my own mission is concerned, my thought is 
active, and I try to wish everyone well in spite of doubts and mistrust. I will 
suffer the agony if that is to be my lot. But I may not unnerve myself while I 
can struggle against evil. (Sp. 6-3-1942) 
 
Mutual trust and mutual love are no trust and no love. The real love is to love 
them that hate you, to love your neighbour even though you distrust him. I 
have sound reasons for distrusting the English official world. If my love is 
sincere, I must love the Englishman in spite of my distrust. Of what avail is my 
love, if it be only so long as I trust my friend? Even thieves do that. They 
become enemies immediately the trust is gone. (H, 3-3-1946, p. 28) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 403   
From Mouths Of Babes 
Believe me, from my experience of hundreds, I was goin g to say thousands, of 
children, I know that they have perhaps a finer sense of honour than you and I 
have. The greatest lesson in life, if we would but stoop and humble ourselves, 
we would learn not from grown-up learned men, but from the so-called 
ignorant children. Jesus never uttered a loftier or a gander truth than when he 
said that wisdom cometh out of the mouth so babes. I believe it. I have noticed 
it in my own experience that, if we would approach babes in humility and in 
innocence, we would learn wisdom from them. 
 
 
World Peace 
I have learned this one lesson-that what is impossible  with man is child's play 
with God and if we have faith in that Divinity which presides on the destiny of 
the meanest of His creation, I have no doubt that all things are possible; and, in 
that final hope, I live and pass my time and endeavour to obey His will. 
..If we are to reach real peace in this world and if we are to carry on a real war 
against war, we shall have to begin with children; and if they will grow up in 
their natural innocence, we won’t have to struggle, we won't have to pass 
fruitless, idle resolutions, but we shall go from love to love and peace to 
peace, until at last all the corners of the world are covered with that peace 
and love for which, consciously or unconsciously, the whole world is hungering. 
(YI, 19-11-1931, p. 361) 
 
 
Soul-Force 
Every moment of my life I realize that God is putting me on my trial. (A, p. 326) 
 
If I could popularize the use of soul-force, which is but another name for love-
force, in place of brute-force, I know I could present you with an India that 
could defy the whole world to do its worst. In season and out of season, 
therefore, I shall discipline myself to express in my life this eternal law of 
suffering, and present it for acceptance to those who care, and if I take part in 
any other activity, the motive is to show the matchless superiority of that law. 
(ibid, p. 331) 
 
Having flung aside the sword, there is nothing except the cup of love which I 
can offer to those who oppose me. It is by offering that cup that cup that I 
except to draw them close to me. I cannot think of permanent enmity between The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 404  man and man, and believing as I do in the theory of rebirth, I live in the hope 
that, if not in this birth, in some other birth, I shall be able to hug all humanity 
in friendly embrace. (YI, 2-4-1931, p. 54) 
 
 
Mission Of Love 
It is perfectly true, I must admit it in all humility,  that however indifferently it 
may be, I endeavour to represent love in every fibre of may being. I am 
impatient to realize the presence of my Maker, who to me embodies Truth, 
and, in the early part of my career, I discovered that, if I was to realize Truth, I 
must obey, even at the cost of my life, the law of love. And having been 
blessed with children, I discovered that the law of Love could be best 
understood and learned through little children. Were it not for us, their 
ignorant poor parents, our children would be perfectly innocent. I believe 
implicitly that the child is not born mischievous in the bad sense of the term. If 
parents would behave themselves whilst the child is growing, before it is born 
and after, it is a well-known fact that the child would instinctively obey the law 
of Truth and the law of Love. And when I understood this lesson in the early 
part of my life, I began a gradual but distinct change in life. 
I do not propose to describe to you the several phases through which this 
stormy life of mine has passed; but I can only, in truth and in perfect humility, 
bear witness to the fact that to the extent that I have represented Love in my 
life, in thought, word, and deed, I have realized the 'Peace that passed 
understanding' I have baffled many of my friends when they have noticed in me 
peace that they have envied, and they have asked me for the cause of that 
priceless possession. I have not been able to explain the cause save by saying 
that, if my friends found that peace in me, it was due to an attempt to obey 
this, the greatest law of our being. (YI, 19-11-1931, p. 361) 
 
I am trying every moment of my life to be guided by AHIMSA, by love. I am 
essentially a lover of peace. I do not want to create dissensions. And I assure 
those who oppose me that I shall not do a single thing which I know may be 
contrary to truth and love. (H, 12-1-1934, p. 8) 
 
I have no weapon but love to wield authority over anyone. (BC, 9-9-1942) 
 
My goal is friendship with the world and I can combine the greatest opposition 
to wrong. (YI, 10-3-1920, p. 5) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 405  I have that implicit faith in my mission that, if it succeeds-as it will succeed, it 
is bound to succeed-history will record it as a movement designed to knit all 
people in the world together, not as hostile to one another but as parts of one 
whole. (H, 26-1-1934, p. 8) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 406   
89. ALL LIFE IS ONE 
 
Kins
hip With All  
MY 
ETHICS not only permit me to claim but require me to own kinship with not 
merely the ape but the horse and the sheep, the lion and the leopard, the 
snake and the scorpion. Not so need these kinsfolk regard themselves. 
The hard ethics which rule my life, and I hold ought to rule that of every man 
and woman, imposes this unilateral obligation upon us. And it is so imposed 
because man alone is made in the image of God. That some of us do not 
recognize that status of ours makes no difference, except that then we do not 
get the benefit of the status, even as a lion brought up in the company of sheep 
may not know his own status and, therefore, does not receive its benefits; but 
it belongs to him nevertheless, and, the moment he realizes it, he begins to 
exercise his dominion over the sheep. But no sheep masquerading as a lion can 
ever attain the leonine status. 
And, to prove the proposition that man is made in the image of God, it is surely 
unnecessary to show that all men admittedly exhibit that image in their own 
persons. It is enough to show that one man at least has done so. And, will it be 
denied that the great religious teachers of mankind have exhibited the image 
of God in their own persons? (YI, 8-7-1926, p. 244) 
 
I believe myself to be saturated with AHIMSA-nonviolence. AHIMSA and Truth 
are as my two lungs. I cannot live without them. But I see every moment, with 
more and more clearness, the immense power of AHIMSA and the littleness of 
man. 
 
 
Imperfect Nonviolence 
Even the forest-dweller cannot be entirely free from vi olence, in spite of his 
limitless compassion. With every breath he commits a certain amount of 
violence. The body itself is a house of slaughter, and, therefore, Moksha and 
Eternal Bliss consist in perfect deliverance from the body, and, therefore, all 
pleasure, save the joy of Moksha, is evanescent, imperfect. That being the 
case, we have to drink, in daily life, many a bitter draught of violence. (YI, 21-
10-1926) 
 
All life in the flesh exists by some HIMSA. Hence, the highest religion has been 
defined by a negative word; AHIMSA. The world is bound in a chain of The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 407  destruction. In other words, HIMSA is an inherent necessity for life in the body. 
That is why a votary of AHIMSA always prays for ultimate deliverance from the 
bondage of flesh. (YI, 4-10-1928, p. 364) 
 
I am painfully aware of the fact that my desire to continue life in the body 
involves me in constant HIMSA. That is why I am becoming growingly indifferent 
to this physical body of mine. For instance, I know that, in the act of 
respiration, I destroy innumerable invisible germs floating in the air. But I do 
not stop breathing. The consumption of vegetables involves HIMSA, but I find 
that I cannot give them up. 
Again, there is HIMSA in the use of antiseptics, yet if cannot bring myself to 
discard the use of disinfectants like kerosene, etc., to rid myself of the 
mosquito pest and the like. I suffer snakes to be killed in the Ashram when it is 
impossible to catch them and put them out of harm's way. I even tolerate the 
use of the stick to drive the bullocks in the ASHRAM. 
Thus, there is no end to HIMSA which I directly commit… If, as a result of this 
humble confession of mine, friends choose to give me up as lost, I would be 
sorry, but nothing will induce me to try to conceal my imperfections in the 
practice of AHIMSA. All I claim for myself is that I am ceaselessly trying to 
understand the implications of great ideals like AHIMSA and to practice them in 
thought, word and deed, and that not without a certain measure of success as I 
think. But I know that I have a long distance yet to cover in this direction. (YI, 
1-11-1928, p.361) 
 
 
Vivisection  
I am not opposed to the progress of science as such. O n the contrary, the 
scientific spirit of the West commands my admiration and, if that admiration is 
qualified, it is because the scientist of the West takes no note of God's lower 
creation. I abhor vivisection with my whole soul. I detest the unpardonable 
slaughter of innocent life in the name of science and humanity so-called, and 
all the scientific discoveries stained with innocent blood I count as of no 
consequence. 
If the circulation of blood theory could not have been discovered without 
vivisection, the human kind could well have done without it. And I see the day 
clearly dawning when the honest scientist of the West will put limitations upon 
the present methods of pursuing knowledge. 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 408  Lower Order 
Future measurements will take note not merely of the h uman family but of all 
that lives, and even as we are slowly but surely discovering that it is an error to 
suppose that Hindus can thrive upon the degradation of a fifth of themselves of 
that peoples of the West can rise or live upon the exploitation and degradation 
of the Eastern and African nations, so shall we realize in the fullness of time 
that our dominion over the low order of creation is not for their slaughter, but 
for their benefit with ours. For I am as certain that they are endowed with a 
soul as that I am. (YI, 17-12-1925, p. 440) 
 
Further march of civilization seems to employ increasing domination of man 
over beast, together with a growingly humane method of using them. There are 
three schools of humanitarians. One believes in replacing animal power by the 
use of any other. Another believes in treating animals as fellow-beings and 
making such use of these as a brotherly spirit will permit. The third will not 
make use of lower animals for man's selfish purpose, but will employ instead 
one's own power and that of fellow-beings to the extent that the latter give 
intelligent and willing use. I belong to the third school. (H, 5-5-1946, p.121) 
 
 
Mercy Killing 
I cannot for a moment bear to see a dog, or for that m atter any other living 
being, helplessly suffering the torture of a slow death. I do not kill a human 
being thus circumstanced because I have more hopeful remedies. I should kill a 
dog similarly situated, because in its case I am without a remedy. Should my 
child be attacked by rabies and there was no hopeful remedy to relieve his 
agony, I should consider it my duty to take his life. 
Fatalism has its limits. We leave things to fate after exhausting all the 
remedies. One of the remedies and the final one to relieve the agony of a 
tortured child is to take his life. (YI, 18-11-1926, p. 396) 
 
I would not kill a human being for protecting a cow, as I will not kill a cow for 
saving a human life, be it ever so precious. (YI, 18-5-1921, p. 156) 
 
To my mind the life of a lamb is no less precious than that of a human being. I 
should be unwilling to take the life of a lamb for the sake of the human body. I 
hold that the more helpless a creature, the more entitled it is to protection by 
man from the cruelty of man. (A, p. 172) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 409  Problem Of Venomous Beasts  
I do not want to live at the cost of the life even of a snake. I should let him bite 
me to death rather than kill him, but it is likely that, if God puts me to that 
cruel test and permits a snake to assault me, I may not have the courage to 
die, but that the beast in me may assert itself and I may seek to kill the snake 
in defending this perishable body. 
I admit that my belief has not become so incarnate in me as to warrant my 
stating emphatically that I have shed all fear of snakes so as to befriend them 
as I would like to be able to. It is my implicit belief that snakes, tigers, etc., 
are God's answer to the poisonous, wicked, evil thoughts we harbour…. 
I believe that all life is one. Thoughts take definite forms. Tigers and snakes 
have kinship with us. They are a warning to us to avoid harbouring evil, wicked, 
lustful thoughts. If I want to rid the earth of venomous beasts and reptiles, I 
must rid myself of all venomous thoughts. I shall not do so if, in my impatient 
ignorance and in my desire to prolong the existence of the body, I seek to kill 
the so-called venomous beasts and reptiles. If in not seeking to defend myself 
against such noxious animals I die, I should rise again a better and fuller man. 
With that faith in me, how should I seek to kill a fellow-being in a snake? (YI, 
14-4-1927, p. 121) 
 
…We are living in the midst of death, tying to grape our way to Truth. Perhaps 
it is as well that we are beset with danger at every point in our life, for, in 
spite of our knowledge of the danger and of our precarious existence, our 
indifference to the Source of all life is excelled only by our amazing arrogance. 
….My intellect rebels against the destruction of any life n any shape 
whatsoever. But my heart is not strong enough to befriend these creatures 
which, experience has shown, are destructive. The language of convincing 
confidence, which comes from actual experience, fails me, and it will continue 
to do so, so long as I am cowardly enough to fear snakes, tigers and the like. 
(YI, 17-7-1927, p. 222) 
 
I verily believe that man's habit of killing man on the slightest pretext has 
darkened his reason and he gives himself liberties with other life which he 
would shudder to take if he really believed that God was a God of Love and 
Mercy. Anyway, though for fear of death I may kill tigers, snakes, fleas, 
mosquitoes and the like, I ever pray for illumination that will shed all fear of 
death and thus refusing to take life, know the better way, for: 
Taught by the power that pities me, I learn to pity them. (H, 9-1-1937, p. 382) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 410  Highest Ideal 
My non-violence is not merely kindness to all living c reatures. The emphasis laid 
on the sacredness of sub-human life in Jainism if understandable. But that can 
never mean that one is to be kind to this life in preference to human life. While 
writing about the sacredness of such life, I take it that the sacredness of human 
life has been taken for granted. The former has been over-emphasized. And 
while putting it into practice, the idea has undergone distortion. For instance, 
there are many who derive complete satisfaction in feeding ants. It would 
appear that the theory has become a wooden, lifeless dogma. Hypocrisy and 
distortion are passing current under the name of religion. 
AHIMSA is t he highest ideal. It is meant for the brave, never the cowardly. To 
benefit by others' killing and delude oneself into the belief that one is being 
very religious and non-violent is sheer self-deception. (H, 9-6-1946, p. 172) 
 
 
Doctrine Of Non-Killing 
My AHIMSA is my own. I am not able to accept in its en tirely the doctrine of 
non-killing of animals. I have no feeling in me to save the life of these animals 
who devour or cause hurt to man. I consider it wrong to help in the increase of 
their progeny. Therefore, I will not feed ants, monkeys or dogs. I will never 
sacrifice a man's life in order to save theirs. 
Thinking along these lines, I have come to the conclusion that to do away with 
monkeys where they have become a menace to the well-being of man is 
pardonable. Such killing becomes a duty. The question may arise as to why this 
rule should not also apply to human beings. It cannot because however bad, 
they are as we are. Unlike the animal, God has given man the faculty of reason. 
(H, 5-5-1946, p. 123) 
 
True AHIMSA demands that, if we must save the society as well as ourselves 
from the mischief of monkeys and the like, we have to kill them. The general 
rule is that we must avoid violence to the utmost extent possible. Non-violence 
for the society is necessarily different from that for the individual. One living 
apart from society may defy all precaution, not so society as such. (H, 7-7-
1946, p. 213) 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 411   
90. NO CULTURE ISOLATION FOR ME 
 
I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides an d my windows to be 
stuffed. I want the cultures of all lands to be blown about my house as freely as 
possible. But I refuse to be blown off my feet by any. I refuse to live in other 
people’s houses as an interloper, a beggar or a slave. (YI, 1-6-1921, p. 170) 
 
Nothing can be farther from my thought than that we should become exclusive 
or erect barriers. But I do respectfully contend that an appreciation of other 
cultures can fitly follow, never precede, an appreciation and assimilation of our 
own. 
It is my firm opinion that no culture has treasures so rich as ours has. We have 
not known it, we have been made even to deprecate its study and depreciate 
its value. We have almost ceased to live it. An academic grasp without practice 
behind it is like an embalmed corpse, perhaps lovely to look at, but nothing to 
inspire or ennoble. 
My religion forbids me to belittle or disregard other cultures, as it insists under 
pain of civil suicide upon imbibing and living my own. (YI, 1-9-1921, p. 277) 
 
 
Indian Culture A Synthesis  
It stands for synthesis of the different cultures tha t  have come to stay in India, 
that have influenced Indian life, and that, in their turn, have themselves been 
influenced by the spirit of the soil. This synthesis will naturally be of the 
Swadeshi type, where each culture is assured its legitimate place…  
(YI, 17-11-1920, p. 6) 
 
It [Indian civilization] is a mingling of the cultures represented by the different 
faiths and influenced by the geographic and other environments in which the 
cultures have met. Thus Islamic culture is not the same in Arabia, Turkey, 
Egypt and India, but it is itself influenced by the condition of respective 
countries. Indian culture is, therefore, Indian. It is neither Hindu, Islamic nor 
any other, wholly. It is a fusion of all and essentially Eastern. And everyone 
who calls himself or herself an Indian is bound to treasure that culture, be its 
trustee and resist any attack upon it. (YI, 30-4-1931, p.88) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 412  The Indian culture of our times is in the making. Many of us are striving to 
produce a blend of all the cultures which seem today to be in clash with one 
another. No culture can live if it attempts to be exclusive. 
There is no such thing as pure Aryan culture in existence today in India. 
Whether the Aryan were indigenous to India or were unwelcome intruders does 
not interest me much. What does interest me is the fact that me remote 
ancestors blended with one another with the utmost freedom and we of the 
present generation are a result of that blend. 
Whether we are doing any good to the country of our birth and the tiny globe 
which sustains us or whether we are a burden, the future alone will show. (H, 
9-5-1936, pp. 100-1) 
 
Either people of different faiths having lived together in friendship have 
produced a beautiful blend of cultures, which we shall strive to perpetuate and 
increasingly strengthen the shape [of] , or we shall cast about for the day when 
there was only one religion represented in Hindustan and retrace our steps to 
that exclusive culture. 
It is just possible that we might not be able to find any such historical date and 
if we do and we retrace our steps, we shall throw our culture back to that ugly 
period and deservedly earn the execration of the universe.  
(H, 2-11-1947, p. 392) 
 
 
Western Culture 
Of myself, whilst I have freely acknowledged my debt t o Western culture, I can 
say that whatever service I have been able to render to the nation has been 
due entirely to the retention by me of Eastern culture to the extent it has been 
possible. I should have been thoroughly useless to the masses as an anglicized, 
denationalized being, knowing little of, caring less for and perhaps even 
despising their ways, habits, thoughts and aspirations. (YI, 5-7-1928, p. 224) 
 
European civilization is no doubt suited for the Europeans, but it will mean ruin 
for India if we endeavour to copy it. This is not to say that we may not adopt 
and assimilate whatever may be good and capable of assimilation by us, as it 
does not also mean that even the Europeans will not have to part with 
whatever evil might have crept into it. 
The incessant search for material comforts and their multiplication is such an 
evil; and I make bold to say that the Europeans themselves will have to 
remodel their outlook if they are not t o perish under the weight of the 
comforts to which they are becoming slaves. It may be that my reading is The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 413  wrong, but I know that for India to run after the Golden Fleece is to court 
certain death. 
Let us engrave on our hearts the motto of a Western philosopher, ‘Plain living 
and high thinking’. 
Today it is certain that the millions cannot have high living and we the few who 
profess to do the thinking for the masses run the risk, in a vain search after 
higher living, of mission high thinking. (YI, 30-4-1931, p. 38) 
 
 
Cultural Domination Of The West   
I t
hink that nobody else can protect our culture for u s. We have to protect it 
ourselves and can destroy it by our folly. (H, 25-5-1947, p. 166) 
 
Though we are politically free, we are barely free from the subtle domination 
of the West. I have nothing to say to that school of politicians who believe that 
knowledge can only come from the West. Nor do I subscribe to the belief that 
nothing good came out of the West. I do fear, however, that we are unable as 
yet to come to a correct decision in the matter. 
It is to be hoped that no one contends that, because we seem to be politically 
free from foreign domination, the mere fact gives us freedom from the more 
subtle influence of the foreign language and foreign thought.  
(H, 2-11-1947, p.392) 
 
 
Asia For The Asiatics 
I so not subscribe to the doctrine of ‘Asia for the As iatics’, if it is meant as an 
anti-European combination. How can we have Asia for the Asiatics unless we 
are content to let Asia remain a frog in the well? But Asia cannot afford to 
remain a frog in the well. It has a message for the whole world life only it will 
live up to it. There is the imprint of Buddhistic influence on the whole of Asia 
which includes India, China, Japan, Burma, Ceylon and the Malay states. I said 
to the Burmese and the Ceylonese that they were Buddhist in name, India was 
the Buddhist in reality. I would say the same thing to China and Japan. But for 
Asia to be not for Asia but the whole world, it has to relearn the message of the 
Buddha and deliver it to the world. Today it is being denied everywhere. I 
…have no message to give you but this –that you must be true to you ancient 
heritage. The message is 2,500 years old, but it has not yet been truly lived. 
But what are 2,500 years? They are but a speck in the cycle of time. The full 
flower of non-violence which seems to be withering has yet to come to full 
bloom. (H, 24-12-1938, p. 404) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 414   
I hope that all the representatives… from the different Asian countries will 
strive their level best to have only one world. They will have to think out ways 
and means for achieving this goal. If you work with fixed determination, there 
is no doubt that, in our own generation, we will certainly realize this dream… I 
will not like to live in this world if it is not to be one. Certainly, I should like to 
see this dream realized in my life-time. (H, 20-4-1947, p. 109) 
 
All eyes are turned on her, India, in particular those of Asia and Africa … India 
has won a moral victory over Britain because she has fought non-violently and 
that is why Asiatic countries hope for proper guidance from her. It is the duty 
of every Indian not to believe their hopes. If Asia and Africa have the right lead 
given to them by India, it will change the face of the world. (H, 11-5-1947, p. 
148) 
 
 
One World  
Go
d has so ordered this world that no one can keep his  goodness or badness 
exclusively to himself. The whole world is like the human body with its various 
members. Pain in one member is felt in the whole body. Rot in one part must 
inevitably poison the whole system. (H, 26-5-1946, p. 154) 
 
Man should earnestly desire the well-being of all God’s creation and pray that 
we may have the strength to do so. In desiring the well-being of all lies his own 
welfare; he who desires only his own or his community’s welfare is selfish and 
it can never be well with him. (H, 27-10-1946, p. 375) 
 
It is open to both the new States [India and Pakistan] to him at… a family of 
independent world States which necessarily rules out internal armies. I cannot 
visualize a dog-in –the-manner policy for India whereby it will become a 
menace to world peace…. 
It by India’s effort such a world federation of free and independent States is 
brought into being, the hope of the Kingdom of God, otherwise called 
Ramarajya, may legitimately be entertained. (H, 13-7-1947, p. 235) 
 
 
UNESCO 
I am deeply interested in the efforts of the United N a tions Economic, Social and 
Cultural Organization to secure peace through educational and cultural 
activities. I fully appreciate that real security and lasting peace cannot be The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 415  secured so long as extreme inequalities in education and culture exist as they 
do among the nations of the world. Light must be carried even to the remotest 
homes in the less fortunate countries which are in comparative darkness and I 
think that, in this cause, the nations which are economically and educationally 
advanced have a special responsibility. (H, 16-11-1947, pp. 412-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 416   
91. NATIONALISM V. INTERNATIONALISM 
 
Ind
ian Nationalism 
I WANT the freedom of my country so that other countri es may learn something 
from my free country, so that the resources of my country may be utilized for 
the benefit of mankind. 
Just as the cult of patriotism teaches us today that the individual has to die for 
the family, the family has to die for the village, the village for the district, the 
district for the province, and the province for the country, even so country has 
to be free in order that it may die, if necessary, for the benefit of the world. 
My love, therefore, of nationalism or my idea of nationalism is that my country 
may become free, that if need be the whole of the country may die, so that the 
human race may live. There is no room for race hatred there. Let that be our 
nationalism. (GIV, p. 171) 
 
Our nationalism can be no peril to other nations in as much as we will exploit 
none, just as we will allow none to exploit us. Through Swaraj we will serve the 
whole world. (YI, 16-4-1931, p. 79) 
 
For me patriotism is the same as humanity. I am patriotic because I am human 
and humane. If is not exclusive, I will not hurt England or Germany to serve 
India. Imperialism has no place in my scheme of life. The law of a patriot is not 
different from that of the patriarch. And a patriot is so much the less patriot if 
he is a Luke-warm humanitarian. There is no conflict between private and 
political law. (YI, 16-3-1921, p. 81) 
 
It is impossible for one to be internationalist without being a nationalist. 
Internationalism is possible only when nationalism becomes a fact, i.e., when 
peoples belonging to different countries have organized themselves and are 
able to act as one man. It is not nationalism that is evil, it is the narrowness, 
selfishness, exclusiveness which is the bane of modern nations which is evil. 
Each wants to profit at the expense of, and rise on the ruin of, the other. 
Indian nationalism has struck a different path. It wants to organize itself or to 
find full self-expression for the benefit and service of humanity at large… God 
having cast my lot in the midst of the people of India, I should be untrue to my 
Maker if I failed to serve them. If I do not know how to serve them I shall never 
know how to serve humanity. And I cannot possibly go wrong so long as I do not 
harm other nations in the act of serving my county. (YI, 18-6-1925, p. 211) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 417   
India Embraces Humanity  
I do want to think in terms of the whole world. My pat riotism includes the gook 
of mankind in general. Therefore, my service of India includes the service of 
humanity…. The whole scheme for the liberation of India is based upon the 
development of internal strength. It is a plan of self-purification. The peoples 
of the West, therefore, can best help the Indian movement by setting apart 
specialists to study the inwardness of it. Let the specialists come to India with 
an open mind and in a spirit of humility as befits a searcher after Truth… 
I believe in thought-power more than in the power of the word, whether 
written or spoken. And if the movement that I seek to represent has vitality in 
it and has divine blessing upon it, it will permeate the whole world without my 
physical presence in its different parts…. 
If I can say so without arrogance and with due humility, my message and 
methods are, indeed, in their essentials for the whole world and it gives me 
keen satisfaction to know that it has already received a wonderful response in 
the hearts of a large and daily-growing number of men and women in the 
West. (YI, 17-9-1925, p.329) 
 
With my limitations of which I am painfully conscious, I feel somehow that my 
experiment must be restricted to a fragment. What may be true of the 
fragment is likely to be true of the whole …. I am pining for the assistance of 
the whole world. I see it coming…. But I know that we shall have to deserve it 
before it comes upon us like a mighty flood, a flood that cleanses and 
invigorates. (ibid, p. 322) 
 
 
Goal Of Brotherhood 
My mission is not merely brotherhood of Indian humanit y. My mission is not 
merely freedom of India, though today it undoubtedly engrosses practically the 
whole of my life and the whole of my time. But through realization of freedom 
of India I hope to realize and carry on the mission of the brotherhood of man. 
My patriotism is not an exclusive thing. It is all-embracing and I should reject 
that patriotism which sought to mount upon the distress or the exploitation of 
other nationalities. The conception of my patriotism is nothing if it is not 
always, in every case without exception, consistent with the broadest good of 
humanity at large. Not only that, but my religion and my patriotism derived 
from my religion embrace all life. I want to realize brotherhood or identity not 
merely with the beings called human, but I want to realize identity with all 
life, even with such things as crawl on earth, I want, if I want, if I don't give The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 418  you a shock, to realize identity with even the crawling things upon earth, 
because we claim descent from the same God, and that being so, all life in 
whatever form it appears must be essentially one. (YI, 4-4-1929, p. 107) 
 
I am a humble servant of India and, in trying to serve India, I serve humanity at 
large. I discovered in my early days that the service of India is not inconsistent 
with the service of humanity. As I grew older in years and, I hope, in wisdom, I 
saw that the discovery was well-made and, after nearly 50 years of public life, I 
am able to say today that my faith in the doctrine that the service of one's 
nation is not inconsistent with the service of the world has grown. It is a good 
doctrine. Its acceptance alone will ease the situation in the world and stop the 
mutual jealousies between nations inhabiting this globe of ours.  
(H, 17-11-1933, pp. 5-6) 
 
 
Independence Vs Interdependence 
Isolated independence is not the goal of the world Sta tes.It is voluntary 
interdependence. (YI, 17-7-1924, p. 236) 
 
The better mind of the world desires today not absolutely independent states 
warring one against another, but a federation of friendly interdependent 
states. The consummation of that event may be far off. I want to make no 
grand claim for our country. But I see nothing grand or impossible about our 
expressing our readiness for universal interdependence rather than 
independence…. I desire the ability to be totally independent without asserting 
the independence. Any scheme that I would frame, while Britain declares her 
goal about India to be complete equality within the Empire, would be that of 
alliance and not of independence without alliance. (YI, 26-12-1924, p. 425) 
 
 
Social Inter-Relation 
Interdependence is and ought to be as much the ideal o f man as self-
sufficiency. Man is a social being. Without inter-relation with society, he cannot 
realize his oneness with the universe or suppress his egotism. His social inter-
dependence enables him to test his faith and to prove himself on the 
touchstone of reality. If man were so placed or could so place himself as to be 
absolutely above all dependence in this fellow-beings, he would become so 
proud and arrogant as to be a veritable burden and nuisance to the world. 
Dependence on society teaches him the lesson of humanity. That a man ought 
to be able to satisfy most of his essential needs himself is obvious; but it is no The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 419  less obvious to me that, when self-sufficient even in respect of all the various 
operations from the growing of cotton too he spinning of the yarn. He has at 
some stage or other to take the aid of the members of his family. And if one 
may take help from one's own family, why not from one's neighbours? Or, 
otherwise, what is the significance of the great saying, ' The world is my 
family'? (YI, 21-3-1929, p. 93) 
 
Let us not … forget that it is man's social nature which distinguishes him from 
the brute creation. If it is his privilege to be independent, it is equality his duty 
to be interdependent. Only an arrogant man will claim to be independent of 
everybody else and be self-contained. (YI, 25-4-1929, p. 135) 
 
 
The Individual 
Individual liberty and interdependence are both essent ial for life in society. 
Only a Robinson Crusoe can afford to be all self-sufficient. When a man has 
done all he can for the satisfaction of has essential requirements, he will seek 
the co-operation of his neighbours for the rest. That will be true co-operation. 
(H, 31-3-1946, p.59) 
 
Searching of self ennobles, searching of others debases. [We] should learn the 
art and virtue of corporate life, in which the circumference of co-operation is 
ever-widening till at last it encircles the whole human race. (H, 14-12-1947, p. 
465) 
 
There is not a single virtue which aims at, or is content with, the welfare of the 
individual alone. Conversely, there is not a single offence which does not, 
directly or indirectly, affect many others besides the actual offender. Hence, 
whether and individual is good or bad is not merely his own concern, but really 
the concern of the whole community, nay, of the whole world. (ER, p. 35) 
 
Mankind is one, seeing that all are equally subject to the moral law. All men 
are equal in God’s eyes. There are, of course, differences of race and status 
and the like, but the higher the status of a man, the greater is his 
responsibility. (ibid, p. 57) 
 
I do not believe… that an individual may gain spiritually and those who surround 
him suffer. I believe in ADVAITA, I believe in the essential unity of man and, for 
that matter, of all that lives. Therefore, I believe that if one man gains The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 420  spiritually, the whole world gains with him and, if one man falls, the whole 
world falls to that extent. (YI, 4-12-1924, p. 398) 
 
The logical conclusion of self-sacrifice is that the individual sacrifices himself 
for the community, the community sacrifices himself itself for the district, the 
district for the province, the province for the nation, and the nation for the 
world. A drop torn from the ocean perishes without doing any good. If it 
remains a part of the ocean, it shares the glory of carrying on its bosom a fleet 
of mighty ships. (H, 23-3-1947, p. 78) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 421   
92. RACIALISM 
 
ONE MAN cannot do right in one department of life whil st he is occupied in 
doing wrong in any other department. Life is one indivisible whole. 
(YI, 27-1-1927, p. 31) 
 
My scheme of life, if it draws no distinction between different religionists in 
India, also draws none between different races. For me, "man is a man for a’ 
that". (YI, 20-2-1920, p. 61) 
 
 
White Policy 
Unseen it [‘South Africa’s white man’s policy’] hold t he seeds of a world war. 
(H, 24-3-1946, p. 52) 
 
Does real superiority [of the whites] require outside props in the shape of 
legislation and lynch law? (ibid) 
 
Is a civilization worth the name which requires for its existence the very 
doubtful prop of racial legislation and lynch law? (H, 30-6-1946, p. 204) 
 
 
Nemesis 
One day the black races will rise like the avenging At tila against their white 
oppressors, unless someone presents to them the weapon of Satyagraha. (H, 19-
5-1946, p. 134) 
 
… It will be a dark blot on the history of the white civilization if lynch law is 
allowed to have its course in South Africa. I hope that the South African 
Government and the civilized conscience of mankind will not allow that. (ibid, 
p. 206) 
 
This new caste [system] is worse than the ancient but dying institution of India 
which has some redeeming features, even while it is dying. But the new 
civilized edition has none. It shamelessly proclaims that white civilization 
requires the erection of legal barriers in order to protect itself against Asiatics The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 422  and Africans. (H, 2-6-1946, p. 157) 
 
 
‘White Man’s Burden’ 
The real ‘white man’s burden’ is not insolently to dom inate coloured or black 
people under the guise of protection, it is to desist from the hypocrisy which is 
eating into them. It is time white men learnt to treat every human being as 
their equal. There is no mystery about whiteness of the skin. It has repeatedly 
been proved that, given equal opportunity, a man, be he of any colour or 
country, is fully equal to any other. 
…"Do unto others as you would that they should do unto you". Or, do they [the 
whites] take in vain the name of Him who said this? Have they banished from 
their hearts the great coloured Asiatic who gave to the world the above 
message? 
Do they forget that the greatest of the teachers of mankind were all Asiatics 
and did not possess a white face? These, if they descended on earth and went 
to South Africa, will all have to live in the segregated areas and be classed as 
Asiatics and coloured people unfit by law to be the equals of whites.  
(H, 30-6-1946, p. 204) 
 
 
Removal Of Racialism  
Those who agree that racial inequality must be remove d and yet do nothing to 
fight the evil are impotent. I cannot have anything to say to such people. After 
all, the underdogs will have to earn their own salvation…. The solution is 
largely in India’s hands. If everything is all right in India internally, she is likely 
to play an effective part in straightening up affairs……. 
If the UNO fails to deal justly with the South African Indian dispute, the UNO 
will lose its prestige. I have no doubt that the UNO can prosper only if it is just. 
(H, 26-10-1947, p. 385) 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 423   
93. WAR AND PEACE 
 
My Participation In War 
EVEN AFTER introspection during all these years, I fee l that, in the 
circumstances in which I found myself, I was bound to adopt the course I did 
both during the Boer War and the Great European War and, for that matter, the 
so-called Zulu 'rebellion' of Natal in 1906. 
Life is governed by a multitude of forces. It would be smooth sailing if one 
could determine the course of one's actions only be one general principle whose 
application at a given moment was too obvious to need even a moment's 
reflection. But I cannot recall a single act which could be so easily determined. 
Being a confirmed war resister, I have never given myself training in the use of 
destructive weapons in spite of opportunities to take such training. It was 
perhaps thus that I escaped direct destruction of human life. But so long as I 
lived under a system of Government based on force and voluntarily partook of 
the many facilities and privileges it created for me, I was bound to help that 
Government to the extent of my ability when it was engaged in a war, unless I 
non-co-operated with the Government and renounced to the utmost of my 
capacity the privileges it offered me. 
Let me take an illustration. I am a member of an institution which holds a few 
acres of land whose crops are in imminent peril from monkeys. I believe in the 
sacredness of all life and hence I regard it as a breach of AHIMSA to inflict any 
injury on the monkeys. But I do not hesitate to instigate and direct an attack on 
the monkeys in order to save the crops. I would like to avoid this evil. I can 
avoid it by leaving or breaking up the institution. I do not do so because I do 
not expect to be able to find a society where there will be no agriculture and, 
therefore, no destruction of some life. In fear and trembling, in humility and 
penance, I therefore participate in the injury inflicted on the monkeys, hoping 
some day to find a way out ... 
Even so did I participate in the three acts of war. I could not, it would be 
madness for me to sever my connexion with the society to which I belong. And 
on those three occasions, I had no thought of non-co-operating with the British 
Government. My position regarding that Government. My position regarding 
that Government is totally different today and hence I should not voluntary 
participate in its wars and I should risk imprisonment and even the gallows if I 
was forced to rake up arms or otherwise take part in its military operations. 
(YI, 13-9-1928, p. 308) 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 424  National Militia 
...If there was a National Government, whilst I should not take a direct part in 
any war, I can conceive occasions when it would be me duty to vote for the 
military training of those who wish to take it. For I know that all its members 
do not believe in non-violence to the extent I do. It is not possible to make a 
person or a society non-violent by compulsion. (ibid) 
 
I have become by force of circumstances a teacher of non-violence. I claim to 
enforce my teaching in my own life to the best of my ability and I feel that I 
have the strength to resist war in my own person. 
I would support the formation of a National Militia under Swaraj, if only 
because I realize that people cannot be made non-violent by compulsion. 
Today, I am teaching the people how to meet a national crisis by non-violent 
means. 
 
 
Working Of Non-Violence 
Non-violence works in a most mysterious manner. Often a man's actions defy 
analysis in terms of non-violence; equally often, his actions may wear the 
appearance of violence when he is absolutely non-violent in the highest sense 
of the term and is subsequently found so to be. All I can then claim for my 
conduct is that it was, in the instances cited, actuated in the interests of non-
violence. There was no thought of sordid national or any other interest at the 
sacrifice of some other interest.... 
For me non-violence is not a mere philosophical principle. It is the rule and the 
breath of my life. I now I fail often, sometimes consciously, more often 
unconsciously. It is a matter not of the intellect but of the heart. True guidance 
comes by the constant waiting upon God, by utmost humility, self-abnegation, 
by being ever ready to sacrifice one's self. Its practice requires fearlessness and 
courage of the highest order. I am painfully aware of my failings. 
But the light within me is steady and clear. There is no escape for any of us 
save through truth and non-violence. I know that war is wrong, is an 
unmitigated evil. I know too that it has got to go. I firmly believe that freedom 
won through bloodshed or fraud is no freedom... Not violence, not untruth, but 
non-violence, Truth is the law of our being. (YI, 13-9-1928, p. 308) 
 
A non-violent man will instinctively prefer direct participation to indirect in a 
system which is based on violence and to which he has to belong without any 
choice is being left to him.... I belong to a world which is partly based on 
violence. If I have only a choice between paying for the army of soldier to kill The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 425  my neighbours or to be a soldier myself, I would, as I must, consistently with 
my creed, enlist as a soldier in the hope of controlling the forces of violence 
and even of converting my comrades. (YI, 30-1-1930, p.37) 
 
 
Military Service 
Merely to refuse military service is not enough. To re fuse to render military 
service when the particular time arrives is to do the thing after all the time for 
combating the evil is practically gone. Military service is only a symptom of the 
disease which is deeper. I suggest to you that those who are not on the register 
of military service are equally participating in the crime if they support the 
State otherwise. He or she who supports a state organized in the military way- 
whether directly or indirectly-participates in the sin. Each man, old or young, 
takes part in the sin by contributing to the maintenance of the state by paying 
the taxes. That is why I said to myself during the war that, so long as I ate 
wheat supported by the army, whilst I was doing everything short of being a 
soldier, it was best for me to enlist in the army and be shot; otherwise I should 
retire to the mountains and eat food grown by nature. Therefore, all those who 
l want to stop military service is much more superficial than non-co-operation 
with the whole system which support the State. But then one's opposition 
becomes so swift and so effective that you run the risk of not only being 
marched to jail but being thrown into the streets. (YI, 31-12-1931, p. 426) 
 
 
Resistance To War 
When two nations are fighting, the duty of a votary o f  AHIMSA is to stop the 
war. He who is not equal to that duty, he who has no power of resisting war, he 
who is not qualified to resist war, may take part in war and yet whole-
heartedly try to free himself, his nation and the world from war. (A, p. 258) 
 
It is... [a matter] of deep conviction [with me] that war is an unmixed evil. I 
would not yield to any one in my detestation of war. But conviction is one 
thing, correct practice is another. The very thing that one war resister may do 
in the interest of his mission may repel another war resister who may do the 
exact opposite and yet both may hold the same view about war. This 
contradiction arises because of the bewildering complexity of human nature. I 
can only, therefore, plead for mutual toleration even among professors of the 
same creed. (YI, 7-2-1929, p. 46) 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 426  All activity for stopping war must prove fruitless so long as the causes of war 
are not understood and radically dealt with. Is not he prime cause of modern 
wars the inhuman race for exploitation of the so-called weaker races of the 
earth? (YI, 9-5-1929, p. 148) 
 
If war had no redeeming feature, no courage and heroism behind it, it would be 
a despicable thing, and would not need speeches to destroy it, but what I 
would suggest to you is infinitely knobbier than war in all its branches, 
including Red Cross organization. Believe me there are many more million 
prisoners-slaves of their passions and conditions of life, and believe me that 
there are millions wounded by their own folly, and million of wrecked homes on 
the face of the earth. The peace societies of tomorrow would, therefore, have 
enough work cut out for them when they take up international service.... (YI, 
31-12-1931, p. 427) 
 
What is happening today is disregard of the law of non-violence and 
enthronement of violence as if it were an eternal law... We see today a mad 
race for outdoing one another in the matter of armaments. And if, when the 
clash comes, as it is bound to come one day, the democracies win, they will do 
so only because they will have the backing of their peoples who imagine that 
they have a voice in their own government.... (H, 11-2-1939, p. 8) 
 
 
World War II 
Personally, I think the end of this giant war will be  what happened in the fabled 
Mahabharata war. The MAHABHARATA has been aptly described by a 
Travancorean as the Permanent History of Man. What is described in that great 
epic is happening today before our very eyes. The warring nations are 
destroying themselves with such fury and ferocity that the end will be mutual 
exhaustion. The victor will share the fate that awaited the surviving Pandavas. 
The mighty warrior Arjuna was looted in broad daylight by a petty robber. And 
out of this holocaust must arise a new order for which the exploited millions of 
toilers have so ling thirsted. The prayers of peace-lovers cannot go in vain. 
Satyagraha is itself an unmistakable mute prayer of an agonized soul. (H, 15-2--
1942, p. 40) 
 
Hatred, [some people argue] cannot be turned into love. Those who believed in 
violence will naturally use it by saying, “kill your enemy, injure him and his 
property wherever you can, whether openly or secretly as necessity requires." 
The result will be deeper hatred and counter hatred and vengeance let loose on The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 427  both sides. The recent war, whose members have yet hardly died, loudly 
proclaims the bankruptcy of this use of hatred. And it remains to be seen 
whether the so-called victors have won or whether they have not depressed 
themselves in seeking and trying to depress their enemies." (H, 24-2-1946, p. 
20) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 428   
94. THE ATOM BOMB 
 
There have been cataclysmic changes in the world. Do I still adhere to my faith 
in truth and non-violence? Has not the atom bomb exploded that faith? Not only 
has it not done so, but it has clearly demonstrated to me that the twins 
constitute the mightiest force in the world. Before it the atom bomb is of no 
effect. The two opposing forces are wholly different in kind, the one moral and 
spiritual, the other physical and material. The one is infinitely superior to the 
other which by its very nature has an end. The force of the spirit is ever 
progressive and endless. Its full expression makes it unconquerable in the 
world. In saying this I know that I have said nothing new. I merely bear witness 
to the fact. What is more, the force resides in everybody, man, woman and 
child, irrespective of the colour of the skin. Only, in many it lies dormant. But 
it is capable of being awakened by judicious training. 
It is further to be observed that, without the recognition of this truth and due 
effort to realize it, there is no escape from self-destruction, the remedy lies in 
every individual training himself for self-expression in every walk of life, 
irrespective of response by the neighbours. (H, 10-2-1946, p. 8) 
 
Has not the atom bomb proved the futility of all violence? (H, 10-3-1946, p. 36) 
 
 
Ahimsa The Answer 
It has been suggested by American friends that the at o m bomb will bring in 
Ahimsa (non-violence) as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant that its 
destructive power will so disgust the world that it will turn it away from 
violence for the time being. This is very like a man glutting himself with 
dainties to the point of nausea and turning away from them only to return with 
redoubled zeal after the effect of nausea is well over. Precisely in the same 
manner will the world return to violence with renewed zeal after the effect of 
disgust is worn out. 
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God’s not man’s plan. Man knows 
that only evil can come out of evil, as good out of good. 
That atomic energy, though harnessed by American scientists and army men for 
destructive purposes, may be utilized by other scientists for humanitarian 
purposes, is undoubtedly within the realm of possibility. But that is not what 
was meant by my American friends. They were not so simple as to put a 
question which connoted an obvious truth. An incendiary uses fire for his The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 429  destructive and nefarious purpose, a housewife makes daily use of it in 
preparing nourishing food for mankind. 
So far as I can see, the atomic bomb has deadened the finest feeling that has 
sustained mankind for ages. There used to be the so-called laws of war which 
made it tolerable. Now we know the naked truth. War knows no law except 
that of might. The atom bomb brought an empty victory to the Allied arms, but 
it resulted for the time being in destroying the soul of Japan. What has 
happened to the soul of the destroying nation is yet too early to see. Forces of 
nature act in a mysterious manner. We can but solve the mystery by deducing 
the unknown result from the known results of similar events. A slave-holder 
cannot hold a slave without putting himself or his deputy in the cage holding 
the slave. Let no one run away with the idea that I wish to put in a defense of 
Japanese misdeeds in pursuance of Japan’s unworthy ambition. The difference 
was only one of degree. I assume that Japan’s greed was more unworthy. But 
the greater unworthiness conferred no right on the less unworthy of destroying 
without mercy men, women and children of Japan in a particular area. 
The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme tragedy of the bomb is 
that it will not be destroyed by counter-bomb, even as violence cannot be by 
counter-violence. Mankind has to get out of violence only through non-violence. 
Hatred can be overcome only by love, Counter-hatred only increases the 
surface as well as the depth of hatred. I am aware that I am repeating what I 
have many times stated before and practiced to the best of my ability and 
capacity. What I first stated was itself nothing new. It is as old as the hills. 
Only, I recited no copy book maxim, but definitely announced what I believe in 
every fibre of my being. Sixty years of practice in various walks of life has only 
enriched the belief which the experience of friends has fortified. It is, 
however, the central truth by which one can stand alone without flinching. I 
believe in what Max Muller said years ago, namely, that truth needed to be 
repeated as long as there were men who disbelieved it. (H, 7-7-1946, p. 212) 
 
"The very frightfulness of the atom bomb will not force non-violence on the 
world? If all nations are armed with the atom bomb, they will refrain from using 
it as it wall mean absolute destruction for all concerned?" I am of the opinion 
that it will not. The violent man’s eye would be lit up with the prospect of the 
much greater amount of destruction and death which he could now wreak.  
(H, 23-7-1946, p. 197) 
 
 
Antidote To The Bomb   
I r
egard the employment of the atom bomb for the whol e sale destruction of 
men, women and children as the most diabolical use of science. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 430  "What is the antidote? Has it antiquated non-violence?" No. On the contrary, 
non-violence is the only thing that is now lift in the field. It is the only thing 
that the atom bomb cannot destroy. I did not move a muscle when I first heard 
that the atom bomb had wiped out Hiroshima. On the contrary, I said to myself, 
‘unless now the world adopts non-violence, it will spell certain suicide for 
mankind.’ (H, 29-9-1946, p. 335) 
 
I have no doubt, that unless big nations shed their desire of exploitation and 
the spirit of violence of which war is the natural expression and atom bomb the 
inevitable consequence, there is no hope for peace in the world. I tried to 
speak out during the War and wrote open letters to the British people, to Hitler 
and to the Japanese and was dubbed a fifth columnist for my pains. (H, 10-11-
1946, p. 389) 
 
 
Wise Men Of The East   
Th
e first of these wise men was Zoroaster. He belonged to the East. He was 
followed by the Buddha who belonged to the East-India. Who followed the 
Buddha? Jesus, who came from the East. Before Jesus was Moses who belonged 
to Palestine though he was born in Egypt. After Jesus came Mohamed. I omit 
any reference to Krishna and Rama and other lights. I do not call them lesser 
lights, but they are less known to the literary world. All the same, I do not 
know a single person in the world to match these men of Asia. And then what 
happened? Christianity became disfigured when it went to the West. I am sorry 
to have to say that. I would not talk any further…
 
 
Message Of Asia 
What I want you to understand is the message of Asia. It is not to be learnt 
through the Western spectacles or by imitating the atom bomb. If you want to 
give a message to the West, it must be the message of love and the message of 
truth…. In this age of democracy, in this age of awakening of the poorest of the 
poor, you can redeliver this message with the greatest emphasis. You will 
complete the conquest of the West not through vengeance because you have 
been exploited, but with real understanding. I am sanguine if all of you put 
your hearts together-not merely heads-to understand the secret of the message 
these wise men of the East have left to us, and if we really become worthy of 
that great message, the conquest of the West will be completed. This conquest 
will be loved by the West itself. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 431  The west today is pining for wisdom. It is despairing of a multiplication of the 
atom bombs, because atom bomb mean utter destruction not merely of the 
West but of the whole world, as if the prophecy of the Bible is going to be 
fulfilled and there is to be a prefect deluge. It is up to you to tell the world of 
its wickedness and sin-that is the heritage your teachers and my teachers have 
taught Asia. (H, 20-4-1947, pp. 116-17) 
 
The weapon of violence, even if it is the atom bomb, becomes useless when it 
is matched against true non-violence. (H, 1-6-1947, p.172) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 432   
95. THE WAY TO PEACE 
 
(A)
 Disarmament 
I DO suggest that the doctrine [of non-violence] holds good also as between 
States and States. I know that I am treading on delicate ground if I refer to the 
late War. But I fear I must, in order to make the position clear. It was a war of 
aggrandizement, as if have understood, on either part. It was a war for dividing 
the spoils of the exploitation of weaker races-otherwise euphemistically called 
the world commence... It would be found that, before general disarmament in 
Europe commences, as it must some day unless Europe is to commit suicide, 
some nation will have to dare to disarm herself and take large risks. The level 
of non-violence in that nation, if that every happily comes to pass, will 
naturally have risen so high as to command universal respect. Her judgments 
will be unerring, her decision firm, her capacity for heroic self-sacrifice will be 
great, and she will want to live as much for other nations as for herself. (YI, 8-
10-1925, p. 345) 
 
Like opium production, the world manufacture of swords needs to be 
restricted. The sword is probably responsible for more misery in the world than 
opium. (YI, 19-11-1925, p. 397) 
 
 
Duty Of Neutral State   
"Si
nce disarmament chiefly depends on Great Power why should Switzerland, 
which is a small State and a neutral State, be asked to disarm itself?"* 
It is from the neutral ground of your country that I am speaking to all other 
powers and not only to Switzerland. If you won’t carry this message to other 
parts of Europe, I shall be absolved from all blame. And seeing that Switzerland 
is a neutral territory and non-aggressive nation, there is all the more reason 
why Switzerland should not need an army. Secondly, it is through your 
hospitality and by reason of your occupying the vantage ground that you have 
nationals coming to you. It should be possible for you to give to the world a 
lesson tin disarmament and show that you are brave enough to do without an 
army. (ibid) 
 
"How could a disarmed neutral country allow other nations to be destroyed? But 
for our army which was waiting ready at our frontier during the last war we 
should have been ruined."* The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 433  At the risk of being considered a visionary or a fool I must answer this question 
in the only manner I know. It would be cowardly of a neutral country to allow 
an army to devastate a neighbouring country. But there are two ways in 
common between soldiers of war and soldier of non-violence, and if I had been 
a citizen of Switzerland and President of the Federal State, what I would have 
done would be to refuse passage to the invading army by refusing all supplies. 
Secondly, by reenacting a Thermopylx in Switzerland, you would have 
presented a living wall of men and woman and children, inviting invaders to 
walk over your corpses. You may say that such a thing is beyond human 
experience and endurance. I say that it is not so. It was quite possible. Last 
year in Gujarat, women stood LATHI charges unflinchingly, and in Peshawar, 
thousands stood hails of bullets without resorting to violence. Imagine these 
men and women staying in front of an army requiring a safe passage to another 
country. The army would be brutal enough to walk over them, you might say. I 
would then say you will still have done your duty by allowing yourself to be 
annihilated. An army that dares to pass over the corpses of innocent men and 
women would not be able to repeat that experiment. You may, if you wish, 
refuse to believe in such courage on the part of the masses o men and women, 
but, then, you would have to admit that non-violence is made of sterner stuff. 
It was never conceived as a weapon of the weak but of the stoutest hearts. 
(YI, 31-12-1931, p. 427) 
 
 
Great Power And Disarmament 
It is… open to the Great Powers to take it [non-viole n ce] up any day and cover 
themselves with glory and earn the eternal gratitude of posterity. If they or any 
of them could shed the fear of destruction, if they disarmed themselves, they 
will automatically help the rest to regain their sanity. But, then, these Great 
Power have to give up imperialistic ambitions and exploitation of the so-called 
uncivilized or semi-civilized nations of the earth and revise their mode of life. 
It means a complete revolution. Great nations c an hardly be expected, in the 
ordinary course, to move spontaneously in a direction the reverse of the one 
they have followed, and according to their notion of values, from victory to 
victory. But miracles have happened before and may happen even in this very 
prosaic age. Who can dare limit God’s power of undoing wrong? One thing is 
certain. If the mad race for armaments continues, it is bound to result in a 
slaughter such as has never occurred in history. If there is a victor left, the very 
victory will be a living death for the nation that emerges victorious. There is no 
escape from the impending doom save through a bold and unconditional 
acceptance of the non-violent method with all its glorious implications.  The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 434  (H, 12-11-1938, p. 328) 
 
 
(B) Gangsterism V. Nonviolence 
 
"What to do with ‘gangster’ nations, if I may the expr ession frequently used? 
There was individual gangsterism in America. It has been put down by strong 
police measures both local and national. Could not we do something similar for 
gangsterism between nations, as instanced in Manchuria-the nefarious use of 
the opium poison, in Abyssinia, in Spain, in the sudden seizure of Austria, and 
then, the case of Czechoslovakia?" 
if the best minds of the world have not imbibed the spirit of non-violence, they 
would have to meet gansterism in the orthodox way. But that would only show 
that we have not got far beyond the law of the jungle, that we have not yet 
learnt to appreciate the heritage that God has given us, that, in spite of the 
teaching of Christianity which is 1900 years old and of Hinduism and Buddhism 
which are older, and even of Islam (if I have read it aright), we have not made 
much headway as human beings. But, whilst I would understand the use of 
force by those who have not the spirit of non-violence to throw their whole 
weight in demonstrating that even gangsterism has to be met by non-violence. 
For, ultimately, force, however justifiably used, will lead us into the same 
morass as the force of Hitler and Mussolini. There will be just a difference of 
degree. You and I who believe in non-violence must use it at the critical 
moment. We may not despair of touching the hearts even of gangsters, even if, 
for the moment, we may seem to be striking our heads against a blind wall. (H, 
10-12-1938, p. 372) 
 
 
Nonviolent Alternative 
When the position is examined in terms of non-violence , I must say it is 
unbecoming of a great nation of 400 millions, a nation as cultured as China, to 
repel Japanese aggression by resorting to Japan’s own methods. If the Chinese 
had non-violence of my conception, there would be no use left for the latest 
machinery for destruction which Japan possesses. The Chinese would say to 
Japan, ‘Bring all your machinery, we present half of our population to you. But, 
the remaining 200 millions won’t bend their knee to you’. If the Chinese did 
that, Japan would become China’s slave. (H, 24-12-1938, p. 394) 
 
…. For the Poles to stand valiantly against the German hordes, vastly superior 
in numbers, military equipment and strength, was almost non-violence. I should The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 435  not mind repeating that statement over and over again. You must give its full 
value to the word ‘almost’. But we are 400 millions here. If we were to 
organize a big army and prepare ourselves to fight foreign aggression, how 
could we by any stretch of imagination call ourselves almost non-violent, let 
alone non-violent? The Poles were unprepared for the way in which the enemy 
swooped down upon them. When we talk of armed preparation, we 
contemplate preparation to meet any violent combination with our superior 
violence. If India ever prepared herself that way, she would constitute the 
greatest menace to world peace. For, if we take that path, we will also have to 
choose the path of exploitation like the European nations.  
(H, 25-8-1940, p. 261) 
 
 
(C) Peace Through Love 
 
It may be long before the law of love will be recognized in international affairs. 
The machineries of Governments stand between and hide the hearts of one 
people from those of another. Yet… we can see how the world is moving 
steadily to realize that between nation and nation, as between man and man, 
force has failed to solve problems, but that the economic sanction of non-co-
operation is far more mighty and conclusive than armies and navies. (YI, 23-6-
1919, p. 50) 
 
Till a new energy is harnessed and put on wheels, the captains of older energies 
will treat the innovation as theoretical, impractical, idealistic and so on. It may 
take long to lay the wires for international love, but the sanction of 
international non-co-operation in preference to continued physical 
compulsion….is a distinct progress towards the ultimate and real solution. (ibid, 
p. 51) 
 
 
Enduring Peace 
Not to believe in the possibility of permanent peace i s to disbelieve in the 
Godliness of human nature. Methods hereto adopted have failed because rock-
bottom sincerity on the part of those who have striven has been lacking. Not 
that they have realized this lack. Peace is unattained by part performance of 
conditions, even as a chemical combination is impossible without complete 
fulfillment of the conditions of attainment thereof. If the recognized leaders of 
mankind who have control over the engines of destruction were wholly to 
renounce their use, with full knowledge of its implications, permanent peace 
can be obtained. This is clearly impossible without the Great Powers of the The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 436  earth renouncing their imperialistic design. This, again, seems impossible 
without great nations ceasing to believe in soul-destroying competition and to 
desire to multiply wants and, therefore, increase their material possessions. It 
is my conviction that the root of the evil is want of a living faith in a living God. 
It is a first-class human tragedy that peoples of the earth who claim to believe 
tin the message of Jesus, whom they describe as the Prince of Peace, show 
little of that belief in actual practice. It is painful to see sincere Christian 
divines limiting the scope of Jesus’ message to select individuals. I have been 
taught from my childhood and tested the truth by experience that the primary 
virtues of mankind are possible of cultivation by the meanest of the human 
species. It is this undoubted universal possibility that distinguishes the humans 
from the rest of God’s creation. If even one nation were unconditionally to 
perform the supreme act of renunciation, many of us would see in our life-time 
visible peace established on earth. (Message to Cosmopolitan, New York, 
quoted in H, 16-5-1936, p. 109; also, H, 18-6-1938, pp. 153-4) 
 
Peace will never come until the Great Power courageously decide to disarm 
themselves. It seems to me that recent events must force that belief on the 
Great Powers. I have an implicit faith, a faith that today burns brighter than 
ever, after half a century’s experience of unbroken practice of non-violence, 
that mankind can only be saved through non-violence which is the central 
teaching of the Bible as I have understood the Bible. (H, 24-12-1938, p. 395) 
 
 
No ‘Appeasement’ 
I have never admitted any partiality for ‘appeasement’  which has become a 
term of reproach in the English language. Peace I want among all mankind, but 
I do not want peace at any cost, and certainly not by placating the aggressor or 
at the cost of honour. Anyone, therefore, who thinks that I am guilty of either 
vice will do great harm to the immediate purpose. (BC, 9-8-1942) 
 
My experience, daily growing stronger and richer, tells me that there is no 
peace for individuals or for nations without practicing Truth and Non-violence 
to the utter most extent possible for man. The policy of retaliation has never 
succeeded. (YI, 15-12-1927, p. 421) 
 
 
Nonviolent Society 
It has become the fashion these days to say that soci e ty cannot be organized or 
run on non-violent lines. I join issue on that point. In a family, when a father 
slaps his delinquent child, the latter does not think of retaliating. He obeys his The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 437  father not because of the deterrent effect of the slap, but because of the 
offended love which he senses behind it. That, in my opinion, is an epitome of 
the way in which society is or should be governed. What is true of the family 
must be true of society which is but a larger family. (H, 3-12-1938, p. 358) 
 
 
End To War  
I reiterate my conviction that there will be no peace for the Allies or the world 
unless they shed their belief in the efficacy of war and its accompanying 
terrible deception and fraud and are determined to hammer out real peace 
based on freedom and equality of all races and nations. Exploitation and 
domination of one nation over another can have no place in a world striving to 
put an end to all wars. In such a world only, the militarily weaker nations will 
be free from the fear of intimidation or exploitation. (BC, 18-4-1945) 
 
Not to return violence by violence but neutralize it by withholding one’s hand 
and, at the same time, refusing to submit to the [aggressor’s] demand [backed 
by force] is the only civilized way of going on in the world. Any other course 
can only lead to a race for armaments, interspersed by periods of peace which 
is by necessity and brought about by exhaustion, when preparations will be 
going on for violence of a superior order. Peace through superior violence 
inevitably leads to the atom bomb and all that it stands for. It is the completes 
negation of non-violence and of democracy which is not possible without the 
former. (H, 30-3-1947, p. 86) 
 
I can say with confidence that if the world is to have peace, non-violence is the 
means to that end and no other. (H, 20-7-1947, p. 243) 
 
 
Pacifism And Pacifists 
A true pacifist is a true satyagrahi. The latter acts by faith and, therefore, is 
not concerned about the result, for he knows that it is assured when the action 
is true. 
…Pacifists have to prove their faith by resolutely refusing to do anything with 
war, whether of defense or offence. (H, 15-4-1939, p. 90) 
 
...Pacifists have to live their lives tin strict accord with the Sermon on the 
Mount, and they will find immediately that there is much to give up and much 
to remodel. The greatest thing that they have to deny themselves is the fruit of 
imperialism… (H, 15-3-1942, p. 73) The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 438   
96. THE WORLD OF TOMORROW 
 
PERHAPS NEVER before has there been so much speculatio n about the future as 
there is today. Will our world always be one of violence? Will there always be 
poverty, starvation, misery? Will we have a firmer and wide belief in religion, 
or will the world be godless? If there is to be a great change in society, how will 
that change be wrought? By war, or revolution? Or will it come peacefully? 
Different men give different answers to these questions, each man drawing the 
plan of tomorrow's world as he hopes and wishes it to be. I answer not only out 
of belief but out of conviction. The world of tomorrow will be, must be, a 
society based on non-violence. That is the first law; out of it all other blessings 
will flow. It may seem a distant goal, an impractical Utopia. But it is not in the 
least unobtainable, since it can be worked for here and now. An individual can 
adopt the way of life of the future-the non-violent way-without having to wait 
for others to do so. And if an individual can do it, cannot whole groups of 
individuals? Whole nations? Men often hesitate to make a beginning because 
they feel that the objective cannot be achieved in its entirety. This attitude of 
mind is precisely our greatest obstacle to progress-an obstacle that each man, 
if he only will it, can clear away. 
 
 
Equal Distribution 
Equal distribution-the second great law of tomorrow's  world as I see it-grows 
out of non-violence. It implies not that the world's goods shall be arbitrarily 
divided up, but that each man shall have the wherewithal to supply his natural 
needs, no more. As a crude example, if one man requires a quarter-pounds of 
flour per week and another needs five pounds, each should not be given 
arbitrarily a quarter-pound, or five pounds; both should be able to satisfy their 
wants. 
Here we come to perhaps the most vital question connected with the shaping of 
tomorrow's world. How is this equal distribution to be brought about? must the 
wealthy be dispossessed of all their holdings? 
Non-violence answers no. Nothing that is violent can be of lasting benefit to 
mankind. Forcible dispossession would deprive society of many great gifts; the 
wealthy man knows how to create and build, his abilities must not be lost. 
Instead, he must be left in possession of his wealth so that he may use what he 
reasonably requires for his personal needs and act as trustee for the remainder, 
to be expended for the benefit of society. There have been and are such men. 
To my mind, as soon as a man looks upon himself as a servant of society, earns The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 439  for its sake, spends for its sake, then his earnings are good and his business 
venture is constructive. 
 
 
Change In Human Nature 
But does not this whole idea of non-violence imply a c hange in human nature? 
And does history at any time record such a change? Emphatically it does. Many 
an individual has turned from the mean, personal, acquisitive point of view to 
one that sees society as a whole and works for its benefit. If there has been 
such a change in one man, there can be, the same change in many. 
 
 
The Future 
I see no poverty in the world of tomorrow, no wars, no  revolutions, no 
bloodshed. And in that world there will be a faith in God greater and deeper 
than ever in the past. The very existence of the world, in a broad sense, 
depends on religion. All attempts to root it out will fail. (NWWP, pp. 49-51) 
 
The structure of a world federation can be raised only on a foundation of non-
violence, and violence will have to be totally given up in world affairs. (GCG, 
1942-44, p. 143) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 440   
SOURCES 
 
A An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with 
Truth: M.K. Gandhi : translated from Gujarati by Mahadev Desai 
:Navajivan Publishing House. Ahmedabad; vol. I, 1927;  
Vol. II, 1929; edition used: 1959 
AA Asia and the Americas: Monthly Magazine published from New 
York. 
ABP Amrita Bazar Patrika:  English daily published from Calcutta. 
AG Among the Great: Dilip Kumar Roy; introduction by S. 
Radhakrishnan; Nalanda Publication, Bombay, 1945; edition 
used; reprint: Jaico Publications, Bombay, 1950 
AOA Ashram Observances in Action: Translated from Gujarati by V.G. 
Desai ; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad,1955. 
BC The Bombay Chronicle: Daily newspaper published from 
Bombay. 
CP Constructive Programme: Its Meaning and place; M. K. Gandhi; 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1941; edition used: 
1948. 
EF The Epic Fast : Pyarelal; Mohanlal Maganlal Bhatt; Ahmedabad, 
1932. 
ER Ethical Religion : Mahatma Gandhi; translated from Hindi by B. 
Rama Iyer; S. Ganesan, Madras,1930. 
FYM From Yeravda Mandir: Ashram Observance : M.K. Gandhi; 
translated by V. G. Desai ; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1933; edition used:1957. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 441  GCG Gandhiji’s Correspondence with the Government , 1942-44: 
Navajivan publishing House, Ahmedabad ; April, 1945. 
GIV Gandhiji in Indian Village : Mahadev Desai; S. Ganesan, Madras, 
1927. 
H Harijan :(1933-1956) English weekly journal founded by Gandhiji 
and published under the auspices of the Harijan Sevak Sangh, 
Poona, and from 1942, by the Navajivan Trust, Ahmedabad. The 
weekly suspended publication in 1940 during the "Individual 
Satyagraha"; resumed in January 1942, but stopped appearing 
during the Quit India Struggle. It reappeared in 1946. 
HS Hind Swaraj or Indian Home rule: Mahatma Gandhi; Navajivan 
Publishing House. Ahmedabad, 1938; edition used:1958. 
HSt The Hindusthan Standard: Daily newspaper published from 
Calcutta. 
Hu The Hindu: Daily newspaper published from Calcutta. 
ICS India's case for Swaraj:  Edited by W. P. Kabadi: Yeshanand & 
Co., Bombay, 1932 
KH key to Health: M. K. Gandhi; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1948. 
L The Leader:  Daily newspaper published from Ahmedabad. 
M Mahatma: Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi:  D. G. 
Tendulkar; Vithalbhai K. Jhaveri and D. G. Tendulkar, Bombay 
1951-54, 8 Volumes. 
MGI Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas:  C.F. Andrews; George Allen, London, 
1929. 
MGLP Mahatma Gandhi:  The Last Phase: Pyarelal; Navajivan Publishing 
House, Ahmedabad; Vol. I, February 1956; Vol. II, February The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 442  1958. 
MI Medium of Instruction:  M. K. Gandhi; edited by Bharatan 
Kumarappa; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1954. 
MKG M. K. Gandhi: An Indian Patriot in South Africa:  By J. J. Doke; 
introduction by Lord Ampthill; The London Indian Chronicle, 
London, 1909. 
MN My Non-violence: M. K. Gandhi; edited by Sailesh Kumar 
Bandopadhyaya; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1960. 
MR The Modern Review:  monthly journal published from Calcutta. 
MS My Socialism:  M. K. Gandhi; compiled by R. K. Prabhu; 
Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1959. 
N Navajivan (1919-1931): Gujarati weekly, with occasional bi-
weekly issues; first issued on September 7, 1919; edited by 
Gandhiji and published from Ahmedabad. 
NWWP Non-violent Way to World Peace: M. K. Gandhi; compiled by R. 
K. Prabhu; Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1959. 
RCPS Report of the Commission Appointed by the Punjab Sub-
committee of the Indian National Congress:  published by K. 
Santhanam, Lahore, 1920. 
S Sabarmati: A Report of the Annual Meeting of the Federation of 
International Fellowships, 1929. 
Sp The Spectator:  weekly issued from London. 
SL Satyagraha Leaflets: Occasionally issued during March-May 
1919,from Bombay. 
SSA Satyagraha in South Africa:  M. K. Gandhi; translated by V. G. 
Desai,, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad, 1928; edition 
used: 1950. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 443  SW Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi:  G. A. Natesan & 
Co., Madras, 1933, 4th edition. 
TI The Times of India : Daily newspaper published from Bombay. 
TNH Towards New Horizons:  Pyarelal; reprinted from Mahatma 
Gandhi; The Last Phase; Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad, 1959. 
WGC With Gandhiji in Ceylon: edited by Mahadev Desai; S. Ganesan, 
Madras, 1928. 
YI Young India: (1919-1932) English weekly journal, published from 
Bombay as a bi-weekly, under Gandhiji's supervision from May 7, 
1919, and as a weekly from Ahmedabad, with Gandhiji as editor 
from October 8, 1919. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 444   
GLOSSARY 
 
Advaita Hindu philosophy of Monism or Non-dualism 
Agiari Zoroastrian fire-temple 
Ahimsa Non-violence; in its positive aspect-love for all living 
things. 
Allah Muslim name of God 
Amanitvam  humility 
Aparigraha non-possession 
Ardhangini woman; the 'better half'. 
Ashram abode of spiritual teacher; place for disciplined 
community living; stage of life. 
Asoka Indian monarch of 3rd century B.C. famed for his 
renunciation of empire and conquest and for his 
rock-edicts embodying Buddhist dharma. 
Atishudra One lower than the shudra, the fourth caste at the 
bottom of Hindu social hierarchy; 'untouchable'. 
Atman soul 
Avatar literally, a 'descent'; incarnation of a deity, 
especially of Vishnu in the Hindu Trinity. 
Bansi bamboo flute as of the divine cowherd, Sri Krishna. 
Bardoli Gujarat village, connected with the Civil 
Disobedience Movement 
Bhagwadgita  (see 'The Gita') 
Bhakti devotion. 
Bhangi scavenger; sweeper.  
Bharat Mata  Mother India. 
Bibhishan brother of Ravana, in the Ramayana, known for his 
wise counsel. 
Bhogabhumi  Land of enjoyment 
Brahma Hindu name of God the Creator, one of the Trinity. 
Brahmachari  A celibate; one who observes Brahmacharya. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 445  Brahmacharya  celibacy; code of conduct involving strict observance 
of chastity or continence in the pursuit of learning, 
philosophy and God. 
Brahman, 
Brahmin member of the first of the four castes, whose chief 
duty is the study and teaching of the Vedas and the 
performance of sacrifices and other religious rituals. 
Buddha a. founder of Buddhism, b. about 563, d. about 483 
B.C; also known as Gautama, Siddhartha, Sakyamuni, 
etc. 
Chaitanya Bengali religious reformer of the 15th century A.D. 
who is worshipped by his followers as an incarnation 
of Sri Krishna. 
Chakki Grinding wheel or mill. 
Chapati Thin flat cakes made of flour; unleavened bread. 
Charkha Spinning-wheel. 
Dandi March  March undertaken by Gandhiji from March 12 to April 
5, 1930, from his Sabarmati Ashram to the coastal 
village of Dandi, about 100 miles distant, with a view 
to breaking the Salt Law by picking upnatural salt 
from the sea-shore. His arrest at Dandi was followed 
by a countrywide movement of Civil Disobedience 
famous as the Salt Satyagraha. 
Damayanti Princess of Vidarbha and wife of Prince Nala of 
Naishadha, the constancy of whose devotion to each 
other forms the theme of a well-known episode in 
the Puranas. 
Daridranarayana  God in the form of the poor and the destitute. 
Dasharatha  King of Ayodhya, father of Rama, in the Ramayana. 
Dayanand Swami Dayanand Saraswati (1824-83), founder of the 
Arya Samaj. 
Dharma religion; law of one's being; righteousness; Hindu 
code of religion and morals or religious and moral 
duty. 
Dharmaja one born from a sense of duty. 
Dharmayuddha  war fought for a righteous end by righteous means 
and methods. 
Dheds a community in Gujarat traditionally treated as 
'untouchable'. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 446  Dhurna 'sit-down' strike; an early and crude form of 
Satyagraha. 
Dnyandev boy poet-saint of Maharashtra of the 13th century 
A.D., author of Dnyaneshwari,  a Marathi commentary 
on the Gita; also spelt as Dnyaneshwar or 
Jnaneshwar. 
Draupadi consort of the Pandava Princes, in the Mahabharata.  
Dublas a backward shudra community of Gujarat 
Duryodhana  Head of the Kaurava Princes, in the Mahabharata. 
Dyer British General who fired on an unarmed assembly in 
Jallianwala Bagh, Amritsar, on April 13, 1919, killing 
over 400 people. 
Ganga the sacred river Ganges of Northern India. 
Ganja narcotic from the flower of Indian hemp. 
Ghani village oil mill. 
Gita, the The 'Song Celestial'; a Hindu scriptural work in 
sanskrit verse, composed some centuries before the 
Christian era, in which Sri Krishna sums up the 
essence of Hindu religion and philosophy. 
Ghee clarified butter. 
Gokhale Gopal Krishna Gokhale (1866-1915), Indian politician, 
member of the Viceroy's Legislative Council and 
founder of the Servants of India Society, whom 
Gandhiji acknowledged as his political  guru. 
Goonda a rowdy or hooligan. 
Goondaism rowdyism 
Gopal cowherd; a name of Sri Krishna. 
Gur jaggery, indigenous form of sugarmolasses 
Guru teacher; preceptor. 
Goseva service of the cattle; cow-protection.. 
Gram Panchayat  village tribune or 'council of five'. 
Gramseva village service. 
Gram sevak  person employed in village service. 
Hakim practitioner of indigenous form of medicine. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 447  Hanuman The 'Monkey-God' who serves Rama in the Ramayana. 
Hartal strike, suspension of normal business. 
Hooghli western most branch of the River Ganges on the 
banks of which Calcutta is situated. 
Ishopanishad  one of the major Upanishads. 
Jainism ancient Indian religion, one of the cardinal principles 
of which is non-violence. 
Jains followers of Jainism. 
Janak philosopher-king of Videha, foster-father of Sita, in 
the Ramayana. 
Kabir poet-saint of northern India, who lived in the 15th 
century A.D. and who, in his devotional songs, dwelt 
on the essential oneness of the Godhead and the 
harmony between Hinduism and Islam. 
Kamaja one born of lust. 
Karmabhumi  land of duty. 
Karmayogi one who has devoted his life to action in the selfless 
service of others. 
Khaddar, Khadi  hand-spun and hand-woven cloth. 
Kisan peasant. 
Koran Muslim scripture. 
Krishna divine hero and central figure of the 
epic, Mahabharata, who is worshipped by the Hindus 
as the 8th incarnation of God. 
Kshatriya member of the second (warrior) caste among Hindus. 
Lila, leela divine play or sport; the creation is often explained 
by the Vaishnavas as the leela of God, a conception 
that introduces elements of spontaneity and freedom 
into the universe. 
Lok Sevak Sangh  Society or association for the service of the people. 
Mahabharata, 
the Hindu epic having for its theme the story of the great 
war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas, princes 
of the Lunar race who were cousins, rival claimants 
to the throne of Hastinapur, (ancient Delhi). 
Mhatma Great Soul, title given to Gandhiji. The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 448  Mahavir Vardhamana. 24th Tirthankar or Prophet of Jainism 
(b. about 540, d. about 468 B.C.) who is popularly 
regarded as its greatest promulgator, originally 
named 
Mhayajna the great sacrifice or ritual of propitiation. 
mantra, 
Mantram sacred or magicalincantation. 
Manushya man. 
Maya illusion; in Hindu philosophy, Maya is the divine 
power which has created the cosmos. 
Moksha liberation from earthly bondage. 
Muni sage; ancient seer. 
Nai Talim literally, 'new education', name given to basic or 
craft education . 
Namaz form of Muslim prayer, worship. 
Nanak Fonder of Sikhism (b.1469-d.1538 or 1539 A.D.) 
Nirvana Salvation, Buddhist equivalent of ‘Moksa’ 
Pancha, 
Panchayat the five ; the communal tribune or ‘council of five’ 
Panchayat Raj  rule of the Panchayat 
Pandavas the five brothers, prices of the Lunar Race, who were 
the victor in the Maharashtra war 
Pinjrapoles institutions for looking after old and disabled cattle 
Poorna Swaraj  full self-government or complete independence 
Prahlad son of Hiranyakashipu, amythological demon king; 
Prahlad’s worship of Vishnu led to persecution by his 
father who was ultimately slain by Narasimha, the ‘ 
Man-Lion’ avatar of Vishnu 
Pritam Pritamdas, Gujarati poet of the 16th century A.D. 
who composed numerous devotional songs 
Raj kingdom, rule, regime 
Rajachandra, 
Raychandbhai  Jain saint and philosopher, contemporary of 
Gandhiji, whom the latter acknowledged as his 
spiritual GURU. He died in 1900 
Ram, Rama  hero of the epic, RAMAYANA, who is regarded by The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 449  Hindus as an ideal man and king, and worshipped as 
the 7 thin carnation of God 
Ramakrishna Bengali saint (1836-86 A.D.) who was the GURU of 
Swami Vivekananda and who taught the oneness of 
the Godhead and the basic harmony of all religions. 
The Ramakrishna Mission is named after him 
Ramayana literally, the name of Rama; recitation of God’s 
names 
Ramanuja Vaishnava scholar of the 12th century, who 
propounded Dualistic philosophy 
Ramarajya Hindu epic narrating the story of the abduction of 
Sita, wife of Rama, prince of Ayodhya, by Ravana, 
demon-king of Lanka (Ceylon), and her rescue after 
the conquest of Lanka by the armies led by Rama and 
the death of Ravana at Rama’s hands 
Ramji Mandir  Rama’s temple 
Ravana the demon-king of Lanka, whose abduction of Sita, 
led to his destruction at Rama’s hands, in the 
Ramayana 
Sadavrat charity 
Sahadharmin  wife 
Samagra 
Gramseva all-round village service 
Samskaras innate tendencies inherited from past life, religious 
customs 
Sanatanist faithful follower of ancient Vedic religion 
Sannyas abandonment of all worldly ties with a view to fixing 
the mind on the Supreme Being 
Sannyasi one who has taken to SANYAS 
Sarvodaya welfare of all 
Satvika tending to truth 
Satya truth 
Satyagraha recourse to truth-force or soul-force 
Satygrahi one who practises Satyagraha 
Savitri wife of Satyavan who according to legend, reclaimed 
his life from the God of Death The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 450  Shankara Hindu philosopher of the 8thcentury A.D. who was 
one of the foremost exponents of Non-dualism of the 
Vedanta school of philosophy. 
Shastras the Hindu scriptures 
Shloka metrical verse or composition 
Shudra member of the fourth or menial caste among Hindus 
Sita wife of Rama 
Smritis the Codes, based on recollection of the Shastras 
Sthitaprajna  literally, ‘one of steadfast mind’ ; a soul unaffected 
by extremes of joy and sorrow 
Sudama the indigent boyhood friend and associate of Shri 
Krishna, whom the latter hours, in the BHAGAVATA 
Surdas blind Hindi poet of northern India wholived in the 
16th century A.D.; his poetical work, Sursagar, 
narrating thestory of Krishna, is immensely popular 
with Hindi-speaking Hindus 
Swadeshi belonging to or made in one’s own country 
Swargarohan 
Parva the name of the last of the eighteen sections of the 
epic MAHABHARATA which describes how, when 
Yudhisthira, the eldest of the five Pandava brothers, 
retired to the Himalayas, towards the close of his 
life, and lost his wife and four brothers one after 
another, Indra appeared in his chariot to take him in 
the flesh to his (Indra’s) SWARGA, i.e, his heaven 
where mortals after death enjoy the results of their 
good deeds on earth, 
Tadgud Jaggery prepared from the juice of palmyra fruit 
Tapascharya  penance 
Tilaks caste-marks on the forehead 
Tukaram poet-saint of Maharashtra who lived in the 
17th century A. D. and who composed thousands of 
devotional songs 
Tulsidas Hindi poet of northern India who lived in the 
16th century A.D. and who composed, among other 
works, Ramacharitamanasa, (lit. The Holy Pool of the 
Life of Rama), retelling the epic story of the exploits 
of Rama. This work is held in the highest veneration 
by all Hindi-speaking Hindus The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 451  Upanishads ancient Hindu philosophical treatises, appended to 
the Vedas and regarded as equally authoritative as 
the Vedas 
Vaidas practitioner of Ayurveda system of indigenous 
medicine 
Vaishyas members of the third (cultivator and mercantile) 
class among Hindus 
Valmiki first of Sanskrit poets and author of the Hindu epic, 
RAMAYANA 
Varna colour ; one of the fourdivisions of Hindu society 
(i.e., Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra) based 
onhereditary occupations 
Varnashrama  four-fold division of Hindu society 
Vedanta a system of philosophy springing from the Upanishads 
Vedas most ancient Hindu scriptures, composed of hymns to 
various deities. There are four collections of these 
hymns, known as Rigveda, Samaveda, Yajurveda and 
Atharvaveda 
Vidura the low-born but ‘wise one’ in the MAHABHARATA 
honoured by Sri Krishna 
Yajna ritual or religious sacrifice 
Yoga Hindu system of contemplation for effecting union of 
the human soul with the Supreme Being 
Yogi one who practises yoga 
Yudhishthira eldest of the Pandava Princes, celebrated for his 
right conduct 
Zamindar land holder 
Zend Avesta  zoroastrian scriptures 
Zoroaster Founder of religious system known as Zoroastrianism. 
He is also known as Zarathustra or Zerdusht. The 
Parsis of India, who areemigrants from Persia, are 
followers of this prophet 
 