 
Mohan-Mala 
[A GANDHIAN ROSARY]  
 
 
 
Compiled by: R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
 
Rs. 10/-  
 
 
 
First Published: 30 th  January 1949  
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by: 
Navajivan Publishing House 
 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
Phone: 079 – 27540635 
E-mail: jitnavjivanlO@gmail.com  
Website: www.navajivantrust.org  
  
Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2   
PREFACE  
IN this work I have essayed to present to the reade r the essence of Mahatma 
Gandhiji’s philosophy of life in the form of a Rosa ry of 366 “Pearls of Thought” 
one “Pearl” for each day of the year, including the  leap year all gleaned from 
his writings and speeches. The “Pearls” have been s o arranged as to make the 
transition from one thought to the next as smooth a s possible, thus enabling 
the reader to make use of the Rosary either for dai ly contemplation of the 
given thought or for continuous reading at a stretc h. 
R. K. Prabhu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3   
JANUARY  
 
January 1  
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that perva des everything. I feel it 
Power that pervades everything. I feel it though I do not see it. It is this unseen 
Power which makes itself felt and yet defies all pr oof, because it is so unlike all 
that I perceive through my senses. It transcends th e senses. But it is possible to 
reason out the existence of God to a limited extent . 
YI, 11 Oct. 1928  
 
January 2  
 I do dimly perceive that whilst everything around me is ever changing, ever 
dying, there is underlying all that change a Living  Power that is changeless, 
that holds all together, that creates, dissolves, a nd recreates. That informing 
Power or Spirit is God. And since nothing else I se e merely through the senses 
can or will persist, He alone is. 
Ibid. 
 
January 3  
And is this Power benevolent or male volent? I see it is purely benevolent. For I 
can see that in the midst of death life persists, i n the midest of untruth truth 
persists, in the midst of darkness light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life, 
Truth, Light. He is Love, He is the Supreme Good. 
YI, 11 Oct. 1928 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4  January 4  
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any r ational method. To want to 
do so is to be co-equal with god. I am therefore, h umble enough to recognize 
evil as such; and I call God long-suffering and pat ient precisely because He 
permits evil in the world. 
Ibid. 
 
January 5  
I know that He has no evil in Him and yet if there is evil, He is the author of it 
and yet if there is evil, He is the author of it an d yet untouched by it. I know 
too that I shall never know God if I do not wrestle  with and against evil even at 
the cost of life itself. 
Ibid. 
 
January 6  
We do not know all the laws of God nor their workin g. Knowledge of the tallest 
scientist or the greater spiritualist is like a par ticle of dust. If God is not a 
personal being for me like my earthly father, He is  infinitely more. He rules me 
in the tiniest detail of my life. I believe literal ly that not a leaf moves but by 
His will. Every breath a leaf moves but by his will . Every breath I take depends 
upon His sufferance. 
H, 16 Feb. 1934  
 
January 7  
He and His Law are one. The Law is God. Anything at tributed to Him is not a 
mere attribute. He is the attribute. He is Truth, L ove and Law and a million 
other things that human ingenuity can name. 
Ibid 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  January 8  
Perfection is the attribute of the Almighty, and ye t what a great democrat He 
is! What a amount of wrong and humbug He suffers on  our part! He even suffers 
insignificant creatures of His to question His very  existence, though He is in 
every atom about us, around us and within us. But, He has reserved to Himself 
the right of becoming manifest to whom so ever He c hooses. He is a Being 
without hands and other organs, yet He can see him to whom He chooses to 
reveal Himself. 
H, 14 Nov. 1936 
 
January 9  
TO me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and mora lity; God is fearlessness. 
God is the source of Light and Life and yet He is a bove and beyond all these, 
God is conscience. He is even the atheism of the at heist. For in His boundless 
love God permits the atheist to live. 
YI, 5 March 1925 
 
January 10  
He is the searcher of hearts. He transcends speech and reason. He knows us and 
our hearts better than we do over selves. He does n ot take us at our word, for 
He knows that we often do mean it, some knowingly a nd others unknowingly. 
YI, 5 March 1925 
 
January 11  
He is a personal God to those who need His personal  presence. He is embodied 
to those who need His touch. He is the purest essen ce. He simply is to those 
who have faith. He is all things to all men. He is in us and yet above and 
beyond us. 
Ibid. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6   
January 12  
He cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities or inhuman brutalities are 
committed in His name. He is a long suffering. He i s patient but He is also 
terrible. He is the most exacting personage in the world and the world to come. 
He metes out the same measures to us that we mete o ut to our neighbors men 
and brutes. With Him ignorance is no excuse. And wi thal He is ever forgiving for 
He always gives us the chance to repent. 
Ibid. 
 
January 13  
He is the greatest democrat the world knows, for He  leaves us unfettered to 
make our own choice between evil and good. He is th e greatest tyrant ever 
known, for He often dashes the cup from our lips an d under the cover of free 
will leaves us a margin so wholly inadequate as to provide only mirth for 
Himself at our expense. Therefore it is that Hindui sm calls it all His sport lila, 
or calls it all an illusion maya. 
YI, 5 March 1925 
 
January 14  
 God is not outside this earthly case of ours. Ther efore, exterior proof is not of 
much avail, if any at all. We must over fail to per ceive Him through the senses, 
because He is beyond them. We can feel Him, if we w ill but withdraw ourselves 
from the senses. The divine music is incessantly go ing on within ourselves, but 
the loud senses drown the delicate music, which is unlike and infinitely superior 
to anything we can perceive or hear with our senses . 
H, 13 1936 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7  January 15  
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on this earth, and He tries you 
through and through. And when you find that your fa ith is failing or your body is 
failing you, and you are sinking, He comes to your assistance somehow or other 
and proves to you that you must not lose your faith  and that He is always at 
your beck and call, but on His terms, not on your t erms. So I have found. I 
cannot really recall a single instance when, at the  eleventh hour, He has 
forsaken me. 
SW, p. 1069 
 
January 16  
The divine guidance often comes when the horizon is  the blackest. 
YI, 27 Aug. 1925 
 
January 17  
God helps when one feels oneself humbler than the v ery dust under one’s feet. 
Only to the weak and helpless is divine succor vouc hsafed. 
SSA, p.6 
 
January18  
Mankind is notoriously too sense to read the signs that God sends from time to 
time. We require drums to be beaten into our ears, before we would wake from 
our trance and hear the warning and se that to lose  oneself in all is the only 
way to find oneself 
YI, 25 Aug. 1927 
 
January 19  
If you would ask Him to help you, you would go to H im in all your nakedness, 
approach Him without reservations, also without fea r or doubts as to how He Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  can help a fallen being like you. He who has helped  millions who have 
approached Him, is He going to desert you? 
YI, 1 March 1929 
 
January 20  
Man’s ultimate aim is the realization of god, and a ll his activities, social, 
political, religious, have to be guided by the ulti mate aim of the vision of God. 
The immediate service of all human beings becomes a  necessary part of the 
endeavor, simply because the only way to find God i s to see Him in His creation 
and be one with it. This can only be done by servic e of all. I am a part and 
parcel of the whole, and I cannot find Him apart fr om the rest of humanity. 
H, 29 Aug. 1936 
 
January 21  
God is a very hard taskmaster. He is never satisfie d with fireworks display. His 
mills although they grind surely and incessantly gr ind excruciatingly slow and 
He is never satisfied with hasty forfeitures of lif e. It is a sacrifice of the purest 
that He demands, and so you and I have prayerfully to plod on, live out the life 
so long as it is vouchsafed to us to live it. 
YI, 22 Sept. 1927 
 
January 22  
God keeps an accurate record of all things good and  bad. There is no better 
accountant on earth. 
H, 21 Sept. 1934 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9  January 23 
If God was a capricious person instead of being cha ngeless, unchangeable living 
law, He would in sheer indignation wipe out those w ho in the name of religion 
deny Him and His Law. 
YI, 11 July 1929 
 
January 24  
God tries His votaries through and through, but nev er beyond endurance. He 
gives them strength enough to go through the ordeal  He prescribes for them. 
YI, Feb. 1925 
 
January 25  
God to be God must the heart and transform it. He m ust express Himself in 
every smallest act of His votary. This can only be done through a definite 
realization more real than the five senses can ever  produce. 
YI, 11 Oct. 1928 
 
January 26  
Where there is realization outside the senses it is  infallible. It is proved not by 
extraneous evidence but in the transformed conduct and character of those 
who have felt the real presence of god within. Such  testimony is to be found in 
the experiences in all countries and climes. To rej ect this evidence is to deny 
oneself. 
Ibid. 
 
January 27  
But it is impossible for us to realize perfect Trut h so long as we are imprisoned 
in this mortal frame. We can only visualize it in o ur imagination. We cannot, Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  through the instrumentality of this ephemeral body,  see face to face Truth 
which is eternal. That is why in the last resort we  must depend on faith. 
YM, Chap. II 
 
January 28  
No one can attain perfection while he is in the bod y for the simple reason that 
the ideal state is impossible so long as one has no t completely overcome his 
ego, and ego cannot be wholly got rid of so long as  one is tied down by the 
shackles of the flesh. 
YI, 20 Sept. 1928 
 
January 29  
Our existence as embodied beings is purely momentar y; what are a hundred 
years in eternity? But if we shatter the chains of egotism, and melt into the 
ocean of humanity, we share its dignity. To feel th at we are something is to set 
up a barrier between God and ourselves; to cease fe elings that we are 
something is to become with God. 
YM, Chap. XII 
 
January 30  
A drop in the ocean partakes of the greatness of it s parent, although it is 
unconscious of it. But it is dried up as soon as it  enters upon an existence 
independent of the ocean. We do not exaggerate when  we say that life is a 
bubble. 
YM, Chap. II 
 
January 31  
As soon as we become one with the ocean in the shap e of God, there is no more 
rest for up, nor indeed do we need rest any longer.  Our very sleep is action. For Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  we sleep with the thought of God in our hearts. Thi s restlessness constitutes 
true rest. This never-ceasing agitation holds the k ey to peace ineffable. This 
supreme state of total surrender is difficult to di fficult to describe, but not 
beyond the bounds of human experience. It has been attained by many 
dedicated souls, and may be attained by ourselves a s well. 
Ibid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12   
FEBRUARY 
 
February 1  
Where Love is, there God is also. 
SSA, p.360 
 
February 2  
Love never claims, it never gives. Love ever suffer s, never resents, never 
revenges itself. 
YI, July 1925 
 
February 3  
I believe that the sum total of the energy of manki nd is not to bring us down 
but to lift us up, and that is the result of the de finite, if unconscious, working 
of the law of love. The fact that mankind persists shows that the cohesive force 
is greater than centrifugal. 
YI, 12 Nov. 1931 
 
February 4  
Scientists tell us that without the presence of the  cohesive force amongst the 
atoms that comprise this globe of ours, it would cr umble to pieces and we 
would cease to exist; and even as there is cohesive  force in blind matter, so 
must there be in all things animate and the name fo r that cohesive force among 
animate beings is Love. 
YI, 5 May 1920 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  February 5  
We notice it between father and son, between brothe r and sister, friend and 
friend. But we have to learn to use that force amon g all that lives, and in the 
use of it consists our knowledge of God. Where ther e is love there is life; 
hatred leads to destruction. 
Ibid. 
 
February 6  
I have found that life persists in the midst of des truction and therefore there 
must be a higher law than that of destruction. Only  under that law would a 
well-ordered society be intelligible and life worth  living. 
YI, 1 Oct. 1931  
 
February 7  
If love was not the law of life, life would not hav e persisted in the midst of 
death. Life is a perpetual triumph over the grave. 
H, 26 Sept. 1936  
 
February 8  
If there is a fundamental distinction between man a nd beast, it is the former's 
progressive recognition of the law and its applicat ion in practice to his own 
personal life. All the saints of the world, ancient  and modern, were each 
according to his light and capacity a living illust ration of that supreme Law of 
our Being. 
Ibid.  
 
February 9  
The forms are many, but the informing spirit is one . How can there be room for 
distinctions of high and low where there is this al l embracing fundamental unity Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  under lying the out ward diversity? For that is a f act meeting you at every step 
in daily life. The final goal of all religions is t o realize this essential oneness. 
H, 15 Dec. 1933  
 
February 10  
We must widen the circle of our love till it embrac es the whole village; the 
village in its turn must take into its fold the dis trict, the district the province, 
and so on till the scope of our love becomes coterm inous with the world. 
YI, 27 June 1929 
 
February 11  
Not killing competition, but life giving co-operati on, is the law of the human 
being. Ignoring the emotion is to forget that man h as feelings. Not the good of 
the few, not even good of the many, but it is the g ood of all that we are made 
to promote, if we are made in His own image'.  
SW, p.350  
 
February 12  
The golden rule of conduct is mutual toleration, se eing that we will never all 
think alike and we shall always see Truth in fragme nt and form different angles 
of vision. 
YI, 23 Sept. 1926  
 
February 13  
A seeker after Truth a follower of the Law and Love , cannot hold any thing 
against tomorrow. God never provides for the morrow . He never cerates more 
than what is strictly needed from day to day. If th erefore, we repose faith in 
His Providence, we should rest assured that He will  give us every day our daily 
bread, supplying enough that we require. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15  YI, Sept. 1930 
 
February 14  
We are either ignorant or negligent of the divine L aw in virtue of which man 
has been given only his daily bread and no more, wi th the result that there 
arise inequalities with all the misery attendant up on them 
Ibid. 
 
February 15  
The rich have a superfluous store of things which t hey do not need and which 
are, therefore, neglected and wasted; while million s starve and are frozen to 
death for want of them. If each retained possession  only of what he needed, 
none would be in want and all would live in content ment. 
Ibid. 
 
February 16  
As it is, the rich are discontented no less than th e poor. The poor man would 
become a millionaire and the millionaire a multimil lionaire. The poor are often 
not satisfied when they get just enough to fill the ir stomachs; but they are 
clearly entitled to it and society should make it a  point to see 5that they get it. 
Ibid. 
 
February 17  
Our civilization, our culture, our Swaraj depend no t upon multiplying our wants 
self-indulgence, but upon restricting our wants sel f-denial. 
YI, 6 Oct. 1921  
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  February 18  
We should be ashamed of resting, or having a square  meal so long as there is 
one able-bodied man or woman without work or food. 
YI, Feb. 1925  
 
February 19  
I suggest we are thieves in a way. If I take anythi ng that I do not need for my 
own immediate use and keep it, I thieve it from som ebody else. 
SW, p. 384  
 
February 20  
I venture to suggest that it is the fundamental law  of Nature, without 
exception, that Nature produces enough for our want s from day to day, and if 
only everybody took enough for himself and nothing more, there would be no 
pauperism in this world, there would be no man dyin g of starvation in this 
world. 
Ibid  
 
February 21  
I am no socialist and I do not want to dispossess t hose who have got 
possessions; but I do say that personally those of us who want to see light out 
of darkness have to follow this rule. I do not want  to dispossess anybody. I 
should then be departing from the rule of Ahimsa. I f somebody else possesses 
more than I do, let him. But so far as my own life has to be regulated, I dare 
not possess anything which I do not want. 
Ibid.  
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  February 22  
In India we have got three millions of people who h ave to be satisfied with one 
meal a day, and that meal consisting of a chapatti containing no fat in it and a 
pinch of salt. You and I have no right to anything that we really have until these 
three millions are clothed and fed better. You and I, who ought to know better, 
must adjust our wants, and even undergo voluntary s tarvation in order that 
they may be nursed, fed and clothed. 
SW, p.385  
 
February 23  
The golden rule is resolutely to refuse to have wha t millions cannot. This ability 
to refuse will not descend upon us all of a sudden.  The first thing is to cultivate 
the mental attitude that will not have possession o r facilities denied to 
millions, arrange our lives as fast as possible in accordance with that mentality. 
YI, 24 June 1926  
 
February 24  
One should eat not in order to please the plate, bu t just to keep body going. 
When each organ of sense sub serves the body and th rough the body the soul, 
its special relish disappears and then alone does i t begin to function in the way 
nature intended it to do. Any number of experiments  is too small and no 
sacrifice too great for attaining this symphony wit h nature. 
Auto, p. 392  
 
February 25  
We want healers of souls rather than of bodies. The  multiplicity of hospitals 
and medical men is no sign of true civilization. Th e less we and others pamper 
our bodies the better for us and the world. 
YI, 29 Sept.1927  Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18   
February 26  
Instead of using the body as a temple of God we use  it as a vehicle for 
indulgences and are not ashamed to run to medical m en for help in our effort 
to increase them and abuse the earthly tabernacle. 
YI, 8 Aug. 1929  
 
February 27  
Man's nature is not essentially evil. Brute nature has been known to yield to the 
influence of love. You must never despair of human nature. 
H, 5 Nov.1938  
 
February 28  
Man's estate is one of probation. During that perio d he is played upon by evil 
forces as well as good. He is ever prey to temptati ons. He has to prove his 
manliness by resisting and fighting temptations. 
H, 4 April 1936  
 
February 29  
It may be long before the law of Love will be recog nized in international 
affairs. The machineries of government stand betwee n and hide the hearts of 
one people from those of another. 
YI, 23 June 1919 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
MARCH  
 
March 1  
Truth is like a vast tree, which yields more and mo re fruit, the more you 
mature it. The deeper the search in the mine of Tru th the richer the discovery 
of the gems buried there, in the shape of openings for and ever greater variety 
of service. 
Auto, p. 218 
 
March 2  
The seeker after Truth should be humbler than the d ust. The world crushes the 
dust under its feet, but the seeker after Truth sho uld so humble himself that 
even the dust could crush him. Only then, and not u ntil then, will he have a 
glimpse of truth.  
Ibid., p. XVI 
 
March 3  
Devotion to Truth is the sole reason for our existe nce. All our activities should 
be centred in Truth. Truth should be the very breat h of our life. when once this 
stage in the pilgrim's progress is reached, all oth er rules of correct living will 
come without effort, and obedience to them will be instinctive. But without 
Truth it would be impossible to observe any princip les or rules in life. 
YI, 30 July 1931 
 
March 4  
There should be Truth in thought, Truth in speech, and Truth in action. To the 
man who has realized this Truth in perfection, noth ing else remains to be 
known, because all knowledge is necessarily include d in it. What is not included Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20  in it is not Truth and so not true knowledge; and t here can be no inward peace 
without the true knowledge. If we once learn how to  apply this never-failing 
test of Truth, we will at once be able to find out what is worth being, what is 
worth seeing and what is worth reading. 
Ibid. 
 
March 5  
The quest of Truth involves tapas self-suffering, s ometimes even unto death. 
there can be no place in it for even a trace of sel f-interest. In such selfless 
search for Truth nobody can lose his bearings for l ong. Directly one takes to the 
wrong path one stumbles and is thus redirected to t he right path. Therefore the 
pursuit of Truth is true bhakti (devotion). It is t he path that leads to God and 
therefore there is no place in it for cowardice, no  place for defeat. It is the 
talisman by which death itself becomes the portal t o life eternal. 
YI, 30 July 1931 
 
March 6  
It is not nit given to know the whole Truth. His du ty lies in living up to the 
Truth as he sees it and in doing so to resort to th e purest means, i.e., to non-
violence. 
H, 24 Nov. 1933 
 
March 7  
If observance of Truth was a bed of roses, if truth  cost one nothing and was all 
happiness and ease, there would be no beauty about it. We must adhere to 
Truth even if the heavens should fall. 
YI, 27 Sept. 1928 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  March 8  
Only Truth quenches untruth, Love quenches anger, s elf-suffering quenches 
violence. This eternal rule is a rule not for saint s only but for all. Those who 
observe it may be few but they are the salt of the earth, it is they who keep 
the society together, not those who sin against lig ht and truth. 
H, 1 Feb. 1942 
 
March 9  
Abstract Truth has no value, unless it incarnates i n human beings who represent 
it by proving their readiness to die for it. Our wr ongs live because we only 
pretend to be their living representatives. The onl y way we can prove our claim 
is by readiness to suffer in the discharge our trus t. 
YI, 22 Dec. 1921 
 
March 10  
A man of Truth must ever be confident, if he has al so equal need to be 
different. His devotion to truth demands the fulles t confidence. His 
consciousness of human nature must make him humble and therefore ever 
ready to retrace his steps immediately he discovers  his error. 
YI, 6 May 1926 
 
March 11  
Finite human beings shall never know in its fullnes s Truth and Love which is in 
itself infinite. But we do know enough for our guid ance. We shall err, and 
sometimes grievously, in our application. But man i s a self-governing being, and 
self-government necessarily includes the power as m uch to commit errors as to 
set them right as often as they are made. 
YI, 21 April 1927 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22  March 12  
I believe that in spite of the best intentions one is led into committing mistakes 
they do not really result in harm to the world or f or the matter of that any 
individual. God always saves the world from the con sequences of unintended 
errors of men who live in fear of Him. 
YI, 3 Jan. 1929 
 
March 13  
To err, even grievously, is human. But it is human only if there is determination 
to wend the error and not to repeat it. The error w ill be forgotten if the 
promise is fully redeemed. 
H, 6 Feb. 1937 
 
March 14  
No niggardly acceptance of the inevitable will appe ar pleasing to God. It must 
be a thorough change of heart. 
YI, 2 Feb. 1922 
 
March 15  
There is no one without faults, not even men of God . They are men of God not 
because they are faultless but because they know th eir own faults, they strive 
against them, they do not hide them and are ever re ady to correct themselves. 
H, 28 Jan. 1939 
 
March 16  
Confession of error is like a broom that seeps away  dirt and leaves the surface 
cleaner than before. 
YI, 16 Feb. 1922 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23  March 17  
Truth is not truth merely because it is ancient. No r is it necessarily to be 
regarded with suspicion, because it is ancient. The re are some fundamentals of 
life which may not be lightly given up because they  are difficult of enforcement 
in one's life. 
H, 14 March 1936 
 
March 18  
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism is a  hideous monster when it 
claims for itself omnipotence. Attribution of omnip otence to reason is as bad a 
piece of idolatry as is worship of stock and stone believing it to be God. 
YI, 14 Oct. 1926 
 
March 19  
Change is a condition of progress. An honest man ca nnot afford to observe 
mechanical consistency when the mind revolts agains t anything as an error. 
YI, 19 Dec. 1929 
 
March 20  
I make no hobgoblin of consistency. If I am true to  myself from moment to 
moment, I do not mind all the inconsistencies that may be flung in my face. 
H, 9 Nov. 1934 
 
March 21  
There is a consistency that is wise and a consisten cy that is foolish. A man who 
in order to be consistent would go bare bodied in t he hot sun of India and 
sunless Norway in mid-winter would be considered a fool and would lose his life 
in the bargain. 
YI, 4 April 1929 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24   
March 22  
Human life is a series of compromises and it is not  always easy to achieve in 
practice what one has found to be true in theory. 
H, 18 Nov.1939 
 
March 23  
There are eternal principals which admit of no comp romise and one must be 
prepared to lay down one's life in the practice of them. 
H, 5 Sept. 1936 
 
March 24  
In my opinion the Sanskrit text means that tone sho uld speak the truth in 
gentle language. One had better not speak it, if on e cannot do so in a gentle 
way; meaning thereby that there is no truth in a ma n who cannot control his 
tongue. 
YI, Sept.1925 
 
March 25  
Nature has so made us that we do not see our backs;  it is reserved for others to 
see them. Hence it is wise to profit by what they s ee. 
DD, p. 224 
 
March 26  
The pursuit of Truth is true bhakti (devotion) . It  is the path that leads to God, 
and, therefore, there is no place in it for cowardi ce, no place for defeat. It is 
the talisman by which deaths itself becomes the por tal to the life eternal. 
YM. Chap. I Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25   
March 27  
From the standpoint of pure Truth, the body too is a possession. It has been 
truly said, that desire for enjoyment creates bodie s for the soul. When this 
desire vanishes, there remains no further need for the body, and man is free 
from the vicious circle of births and deaths. 
YM, Chap. VI 
 
March 28  
How beautiful it would be, if all of us, men and wo men, devoted ourselves 
wholly to Truth in all that we might do in our waki ng hours, whether working, 
eating, drinking, or playing, till dissolution of t he body makes us one with 
Truth? 
YM, Chap, I 
 
March 29  
Where there is no Truth, there can be no true knowl edge. That is why the word 
Chit or knowledge is associated with the name of Go d. And where there is a 
true knowledge, there is always bliss (Ananda). Sor row has no place there. And 
even as Truth is eternal, so is bliss derived from it. Hence we know God as Sat-
chit-ananda, one who combines in Himself Truth, Kno wledge and Bliss. 
YM, 30 July 1931 
 
March 30  
Silence is a great help to a seeker after truth. In  the attitude of silence the soul 
finds the path in a clearer light and what crystal cleanness. Our life is along and 
arduous quest after Truth, and the soul requires in ward restfulness to attain its 
full height. 
H, 10 Dec. 1938 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26   
March 31  
Experience has taught me that silence is a part of the spiritual discipline of a 
votary of truth. Proneness to exaggerate, to suppre ss or modify the truth 
wittingly or unwittingly, is a natural weakness of man, and silence is necessary 
in order to surmount it. A man of few words will ra rely be thoughtless in his 
speech; he will measure every world. 
Auto, p.62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
APRIL  
April 1  
Religions are different roads converging upon the s ame point. What does it 
matter that we take different roads so long as we r each the same goal? 
HS, p. 65 
 
April 2  
Belief in one God is the corner-stone of all religi ons. But I do not foresee a time 
when there would be only one religion on earth in p ractice. In theory, since 
there is one God, there can be only one religion. B ut in practice, no two 
persons I have known have had the same identical co nception of God. 
Therefore, there will perhaps always be different r eligions answering to 
different temperaments and climate conditions. 
H, Feb.1934 
 
April 3  
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great rel igion of the world. I believe 
that they are all God-given and I believe that they  were necessary for the 
people to whom these religions were revealed. And I  believe that if only we 
could all of us read the scriptures of the differen t faiths from the standpoint of 
the followers of these faiths, we should find that they were at the bottom all 
one and were all helpful to one another. 
H, 16 Feb.1934 
 
April 4  
I believe that all the great religions of the world  are true more or less. I say 
more or less because I believe that everything that  the human hand touches be 
reason of the very fact that human beings are imper fect becomes imperfect. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  YI, 22 Sept. 1927 
 
April 5  
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it  is indescribable, 
untranslatable. I do believe that it is possible fo r every human being to become 
perfect even as God is perfect. It is necessary for  all of us to aspire after 
perfection, but when that blessed state is attained , it becomes indescribable, 
indefinable. 
YI, 22 Sept. 1927 
 
April 6  
If we had attained the full vision of but would no longer be mere seekers, but 
would have become one with God, for Truth is God. B ut being only seekers we 
prosecute our quest and are conscious of our imperf ection. And if we are 
imperfect ourselves, religion as conceived by us mu st also be imperfect. 
Y M. Chap. X 
 
April 7  
We have not realized religion in its perfection, ev en as we have not realized 
thus imperfect, is always subject to a process of e volution and re-
interpretation. Progress towards Truth, towards God  is possible only because of 
such evolution. And if all faiths outlined by men a re imperfect, the question of 
comparative merit does not arise. 
YM, Chap. X 
 
April 8  
All faiths constitute a revelation of Truth but all  are imperfect, and liable to 
error. Reverence for other faiths need not blind us  to their faults. We must be 
keenly alive to the defects of our own faith also, yet not leave it on that Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29  account, but try to overcome those defects. Looking  at all to religions with an 
equal eye, we would not only not hesitate, but woul d think it our duty, to 
blend into our faith every acceptable feature of ot her faiths. 
Ibid. 
 
April 9  
Even as a tree has a single trunk but many branches  and leaves, so there is one 
true and perfect religion but it becomes many, as i t passes through the human 
medium. 
YM, Chap. X 
 
April 10  
I came to the conclusion long ago, after prayerful search and study and 
discussion with as many people as I could meet, tha t all religions were true and 
also that all had some error in them, and that whil st I hold by my own, I should 
hold others as dear as Hinduism, from which it logi cally follows that we should 
hold all as dear as our nearest kith and kin and th at we should make no 
distinction between them.  
YI, 19 Jan. 1928 
 
April 11  
The one religion is beyond all speech. Imperfect me t put it into such language 
as they can command, and their words are interprete d by other men equally 
imperfect. Whose interpretation is to be held to be  the right one? Everybody is 
right from his own standpoint, but it is not imposs ible that everybody is wrong. 
Hence the necessity of tolerance, which does not me an indifference to one's 
own faith, but a more intelligent and purer love fo r it. 
YM. Chap. X 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  April 12  
Tolerance gives us spiritual insight, which is as f ar from fanaticism as the north 
pole from the south. True knowledge of religion bre aks down the barriers 
between faith and faith. 
Ibid.  
 
April 13  
It is not necessary for toleration that I must appr ove of what I tolerate. I 
heartily dislike drinking, meat-eating and smoking,  but I tolerate these in 
Hindus, Mahomedans and Christians, even as I expect  them to tolerate my 
abstinence from all these, although they may dislik e it.  
YI, 25 Feb. 1920 
 
April 14  
Religion which takes no account of practical affair s and does not help to solve 
them is no religion. 
YI, 7 May 1925 
 
April 15  
I do not know any religion apart from human activit y. It provides a moral basis 
to all other activities which they would otherwise lack, reducing life to maze of 
'sound and fury signifying nothing'. 
H, 24 Dec. 1938 
 
April 16  
For me, politics bereft of religion is absolute dir t ever to be shunned. Politics 
concern nations and that which concerns the welfare  of nations must be one of 
the concerns of a man who is religiously inclined, in other words a seeker after 
God and Truth. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31  YI, 18 June 1925 
 
April 17  
For me, God and Truth are convertible terms and if anyone told me that God 
was a god of untruth of a god of torture I would de cline to worship him. 
Therefore, in politics also we have to establish th e Kingdom of Heaven. 
YI, 18 June 1925 
 
April 18  
A good Hindu or a good Musalman should be a better Hindu or a better 
Musalman for being a lover of his country. There ne ver can be any conflict 
between the real interest of one's country and that  of one's religion. Where 
there appears to be any there is something wrong wi th one's religion, i.e., one's 
morals. True religion means good thought and good c onduct. True patriotism 
also means good thought and good conduct. To set up  a comparison between 
two synonymous things is wrong.  
YI, 9 Jan. 1930 
 
April 19  
We the human families are not all philosophers. We are of the earth very 
earthy, and we are not satisfied with contemplating  the Invisible God. somehow 
or other we want something which we can touch, some thing which we can see, 
some does not matter whether it is a book, of an em pty stone building or a 
stone building inhabited by numerous figures. A Boo ks satisfy some others, and 
many others will not be satisfied unless they see s omething inhabiting these 
empty buildings. 
H, 23 Jan.1937 
 
April 20  Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32  It depends on our mental condition whether we gain something or do not gain 
something by going to the temples. We have to appro ach these temples in a 
humble and penitent mood. They are so many homes of  God. Of course God 
resides in every human form, indeed every particle of His creation, everything 
that is on this earth. But since we very fallible m ortals do not appreciate the 
fact that God is everywhere we impute special sanct ity to temples and think 
that God resides there. 
H, 23 Jan. 1937 
 
April 21  
When we approach these temples we must cleanse our bodies, our minds and 
our hearts and we should enter them in a prayerful mood and ask God to make 
us purer men and purer women for having entered the ir portals. And if you will 
take this advice of an old man, these physical deli verance that you have 
secures will be a deliverance of the soul. 
Ibid. 
 
April 22  
Bitter experience has taught me that all temples ar e not houses of God. They 
can be habitations of the devil. These places of wo rship have no value unless 
the keeper is a good man of God. Temples, mosques, churches are what man 
makes them to be. 
YI, 19 May 1927 
 
April 23  
If anyone doubts the infinite mercy of God, let him  have a look at these sacred 
places. How much hypocrisy and irreligion does the prince of yogis suffer to be 
perpetrated in His holy name? 
Auto, p. 242 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33  April 24  
Churches, mosques and temples which cover so much h ypocrisy and humbug a 
mockery of God and His worship when one sees the et ernally renewed temple 
of worship under the vast blue canopy inviting ever y one of us to real worship, 
instead of abusing His name by quarreling in the na me of religion. 
H, 5 March 1942 
 
April 25  
Unsociability poisons Hinduism as a drop of arsenic  poisons milk. 
YI, 20 Dec. 1927 
 
April 26  
The 'touch-me-not’s that disfigures the present day  Hinduism is a morbid 
growth. It only betrays a woodenness of mind, a bli nd self-conceit. It is 
abhorrent alike to the spirit of religion and moral ity. 
H, 20 April 1934 
 
April 27  
It is to mind a curse that has come to us and as lo ng as that curse remains with 
us, so long as that curse remains with us, so long I think we are bound to 
consider that every affliction that we labour under  in this sacred land is a fit 
and proper punishment for this great and indelible crime that we are 
committing. 
SW, p. 387 
 
April 28  
Shall we have not the vision to see that in suppres sing a sixth (or whatever the 
number) of ourselves, we have depressed ourselves? No man takes another Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34  down a pit without descending into it not the suppr essed that sin. It is the 
suppressor who has to answer for his crime against these whom he suppresses. 
YI, 29 March 1928 
 
April 29  
God does not punish directly. His ways are inscruta ble. who knows that all our 
woes are not due to that one black sin? 
YI, 29 March 1924 
 
April 30  
Swaraj is a meaningless term, if we desire to keep a fifth of India under 
perpetual subjection and deliberately deny to them the fruits of national 
culture. We are seeking the aid of God in this grea t purifying movement, but 
we deny to the most deserving among His creatures t he rights of humanity. 
Inhuman ourselves, we may not plead before the thro ne for deliverance from 
the inhumanity of others. 
YI, May 1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35   
MAY  
 
May 1  
Prayer is the key of the morning and the bolt of th e evening. 
YI, 23 Jan. 1930 
 
May 2  
As food is necessary for the body, prayer is necess ary for the soul. A man may 
be able to do without food, for a number of days as  MacSwiney did for over 
seventy days but, believing in God, man cannot, Sho uld not, live a moment 
without prayer.  
YI, 15 Dec. 1927 
 
May 3  
Prayer needs to speech. It is in itself independent  of any sensuous effort. I have 
not the slightest doubt that prayer is an unfailing  means of cleansing the heart 
of passion. But it must be combined with the utmost  humility. 
Auto, p. 72 
 
May 4  
I am giving you a bit of my experience and that of my companions when I say 
that he who has experienced the magic of prayer may  do without food for days 
together but not a single moment without prayer. Fo r without prayer there is 
no inward peace. 
YI, 23 Jan. 1930 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36  May 5 
Never own defeat in a sacred cause and make up your  minds henceforth that 
you will be pure and that you will find a response from God. But God never 
answers the prayers of the arrogant, nor the prayer s of those who bargains with 
Him.  
YI, 4 April 1929 
 
May 6  
I can give my own testimony and say that I heartfel t prayer is undoubtedly the 
most potent instrument that man possesses for overc oming cowardice and all 
other bad old habits. Prayer is an impossibility wi thout a living faith in the 
presence of God within. 
YI, 20 Dec. 1928 
 
May 7  
The prayer of even the most impure will be answered . I am telling this out of 
my personal experience, I have gone through the pur gatory. Seek first the 
kingdom of Heaven and everything will be added unto  you. 
YI, 4 April 1929 
 
May 8  
Not until we have reduced ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil in 
us. God demands nothing less than complete self-sur render as the price for the 
only real freedom that is worth having. And when a man thus loses himself he 
immediately finds himself in the service of all tha t lives. It becomes his delight 
and his recreation. He is a new man, never weary of  spending himself in the 
service of God's creation. 
YI, 20 Dec. 1928 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  May 9  
Our prayer is a heart search. It is a reminder to o urselves that we are helpless 
without His support. No effort is complete without prayer without a definite 
recognition that the best human Endeavour is of no effect if it has not God's 
blessing behind. Prayer is a call to humility. It i s a call to self-purification, to 
inward search. 
H, 8 June 1935 
 
May 10  
There are limits to the capacity of an individual a nd the moment he flatters 
himself that he can undertake all tasks, God is the re to humble his pride. 
YI, 12 March 1931 
 
May 11  
Man is a falling being. He can never be sure of his  steps. What he may regard as 
answer to prayer may be an echo of his pride. For i nfallible guidance man has 
to have a perfectly innocent heart incapable of evi l. 
YI, 25 Sept. 1931 
 
May 12  
Let everyone try and find that as a result of daily  prayer he adds something 
new to his life, something with which nothing can b e compared. 
YI, 24 Sept. 1924 
 
May 13  
There are subjects where reason cannot take us far and we have to accept 
things on faith. Faith then does not contradict rea son but transcends it. Faith is 
a kind of sixth sense which works in cases which ar e without the purview of 
reason. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  H, 6 March 1937 
 
May 14  
Without faith this world would come to naught in a moment. True faith is 
appropriation of the reasoned experience of people whom we believe to have 
lived a life purified by prayer and penance. Belief  therefore in prophets or 
incarnation who have lived in remote ages is not an  idle superstition but a 
satisfaction of an inmost spiritual want. 
YI, 14 April 1927 
 
May 15  
A man without faith is like a drop thrown out of th e ocean bound to perish. 
Every drop in the ocean shares its majesty and has the honour of giving us the 
ozone of life. 
H, 25 April 1936 
 
May 16  
Faith is a function of the heart. It must be enforc ed by reason. The two are not 
antagonistic as some think. The more intense one's faith is, the more it whets 
one's reason. When faith becomes blind it dies. 
H, 6 April 1940 
 
May 17  
It is faith that steers us through stormy seas, fai th that moves mountains and 
faith that jumps across the oceans. That faith is n othing but a living, wide-
awake consciousness of god within. He who has achie ved that faith wants 
nothing. Bodily diseased, he is spiritually healthy , physically poor, he rolls in 
spiritual riches. 
YI, 24 Sept. 1925 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39   
May 18  
I am a man of a faith. My reliance is solely on God . One step is enough for me. 
The next step he will make clear to me when time fo r it comes. 
H, 20 Oct. 1940 
 
May 19  
That faith is of little value which can flourish on ly in fair weather. Faith in 
order to be of any value has to survive the severes t trials. Your faith is a whited 
sepulcher if it cannot stand the calumny of the who le world. 
YI, 25 April 1929 
 
May 20  
 Faith is not a delicate flower which would wither under the slightest stormy 
weather. Faith is like the Himalaya Mountains which  cannot possibly change. No 
storm can possibly remove the Himalaya Mountains fr om their foundations. And 
I want every one of you to cultivate that faith in God and religion. 
H, 26 Jan. 1934 
 
May 21  
If we have faith in us, if we have a prayerful hear t, we may not tempt God, 
may not make terms with Him. We must reduce ourselv es to a cipher. 
YI, 22 Dec. 1928 
 
May 22  
There is a divine purpose behind every physical cal amity. That perfected 
science will one day be able to tell us beforehand when earthquakes will occur, 
as it tells today of eclipse, is quite possible. It  will be another triumph of the Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40  human mind. But such triumphs even indefinitely mul tiplied can bring about no 
purification of self without which nothing is of an y value. 
H, 8 June 1935 
 
May 23  
This earthly existence of ours is more brittle than  the glass bangles that ladies 
wear. You can keep glass bangles for thousands of y ears if you treasure them in 
a chest and let them remain untouched. But this ear thly existence is so fickle 
that it may be wiped out in the twinkling of an eye . Therefore while we get 
breathing time, let us get rid of the distinctions of high and low, purify our 
hearts and be ready to face our maker when an earth quake or some natural 
calamity or death in the ordinary course overtakes us. 
H, 2 Feb. 1934 
 
May 24  
Death, which is an eternal verity, is revolution, a s birth and after is slow and 
steady evolution. Death is as necessary for a man's  growth as life itself. 
YI, 2 Feb. 1922 
 
May 25  
Death is no friend, he is the truest of friends. He  delivers us from agony. He 
helps us against ourselves. He ever gives us new ch ances, new hopes. He is like 
sleep a sweet restorer.   
YI, 20 Dec. 1926 
 
May 26  
It is as clear to me as daylight that life and deat h are but phases of the same 
thing, the reverse and observe of the same coin. In  fact tribulation and death Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41  seem to me to present a phase far richer than happi ness of life. What is life 
worth without trials and tribulation which are the salt of life? 
YI, 12 March 1930 
 
May 27  
My religion teaches me that whenever there is distr ess which one cannot 
remove, one must fast and pray. 
YI, 25 Sept. 1924 
 
May 28  
There is nothing so powerful as fasting and prayer that would give us the 
requisite discipline, spirit of self-sacrifice, hum ility and resoluteness of will 
without which there can be no real progress. 
YI, 31 March 1920 
 
May 29  
Fasting is a potent weapon in the Satyagraha armory . It cannot be taken by 
everyone. Mere physical capacity to take it is no q ualification for it. It is of no 
use without a living faith in God. It should never be a mechanical effort nor a 
mere imitation. It must come from the depth of one' s soul. 
H, 18 March 1939 
 
May 30  
One fast for health's sake under laws governing hea lth, fasts as penance for a 
wrong done and felt as such. In these fasts, the fa sting one need not believe in 
ahimsa. There is, however, a fast which every votar y of non-violence 
sometimes feels impelled to undertake by way of pro test against some wrong 
done by society and this he does when he as a votar y of ahimsa has no other 
remedy left. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  DD, p. 330 
 
May 31  
A complete fast is a complete and literal denial of  self. It is the truest prayer. 
'Take my life and let it be always, only, all for T hee' is not, should not be, a 
mere lip or figurative expression. It has to be a r eckless and joyous giving 
without the least reservation. Abstention from food  and even water is but the 
mere beginning the least part of the surrender. 
H, 13 April 1933 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43   
JUNE 
 
June 1  
If we realized the presence of God as witness to al l we say and do we would not 
have anything to conceal from anybody on earth. For  we would not think 
unclean thoughts before our Maker, much less speak them. It is uncleanness 
that seeks secrecy and darkness. 
YI, 22 Dec. 1920 
 
June 2  
The tendency of human nature is to hide dirt, we do  not want to see or touch 
dirty things; we want to put them out of sight. For  we want to put them out of 
sight. And so must it be with our speech. I would s uggest that we should avoid 
even thinking thoughts we would hide from the world . 
Ibid 
 
June 3  
Whatever you do, be true to ourselves and to the wo rld. Hide not your 
thoughts. If it is shameful to reveal them, it is m ore shameful to think them. 
H, 24 April 1937 
 
June 4  
All sins are committed in secrecy. The moment we re alize that God witnesses 
even our thoughts we shall be free. 
H, 17 Jan. 1939 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44  June 5  
Control over thought is a long and painful and labo rious process. But I am 
convinced that no time, no labour and no pain is to o much for the glorious 
result to be reached. The purity of thought is poss ible only with a faith in God 
bordering on definite experience. 
YI, 25 Aug. 1927 
 
June 6  
When your passions threaten to get the better of yo u, go down on your knees 
and cry out to God for help. Ramanama is my infalli ble Help. 
SRSI, Part II, p. ix 
 
June 7 
Let every aspirant after a pure life take from me t hat an impure thought is 
often powerful in undermining the body as an impure  act. 
YI, 25 Aug. 1927 
 
June 8  
The potency of thought unsuppressed but unembodied is far greater than that 
of embodied that is translated into action. And whe n the action is brought 
under due control, it reacts upon and regulates the  thought itself. Thought thus 
translated into action becomes a prisoner and is br ought under subjection. 
YI, 2 Sept. 1926 
 
June 9  
Always aim at complete harmony of thought and word and deed. Always at 
purifying your thoughts and everything will be well . There is nothing more 
potent than thought. Deed follows word and word fol lows thought. The word is Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  the result of a mighty thought and where the though t is mighty and pure the 
result is always mighty and pure. 
H, 24 April 1937 
 
June 10  
Man often becomes what he believes himself to be. I f I keep on saying to myself 
that I cannot do a certain thing, it is possible th at I May end by really becoming 
incapable of doing it. On the contrary, if I have t he belief that I can do it, I 
shall surely acquire the capacity to do it even If may not have it at the 
beginning. 
H, 1 Sept. 1940 
 
June 11  
Prayerful well-meaning effort never goes in vain an d man's success lies only in 
such an effort. The result is in his hands. 
YI, 17 June 1931 
 
June 12  
'Be thou certain, none can perish, trusting Me,' sa ys the Lord, but let it not be 
understood to mean that our sins will be washed awa y by merely trusting Him 
without an y striving. Only he who struggles hard a gainst the allurements of 
sense objects and turns in tears and grief to the L ord will be comforted. 
YI, 12 Jan. 1928 
 
June 13  
It is easy enough to say, 'I do not believe in God. ' For God permits all things to 
be said of Him with impunity. He looks at our acts.  And any breach of His Law 
carries with it, not its vindictive, but its purify ing, compelling, punishment. 
YI, 23 Sept. 1926 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46   
June 14  
The path of self-purification is hard and steep. To  attain to perfect purity one 
has to become absolutely passion free in thought, s peech and action; to rise 
above the opposing currents of love and hatred, att achment and repulsion. 
Auto, p. 504 
 
June 15  
I believe that a healthy soul should inhabit a heal thy body. To the extent, 
therefore, that the soul grows into health and free dom from passion, to that 
extent the body also grows into that state. 
YI, 5 June 1924 
 
June 16  
Cleanliness is next to godliness. We can no more ga in God's blessings with an 
unclean body than with an unclean mind. A clean bod y cannot reside in an 
unclean city. 
YI, 19 Nov. 1925 
 
June 17  
Restraint never ruins one's health. What ruins one' s health is not restraint but 
outward suppression. A really self-restrained perso n grows every day from 
strength to strength and from peace to more peace. The very first step in self-
restraint is the restraint of thoughts. 
H, 28 Oct. 1937 
 
June 18  
An innocent youth is a priceless possession not to be squandered away for the 
sake of a momentary excitement, miscalled pleasure.  Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  H, 21 Sept. 1935 
 
June 19  
Steam becomes a mighty power only when it allows it self to be imprisoned in a 
strong little reservoir and produces tremendous mot ion and carries huge 
weights by permitting itself a tiny and measured ou tlet. Even so have the youth 
of the country of their own free will to allow thei r inexhaustible in strictly 
measured and required quantities. 
YI, 30 Oct. 1929 
 
June 20  
As a splendid palace deserted by its inmates looks like a ruin, so does a man 
without character, all his material belongings notw ithstanding. 
SSA, p. 355 
 
June 21  
All our learning or recitation of the Vedas, correc t knowledge of Sanskrit, Latin, 
Greek and what not will avail us nothing if they do  not enable us to cultivate 
absolute purity of heart. The end of all knowledge must be building up of 
character. 
YI, 8 Sept. 1927 
 
June 22  
Knowledge without character is a power for evil onl y, as seen in the instances 
of so many 'talented thieves' and 'gentleman rascal s' in the world. 
YI, 21 Feb. 1929 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48  June 23  
Drugs and drink are the two arms of the devil with which he strikes his helpless 
victims into stupefaction and intoxication. 
YI, 12 April 1926 
 
June 24  
When Satan comes disguised as a champion of liberty , civilization, culture and 
the like he make himself almost irresistible. 
YI, 11 July 1929 
 
June 25  
I hold drink to be more damnable than thieving and perhaps even prostitution 
thieving and perhaps even prostitution. Is it not o ften the parent of both?  
YI, 23 Feb. 1922 
 
June 26  
People drink because of the conditions to which the y are reduced. It is the 
factory labourers and others that drink. They are f orlorn, uncared for and they 
take to drink. They are no more vicious by nature t han teetotalers are saints by 
nature. The majority of people are controlled by th eir environment. 
YI, 8 Sept. 1927 
 
June 27  
Nothing but ruins stares a nation in the face that is a prey to the drink habit. 
History records that empires have been destroyed th rough that habit. 
YI, 4 April 1929 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49  June 28  
There is as much flaw in the argument that it is an  interference with the right 
of the people as there would be in the argument tha t the laws prohibiting theft 
interfere with the right of thieving. A thief steal s all earthy possessions, a 
drunkard steals his own and his neighbors' honour. 
YI. 6 Jan. 1927 
 
June 29  
I have a horror of smoking as of wines. Smoking I c onsider to be a vice. It 
deadens one's conscience and is often worse than dr ink in that it acts 
imperceptible. It is a habit which is difficult to get rid of when once it seizes 
hold of a person. It is an expensive vice. It fouls  the breath, discolors teeth and 
sometimes even causes cancer. It is an unclean habi t. 
YI, 12 Jan. 1921 
 
June 30  
Smoking is in a way a greater curse than drink inas much as the victim does not 
realize its evil in time. It is not regarded as ass ign of barbarism, it is even a 
claimed by the civilized people. I can only say, le t those who can, give it up 
and set the example. 
YI, 4 Feb. 1926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50   
JULY  
 
July 1  
Non- violence is the law of our species as violence  is the law of the brut. The 
spirit is dormant in the brute and he knows no law but that of physical might. 
The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher l aw to the strength of the 
spirit.  
YI, 11 Sept. 1920 
 
July 2  
Non-violence is an active force of the highest orde r. It is soul force or the 
power of Godhead within us. Imperfect man cannot gr asp the whole of that 
essence he would not be able to bear it full blaze,  but even an infinitesimal 
fraction of it, when it becomes active within us, c an work wonders. 
H, 12 Nov. 1938 
 
July 3 
The sun in the heavens fills the whole universe wit h its life-giving warmth. But 
if one went too near it, it would consume him to as hes. Even so, it is with 
Godhead. We become God-like to the extent we realiz e non-violence; but we 
can never become wholly God. 
H, 12 Nov. 1938 
 
July 4  
Non-violence is like radium in its action. An infin itesimal quantity of it 
embedded in a malignant growth, acts continuously, silently and ceaselessly till 
it has transformed the whole mass of the diseased t issue into a healthy one. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51  Similarly, even a little of true non-violence acts in a silent, sublet, unseen way 
and leavens the whole society. Unseen way and leave ns the whole society.  
H, 12 Nov. 1938 
 
July 5  
Non-violence is the greatest force at the disposal of mankind. It is mightier 
than the mightiest weapon of the destruction devise d by the ingenuity of man. 
Destruction is not the law of the humans. Man lives  freely by his readiness to 
die, if need be, at the hands of his brother, never  by killing him. Every murder 
or other injury, no matter for what cause, committe d or inflicted on another is 
a crime against humanity. 
H, 20 July 1925 
 
July 6  
My creed of non-violence is an extremely active for ce. It has no room for 
cowardice or even weakness. There is hope for a vio lent man to be some day 
non-violent, but there is none for a coward. I have , therefore, said more than 
once that if we do not know how to defend ourselves  our women and our places 
of worship by the force of sufferings, i.e., non-vi olence, we must, if we are 
men, be at least able to defend all these by fighti ng. 
YI, 16 June 1927 
 
July 7  
 My non-violence does admit of people who cannot or  will not be non-violent 
holding and making effective use of arms. Let me re peat for the thousandth 
time that non-violence is of the strongest, not of the weak. 
TI, 8 May 1941 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52  July 8  
No matter how weak a person is in body, if it is a shame to flee. He will stand 
his ground and die at his post. This would be non-v iolence and bravery. No 
matter how weak he is, he will use what strength he  has in inflicting injury on 
his opponent, and die in the attempt. This is brave ry, but not non-violence if 
when his duty is to face danger, he flees, it is co wardice. In the first case in the 
man will have love or charity in him. In the second  and third cases, there would 
be a dislike or distrust and fear. 
H, 17 Aug. 1935 
 
July 9  
If the best minds of the world have not imbibed of the spirit of non-violence, 
they would have to meet gangsterism in the orthodox  way. But that would only 
show that we have not gone far beyond the law of th e jungle, that we have not 
yet learnt to appreciate the heritage that God has given us, that in spite of the 
teaching of Christianity which is 1900 years old an d of Hinduism and Buddhism 
which are older, and even Islam, we have not made m uch headway as human 
beings. But whilst I would understand the use of fo rce by those who have not 
the spirit of non-violence in them I would have tho se who know non-violence to 
throw their whole weight in demonstrating that even  gangsterism has to be met 
with non-violence. 
H, 10 Dec. 1938 
 
July 10  
Fearlessness is the first requisite of spirituality  Cowards can never be moral. 
YI, 13 Oct. 1921 
 
July 11  
Let us fear God and we shall cease to fear man. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53  SW, P. 330 
 
July12  
Self-sacrifice of the innocent man is a million tim es more potent than the 
sacrifice of million men who die in the act of kill ing others. The willing sacrifice 
of the innocent is the most powerful retort to inso lent tyranny that has yet 
been conceived by God or man. 
YI, 12 Feb. 1925 
 
July 13  
With Satya combined with Ahimsa, you can bring the world to your feet. 
Satyagraha in its essence is nothing but the introd uction o truth and gentleness 
in the political, i.e., the national life. 
YI, 10 March 1920 
 
July 14  
A Satyagrahi bids good-bye to fear. He is, therefor e, never afraid of trusting 
the opponent. Even if the opponent plays him false twenty times, the 
Satyagrahi is ready to trust him the twenty-first t ime, for an implicit trust in 
human nature is the essence of the creed. 
SSA, p. 246 
 
July 15  
A Satyagrahi is nothing of not instinctively law-ab iding and it is his law abiding 
nature which exacts from him implicit obedience to the highest law that is the 
voice of conscience which overrides all other laws.  
SW, p. 465 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  July 16  
Satyagraha is gentle, it never wounds. It must not be the result of anger or 
malice. It is never fussy, never impatient, never v ociferous. It is the direct 
opposite of compulsion. It was conceived as a compl ete substitute for violence. 
H, 15 April 1933 
 
July 17  
It is force that may be used by individuals as well  as by communities. It may be 
used as well in political as in domestic affairs. I ts universal applicability is a 
demonstration of its permanence and invincibility. It can be used alike by men, 
women and children. It is totally untrue to say tha t it is a force to be used only 
by the weak so long as they are not capable of meet ing violence by violence. 
YI, 3 Nov. 1927 
 
July 18  
This force is to violence and therefore to all tyra nny, all injustice, what light is 
to darkness. In politics, its use is based upon the  immutable maxim, that 
government of the people is possible only so long a s they consent either 
consciously or unconsciously to be governed. 
Ibid. 
 
July 19  
The hardest heart and the grossest ignorance must d isappear before the rising 
sun of suffering without anger and without malice. 
YI, 10 Feb. 1925 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55  July 20  
In every great cause it is not the number of fighte rs that counts but it is the 
quality of which they are made that becomes the dec iding factor. The greatest 
men of the world have always stood alone. 
YI, 10 Oct. 1929 
 
July 21  
Take the great prophets, Zoroaster, Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed they stood 
alone like many others whom I can name. But they ha d living faith in 
themselves and their God, and believing as they did  that God was on their side, 
they never felt lonely. 
Ibid. 
 
July 22  
You may recall the occasion when pursued by a numer ous enemy, Abu Bakr, 
who was accompanying the prophet in his flight, tre mbled to think of their fate 
and said, 'Look at the number of enemies that is ov ertaking us. What shall we 
two do against these heavy odds?' Without a moment' s reflection the prophet 
rebuked his faithful companion by saying, 'No, Abu Bakr, we are three for God 
is with us! Or take the invincible faith of Vibhish an and Prahlad. I want you to 
have that same living faith in yourselves and God. 
YI, 10 Oct. 1929 
 
July 23  
All life in the flesh exists by some Himsa. Hence t he highest religion has been 
defined by a negative word Ahimsa. The world is bou nd in a chain of 
destruction. In other words Himsa is an inherent ne cessity for life always prays 
for ultimate deliverance from the bondage of flesh.  
YI, 2 Oct. 1928 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56   
July 24  
I do believe that all God's creatures have the righ t to live as much as we have. 
Instead of prescribing the killing of the so called  injurious fellow creatures of 
ours as a duty, if men of knowledge had devoted the ir gift to discovering ways 
of dealing with them otherwise than by killing them , we would be living in a 
world befitting our status as men animals endowed w ith reason and the power 
of choosing between good and evil right and wrong, violence and non-violence, 
truth and untruth. 
H, 9 Jan. 1937 
 
July 25  
We are living in the midst of death trying to grope  our way to Truth. Perhaps it 
is as well that we are beset with danger at every p oint in our life, for, in spite 
of our knowledge of the danger and of our precariou s existence our 
indifference to the source of all life is excelled only by our amazing arrogance. 
YI, 7 July 1927 
 
July 26  
Both my intellect and heart refuse to believe that the so-called noxious life has 
been created for destruction by man. God is good an d wise. A good and wise 
God cannot be so bad and so in wise as to create to  no purpose. It is more 
conductive to reason to own our ignorance and assum e that every form of life 
has a useful purpose which we must patiently strive  to discover. 
H, 9 Jan.1937 
 
July 27  
I verily believe that man's habit of killing man on  the slightest pretext has 
darkened his reason and he gives himself liberties with other life which he Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57  would shudder to take if he really believed that Go d was a God of Love and 
Mercy. 
Ibid 
 
July 28  
I abhor vivisection with my whole soul. I detest th e unpardonable slaughter of 
innocent life in the name of science and of humanit y so-called, and all the 
scientific discoveries strained with innocent blood  I count as of no 
consequence. 
YI, 17 Dec. 1925 
 
July 29  
Means and ends are convertible terms in my philosop hy of life. 
YI, 26 Dec. 1924 
 
July 30  
They say, 'means are after all means' I would say, 'means are after all 
everything'. As the means so the end. Violent means  will give violent Swaraj. 
That would be a menace to the world and to India he rself. France obtained her 
freedom by violent means. She is still paying dearl y for her violence. 
YI, 17 July 1924 
 
July 31  
There is no wall of separation between means and en d. Indeed the Creator has 
given us control (and that too very limited) over m eans none over the end. 
Realization of the goal is in exact proportion to t hat of the means. This is a 
proposition that admits of no exception. 
YI, 17 July 1924 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58   
AUGUST  
 
August 1  
Economics that hurt the moral wellbeing of an indiv idual or a nation are 
immoral and therefore sinful. Thus, the economics t hat permit one country to 
prey upon another are immoral. It is sinful to buy and use articles made by 
sweated labour. 
YI, 13 Oct. 1921 
 
August 2  
The economics that disregard moral and sentimental considerations are like 
wax works that being life-like still lack the life of the living flesh. At every 
crucial moment these new-fangled economic laws have  broken down in 
practice. And nations or individuals who accept the m as guiding maxims must 
perish. 
YI, 27 Oct. 1921 
 
August 3  
The extension of the law of non-violence in the dom ain of economics means 
nothing less than the introduction of moral values as a factor to be considered 
in regulating international commerce. 
YI, 26 Dec. 1924 
 
August 4  
I wholeheartedly detest this mad desire to destroy distance and time, to 
increase animal appetites and go to the ends of the  earth in search of their 
satisfaction. If modern civilization stands for all  this, and I have understood it 
to do so, I call it Satanic. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59  YI, 17 March 1927 
 
August 5  
I am not aiming at destroying railways or hospitals , though I would certainly 
welcome their natural destruction. Neither railways  nor hospitals are a test of a 
high and pure civilization. At best they are a nece ssary evil. Neither adds one 
inch to the moral statues of a nation. 
YI, 26 Jan. 1921 
 
August 6  
Is the world any the better for quick instruments o f locomotion? How do these 
instruments advance man's spiritual progress?  Do t hey not in the last resort 
hamper it? And is there any limit to man's ambition ? Once we were satisfied 
with traveling a few miles an hour; today we want t o negotiate hundreds of 
miles an hour; one day we might desire to fly throu gh space. What will be the 
result? Chaos. 
YI, 21 Jan. 1926 
 
August 7  
It is my firm belief that Europe today represents n ot the spirit of God or 
Christianity but the spirit of Satan. And Satan's s uccesses are the greatest when 
he appears with the name of God on his lips. Europe  is today only nominally 
Christian. In reality it is worshipping Mammon. 
YI, 8 Sept. 1920 
 
August 8  
'Brahma created His people with the duty of sacrifi ce laid upon them and said; 
"By this do you flourish. Let it be the fulfiller o f all you desires." 'He who eats 
without performing this sacrifice, eats stolen brea d,' thus says the Gita. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60  H, 29 June 1935 
 
August 9  
'Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow,' says the  Bible. Sacrifices may be of 
many kinds. One of them may well be bread labour. I f all laboured for their 
bread and no more, then there would be enough food and enough leisure for 
all. 
Ibid. 
 
August 10  
Then there would be no cry of over population, no d isease, and no such misery 
as we see around. Such labour will be the highest f orm of sacrifice. Men will no 
doubt do many other things, either through their bo dies or through their minds, 
but all this will be labour of love, for the common  good. There will then be no 
rich and no poor, none high and none low, no toucha ble and no untouchable. 
Ibid. 
 
August 11  
Even if, without fulfilling the whole law of sacrif ice, that is, the law of our 
being, we perform physical labour enough for our da ily bread, we should go 
along way towards the ideal. If we did so, our want s would be minimized, our 
food would be simple. We should then eat to l live,  not live to eat. Let anyone 
who doubts the accuracy of this proposition try to sweat for his bread; he will 
derive the greatest relish from the productions of his labour, improve his health 
and discover that many things he took were superflu ities.  
H, 29 June 1935 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  August 12  
I cannot picture to myself a time when no man shall  be richer than another. But 
I do picture to myself a time when the rich will sp urn to enrich themselves at 
the expense of the poor and the poor will cease to envy the rich. Even in a 
most perfect world, we shall fail to avoid inequali ties, but we can and must 
avoid strife and bitterness. 
YI, 7 Oct. 1926  
 
August 13  
The dream I want to realize is not the spoliation o f the property of private 
owners, but to restrict its enjoyment so as to avoi d all pauperism, consequent 
discontent and the hideously ugly contrast that exi sts today between the lives 
and surroundings of the rich and the poor. 
YI, 21 Nov. 1929 
 
August 14  
Dead machinery must not be pitted against the milli ons of living machines 
represented by the villagers scattered in the seven  hundred villages of India. 
H, 14 Sept. 1935 
 
August 15  
Machinery to be well used has to help and ease huma n effort. The present use 
of machinery tends more and more to concentrate wea lth in the hands of a few 
in total dis-regard of millions of men and women wh ose bread is snatched by it 
out of their mouths. 
Ibid. 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62  August 16  
The supreme consideration is man. The machine shoul d not tend to make 
atrophied the limbs of man. 
YI, 13 Nov. 1924 
 
August 17  
What I object to is the craze for machinery, not ma chinery as such. The craze is 
for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on 'saving labour', till 
thousands are without work and thrown on the open s treets to die of 
starvation. 
Ibid. 
 
August 18  
But why not, it is asked, save the labour of millio ns, and give them more leisure 
for intellectual pursuits? Leisure is good and nece ssary up to a point only, God 
created man to eat his bread in the sweat of his br ow, and I dread the prospect 
of our being able to produce all that we want, incl uding our food stuffs, out of 
a conjuror's hat. 
H, 16 May 1936 
 
August 19  
I want to save time and labour not for a fraction o f mankind, but for all. I want 
the concentration of wealth, not in the hands of a few, but in the hands of all. 
Today machinery merely helps a few to ride on the b acks of millions. The 
impetus behind it all is not the philanthropy to sa ve labour, but greed. It is 
against this constitution of things that I am fight ing with all my might. 
YI, 13 Nov. 1924 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  August 20  
The movement of the spinning wheel is an organized attempt to displace 
machinery from that state of exclusiveness and expl oitation and to place it in 
its proper state. Under my scheme therefore, men in  charge of machinery will 
think not of themselves or even of the nation to wh ich they belong but of the 
whole human race. 
YI, 17 Sept. 1925 
 
August 21  
I claim for the Charkha the honour of being able to  solve the problem of 
economic distress in a most natural, simple, inexpe nsive and businesslike 
manner. The Charkha, therefore, is not only not use less but is a useful and 
indispensable article for every home. It is the sym bol of the nation's prosperity 
and, therefore, freedom. It is a symbol not of comm ercial war of commercial 
peace. 
YI, 8 Dec. 1921 
 
August 22  
It bears not a message of ill-will towards the nati ons of the earth but of good-
will and self-help. It will not need the protection  of a navy threatening a 
world's peace and exploiting its resources, but it needs the religious 
determination of millions to spin their yarn in the ir homes as today they cook 
their food in their own homes. 
Ibid. 
 
August 23  
As I look at Russia where the apotheosis of industr ialization has been reached, 
the life there does not appeal to me. To use the la nguage of the Bible, 'what 
shall it avail a man if he gain the whole world and  lose his soul?' In modern Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64  terms, it is beneath human dignity to lose one's in dividuality and become a 
mere cog in the machine. I want every individual to  become a full-blooded, full 
developed member of the society. 
H, 28 Jan. 1939 
 
August 24  
What does communism mean in the last analysis? It m eans a classless society an 
ideal that is worth striving for. Only I part compa ny with it when force is called 
to aid for achieving it. We are all born equal, but  we have all these centuries 
resisted the will of God. The idea of inequality, o f 'high and low', is an evil, but 
I do not believe in the eradicating evil from the h uman breast at the point of 
the bayonet. The human breast does not lend itself to that means. 
H, 13 March 1937 
 
August 25  
Every man has an equal right to the necessaries of life even as birds and beasts 
have. And since every right carries with it a corre sponding duty and the 
corresponding remedy for resisting any attack upon it, it is merely a matter of 
finding out the corresponding duties and remedies t o vindicate the elementary 
fundamental equality. The corresponding duty is to labour with my limbs and 
the corresponding remedy is to non-co-operate with him who deprives me of 
the fruit of my labour. 
YI, 26 March 1931 
 
August 26  
The true source of rights is duty. If we all discha rge our duties, rights will not 
be far to seek. If leaving duties unperformed we ru n after rights, they escape 
us like a will-o'-the-wisp. The more we pursue them , the farther they fly. The 
same teaching has been embodied by Krihna in the im mortal words: ' action Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65  alone is thine: leave thou the fruit severely alone ,' Action is duty: fruit is the 
right. 
YI, 8 Jan. 1925 
 
August 27  
Let labour realize its dignity and strength. Capita l has neither dignity not 
strength, compared to labour. These the man in the street also has. In a well-
ordered democratic society there is no room, no occ asion for lawlessness or 
strikes. In such a society there are ample lawful m eans for vindicating justice. 
Violence, veiled or unveiled, must be taboo. 
DD, p. 381 
 
August 28  
Capital controlled labour because it knew the art o f combination. Drops in 
separation would only fade away; drops in co-operat ion made the ocean which 
carried on its broad bosom ocean greyhounds. Simila rly if all labouers in any 
part of the world combined together they could not be tempted by higher 
wages or could not be tempted by higher wages or he lplessly allow themselves 
to be attracted for, say, a pittance. 
H, 7 Sept. 1947 
 
August 29  
A true and non-violent combination of labour would act like a magnet 
attracting to it all the needed capital. Capitalist s would then exist only as 
trustees. When that happy day dawned, there would b e no difference between 
capital and labour. The labour will have ample food , good and sanitary 
dwellings, all the necessary education for their ch ildren, ample leisure for self-
education and proper medical assistance. 
H, 7 Sept. 1947 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  August 30  
America is the most industrialized country in the w orld and yet it has not 
banished poverty and degradation. That was because it neglected the universal 
man-power and concentrated power in the hands of th e few who amassed 
fortunes at the expense of the many. The result is that its industrialization has 
become a menace to its own poor and to the rest of the world. 
H, 9 March 1947 
 
August 31  
If India was to escape such a disaster, it had to i mitate what was best in 
America and other western countries and leave aside  its attractive looking but 
destructive economic policies. Therefore, real plan ning consisted in the best 
utilization of the whole manpower of India and the distribution of the raw 
products of India in her numerous villages instead of sending them outside and 
re-buying finished articles at fabulous prices. 
H, 23 March 1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67   
SEPTEMBER  
 
September 1  
Daridranarayana is one of the millions of name by w hich humanity knows God, 
who is unnamable and unfathomable by human understa nding, and it means 
God of the poor, God appearing in the hearts of the  poor. 
YI, 4 April 1929 
 
September 2  
I recognize no God except the God that is to be fou nd in the hearts of the dumb 
millions. They do not recognize his presence; I do.  And, I worship the God that 
is Truth or Truth which is God, through the service  of these millions. 
H, 11 March 1939 
 
September 3  
For the poor the economic is the spiritual. You can not make any other appeal 
to those starving millions. It will fall flat on th em. But you take food to them 
and they will regard you as their God. They are inc apable of any other thought. 
YI, 5 May 1927 
 
September 4  
With this very hand I have collected soiled pies fr om them tied tightly in their 
rags. Talk to them of modern progress. Insult them by taking the name of God 
before them in vain. They will call you and me fien ds if we tale about God to 
them. They know, if they know any God at all, a God  of terror, vengeance, a 
pitiless tyrant. 
YI, 15 Sept. 1927 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68  September 5  
If I preach against the modern artificial life of a  sensual enjoyment, and ask 
men and women to go back to the simple life epitomi zed in the Charkha, I do 
so because I know that without an intelligent retur n to simplicity, there is no 
escape from our descent to a state lower than bruta lity. 
YI, 21 July 1921 
 
September 6  
Don’t be dazzled by the splendour that comes to you  from the west. Do not be 
thrown off your feet by this passing show. The Enli ghtened One has told you in 
never to be forgotten words that this little span o f life is but a passing shadow, 
a fleeting thing, and if you realize the nothingnes s of all that appears before 
you eyes, the nothingness of this material case tha t we see before us ever 
changing, then indeed there are treasures for you u p above and there is peace 
for you down here, peace which pass the all underst anding, and happiness to 
which we are utter strangers. It requires an amazin g faith, a divine faith and 
surrender of all that we see before us. 
YI, 8 Dec. 1927 
 
September 7  
What did Buddha do, and Christ do, and also Mohamme d? Theirs were lives of 
self-sacrifice and renunciation. Buddha renounced e very worldly happiness 
because he wanted to share with the whole world, hi s happiness which was to 
be had by man who sacrificed and suffered in search  for Truth. 
Ibid. 
 
September 8  
If it was a good thing to scale the heights of Mt.E ver est. sacrificing precious 
lives in order to be able to get there and make som e slight observations, if it Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69  was a glorious thing to give up life after life in planting a flag in the uttermost 
extremities of the earth, how much more glorious wo uld it be to give not one 
life, surrender not a million lives but a billion l ives in search of the potent and 
imperishable truth? 
YI, 8 Dec. 1927 
 
September 9  
A time is coming when those, who are in the mad rus h today of multiplying 
their wants vainly thinking that they add to the re al substance, real knowledge 
of the world, will retrace their steps and say: ‘Wh at have we done?’ 
Ibid.  
 
September 10  
Civilization have come and gone, and in spite of al l our vaunted progress I am 
tempted to ask again and again, ‘To what purpose?’ Wallace, a contemporary 
of Darwin, has said the same thing. Fifty years of brilliant inventions and 
discoveries, he has said, has not added one inch to  the moral height of 
mankind. So said a dreamer and visionary if you wil l, Tolstoy. So said Jesus, and 
Buddha, and Mohammed, whose religion is being denie d and falsified in my own 
country today. 
YI, 8 Dec. 1927 
 
September 11  
By all means drink deep of the fountains that are g iven to you in the Sermon on 
the Mount, but then you will have to take to sackcl oth and ashes. The teaching 
of the Sermon was meant for each and every one of u s. You cannot serve both 
God and Mammon. God the Compassionate and the Merci ful, Tolerance 
incarnate, allows Mammon to have his nine days’ won der. But I say to you: fly 
from that self-destroying but destructive show of M ammon. 
Ibid. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70   
September 12  
India’s destiny lies not alone the bloody way of th e West, of which she shows 
signs of tiredness, but along the bloodless way of peace that comes from a 
simple and godly life. India is in danger of losing  her soul. She cannot lose it 
and live. She must not therefore lazily and helples sly say; ‘I cannot escape the 
onrush from the West.’ She must be strong enough to  resist it for her own sake 
and that of the world. 
YI, 7 Oct. 1926 
 
September 13  
I do believe, that if India had patience enough to go through th4e fire of 
suffering and to resist any unlawful encroachment u pon it s own civilization 
which, imperfect though it undoubtedly is, has hith erto stood the ravages of 
time, she can make a lasting contribution to the pe ace and solid progress of the 
world. 
YI, 11 Aug. 1927 
 
September 14  
I feel that India’s mission is difference from that  of others. India is fitted for 
the religious supremacy of the world. There is no p arallel in the world for the 
process of purification that this country has volun tarily undergone. 
SW, p. 405 
 
September 15  
India is essentially Karmabhumi (land of duty) in c ontradiction to bhogabhumi 
(land of enjoyment). 
YI, 5 Feb. 1925 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71  September 16  
India has never waged war against any nation. She h as put up sometimes ill 
organized or half-organized resistance in self-defe nce pure and simple. She has, 
therefore, not got to develop the will for peace. S he has that in abundance 
whether she knows it or not. 
YI, 4 July 1929 
 
September 17  
I want India to recognize that she has a soul that cannot perish and that can 
rise triumphant above every physical weakness and d efy the physical 
combination of a whole world. 
YI, 11 Aug. 1920 
 
September 18  
I venture to suggest, in all humility, that if Indi a reaches her destiny through 
truth and non-violence she will have made no small contribution to the world 
peace for which all the nations of the earth are th irsting and she would also 
have, in that case, made some slight return for the  help that those nations 
have been freely giving to her. 
YI, 12 March 1921 
 
September 19  
India’s freedom must revolutionize the world’s outl ook upon peace and war. 
Her impotence affects the whole of mankind. 
YI, 17 Sept. 1925 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  September 20  
Out nationalism can be no peril to other nations in asmuch as we will exploit 
none, just as we will allow none to exploit us. Thr ough Swaraj we will serve the 
whole world. 
YI, 16 April 1931 
 
September 21  
If the mad race for armaments continues it is bound  to result is a slaughter such 
as has never occurred in history. If there is a vic tor left the very victory will be 
a living death for the nation that emerges victorio us.  
H, 12 Nov. 1938 
 
September 22  
There is no escape from the impending doom save thr ough a bold and 
unconditional acceptance of the non-violent method with all its glorious 
implications. 
Ibid. 
 
September 23  
If there were no greed, there would be no occasion for armaments. The 
principle of non-violence necessitates complete abs tention from exploitation in 
any form. 
H, 12 Nov. 1938 
 
September 24  
Immediately the spirit of exploitation is gone, arm aments will be left as 
appositive unbearable burden. Real disarmament cann ot come unless the 
nations of the world cease to exploit one another. 
Ibid. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73   
September 25  
The better mind of the world desires today not abso lutely independent States 
warring one against another, but a federation of fr iendly interdependent 
States. 
YI, 26 Dec. 1924 
 
September 26  
Interdependence is and ought to be as much the idea l of man as self-
sufficiency. Man is a social being. Without realize  its oneness with the universe 
or suppress his egotism. 
YI, 21 March 1929 
 
September 27  
His social interdependence enables him to test his faith and to prove himself on 
the touchstone of reality. If man were so placed or  could so place himself as to 
be absolutely above all dependence on his fellow-be ings he would become so 
proud and arrogant as to be a veritable burden and nuisance to the world. 
Ibid. 
 
September 28  
Dependence on society teaches him the lesson of hum ility. That a man ought to 
be able to satisfy most of his essential needs hims elf is obvious; but it is no less 
obvious to me when self-sufficiency is carried to t he length of isolating oneself 
from society it almost amounts to sin. 
Ibid. 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74   
September 29  
It is impossible for one to be internationalist wit hout being a nationalist. 
Internationalism is possible only when nationalism becomes a fact, i.e., when 
peoples belonging to different countries have organ ized themselves and are 
able to act as one man. 
YI, 18 June 1925 
 
September 30  
It is not nationalism that is evil, it is the narro wness, selfishness, exclusiveness 
which is the bane of modern nations which is evil. Each wants to profit at the 
expense of, and rise on the ruin of, the other. 
Ibid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75   
OCTOBER 
 
October 1  
A large part of the miseries of today can be avoide d, if we look at the relations 
between the sexes in a healthy and pure light, and regard ourselves as trustees 
for the moral welfare of the future generations. 
YI, 27 Sept. 1928 
 
October 2  
What chiefly distinguishes man from to beast is tha t man from his age of 
discretion begins to practice a life of continual s elf-restraint. God has enabled 
man to distinguish between the sister, his mother, his daughter and his wife. 
WGG, p. 84 
 
October 3  
Human society is a ceaseless growth, an unfoldment in terms of spirituality. If 
so, it must be based on ever increasing restraint u pon the demands of the flesh. 
Thus, marriage must be considered to be a sacrament  imposing discipline upon 
the partners, restriction them to the physical unio n only among themselves and 
for the purpose only of procreation when both the p artners desire and are 
prepared for it. 
YI, 16 Sept. 1926 
 
October 4  
Sex urge is a fine and noble thing. There is nothin g to be ashamed of in it. But 
it is meant only for the act of creation. Any other  use of it is a sin against God 
and humanity. 
H, 28 March 1936 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76   
October 5  
Absolute renunciation, absolute brahmacharya, is th e ideal state. If you dare 
not think if it, marry by all means, but even then live a life of self-control. 
H, 7 Sept. 1935 
 
October 6  
Marriage is a natural thing in life, and to conside r it derogatory in any sense is 
wholly wrong. The ideal is to look upon marriage as  a sacrament, and 
therefore, to lead a life of self-restraint in the married estate. 
H, 22 March 1942 
 
October 7  
Brahmacharya is not mere mechanical celibacy, it me ans complete control over 
all the senses and freedom from lust in thought, wo rd and deed. As such it is 
the royal road to self-realization or attainment of  Brahman. 
YI, 29 April 1926 
 
October 8  
Marriage is meant to cleanse the hearts of the coup le of sordid passion and take 
them nearer god. Lust less love between husband and  wife is not impossible. 
Man is not a brute. He has risen to a higher state after countless births in the 
brute creation. He is born to stand not to walk on all fours or crawl. Bestiality 
is as far removed from manhood as matter from spiri t. 
Ibid. 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77  October 9  
The wife is not the husband’s bond slave but his co mpanions and his help-mate 
and an equal partner in all his joys and sorrows as  free as the husband to 
choose her own path. 
Auto, p. 25 
 
October 10  
You will guard your wife’s honour and be not her ma ster, but her true friend. 
You will hold her body and her soul as sacred as I trust she will hold your body 
and your soul. To that end you will have to live a life of prayerful toil, and 
simplicity and self-restraint. Let not either of yo u regard another as the object 
of his or her lust. 
YI, 2 Feb. 1928 
 
October 11  
Just as fundamentally man and woman are one, their problem must be one in 
essence. The soul in both is the same. The two live  the same life, have the 
same feelings. Each is a complement of the other. T he one cannot live without 
the other’s active help. 
H, 24 Feb. 1940 
 
October 12  
But somehow or other man has dominated from ages pa st, and so woman has 
developed an inferiority complex. She has believed in the truth of man’s 
interested teaching that she is inferior to him. Bu t seers among men have 
recognized her equal status. 
H, 24 Feb. 1940 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78  October 13  
Nevertheless there is no doubt that is some point t here is bifurcation. Whilst 
both are fundamentally one, it is also equally true  that in that form there is a 
vital difference between the two. Hence the vocatio ns of the two must also be 
different. The duty of motherhood, which the vast m ajority of women will 
always undertake, requires qualities which man need  not, possess. She is 
passive, he is active. She is essentially mistress of the house. He is the bread-
winner. She is the keeper and distributor of the br ead. She is the caretaker in 
every sense of the term. 
Ibid. 
 
October 14  
Woman is the companion of man, gifted with equal me ntal capacities. She has 
the right to participate in very minutest detail in  the activities of man and she 
has an equal right of freedom and liberty with him.  
SW, p. 425 
 
October 15  
Of all the evils which man has made himself respons ible, none is so degrading, 
so shocking or so brutal as his abuse of the better  half of humanity to me, the 
female sex, not the weaker sex. It is the nobler of  the two, for it is even today 
the embodiment of sacrifice, silent suffering, humi lity, faith and knowledge. 
YI, 15 Sept. 1921 
 
October 16  
Woman, I hold, is the personification of self-sacri fices, but unfortunately today 
she does not realize what a tremendous advantage sh e has over man. As Tolstoy 
used to say, they are labouring under the hypnotic influence of man. If they Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  would realize the strength of non-violence they wou ld not consent to be called 
the weaker sex. 
YI, 14 Jan. 1932 
 
October 17  
Man has regarded woman as his tool. She has learnt to be his tool, and in the 
end found this easy and comfortable to be such, bec ause when one drags 
another in his fall the descent is easy. 
H, 25 Jan. 1936 
 
October 18  
Woman must cease to consider herself the object of man’s lust. The remedy is 
more in her hands than man’s. She must refuse to ad orn herself for men, 
including her husband, if she will be an equal part ner with man. I cannot 
imagine Sita ever wasting a single moment on pleasi ng Rama by physical 
charms. 
YI, 21 July 1921 
 
October 19  
Women are special custodians of all that is pure an d religious in life. 
Conservative by nature, if they are slow to shed su perstitions habits, they are 
slow to shed superstitious habits, they are also sl ow to give up all that is pure 
and noble in life. 
H, 25 March 1933 
 
October 20  
Woman is the incarnation of Ahimsa. Ahimsa means in finite love, which again 
means infinite love, which means infinite capacity for suffering. Who but 
woman, the mother of man, shows this capacity in th e largest measure? She Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80  shows it is as she carries the infant and feeds it during nine months and derives 
joy in the suffering involved. What can beat the su ffering involved by the pangs 
of labour? But she forgets them in the joy of creat ion. Who, again, suffers daily 
so that her babe may wax from day to day? Let her t ransfer that love to the 
whole of humanity, let her forget that she was or c an be the object of man’s 
lust. And she will occupy her proud position by the  side of man as his mother, 
maker and silent leader. It is given to her to teac h the art of peace to the 
warring world thirsting for that nectar.  
H, 24 Feb. 1940 
 
October 21  
There is as much reason for man to wish that the ha s born a woman as for 
woman to do otherwise. But the wish is fruitless. L et us be happy in the state 
to which we are born and do the duty for which natu re has destined us. 
Ibid.  
 
October 22  
Chastity is not a hot house growth. It cannot be pr otected by the surrounding 
wall of the purdah. It must grow from within, and t o be worth anything it must 
be capable of withstanding unsought temptation. 
YI, 3 Dec. 1927 
 
October 23  
And why is there all this morbid anxiety about fema le purity? Have women and 
say in the matter of male purity? We hear nothing o f women’s anxiety about 
men’s chastity. Why should men arrogate to themselv es the right to regulate 
female purity? It cannot be superimposed from witho ut. It is a matter of 
evolution from within and therefore of individual s elf effort. 
YI, 25 Nov. 1926 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81  October 24  
It is my firm conviction that a fearless woman who knows that her purity is her 
best shield can never be dis-honoured. However beas tly the man, he will bow in 
shame before the flame of her dazzling purity.      
H, 1 March 1942 
 
October 25  
Let it be man’s privilege to protect woman, but let  no woman of India feel 
helpless in the absence of man or in the event of h is failing to perform the 
sacred duty of protecting her. One who knows how to  die need never fear and 
harm to her of his honour. 
YI, 15 Dec. 1921 
 
October 26  
Man must choose either of the two courses, the upwa rd or the downward; but 
as he has the brute in him, he will more easily cho ose the downward course 
than the upward, especially when the down ward cour se is presented to him in 
a beautiful grab. Man easily capitulates when sin i s presented in the grab of 
virtue. 
H, 21 Jan. 1935 
 
October 27  
It is wrong and immoral to seek to escape the conse quences of one’s acts. It is 
good for a person who overeats to have an ache and an ache and a fast. It is 
bad for him to indulge his appetite and then escape  the consequence by taking 
tonics or other medicine. It is still worse for a p erson to indulge in animal 
passions and escape the consequences of his acts.            
YI, 12 March  
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82  October 28  
Nature is relentless and will have full revenge for  any such violation of her 
laws. Moral results can only be produced by moral r estraints. All other 
restraints defeat the very purpose for which they a re intended. 
Ibid. 
 
October 29  
The world depends for its existence on the act of g eneration, and as the world 
is the playground of God and reflection of His glor y, the act of generation 
should be controlled for the ordered growth of the world.  
Auto, P. 204 
 
October 30  
The conquest of lust is the highest endeavour of a man or woman’s existence. 
Without overcoming lust man cannot hope to rule ove r self. And without rule 
over self there can be no Swaraj or Ramaraj. Rule o f all without rule of oneself 
would prove to be as deceptive and disappointing as  painted toy-mango, 
charming to look at outwardly but hollow and empty within.  
H, 21 Nov. 1936 
 
October 31  
The ideal that marriage aims at is that of spiritua l union through the physical. 
The human love that it incarnates is intended to se rve as a stepping stone to 
divine or universal love. 
YI, 21 May 1931 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83   
NOVEMBER  
 
November 1  
It is not man’s duty to develop all his faculties t o perfection: his duty is to 
develop all his God ward faculties to perfection an d to suppress completely 
those of contrary tendencies. 
YI, 24 June 1926 
 
November 2  
Man is neither mere intellect, nor the gross animal  body, nor the heart or soul 
alone. A proper and the harmonious combination of a ll the three is required for 
the making of the whole man and constitutes the tru e economics of education. 
H, 11 Sept. 1937 
 
November 3  
I hold that true education of the intellect can onl y come through a proper 
exercise and training of the bodily organs, e.g., h ands, feet, eyes, ears, nose, 
etc. In other words, an intelligent use of the bodi ly organs in a child provides 
the best and quickest way of developing his intelle ct.     
H, 8 March 1937 
 
November 4  
But unless the development of the mind and body goe s hand in hand with a 
corresponding awakening of the soul, the former alo ne would prove to be a 
poor lop-sided affair. By spiritual training I mean  education of the heart. A 
proper and all round development of the mind, there fore, can take place only 
when it proceeds pari passu with the education of t he physical and spiritual 
faculties of the child. They constitute an indivisi ble whole. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  H, 17 April 1937 
 
November 5  
In my scheme of things the h and will handle tools before it draws or traces the 
writing. The eyes will read the pictures of letters  and words as they will know 
other things in life, the ears will catch the manes  and meanings of things and 
sentences. The whole training will be natural, resp onsive, and therefore the 
quickest and the cheapest in the world. 
H, 28 Aug. 1937 
 
November 6  
Literary education should follow the education of t he hand the one gift that 
visibly distinguishes man from the beast. It is a s uperstition to think that the 
fullest development of man is impossible without kn owledge of the art of 
reading and writing. The knowledge undoubtedly adds  grace to life, but is in no 
way indispensable for man’s moral, physical or mate rial growth.  
H, 8 March 1935 
 
November 7  
The introduction of manual training will serve a do uble purpose in a poor 
country like ours. It will pay for the education of  our children and teach them 
an occupation, on which they can fall back in after  life, if they choose, for 
earning a living. Such a system must make our child ren self-reliant. Nothing will 
demoralize the nation so much as that we should lea rn to despise labour. 
YI, 1 Sept. 1926 
 
November 8  
Among the many evils of foreign rule, this blightin g imposition of a foreign 
medium upon the youth of the country will be counte d by history as one of the Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85  greatest. It has sapped the energy of the nation, i t has shortened the lives of 
the pupils. It has estranged them from the masses, it has made education 
unnecessarily expensive. If this process is still p ersisted in, it bids fair to rob 
the nation of its soul. 
YI, 5 July 1928 
 
November 9  
If we are to reach real peace in this world and if we are to carry on a real war 
against war, we shall have to begin with children; and if they will grow up in 
their natural innocence, we won’t have to struggle;  we won’t have to pass 
fruitless idle resolution, but we shall go from lov e to love and peace top peace, 
until at last all the corners of the world are cove red with that peace and love 
for which consciously or unconsciously the whole wo rld is hungering.  
YI, 19 Nov. 1931 
 
November 10  
Real education consists in drawing the best out of yourself. What better book 
can there be than the book of humanity?  
H, 30 March 1934 
 
November 11  
A nation building programme can leave no part of th e nation untouched. 
Students have to react upon the dumb millions. They  have to learn to think, not 
in terms of province, or a town, or a class or a ca ste, but in terms of a 
continent and of the millions who include untouchab les, drunkards, hooligans 
and even prostitutes, for whose existence in our mi dst every one of us is 
responsible. 
YI, 9 June 1927 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  November 12  
Students in olden times were called brahmacharis, i .e., those who walked wit 
and in the fear of God. They were honoured by kings  and elders. They were a 
voluntary charge on the nation, and in turn they ga ve to the nation a hundred 
fold strong souls, strong brains, strong arms. 
Ibid. 
 
November 13  
All true art is an expression of the soul. The outw ard forms have value only in 
so far as they are expression of the inward spirit of man. 
YI, 13 Nov. 1924 
 
November 14  
What conscious art of man can give me the panoramic  scenes that open out 
before me, when I look up to the sky above with all  its shining stars? This, 
however, does not mean that I refuse to accept the value of productions of art, 
accept the value of productions of art, generally a ccepted as such, but only 
that generally accepted as such, but only that I pe rsonally feel how inadequate 
these are compared with the eternal symbols of beau ty in Nature. These 
productions of man’s art have their value only in s o far as they help the soul 
onward towards self-realization. 
YI, 13 Nov. 1924 
 
November 15  
To a true artist only that face is beautiful which,  quite apart from its exterior, 
shines with the Truth within the soul. There is no Beauty apart from Truth. On 
the other hand, Truth may manifest itself in forms which may not be outwardly 
beautiful at all. 
Ibid. Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87   
November 16  
I see and find Beauty in Truth or through Truth. Al l Truth, not merely true ideas 
but truthful faces, truthful pictures, or songs are  highly beautiful. People 
generally fail to see Beauty in Truth, the ordinary  man runs away from and 
becomes blind to the Beauty in it. Whenever men beg in to see Beauty in Truth, 
then true art will arise. 
YI, 13 Nov. 1924 
 
November 17  
When I admire the wonder of a sunset or the beauty of the moon, my soul 
expands in worship of the creator. I try to see Him  and Him mercies in all these 
creations. But even the sunsets and sunrises would be mere hindrances if they 
did not help me to think of Him. Anything, which is  a hindrance to the fight of 
the soul, is a delusion and snare; even like the bo dy, which often does actually 
hinder you in the path of salvation. 
Ibid. 
 
November 18  
Life is greater than all art. I would go even furth er and declare that the man 
whose life comes nearest to perfection is the great est artist; for what is art 
without the sure foundation and framework of a nobl e life?  
LG. p.210 
 
November 19  
After all true art can only be expressed not throug h inanimate power-driven 
machinery designed for mass production, but only th rough the delicate living 
touch of the hands of men and women. 
YI, 13 March 1929 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88   
November 20  
True art takes note not merely of form but also of what lies behind. There is an 
art that kills and an art that gives life. True art  must be evidence of happiness, 
contentment and purity of its authors. 
YI, 11 Aug. 1921 
 
November 21  
Purity of life is the highest and truest art. The a rt of producing good music from 
a cultivated voice can be achieved by many, but the  art of producing that 
music from the harmony of a pure life is achieved v ery rarely. 
H, 19 Feb. 1938 
 
November 22  
No culture can live, if it attempts to be exclusive . There is no such thing as 
pure Aryan culture in existence today in India. Whe ther the Aryans were 
indigenous to India or were unwelcome visitors, doe s not interest me much. 
What does interest me is the fact that my remote an cestors blended with one 
another with the utmost freedom and we of the prese nt generation are a result 
of that blend. Whether we are doing any good to the  country of our birth and 
the tiny globe that sustains us or whether we are a  burden, the future alone 
will show. 
H, 9 May 1936 
 
November 23  
I am no indiscriminate superstitious worshipper of all that goes under the name 
of ‘ancient’. I never hesitated to endeavour to dem olish all that is evil 
immoral, no matter how ancient it may be, but with this reservation. I must 
confess to you that I am an adorer of ancient insti tutions and it hurts me to Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89  think that people in their mad rush for everything modern despise all their 
ancient traditions and ignore them in their lives. 
WGG, p. 105 
 
November 24  
We have to decide whether we shall indiscriminately  copy this civilization. We 
may well pause in the face of the awful revelations  that come to us from the 
West from time to time, and ask ourselves, whether after all it is not better to 
hold by our own civilization an seek in the light o f the comparative knowledge 
that is available to us, to reform it by removing i ts known excrescences. 
YI, 2 June 1927 
 
November 25  
It is perhaps unnecessary, if not useless, to weigh  the merits of the two 
civilizations. It is likely that the West has evolv ed a civilization suited to its 
climate and surroundings and similarly, we have a c ivilization suited to our 
conditions and both are good in their own respectiv e spheres. 
YI, 2 June 1927 
 
November 26  
Cowardliness which often springs from pacific train ing, and obsequiousness 
which comes from the restraint that is handed down from generation to 
generation, have somehow to be avoided , if the anc ient civilization is not to 
perish before the mad modern rush. 
Ibid. 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90  November 27  
The distinguishing characteristic of modern civiliz ation is an indefinite 
multiplicity of human wants. The characteristic of ancient civilization is an 
imperative restriction upon and a strict regulating  these wants. 
Ibid. 
 
November 28  
The modern or Western insatiableness arises really from want of a living faith in 
a future state and therefore also in Divinity. The restraint of ancient or Eastern 
civilization arises from a belief, often in spite o f ourselves in future state and 
the existence of a Divine Power. 
YI, 2 June 1927 
 
November 29  
Some of the immediate and brilliant results of mode rn inventions are too 
maddening to resist. But I have no manner of doubt that the victory of man lies 
in that resistance. We are in danger of bartering a way the permanent good for 
a momentary pleasure. 
Ibid. 
 
November 30  
I do not want my house to be walled in on all sides  an y my windows to be 
stuffed. I want the cultures of all the lands to be  blown about my house as 
freely as possible. But I refuse to be blown off my  feet by any. I refuse to live 
in other people’s houses as an interloper, a beggar  or a slave. 
YI, 1 June 1921 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91   
DECEMBER  
 
December 1  
Democracy must in essence mean the art and science of mobilizing the entire 
physical, economic and spiritual resources of all t he various sections of the 
people in the service of the common good of all. 
H, 27 May 1939 
 
December 2  
A born democrat is a born disciplinarian. Democracy  comes naturally to him 
who is habituated normally to yield willing obedien ce to all laws, human or 
divine. 
Ibid. 
 
December 3  
Willing submission to social restraint for the sake  of the well-being of the whole 
society enriches both the individual and the societ y of which one is a member. 
Ibid. 
 
December 4  
The spirit of Democracy is not a mechanical thing t o be adjusted by abolition of 
forms. It requires change of the heart. 
YI, 16 March 1927 
 
December 5  
The spirit of democracy cannot be established in th at midst of terrorism 
whether governmental or popular. In some respects p opular terrorism is more Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  antagonistic to the growth of the democratic spirit  than the governmental. For 
the latter strengthens the spirit of democracy, whe re as the former kills it. 
YI, 23 Feb. 1921 
 
December 6  
Democracy disciplined and enlightened is the finest  thing in the world. A 
democracy, prejudiced, ignorant, superstitious will  land itself in the chaos and 
may be self-destroyed. 
YI, 30 July 1931 
 
December 7  
The democracy of m conception is wholly inconsisten t with the use of physical 
force for enforcing its will. 
EF, p. 102 
 
December 8  
Democracy will break under the strain of apron stri ngs. It can exist only on 
trust. 
DD, p. 136 
 
December 9  
The highest form of freedom carries with it the gre atest measure of discipline 
and humility. Freedom that comes from discipline an d humility cannot be 
denied; unbridled license is a sign of vulgarity, i njurious alike to self and one’s 
neighbours.  
YI, 3 June 1926 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93  December 10  
When people come into possession of political power s, the interference with 
the freedom of the people is reduced to a minimum. In other words, a nation 
that runs its affairs smoothly and effectively with out such state interference is 
truly democratic. Where such a condition is absent,  the form of Government is 
democratic in name. 
H, 11 Jan. 1936 
 
December 11  
Democracy and violence can ill go together. The Sta tes that are today 
nominally democratic have either to become frankly totalitarian or, if they are 
to become truly democratic, they must become courag eously non-violent. It is 
a blasphemy to say that non-violence can only be pr acticed by individuals and 
never by nations which are composed of individuals.  
H, 12 Nov. 1938 
 
December 12  
The true democrat is he who with purely non-violent  means defends his liberty 
and therefore, his country’s and ultimately that of  the whole of mankind. 
H, 15 April 1939 
 
December 13  
In matters of conscience, the law of Majority has n o place. 
YI, 4 Aug. 1920 
 
December 14  
Let us not push the mandate theory to ridiculous ex tremes and become slave to 
resolutions of majorities. That would be a revival of brute force in a more 
virulent form. If rights of minorities are to be re spected, the majority must Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94  tolerate and respect their opinion and action. It w ill be the duty of the 
majority to see to it that the minorities receive a  proper hearing and are not 
otherwise exposed to insults. 
YI, 8 Dec. 1921 
 
December 15  
The rule of majority has a narrow application, i.e. , on should yield to the 
majority in matters of detail. But it is slavery to  be amenable to the majority, 
no matter what its decisions are. 
YI, 2 March 1922 
 
December 16  
Democracy is not a state in which people act like s heep. Under democracy, 
individual liberty of opinion and action is jealous ly guarded. I, therefore, 
believe that the minority has a perfect right to ac t differently from the 
majority. 
Ibid. 
 
December 17  
Keep a child in cotton wools and stunt it or kill i t. If you will let it develop into 
a robust man, you will expose his body to all weath ers teaching him how to 
defy them. Precisely in the same manner, a governme nt worth the name has to 
show the nation how to face deficits, bad weathers and other handicaps of life 
through its own collective effort instead of its be ing effortlessly helped to live 
anyhow. 
DD, p. 242 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  December 18  
Possession of power makes men blind and deaf, they cannot see things which 
are under their very nose and cannot hear things wh ich invade their ears. There 
is thus no knowing what power-intoxicated governmen t may not do. So patriotic 
men ought to be prepared for death, imprisonment an d similar eventualities. 
YI, 13 Oct. 1921 
 
December 19  
Power that comes from service faithfully rendered e nnobles. Power that is 
sought in the name of service and can only be obtai ned by a majority of votes is 
delusion and snare to be avoided. 
YI, 11 Sept. 1924 
 
December 20  
Power is of two kinds. One is obtained by the fear of punishment and the other 
by arts of love. Power based on love is thousand ti mes more effective and 
permanent than the one derived from fear of punishm ent. 
YI, 8 Jan. 1925 
 
December 21  
Whilst power, superimposed, always needs the help o f police and military, 
power generated from within should have little or n o us3e for them. 
H, 4 Sept. 1937 
 
December 22  
Those who claim to lead the masses must resolutely refuse to be led by them, if 
we want to avoid mob law and desire ordered progres s for the country. I 
believe that mere protestation of one’s opinion and  surrender to the mass 
opinion is not only not enough, but in the matters of vital importance, leaders Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  must act contrary to the mass opinion if it does no t commend itself to their 
reason. 
YI, 14 July 1920 
 
December 23  
Love and Ahimsa are matchless in their effect. But,  in their play there is no 
fuss, show, noise or placards. They presuppose self -confidence which in its turn 
presupposes self-purification. Men of stainless cha racter and self-purification 
will easily inspire confidence and automatically pu rify the atmosphere around 
them. 
YI, 6 Sept. 1928 
 
December 24  
The reformer’s path is strewn not with roses, but w ith thorns, and he has to 
walk warily. He can but limps, dare not jump. 
YI, 28 Nov.1929 
 
December 25  
The only code that guides a reformer is his own con science in the last resort. 
The law would be corrected through the righteous su ffering of a few if public 
opinion had not already secured either correction o r disuse. 
YI, 7 Feb. 1929 
 
December 26  
All is well with you even though everything seems t o go dead wrong. If you are 
a square with yourself. Reversely, all is not well with you although everything 
outwardly may seem to go right, if you are not squa re with yourself. 
H, 20 May 1939 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97  December 27  
My patriotism is not an exclusive thing. It is all- embracing and I should reject 
that patriotism which sought to mount upon the dist ress of the exploitation of 
other nationalities. The conception of my patriotis m is nothing if it is not 
always, in every case, without exception, consisten t with the broadest good of 
humanity at large. 
YI, 4 April 1929 
 
December 28  
I do not believe that an individual may gain spirit ually and those who surround 
him suffer. I believe in advita, I believe in the e ssential unity of man and for 
that matter, of all that lives. Therefore, I believ e that if one man gains 
spiritually, the whole world gains with him and if one man falls the whole world 
falls to that extent. 
YI, 4 Dec. 1924 
 
December 29  
Mankind is one, seeing that all are equally subject  to the moral law. All men 
are equal in God’s eyes. There are, of course, diff erences of race and status 
and the like, but the higher the status of man, the  greater is his responsibility. 
ER, p. 57 
 
December 30  
Just as the cult of patriotism teaches us today tha t the individual has to die for 
the family, the family has to die for the village t he village for the district, the 
district for the province, and the province for the  country, and so a country has 
to be free in order that it may die, if necessary, for the benefit of the world. 
GIV, p. 170 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98  December 31  
A nation that is capable of limitless sacrifice is capable of rising to limitless 
heights. The purer the sacrifice the quicker the pr ogress. 
YI, 25 Aug. 1920  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mohan-Mala 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99   
SOURCES  
BC  The Bombay Chronicle, daily newspaper published in Bombay. 
DD  Delhi Diary (Prayer Speeches from 10-9-46 to 29-1-4 8),  
M.K. Gandhi, Navajivan Publishing House, Ahmedabad,  1948. 
EF  The Epic Fast, by Pyarelal. Mohanlal Maganlal Bhat,  Ahmedabad. 1932. 
ER  Ethical Religion, by Mahatma Gandhi. S. Ganesan, Ma dras, 1930. 
GIV  Gandhiji In Indian Villages, by Mahadev Desai. S. G anesan, Madras, 1927. 
H Harijan, weekly journal edited by Gandhiji and othe rs and published at 
Ahmedabad. 
HS  Hind Swaraj or Indian Home rule, by Mahatma Gandhi.  Navjivan Press, 
Ahmedabad, 1928. 
LG  Lenin and Gandhi, by Rene Fullop-Miller. Putnam, Lo ndon, 1930. 
Auto  The story of My Experiments with Truth by M.K. Gand hi. Navjivan Press 
Ahmedabad, 1956. 
SRIS  Self Restraint v. Self Indulgence, by M.K. Gandhi. Navjivan Press, Ahmedabad, 
Pt. I (1930) and Pt. II (1939). 
SSA  Satyagraha in South Africa, by M.K.Gandhi. Navjivan  Press, Ahmedabad. 1928. 
SW  Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi, G.A. Nates an, Madras, 4th Edition, 
1933. 
TI  The Times of India, daily Newspaper published in Bo mbay. 
WGG  with Gandhiji in Ceylon, by Mahadev Desai. S. Ganes an, Madras, 1928. 
YI  Young India, weekly journal edited by Gandhiji and published at Ahmedabad; 
ceased publication in February 1932. 
YM  From Yervada Mandir, by M. K. Gandhi Navjivan Press , Ahmedabad, 2nd 
Edition, 1935. 
 