 
The Moral Basis of 
Vegetarianism 
 
 
Written by : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
 
 
First Published : April 1959 
 
 
 
Rs. 7/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Mudranalaya 
Ahmedabad 380 014  (INDIA) 
 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
01. FOOD VALUES  
Whilst it is true that man cannot live without air and water, the thing that nourishes 
the body is food. Hence the saying, food is life. 
Food can be divided into three categories: vegetari an, flesh, and mixed. Flesh foods 
include fowl and fish. Milk is an animal product an d cannot by any means be is an 
animal product and cannot by any means be included in a strictly vegetarian diet. It 
serves the purpose of meat to a very large extent. In medical language it is classified 
as animal food. A layman does not consider milk to be animal food. On the other 
hand, eggs are regarded by the layman as a flesh fo od. In reality, they are not. 
Nowadays sterile eggs are also produced. The hen is  not allowed to see the cock and 
yet it lays eggs. A sterile egg never develops into  a chick. Therefore, he who can 
take milk should have no objection to taking steril e eggs. 
Medical opinion is mostly in favour of a mixed diet , although there is a growing 
school, which is strongly of the opinion that anato mical and physiological evidence is 
in favour of man being a vegetarian. His teeth, his  stomach, intestines, etc. seem to 
prove that nature has meant man to be a vegetarian.  
Vegetarian diet, besides grains, pulses, edible roo ts, tubers and leaves, included 
fruits, both fresh and dry. Dry fruit includes nuts  like almonds, pistachio, walnuts, 
etc. 
 
Milk  
I have always been in favour of pure vegetarian die t. But experience has taught me 
that in order to keep perfectly fit, vegetarian die t must include milk and milk 
products such as curds, butter, ghee etc. This is a  significant departure from my 
original idea. I excluded milk from my diet for six  years.  At that time, I felt none 
the worse for the denial. But in the year 1917, As a result of my own ignorance, I 
was laid down with severe dysentery. I was reduced to a skeleton, but I stubbornly 
refused to take milk or buttermilk. But I could not  build up my body and pick up 
sufficient strength to leave the bed. I had taken t he vow of not taking milk. A 
medical friend suggested that at the time of taking  vow. I could have had in mind The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3 only the milk of the cow and buffalo; why should th e vow prevent me from taking 
goat’s milk? My wife supported him and I yielded. R eally speaking, for one who has 
given up milk, though at the time of taking the vow  only the cow and the buffalo 
were in mind, milk should be taboo. All animal milk s have practically the same 
composition, though the proportion of the component s varies in cash case. So I may 
be said to have kept merely the letter, not the spi rit, of the vow. Be that as it may, 
goat’s milk produced immediately and I drank it. It  seemed to bring me new life. I 
picked up rapidly and was soon able to leave the be d. On account of this several 
similar experiences, I have been forced to admit th e necessity of adding milk to the 
strict vegetarian diet. But I am convinced that in the vast vegetable kingdom there 
must be some kind, which, while supplying those nec essary substances which we 
derive from milk and meat, is free from their drawb acks, ethical and other.  
In my opinion there are definite drawbacks in takin g milk or meat. In order to get 
meat we have to kill. And we are certainly not enti tled to any other milk except the 
mother’s milk in our infancy. Over and above the mo ral drawback, there are others, 
purely from the point of view of health. Both milk and meat bring with them the 
defects of the animal from which they are derived. Domesticated cattle are hardly 
ever perfectly healthy. Just like man, cattle suffe r from innumerable diseases. 
Several of these are overlooked even when the cattl e are subjected to periodical 
medical examinations. Besides, medical examination of all the cattle in India seems 
to be an impossible feat, at any rate for the prese nt. What applies to the milch 
cattle applies to a much greater extent to the anim als slaughtered for meat. As a 
general rule, man just depends upon luck to escape from such risks. He does not 
seem to worry much about his health. He considers h imself to be a quite safe in his 
medical fortress in the shape of doctors, vaids and  hakims. His main worry and 
concern is how to get wealth and position in societ y. This worry overshadows all the 
rest. Therefore, so long as some selfless scientist  does not, as a result of patient 
research work, discover a vegetable substitute for milk and meat, man will go on 
taking meant and milk. 
Now let us consider mixed diet. Man requires food w hich can supply tissue building 
substances to provide for the growth and daily wear  and tear of the body. It should 
also contain something which can supply energy, fat , certain slats and roughage to 
help the excretion of waste matter. Tissue building  substances are known as The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4 proteins. They are obtained from milk, meat, eggs, pulses and nuts. The proteins 
contained in milk and meat, in other words, the ani mal proteins being more easily 
digestible and assailable, are much more evaluable than vegetable proteins. Milk is 
superior to meat. The medicos tell us that in case where meat cannot be digested, 
milk is digested quite easily. For vegetarian’s mil k, being the only source of animal 
proteins is a very important article of diet. The p roteins, in raw eggs are considered 
to be the most easily digestible of all proteins.  
But everybody cannot afford to drink milk. And milk  is not available in every place. I 
would like to mention here a very important fact wi th regard to milk. Contrary to 
the popular belief, skimmed milk is a very valuable  article to diet. There are times 
when it proves even more useful than whole milk. Th e chief function of milk is to 
supply animal proteins for tissue building and tiss ue repair. Skimming, instruments 
cannot removes the fats, does not affect the protei ns at all. Moreover , the available 
skimming instruments cannot remove all the fat from  milk. Neither is there any 
likelihood of such an instrument being constructed.  
 
Cereals  
The body requires other things besides milk, whole or skimmed. I give the second 
place to cereals wheat, rice, jawar, bajri, etc. Th ese are used as the staple diet. 
Different cereals are used as staple in different p rovinces of India. In many places, 
more than one kind of cereals are eaten at the same  time, for instance, small 
quantities of wheat, bajri and rice are often serve d together. This mixture is not 
necessary for the nourishment of the body. It makes  it difficult to regulate the 
quantity of food intake, and puts an extra strain u pon digestion. As all these 
varieties supply starch mainly, it is better to tak e one only, at a time. Wheat may 
well be described as the king among the cereals. If  we glance at the world map, we 
find that wheat occupies the first place. From the point of view of health, if we can 
get wheat, rice and other cereals become unnecessar y. If wheat is not available and 
jawar,etc. cannot be taken on account of dislike or  difficulty in digesting them, rice 
has to be resorted to. 
 The cereals should be properly cleansed, ground on  a grinding stone, and the 
resulting flour used as it is. Sieving of the flour  should be avoided. It is likely to The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5 remove the bhushi or the pericarp which is a rich s ource of salts and vitamins, both 
of which is a rich source of salts and vitamins, bo th of which are most valuable from 
the point of view of nutrition. The pericarp also s upplies roughage, which helps the 
action of the bowels. Rice grain being very delicat e, nature has provided it with an 
outer covering or epicarp. This is not edible. In o rder to remove this inedible 
portion, rice has to be pounded not only removes th e outer skin, but also polishes 
the rice by removes the outer skin of the rice grai n. But machine pounding not only 
removing its pericarp. The explanation of the popul arity helps preservation. The 
pericarp is very sweet and unless it is removed, ri ce is easily attacked by certain 
organisms. Polished rice and wheat without its peri carp, supply us with almost pure 
starch. Important constituents of the cereals are l ost with the removal of the 
pericarp. The pericarp of rice is sold as rice poli shing. This and the pericarp of wheat 
can be cooked and eaten by themselves. They can be also made into chapatis or 
cakes. It is possible that rice chapattis may be mo r easily digestible than whole rice 
and in this form a lesser quantity may result in fu ll satisfaction.  
We are in the habit of dipping each morsel of the c hapatti in vegetable or dal gravy 
before eating it. The result is that most people sw allow their food without proper 
mastication. Mastication is an important step in th e process of digestion, especially 
that of starch. Digestion of starch begins on its c oming into contact with saliva in the 
mouth. Mastication ensures foods should be eaten in  relatively dry form, which 
results in a greater flow of saliva and also necess itates their thorough mastication. 
 
Pulses  
After the starch supplying cereals come the protein  supplying pulses beans, lentils, 
etc. Almost everybody seems to think that pulses ar e an essential constitution of 
diet. Even meat eaters must have pulses. It is easy  to understand that those who 
have to do hard manual work and who cannot afford t o drink milk, cannot do without 
pulses. But I can say without any hesitation whatso ever that those who follow 
sedentary occupations as for instance, clerks, busi nessmen, lawyers, doctors, 
teachers and those who are not too poor to buy milk , do not requires pulses. Pulses 
are generally considered to be difficult to digest and are eaten in a much small 
quantity than cereals. Out of the varieties of puss es, peas, gram and haricot beans The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6 are considered to be the most and mung and masoor ( lentils) the least difficult to 
digest. 
 
Vegetables  
Vegetable and fruit should come third on our list. One would expect them to cheap 
and easily available in India. But it is not so. Th ey are generally considered to be 
delicates meant for the city people. In the village  fresh vegetables are a rarity, and 
in most places fruit is also not available.  This s hortage of greens and fruits is a slur 
on the administration of India, the villagers can g row plenty of green vegetables if 
they wish to. The question of fruit cannot be solve d so easily. The land legislation is 
bad from the villager’s stand point. But I Am trans gressing.  
Among fresh vegetables, a fair amount of leafy pota toes, sweet potatoes, suran etc. 
which supply starch mainly, among vegetables. They should be put down in the same 
category as starch supplying cereals. A fair helpin g of ordinary fresh vegetables is 
advisable. Certain varieties such as cucumber, toma toes, mustard and cress and 
other tender leaves need not be cooked. They should  be washed properly and them 
eaten raw in small quantities. 
 
Fruits  
As a fruits, our daily diet should include the avai lable fruits of the season, e.g. 
mangoes, jambu, guavas, grapes, papaiyas, limes swe et or sour, oranges, moosambi, 
etc. should all be used in their season. The best t ime for taking fruit is in the early 
morning. A breakfast of fruit and milk should give full satisfaction. Those who take 
an early lunch may well have a breakfast of fruit o nly. 
 
Ghee And Oil 
A certain amount o f fat is also necessary. This ca n be had in the form of ghee of oil. 
If ghee can be had oil becomes unnecessary. It is d ifficult to digest and it not so 
nourishing as pure ghee. An ounce and a half of ghe e per head per day, should be 
considered ample to supply the needs of the body. W hole milk also is source o f The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 ghee. Those who cannot afford it should take enough  oil to supply the need for fat. 
Among oils, sweet oil, groundnut oil and coconut oi l should be given preference. Oil 
must be fresh. If available, it is better to use ha nd-pressed oil. Oil and ghee sold in 
the bazaar are generally quite useless. It is matte r of great sorrow and shame. But so 
long as honesty has not become an integral part of business morals, whether through 
legislation or through education, the individual wi ll have to procure the pure  article 
with patience and diligence. One should never be sa tisfied to take what one can get, 
irrespective of its quality. It is far better to do  without ghee and oil altogether than 
to eat rancid oil and adulterated ghee. As in the c ase of fats, a certain amount of 
sugar is also necessary. Although sweet fruits supp ly plenty of sugar, there is no 
harm in taking one to one and a half ounces of suga r, brown or white, in the day. If 
one cannot get sweet fruits, sugar may become a nec essity. But the undue 
prominence given to sweet things nowadays is wrong.  City folk eat too much of 
sweet things. Milk puddings, milk sweets and sweets  of other kind are consumed in 
large quantities. They are all unnecessary and are harmful except when taken in very 
small quantities. It may be said without any feat o f exaggeration that to partake of 
sweetmeats and other delicacies, in a country where  the millions do not even get an 
ordinary full meal, is equivalent to robbery. 
What applies to sweets, applies with equal force to  ghee and oil. There is no need to 
eat food fried in ghee or oil. To use up ghee in ma king puries and laddus is 
thoughtless extravagance. Those who are not used to  such food cannot eat these 
things at all. For instance, Englishmen on their fi rst coming into our country cannot 
eat our sweets and fried foodstuffs. Those  that do  eat them I have often seen fall 
ill. Taste is acquired, not born with us. All the d elicacies of the world cannot equal 
the relish that hunger gives to food. A hungry man will eat a dry piece of bread with 
the greatest relish, whereas one who is not hungry gives to food. A hungry man will 
eat a dry piece of bread with the greatest relish, where one who is not hungry will 
refuse the best of sweetmeats. 
 
How often and How much to Eat 
Now let us consider how much should one eat. Food s hould be taken as a matter of 
duty even as a medicine to sustain the body, never for the satisfaction of the palate. The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8 Thus, pleasurable feeling comes from satisfaction o f real hunger. Therefore, we can 
say that relish is dependent upon hunger not outsid e it. Because of our wrong habits 
and artificial way of living, very few people know what their system requires. Our 
parents who bring us into this world do not, as a r ule, cultivate self-control. Their 
habits and their way of living influence the childr en to certain extent. The mother’s 
food during childhood, the mother pampers the child  with all sorts of tasty foods. 
She gives the child a little bit out of whatever sh e herself may be eating and the 
child’s digestive system gets a wrong training from  its infancy. Habits once formed 
are difficult to shed. They are very realization co mes to man that he is his own 
bodyguard, and his body has been dedicated to servi ce, he desires to learn the law 
of keeping his body in a fit condition and tries ha rd to follow them. 
We have now reached a point when we can lay down th e amount of various foods 
required by a man of sedentary habits, which most m en and women who will read 
these pages are.  
Cow’s milk  -2lbs.  
Cereals  
(Wheat rice, bajri, in all) -6oz.  
Vegetables leafy  3oz.  
Vegetables others  5oz.  
Vegetables raw  1oz.  
Ghee  1 and half oz  
Butter  2 oz  
Gur or white sugar  1 and half oz  
Fresh fruit according to one’s taste and purse. In any case it is good to take sour 
limes a day. The juice should be squeezed and taken  with vegetables or in water, 
cold and hot. 
All these weight are of raw stuff. I have not put d own the amount of salt. It should 
be added afterwards according to taste. 
Now, how often should one eat? Many people take two  meals a day. The general rule 
is to take three meals: breakfast early in the morn ing and before going out to work, The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 dinner at midday and supper in the evening or later . There is no necessity to have 
more than three meals. In the cities some people ke ep on nibbling from time to time 
to time. This habit is harmful. The digestive appar atus requires rest. 
Key to Health, pp. 13-27, Edn. 1956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10   
02. UNFIRED FOOD 
(In the course of a letter from Coonoor, dated 26-7 -1929, addressed to Gandhiji in connection 
with his experiments in dietetics, Dr. R. McCarriso  had written as follows: )  
“One of the great fault in Indian diets are at the present day is their deficiency in 
vitamin A, in suitable protein and in certain salts ; and the greatest nutritional need 
of India is the freer use of good milk and its prod ucts which supply these factors. 
There can be no doubt in the minds of those of us w ho have devoted a life time to 
the study of nutrition that milk is one of the grea test blessings given to mankind. 
And to one like myself, whose work is to learn the truth and spread it, the scarcity of 
this food in India and the lack of appreciation of its value are matters of grave 
concern. Do not, I beg of you, decry it; for a pint  of milk a day will do more for 
Young India than most things I wot of. It is, for e xample,  to deficiency of vitamin A 
that we owe so much disease of the bowels and lungs , so much disease to the 
bladder (such as ‘stone’ ) and so much anaemia in t his country. 
I am glad you are interesting yourself in the matte r of food and I agree with much 
that you say. But let me assure you that a little m ore ‘fortissimo’ on the ‘milk’ and 
milk products theme’ will do great good when you ar e leading the orchestra of 
Truth. 
P. S. when next you make an Andhra tour, avoid “the  extreme weakness”, which 
overtook you in your last one, by taking a pint of milk a day! 
(Commenting on Dr. McCarrison’s letter Gandhiji wro te as under: ) 
I publish this letter thankfully and wish that othe r men versed in medical science 
would also guide me. In making the experiment, I ma y trying to find out the truth 
about food in so far as it is possible for a layman  to do so.  
As for Dr. McCarrison’s argument about the necessit y of animal food. I dare not as a 
layman combat it, but I may state that there are me dical men who are decidedly of 
opinion that animal food including milk is not inst inct and upbringing I personally 
favour a purely vegetarian diet, and have for years  been experimenting in finding a 
suitable vegetarian combination. But there is no da nger of my decrying mild until I 
have obtained overwhelming evidence in support of m ilk less diet. It is one of many The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  in consistencies of my life that whilst I am in my own person avoiding milk, I am 
conducting a model dairy which is already producing  cow’s milk that can successfully 
compete with any such milk produced in India in pur ity and fat content. 
Notwithstanding Dr. McCoarrion’s claim for medical science I submit that science I 
submit that scientist have not yet explored the hid den possibilities of the 
innumerable seeds, leaves and fruits for giving the  fullest possible nutrition to 
mankind. For one thing the tremendous vested intere sts that have grown round the 
belief in animal food prevent the medical professio n from approaching the question 
with complete detachment. It almost seems to me tha t it is reserved for lay 
enthusiasts to cut their way through a mountain of difficulties even at the risk of 
their lives to find the truth. I should be satisfie d if scientists would lend their 
assistance to such humble seekers. 
Young India, 15-8-1929  
 
As a searcher for Truth I deem it necessary to find  the perfect food for a man to 
keep body, mind and soul in a sound condition. I be lieve that the search can only 
succeed with unfired food, and that in the limitles s vegetable kingdom there is an 
effective substitute for milk, which every medical man admits, has its drawbacks and 
which is designed by nature not for man but for bab ies and young ones of lower 
animals. I should count no cost too dear for making  a search which in my opinion is 
so necessary from more points of view than one. I t herefore still seek information 
and guidance from kindred spirits. 
Young India, 22-8-1929 
 
If one may take ripe fruit without cooking I see no  reason why one may not take 
vegetables too in an uncooked state provided one ca n properly digest them. 
Dialecticians are of opinion that the inclusion of a small quantity of raw vegetables 
like cucumber, vegetable marrow, pumpkin, gourd, et c. in one’s menu is more 
beneficial to health than the eating of large quant ities of the same cooked. But the 
digestions of most people are very often so impaire d through a surfeit of cooked fare 
than one should not be surprised if at first they f ail to do justice to raw greens, The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  though I can say from personal experience that no h armful effect need follow if a 
tola or two of raw greens are taken with each meal provided one masticates them 
thoroughly. It is a well-established fact that one can derive a much greater amount 
of nourishment from the same quality of food if it is masticated well. The habit of 
proper mastication of food inculcated by the use of  uncooked greens , therefore, if it 
does nothing else, will at least enable one to do w ith less quantity of food and thus 
not only make for economy in consumption but also a utomatically reduced the 
dietetic himsa that one commits to sustain life. 
Therefore, whether regarded from the viewpoint of d ietetics or that of Ahimsa, the 
use of uncooked vegetables is not only free from al l objection but is to be highly 
recommended. Of course, it does without saying that  if the vegetables are to be 
eaten raw extra care will have to be exercised to s ee that they are not stale, over-
ripe or rotton, or otherwise dirty. 
Young India, 15-11-1928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13   
03. VITAL NEED FOR RESEARCH 
The unlimited capacity of the plant world to sustai n man at his highest is a region 
yet unexplored by modern medical science which thro ugh force of habit pins its faith 
on the shambles or at least milk and its by-product s. It is a duty which awaits 
discharge by Indian Medical men whose tradition is vegetarian. The fast developing 
researches about vitamins and the possibility of ge tting the most important of them 
directly from the sun bid fair to revolutionize man y of the accepted theories and 
beliefs propounded by medical science about food. 
Young India, 18-7-1929 
 
I have found after prolonged experiment and observa tion that there is no fixed 
dietetic rule for all constitutions. All that the w isest physicians claim for their advice 
is that it is likely to benefit in a given case as in a majority of cases they have found 
it to answer fairly well. In no branch of science i s the scientist so hampered in his 
research as in the medical. He dare not speak with certainly of the effect of a single 
drug or food or of the reactions of human bodies. I t is and will always remain 
empirical. The popular saying that one man’s food m ay be another’s poison is based 
on vast experience which finds daily verification. Such being the case, the field for 
experiment on the part of intelligent men and women  is limitless. Laymen ought to 
acquire a workable knowledge of the body which play s such an important part in the 
evolution of the soul within. And yet about nothing  are we so woefully negligent or 
ignorant as in regard to our bodies. Instead of usi ng the body as a temple of God we 
use it as a vehicle for indulgence, and are not ash amed to run medical men for help 
in our effort to increase them and abuse the earthl y tabernacle. 
Young India, 8-8-1929 
 
Take up any modern textbook on food or vitamins, an d you would find in it a strong 
recommendation to take a few edible green leaves un cooked at every meal. Of 
course, these should always be well washed half a d ozen times to remove all dirt. 
These leaves are to be had in every village for the  trouble of picking. And yet greens The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14  are supposed to be only a delicacy of cities. Villa gers in many parts of India live on 
dal and rice or roti, and plenty of chilies, which harm the system. Sin ce the 
economic reorganization of villages has been commen ced with food reform, it is 
necessary to find out the simplest and cheapest foo ds that would enable villagers to 
regain lost health. The addition of green leaves to  their meals will enable villagers to 
avoid many diseases from which they are now sufferi ng. The villagers’ food is 
deficient in vitamins; many of them can be supplied  by fresh green leaves. 
That, of course, means elaborate research and exami nation in detail of the 
nourishing properties of the innumerable leaves tha t are to be found hidden among 
the grasses that grow wild in India. 
Harijan, 15-2-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15   
04. VEGETARIANISM 
A correspondent is born in a meat-eating family. He  has successfully resisted the 
pressure from his parents to return to the flesh-po t. “But”, he says, “in a book I have 
before me, I read the opinion of swami Vivekanand o n the subject and feel a good 
deal shaken in my belief. The Swami holds that for Indians in their present state 
flesh diet is a necessity and he advises his friend s to eat flesh freely. He even goes so 
far as to say, “if you incur any sin thereby throw it upon me; I will bear it.’ I am now 
fix whether to eat flesh or not.” 
This blind worship of authority is a sign of weakne ss of mind. If the correspondent 
has such a deep seated conviction that flesh eating  is not right, why should he be 
moved by the opinion to the contrary of the whole w orld? One needs to be slow to 
form convictions, but once formed they must be defe nded against the heaviest odds.  
As for the opinion of the great Swami, I have not s een actual writing but I fear the 
correspondent has correctly quoted him. My opinion is well known. I do not regard 
flesh-food as necessary for us at any stage and und er any clime in which it is possible 
for human beings ordinarily to live. I hold flesh-f ood to be unsuited to our species. 
We err in copying the lower animal world if we are superior to it. Experience teaches 
that animal food is unsuited to those who would cur b their passions. 
But it is wrong to overestimate the importance of f ood in the formation of character 
or in subjugating the flesh. Diet is a powerful fac tor not to be neglected. But to sum 
up all religion in terms of diet, as is often done in India, is as wrong as it is to 
disregard all restraint in regard to diet and to gi ve full reins to one’s appetite. 
Vegetarianism lightly given up. It is necessary, th erefore, to correct the error that 
vegetarianism has made us weak in mind or body or p assive or inert in action. The 
greatest Hindu they have invariably been vegetarian s. Who could show greater 
activity than say Shankara or Dayanand in their tim es? 
But my correspondent must not accept me as his auth ority. The choice of one’s diet 
is not a thing to be based on faith. It is a matter  for everyone to reason out for 
himself. There has grown up especially in the West an amount of literature on 
vegetarianism which any seeker after truth may stud y with profit. Many eminent 
medical men have contributed to this literature. He re, in India, we have not needed The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16  any encouragement for vegetarianism. For it has bee n hitherto accepted as the most 
desirable and the most respectable thing. Those, ho wever, who like the 
correspondent towards vegetarianism in the West. 
Young India, 7-10-1926  
 
One should eat not in order to please the palate bu t just to keep the body going. 
When each organ of sense sub serves the body and th rough the body the soul, its 
special relish disappears, and then alone does it b egin to function in the way nature 
intended it to do. 
Any number of experiments is too small and no sacri fice is too great for attaining this 
symphony with nature. But unfortunately the current  is nowadays flowing strongly in 
the opposite direction. We are not ashamed to sacri fice a multitude of other lives in 
decorating the perishable body and trying to prolon g its existence for a few fleeting 
moments with the result that we kill ourselves, we give rise to a hundred new ones; 
in trying to enjoy the pleasures of sense, we lose in the end even our capacity for 
enjoyment. All this is passing before our very eyes , but there are none so blind as 
those who will not see. 
Autobiography, p. 237, Edn. 1958 
 
There is a great deal of truth in the saying that m an becomes what he eats. The 
grosser the food the food the grosser the body. 
Harijan, 5-8-1933 
 
I do feel that spiritual progress does demand at so me stage that we should cease to 
kill our fellow creatures for the satisfaction of o ur bodily wants. The beautiful lines 
of Goldsmith occurs to me as I tell you of my veget arian fad:  
No flocks that range the valley free  
To slaughter I condemn; 
Taught by the Power that pities me 
I learn to pity them 
India’s Case for Swaraj, pp. 402, Edn. 1932 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17   
05. NOT AN END IN ITSELF  
Abstemiousness from intoxicating drinks and drugs, and from all kinds of foods, 
especially meat, is undoubtedly a great aid to the evolution of the spirit, but It is by 
no means an end in itself. Many a man eating meat a nd with everybody living in the 
fear of God is nearer his freedom than a man religi ously abstaining from meat and 
many other things, but blaspheming God in every one  of his acts. 
Young India, 6-10-21 
 
Abjure brinjals or potatoes by all means, if you wi ll, but do not for heaven’s sake 
begin to feel yourself self-righteous or flatter yo urself that you are practicing Ahimsa 
on that account. The very idea is enough to make on e blush. Ahimsa is not a mere 
matter of dietetics, it transcends it. What a man e ats or drinks matters little; it is 
the self-denial, the self-restraint behind it that matters. By all means practice as 
much restraint in the choice of the articles of you r diet as you like. The restraint is 
commendable, even necessary, but it touches wide la titude in the matter of diet and 
yet may be a personification of Ahimsa and compel o ur homage, if his heart 
overflows with love and melts at another’s woe, and  has been purged of all passions. 
On the other hand, a man always over scrupulous in diet is an utter stranger to 
Ahimsa and a pitiful wretch, if he is a slave to se lfishness and passions and is hard of 
heart. 
Young India, 6-9-1928 
 
I am painfully aware of the fact that my desire to continue life in the body involves 
me in constant himsa. That is why I am becoming gro wingly indifferent to this 
physical body of mine. For instance, I know that in  the act of respiration I destroy 
innumerable invisible germs floating in the air. Bu t I do not stop breathing. The 
consumption of vegetables involves himsa, but I fin d that I cannot give them up. 
Again, there is himsa in the use of antiseptics, ye t I cannot bring myself to discard 
the use of disinfectants like kerosene, etc. to rid  myself of the mosquito pest and 
the like. I suffer snakes to be killed in the Ashra m when it is impossible to catch The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  them and put them out of harm’s way. I ever tolerat e the use of the stick to drive 
the bullocks in the Ashram. Thus there is no end of  himsa which I directly and 
indirectly commit. If, as a result of this humble c onfession of mine, friends choose to 
give me up as lost I would be sorry, but nothing wi ll induce me to try to conceal my 
imperfection ion in the practice of Ahimsa. All I c laim for myself is that I am 
ceaselessly trying to understand the implications o f great ideals like Ahimsa and to 
practice them in thought, word and deed and that no t without a certain measure of 
success as I think. But I know that I have long dis tance yet to cover in this direction. 
Young India, 1-11-1928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19   
06. THE MORAL BASIS OF VEGETARIANISM 
(Address to the London Vegetarian Society* on 20th November, 1931.) 
When I received the invitation to be present at thi s meeting, I need not tell you how 
please I was, because it revived old memories and r ecollections of pleasant 
friendships formed with vegetarians. I feel especia lly honoured to find on my right 
Mr. Henry Salt. It was Mr. Salt’s book. A Plea for Vegetarianism, which showed me 
why, apart from a hereditary habit, and a part from  my adherence to a vow 
administered to me by my mother, it was right to be  a vegetarian. He showed me 
why it was a moral duty incumbent on vegetarians no t to live upon  fellow-animals. 
It is, therefore, a matter of additional pleasure t o me that I find Mr. Salt in our 
midst. 
I do not propose to take up your time by giving you  my various experiences of 
vegetarianism, nor do I want to tell you something of the great difficulty that faced 
me in London itself in remaining staunch to vegetar ianism, but I would like to share 
with you some of the thoughts that have developed i n me in connection with 
vegetarianisms. Forty years ago I used to mix freel y with vegetarians. There was that 
time hardly a vegetarian restaurant in London that I had not visited. I made it a 
point, out of curiosity, and to study at that time hardly a vegetarian restaurant in 
London, to visit every one of them. Naturally, ther efore, I came into close contact 
with many vegetarians. I found at the tables, that largely the conversation turned 
upon food and disease. I also found that the vegeta rians who were struggling to stick 
to their vegetarianism were finding it difficult fr om health point of view. I do not 
know whether, nowadays, you have those debates that  were held between 
vegetarians and vegetarians, and between vegetarian s and non-vegetarians. I 
remember one such debate, between Dr. Densmore, and  the late Dr. T. R. Allinson. 
Then vegetarians had a habit of taking of nothing b ut food and nothing but disease. I 
feel that is the worst way of going about the busin ess. I notice also that it is those 
persons who become vegetarians because they are suf fering form some disease or 
other that is from purely the health point of view.  It is those persons who largely fall 
back. I discovered that for remaining staunch to ve getarianism a man requires a 
moral basis.  The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20   For me that was a great discovery in my search aft er truth. At an early age in the 
course of my experiments, I found that a selfish ba sis would not serve the purpose of 
taking a man higher and higher along the paths of e volution. What was required was 
an altruistic purpose. I found also that health was  by no means the monopoly of 
vegetarians. I found many people having no bias one  way or the other,  and that non-
vegetarians were able to show, generally speaking, good health. I also found that 
several vegetarians found it impossible to remain v egetarians because they had made 
food a fetish and because they thought that by beco ming vegetarians they could eat 
as much lentils, haricot beans, and cheese as they liked. Of course those people 
could not possibly keep their health. Observing alo ng these lines, I saw that a man 
should eat sparingly and now and then fast. No man or woman really ate sparingly or 
consumed just that quantity which the body requires  and no more. We easily fall a 
prey to the temptations of the palate, and therefor e when thing taste delicious we 
do not mind taking a morsel or two more. But you ca nnot keep health under those 
circumstances. Therefore I discovered that in order  to keep health, no matter what 
you ate, it was necessary to cut down the quantity of your food, and reduce the 
number of meals. Becomes moderate; err on the side of less, rather than on the side 
of more. When I invite friends to share their meals  with me I never press them to 
take anything except only what they require. On the  contrary, I tell them not to take 
a thing if they do not want to. 
What I want to bring to your notice is that vegetar ians need to be tolerant if they 
want to convert others to vegetarianism. Adopt a li ttle humility. We should appeal to 
the moral sense of the people who do not see eye to  eye with us. If a vegetarian 
became ill, and a doctor prescribed beef-tea, then I would not call him a vegetarian. 
A vegetarian is made of sterner stuff. Why? Because  it is for the building of the spirit 
and not of the body. Man is more than meat. It is t he spirit in man for which we are 
concerned. Therefore vegetarians should have that m oral basis that a man was not 
born carnivorous animal, but born to live on the fr uits and herbs that the earth 
grows. I know we must all err. I would give up milk  if I could, but I cannot. I have 
made that experiment times without number I could n ot after a serious illness, 
regain my strength unless I went back to milk. That  has been the tragedy of my life. 
Bu the basis of my vegetarianism is not physical, b ut moral if anybody said that I 
should die if I did not take beef tea of mutton, ev en under medical advice, I would The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  prefer death. That is the basis of my vegetarianism . I would love to think that all of 
us who called ourselves vegetarians should have tha t basis. There were thousands of 
meat-eaters who did not stay meat-eaters. There mus t be a definite reason for our  
making that change in our lives, for our adopting h abits and customs different  from 
society, even though sometimes that change may offe nd those nearest and dearest 
to us. Not for the world should you sacrifice a mor al principle. Therefore the only 
basis for having a vegetarian society and proclaimi ng a vegetarian principle is, and 
must be, a moral one. I am not to tell you as I see  and wander about the world, that 
vegetarian, on the whole, enjoy much better health than meat-eaters. I belong to a 
country which is predominantly vegetarian by habit or necessity. Therefore I cannot 
testify that shows much greater endurance, much gre ater courage, or much greater 
exemption from disease. Because it is a peculiar, p ersonal thing. It requires 
obedience, and scrupulous obedience, to all the law s of hygiene. 
Therefore, I think that what vegetarians should do is not to emphasize the physical 
consequences of vegetarianism, but to explore the m oral consequences. While we 
have not yet forgotten that we share many things in  common with the beast, we do 
not sufficiently realize that there are certain thi ngs which differentiate us from the 
beast. Of course, we have vegetarians in the cow an d the bull which are better 
vegetarians than we are but there is something much  higher which calls us to 
vegetarianism. Therefore, I thought that, during th e few minutes which I give myself 
the privilege of addressing you. I would just empha size the moral basis of 
vegetarianism. And I would say that I have found fr om my own experience, and the 
experience of thousands of friends and companions, that they find satisfaction, so 
far as vegetarianism is concerned, from the moral b asis they have chosen for 
sustaining vegetarianism. 
In conclusion, I think you all for coming here and allowing me to see vegetarian face 
to face. I cannot say I used to meet you forty or f orty-two years ago. I suppose the 
faces of the London Vegetarian Society have changed . There are very few members 
who, like Mr. Salt, can claim association with the Society extending over forty years. 
Lastly, I would like you, if you wan to, to ask me any questions, for I am a your 
disposal for a few minutes.  
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22   
(Gandhiji was then asked to give his reasons for li miting his daily diet to five articles only, and 
he replied:) 
That has no connection with vegetarianism. There wa s another reason. I had been a 
pampered child of nature. I had acquired then that notoriety that when I was invited 
to friends, they placed before me ample dishes of f ood. I told them I had come there 
to serve, and, personally, I should find myself dyi ng by inches if I allowed myself to 
be pampered like that. So, in limiting myself to fi ve ingredients of food, I served a 
double purpose. And I must finish all my eating bef ore sundown. I have been saved 
many pitfalls by that. There are many discoveries a bout that in regard to health 
reasons. Dietists are saying that we are more and m ore tending towards simplifying 
diet, and that if one must live for health one must  have one thing at a time and 
avoid harmful combination. I like the process of ex clusion better than that of 
inclusion, because no two doctors have the same opi nion. 
Then, I think the restriction to five articles of f ood has helped me morally and 
materially materially because, in a poor country li ke India it is not always possible to 
procure goat’s milk, and it is a hard thing to prod uce fruit and grapes. Then, I go to 
visit poor people, and if I expected hot-house grap es, they would banish me. So, by 
restricting myself to five articles o ffood, it als o serves the law of economy. 
Harijan, 20-2-1919  
 
*During his student days in England Gandhiji had be come a member of this society and had been 
elected subsequently as its Secretary. Dr. Oldfield  was president, In 1931, when Gandhiji was in 
England for the Round Table Conference on India, he  was invited to address the society. 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23   
07. OUR DAILY DIET 
Rice  
Whole, unpolished rice is unprocurable in the bazaa rs. It is beautiful to look at and 
rich and sweet to the taste. Mills can never compet e with this unpolished rice. It is 
husked in a simple manner. Most of the paddy can be  husked in alight chakki without 
difficulty. There are some varieties the husk of wh ich is not separated by grinding. 
The best way of treating such paddy is to boil it f irst and then separate the chaff 
from the grain. This rice, it is said is most nutri tious and , naturally, the cheapest. In 
the villages, if they husk their own paddy, it must  always be cheaper for the 
peasants than the corresponding mill husked rice, w hether polished or unpolished. 
The majority of rice found in ordinarily in the baz aars is always more or less 
polished, whether hand-husked or mill husked. Wholl y unpolished rice is always hand 
husked and is every time cheaper than the mill-husk ed rice, the variety being the 
same. 
Harijan, 25-1-1935 
 
Wheat  
The branless (wheat) flour is as bad as polished ri ce is the universal testimony of 
medical men. Whole –wheat flour ground in one’s cha kki is any day superior to, and 
cheaper because the cost of grinding is saved. Agai n, in the whole-wheat there is no 
loss of weight. In fine flour there is loss of whea t. The richest part of wheat is 
contained in its bran. There is a terrible loss of nutrition when the bran of whet is 
removed. The villagers and others who eat whole-whe at flour ground in their own 
chakki save their money and, what is more important  their health. A large part of 
the millions that flour-mills make will remain in a nd circulate among the deserving 
poor when village grinding is revived. 
Harijan, 1-2-1935 
 
 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24  Cereals 
Another physician quotes a text against the use of sprouted pulses but he too lacks 
actual experience for supporting his text. And this  has been my complaint against 
many Ayurvedic physicians. I have no doubt that the re is abundant ancient wisdom 
buried in the Sanskrit medical works. Our physician s appear to be too lazy to unearth 
that wisdom in the real sense of the term. They are  satisfied with merely repeating 
the printed formula. Even as a layman I know many v irtues are claimed for several 
Ayurvedic preparations. But where is their use, of they cannot be demonstrated 
today? I plead for the sake of this ancient science  for a spirit of genuine search 
among our Ayurvedic physicians. I am as anxious as the tallest among them can be to 
free ourselves from the tyranny of Western medicine s which are ruinously expensive 
and the preparation of which takes no count of the higher humanities 
Young India, 8-8-1929 
 
Milk  
It is my firm conviction that man need take no milk  at all, beyond the mother’s milk 
that he takes as a baby. His diet should consist of  nothing but sunbaked fruits and 
nuts. He can secure enough nourishment both for the  tissues and the nerves from 
fruits like grapes and nuts like almonds. Restraint  of the sexual and other passions 
becomes easy for a man who lives on such food. My c o-workers and I have seen by 
experience that there is much truth in the Indian p roverb that as a man eats, so shall 
he become. 
Autobiography, p. 200, Edn. 1958 
 
Honey  
My own experience of taking honey mixed with hot wa ter extends to more than four 
years. I have experienced no ill-effect what so eve r. Objection has also been raised 
against has, I admit, considerable force though the  western method of gathering 
honey is cleaner and less I should have to cut down  many things I take or use. But 
life is not governed by strict logic. It is an orga nic growth, seemingly irregular, 
growth following its own law and logic. Western doc tors bestrow high praise upon it. The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25  Most of them who condemn the use of sugar in unmeas ured terms speak highly of 
honey which they say does not irritate as refined s ugar or even gur does. 
Young India, 8-8-1929 
 
Gur  
According to medical testimony gur is any day super ior to refined sugar in food 
value, and if the villagers cease to make gur as th ey are beginning to do, they will be 
deprived of an important food adjunct for their chi ldren. They may do without gur 
themselves, but their children cannot without under mining their stamina. Retention 
of gur and its use by the people in general mean se veral crores of rupees retained by 
the villagers. 
Harijan, 1-2-1935 
 
Fruits  
No one perhaps, as far as I know, has eaten as much  fruit as I have, having lived for 
six years on entirely fruits and nuts and always ha ving has a liberal supply of fruit as 
part of my ordinary diet. But I had in my mind, whe n writing, the special conditions 
of India. Its people should have, by reason of its extent and variety of climate, a 
most liberal supply of fruits, vegetables and milk.  Yet it is the poorest country in this 
respect. I therefore suggested what seemed to me to  be feasible. But I heartily 
endorse the proposition that for retaining health f resh fruit and fresh vegetables 
should form the main part of our diet. It is for th eir medical profession to study the 
peculiar condition of India and suggest the list of  vegetables and villages for local 
consumption. Wild berries , for instance, sale but can be used for the picking. This is 
a vast field for research. It can bring neither mon ey nor perhaps fame. But it may 
earn the gratitude of dumb millions. 
Harijan, 15-3-1942 
 
I had introduced to me the leaves of sarsav, suwa, turnip-tops, carrot-tops, radish-
tops and pea-nut leaves. Besides these, it is hardl y necessary to state that the The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26  radish, turnip and carrot tubers are also known to be edible in their raw state. It is 
waste of money and ‘good’ taste, to cook these leav es or tubers. The vitamins 
contained in these vegetables are wholly or partial ly lost in cooking. I have called 
cooking these waste of ‘good’ taste because the unc ooked vegetables have a natural 
good taste of their own which is destroyed by cooki ng. 
Harijan, 15-2-1935 
 
Condiments  
Common salt may be rightly counted as the king amon g condiments. Many people 
cannot eat their food without it. The body requires  certain salts and common salt is 
one of them. These salts occur naturally in the var ious foodstuffs but when food is 
cooked in an unscientific way, e.g. throwing away t he water in which rice, potatoes 
or other vegetables have been boiled, the supply be comes inadequate. The 
deficiency then has to be made up by a separate add ition of salts. As common salt is 
one of the most essential salts for the body. It mi ght be supplemented in small 
quantities. 
But several condiments are not required by the body  as a general rule, e.g. chilies 
fresh or dry, peper, turmeric, coriander, caraway, mustard, methi, asafotida etc. 
These are taken for the satisfaction of the palate.  My opinion based on my personal 
experience of fifty years, is that not one of these  is needed to keep perfectly 
healthy. Those whose digestion has become very feeb le might take these things as 
medicines for a certain length of time, if consider ed necessary. But one should make 
it a point to avoid their use for the satisfaction of the palate. All condiments, even 
salt, destroy the natural flavor of vegetables and cereals. etc. Those whose palate 
has not become vitiated enjoy the natural flavor of  the foodstuffs much more than 
after the addition of salt should be taken when nec essary as an adjunct. As for 
chilies, they burn the mouth and irritate the stoma ch. Those who are not in habit of 
taking chilies cannot bear them in the beginning. I  have seen several cases of sore 
mouth caused by the taking of chilies. I know of on e case who was very fond of 
chilies, and an excessive use resulted in his prema ture death. 
Key to Health, pp. 27-29, Edn. 1956 The Moral Basis of  Vegetarianism 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27   
08. MINIMUM DIET 
Use one grain at a time. Chapati, rice and pulses, milk, ghee, gur and oil are used in 
ordinary households besides vegetables and fruit. I  regard this as an unhealthy 
combination. Those who get animal protein in the sh ape of milk, cheese, eggs or 
meat need not use pulses at all. The poor people ge t only vegetable protein. I the 
well-to-do give up pulses and oils, they set free t hese two essentials for the poor 
who get neither animal protein nor animal fat. Then  the grain eaten should not be 
sloppy. Half the quantity suffices when it is eaten  dry and not be sloppy. Half the 
quantity suffices when it with raw salads such as o nion, carrot, radish, salad leaves, 
tomatoes. An ounce or two of salads serve the purpo se of eight ounces of cooked 
vegetables. Chapatis or bread should not be eaten w ith milk. To begin with, one 
meal may be raw vegetables and chapatti or bread, a nd the other cooked vegetables 
with milk or curds. 
Sweet dishes should be eliminated altogether. Inste ad gur in small quantities may be 
taken with milk or bread or by itself. 
Fresh fruit is god to eat, but only a little is nec essary to give tone to the system. It is 
an expensive article, and an over-indulgence by the  well-to-do has deprived the poor 
and the ailing of an article which they need much m ore than the well-to-do. 
Any medical man who has studied the science of diet etics will certify that what I 
have suggested can do no harm to the body, on the c ontrary it must conduce to 
better health.  
Harijan, 25-1-1942 
 
 