 
My Dear Pranav 
(An Introduction to the thoughts of Vinoba) 
 
 
Written by : L. N. Godbole 
 
Foreword by : Usha Chandrasekhar 
 
First Published : 1994 
 
Price: Rs. 40/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by: N. H. Atthreya, 
Hon. Director of Indian Centre  
for Encouraging Excellence, 
Court Chambers, III Floor, Bombay 400 020  
   
Printed at: St Paul Press Training School, Bombay  
 
 
My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the form of 52 letters - one a week, written ove r a 
year - the author introduces some of the insightful  
thoughts of Vinoba to Pranav, a young man of twelve . 
Vinoba was a willing soldier, a keen student, a 
versatile scholar, a scintillating synthesizer, a s ocial 
activist, a spiritual seeker and a great satyagrahi  - all 
rolled into one. Every Indian, young and old, shoul d 
have a feel of this great son of India. 
Reading him is best and reading about him is the 
second best. The author hopes the reader will get s ufficiently provoked to read 
Vinoba's writings… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 3   
Foreword 
Many tall women and men have walked this land. My s alutations to all of them. 
One of the tallest was Vinoba Bhave. 
Vinobaji literally walked this land. More, he walke d his talk - like very few did. 
What he says therefore carries conviction. 
Although his thoughts are available in a number of books, little has been 
written about him. Dr. L. N. Godbole, a dear friend  of our family, has ably 
filled this void. And in two ways. 
One is to convey to the young audience the meaning of a spiritual citizen as 
conveyed by Vinoba Bhave. The other is a glimpse of  the great leader himself. 
We all concede that spirituality is one of the legs  of the three legged stool as 
represented by our lives. Yet very few understand w hat it means and implies. 
One of the highlights of these letters is that this  aspect of life is brought out 
clearly and convincingly. 
Dr. Godbole addressed these letters - one a week fo r 52 weeks - to my son 
Pranav, a young man of 12. With little anecdotes an d stories that lace every 
letter, he conveys to him and every reader of his a ge or older, the approaches 
to the pursuit of excellence for a citizen, drawn f rom the teachings in the Gita, 
the Upanishads and the Vedas. The subject can norma lly be heavy for a 12 year 
old but it has been conveyed with such simplicity t hat it becomes interesting 
reading and rereading. 
I feel honoured and indebted to Dr. Godbole for hav ing taken time off to give 
the benefit of his great erudition and scholarship in 52 letters to my son. I 
would like to make this rich gift available to thou sands of young people like 
him. 
Vinobaji pursued excellence, human excellence. Many  would like to know how 
he thought and what he did, so they too may take th e journey in that direction 
and less flateringly. It is in the fitness of thing s, therefore, that this book is 
being published by the Indian Centre for Encouragin g Excellence. 
Usha Chndrasekhar  
Bombay, April 1994 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 4   
Preface  
This book is a bunch of 52 letters written by me to  Pranav Chndrasekhar, a 
young man of twelve. 
Vinoba Bhave is a name which may not ring a bell in  many young minds and 
especially if they happen to be educated in English  medium schools. 
Being a student of Vinoba's writings, I have put in  my efforts in presenting his 
thoughts. These letters, since I wrote to Pranav, h ave been persued by Shri 
Daniel Majgaonkar and Br. Pravin Desai, lifelong as sociates of Vinoba. They 
found that these letters could be published for the  general public. All opinions 
are of course my own. 
Since it is a bunch of letters, the reader could st art at any page and read them 
in any order. The basic purpose of writing of these  letters was that Pranav 
should read Vinoba's thoughts, read his books and a cquaint himself with 
Vinoba's writings. Perhaps a different sequence and  order of complexity some 
reader would prefer. I have not disturbed the seque nce of what I wrote in 1990-
91. 
A person educated in the western tradition must kee p in mind that Vinoba is a 
son of the soil in the sense that all his basic phi losophical foundations are 
typically Indian. As Geoffrey Ostergaard has observ ed, "further reflection, 
however, has convinced me that Sarvodaya ideas, inc luding its political ones, 
can be properly understood only if they are viewed within the framework of 
Indian religious thought and seen as a reinterpreta tion of a distinctively Indian 
conception of the self and the relation of the self  to society, nature and the 
cosmos." My first few letters have this observation  as a background. 
The letters have been seen by Dr. (Mrs.) Rama Sivar am, Professor Nissim Ezikel, 
Ms Marjori Sykes, Shri S R Mohandas, Shri R V Joshi  and several friends. I needed 
their help primarily because English is my second l anguage. Shri N Paranjpe and 
Shri VG Potdar, my colleagues, have been helping in  the typing, retyping and 
computerizing. I am obliged to all of them. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 5  I have profusely quoted from various books of Vinob a and acknowledged them 
with gratitude. I have used Vinoba's thoughts as a property which belongs to all. 
Sab bhoomi Gopal ki. 
Jai Jagat !  
L. N. Godbole  
Bombay, April, 1994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 6   
01. Birth Definition of 'Brahma' 
4th February, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
You will be surprised to get a letter from me whom you hardly know. But we 
have met in your home, when you were busy doing sum s. Your grandpa, who is 
my Guru, suggested that I should write to you a let ter every week. I have to 
obey his order. Therefore this letter. 
Again, he asked that I should write to you about Vi noba. Vinoba was a great 
THINKER, who was living amongst us till 1982. Very few people know him now, 
still fewer people read his books. But as you grow older you will know more and 
more about him, if you read his books. My weekly le tters will tell you what I 
know about him. I will be very happy if these lette rs make you read more about 
Vinoba. 
What I write will have numbers in brackets after th e sentence. These numbers 
will tell you which book of Vinoba includes that se ntence. This will be useful if 
you want to read more about Vinoba. Otherwise, you can forget them. If you 
find the letters themselves useless, please pass th em on to someone who may 
like to read them. Your grandpa, for example. 
Acharya Vinayak Narhar Bhave (VINOBA) was born on 1 1th September, 1895 at 
Gagode in the Raigad District of Maharashtra, about  125 Kms from Bombay, 
where you live. He died on 15th November, 1982 at P avnar, 80 Kms from 
Nagpur or about 900 Kms from Bombay. This is just t o tell you about History 
and Geography. All of us live at a place. So we rel ate to distances from that 
geographical point. You already know where you stay  and have a picture of that 
place in your mind. That much geography is already known to you. After all, 
what is Geo + Graphy, but a graph or picture of Geo , which is our world. The 
dates of birth and death tell you how many years ol der or younger he was than 
you. Time being a continuous river, these dates tel l you how many years before 
this day such a man lived. That is his story in tim e which we call History. Time 
and Place are two continuous straight lines. Where they cross each other, a My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 7  point gets fixed. That point is you. There was some  such point that was Vinoba. 
I want to introduce you to that point. 
Vinoba has written and spoken millions of words. A few thousands of them are 
recorded in printed form. Those words changed my li fe. By telling you about 
those words I am doing my duty. Each one of us owes a certain duty to 
parents. It is called Pitr-Rna. We also owe a duty to our teachers. It is called 
Guru-Rna. My letters are my repayment of my Guru-Rn a.  
Vinoba was a firm believer in God. He is called Bra hman. It is not some idol, 
though you can see it in an idol form or even in em pty space. Once he was 
asked, "Are you as quite sure of God's existence as  you are of the existence of 
this lamp in front of us?" He said, "I positively b elieve that God exists. As for the 
lamp in front of us, I cannot guarantee that it doe s in fact exists" (1). This is 
difficult to understand. You will learn later in yo ur life when you read Bertrand 
Russell on "Reality and Appearance", how Russell pr oved logically that a table is 
possibly not a table (2). 
Therefore, if you want to learn and understand Vino ba's thoughts, it is very 
necessary to understand that he was a firm believer  in Brahman. 
He explains this axiom in a simple way. We learn Ge ometry or Science (metry) 
of God (land or world). The first definition that i s taught in Euclid's Geometry is 
that of a point. It has existence but no magnitude.  It means that a point has no 
length, breadth or depth. If that is so, how can yo u "see" it? How can you 
"imagine" it? If you cannot imagine it, then how ca n you say that it "is"? But you 
start with an assumption of its existence. You star t with its existence as a 
reality. The point moving in a direction is a line;  a straight line is the shortest 
distance between two points. The intersecting lines , angles, triangle, rectangle 
and the whole of geometry, engineering and designin g are all based on this 
definition of a point. Vinoba says that for him Brahman  is such a self-evident 
truth. Because it "is". 
I think, I have written enough for one letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 8   
02. In Search of Meaning 
11th February, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Did you get my first letter? I continue with the sa me thoughts. Brahman (it) 
Exists (is). Vinoba was a firm believer in spiritua lity (adhyatma) or Science of 
understanding brahman. He believed that Religion an d Politics were outdated. 
The future lies with Science and Spirituality. 
All of us are children of Light. We are a part of b rahman. This self Atman and 
Brahman or Parmatman Advaita or non-duality. But wh o am "I"? What am "I" in 
all this? 
Vinoba left his home at the age of 16 when he was i n the second year of 
college. He was studying at Baroda, when he left fo r Varanasi in the north. His 
basic desire was to learn and understand what Brahm an is (Atha to 
brahmajignysa). He wanted an answer to who am I? 
He clearly knew that a man is not his clothes. A ma n is not his hands, legs or 
even the sum total of the parts of his body. A man is not just his body. This is 
called Dehabhava You must know that you are somethi ng different and better 
than your body. Then you see how you are related to  others. But such ideas or 
thoughts are like seeds. "I discover many a time th at thoughts keep on 
developing in deep sleep. Seed that is covered with  soil appears to have been 
lost, but it continues to develop underground. It s eems this is a similar 
process." (1) How are you related to the total? How  are you related to brahman? 
Vinoba's life was a constant search for the truth a bout this self (atman) and the 
Supreme being (brahman). All his actions and though ts were based on this basic 
mind-set. 
Pranav, you may find this rather tough. Most people  will not accept the 
brotherhood of human beings unless they accept the fatherhood of God 
(brahman) (2). But let me tell you that it will be increasingly clear as you grow 
and think. Take your name, for example; Pranav or Aum  is the original My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 9  expression of brahman. It is called the first Mantra . It is a symbolic expression 
common to all religions born in India. All our pray ers and religious ceremonies 
start with aum . 
It is the beginning of the Vedas. It has three diff erent syllables. A, U and M. 
The beginning and end of the Sanskrit ( Nagari ) vowels is A and M, (Ah). The 
Vedas consist of all alphabets ( Aaksharas ) and each alphabet is a Mantra. If you 
make words out of them it is your commentary on the m. It is not original. 
Akshara  (letter) is that which does not diminish. Aksharas  are original. Words 
and sentences are commentaries or interpretations g iven by others (3). So how 
do you propose to put meaning into these three syll ables? It is upto you. Your 
parents have given the mantra  to you. You have to search for its meanings. 
That reminds me of a beautiful story which Vinoba n arrated in his early 
writings. You do use a dictionary when you come acr oss a difficult word. Don't 
you? What does a dictionary give to you? Does it gi ve meaning? No. It gives 
another word which is possibly simpler or better kn own. It gives a synonym. 
Vinoba said that in Sanskrit the word for horse is ashva. What is the meaning 
of ashva ? No, not a horse. The meaning is grazing or runnin g a race. What 
you get in a dictionary is a similar word. You don' t get meaning in a 
dictionary. You have to search for it in life. You have to search for it in 
living. This is the beginning of education or learn ing.  
In Sanskrit, there is no direct word for teaching. The right word is 
"learning". The teacher makes learning possible. Th e meaning of a word is to 
be learned by you. It is to be searched for in real  life. We use a lot of words, 
but we do not always understand them. We do not exp erience them. And 
unless we experience them they do not become a part  of our understanding 
or knowledge.  Take the simple word fear. Unless you see somethin g fearful or 
a car passes very near you and your hairs stand on their ends you do not 
understand what fear is. Otherwise you will go on u sing more and more words, 
but not more full meaning. Understanding a meaning alone changes you. You 
will not change. You will not grow. You will only u se more words. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 10  Let me end this letter with a small story. Vinoba s ays Prajapati (creator of the 
world) gave a mantra, "da". Devas interpreted it as  "daman", to rule. Asuras 
interpreted it as "daya", compassion. Manushyas int erpreted it as "daan", giving 
(4). Each one is right according to his light. No o ne is wrong. This is the beauty 
of our great Hindu Tradition. There is no one corre ct answer. All answers have 
an equal right to exist. All of them have equal jus tification. There need not be 
any conflict about the "right" meaning. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 11   
03. Learning : The change in ourselves 
18th February,1990 
My dear Pranav, 
I wrote two letters to you which were perhaps diffi cult in their arguments, but I 
could not help it. Now, I believe, this one will be  pretty simple. Once you climb 
the hill top, the entire scene is beautiful and sim ple. 
Vinoba has given us so many ideas about education. The first and the most 
important is an idea from the Upanishads. It is "Au m Purnat Purna 
Mudicyate." When you learn, you grow from fullness to fullness.  It sounds 
silly. But that is the beauty of Hindu thought. If I tell you that you grow from 
the incomplete to the complete, you find it easy to  understand, but you also 
grow from the complete to the complete (1). 
Let us look at it this way. You are a young child. But are you not complete? Last 
year also you were complete. Your mother is also co mplete. Your grandfather is 
also complete. Next year you will be a taller or a bigger boy. Still, you are 
complete today and you will remain complete next ye ar. But you will be more 
complete. Your growth will be from smaller complete  to the larger complete, 
but you will be complete at both times. You will no t grow from the incomplete 
to the complete, but from the complete to the compl ete. 
Take another instance. Draw a small circle on a pap er with your compass. Put it 
under a looking glass. It looks bigger, but it is t he same circle. You see a bigger 
and clearer circle. But the circle remains the same . You only see it better. 
Education or learning does the same trick. The world, things and people are 
the same around us. But we see them better, we look  at them better. We 
know them better. The reality is the same but we be come better. Learning 
changes us. It does not change things. That is what  school should do to you.  
In fact, the English word educate comes from its ro ot "educare", which means 
"to draw out". The school or a teacher draws out fr om you. The things are 
already in you. Education or learning draws more an d more out of you. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 12  That is what a good teacher does. In the Vedas, the  teacher is called "gatu vit". 
He is the path finder, he shows you the way, he bre aks the path and shows you 
the way, he cannot walk for you. You have to do the  walking. Your mother can 
cook for you, she cannot eat for you. You yourself have to eat. If you want to 
be strong and healthy you have to eat good food, yo u have to eat regularly and 
you have to take exercise. By seeing TV or pictures  or reading you cannot 
develop a good body. You have to do something for i t. 
The teacher is like a signpost or finger post which  tells you where that road will 
take you. But it cannot do the walking for you. You  have to do that yourself. 
According to Vinoba, learning is a part of living. Learning is not different from 
living. When you eat, you are learning. When your m other cooks food she is 
using chemistry. How is water boiled? What happens when you boil water? How 
is the steam created? What happens if you touch a h ot pot? How is dahi (curd) 
prepared? All this is called chemistry. Start looki ng at it that way, then it is not 
learning, it is no more trouble. It becomes fun. Vi noba's idea was that learning 
means living. 
How about finding the meaning of the word sweet by eating some jilebi? That's 
it. Please keep some sweets for me to understand th e meaning of the word 
"sweet". 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 13   
04. Education: Ever eternal, ever changing 
25th February, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba was basically a teacher. In Sanskrit, the wo rd for teacher is Acharya . He 
was therefore called Acharya Vinoba Bhave. Do you k now what acharya  means? 
A similar word for it is one-who-acts. If he teache s goodness, he acts like a 
good person. You must act as you preach. The Hindu concept of learning is to 
sit with someone (up/ni/sad)  who has acted on his knowledge. Vinoba was truly 
an acharya . Whatever he preached he practised. 
There are two stories about this way (1). Vinoba wa s considered a great 
follower of Mahatma Gandhi, who used to stay in Man i Bhavan on Laburnum 
Road in Bombay. Vinoba's disciples too had their of fice at Mani Bhavan. They 
had all their books and furniture in that house. On ce, the trustees of Mani 
Bhavan asked Vinoba's disciples to vacate the offic e. They went to Vinoba, 
requesting him to talk to the trustees so that they  may not have to vacate the 
office. They said, "We have used Mani Bhavan as our  office and now they have 
given us notice to vacate. If you talk to them they  will allow us to stay." Vinoba 
told his disciples, "Go now and give notice to the trustees that you are vacating 
their office one day earlier than their date." The disciples said, "But, Baba, we 
have a lot of furniture. Where can we put it?" He s aid, "Give it to Mani Bhavan 
as a gift. You have taken help from Mani Bhavan all  these years. Now you can 
give help to it." One fellow said," But, Baba, we h ave so many books. What do 
we do with them?" Go to all the neighbouring houses  and distribute them. It will 
be Vichar Prasar ." (dissemination of thoughts). 
Vichar Prasar  is the main theme or action of Vinoba's life. I wi ll speak about it 
quite often in the future. But the disciples persis ted. They said," Then where 
will we have our meetings?" Baba said, “In the grea t city of Bombay, don't you 
have a garden where you can meet?" He then preached  that we should not have 
any attachment to property. This was his "action." My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 14  His other continuing theme was that one must grow c ontinuously. One must 
change. Gandhiji wanted the education system to be changed and called it Nayi 
Talim  (New Education). Vinoba practised that idea in reality. He used to c all 
it Nitya Nayi Talim  (Continuous New Education). This continuous change , 
grappling with new ideas, experimenting with new wa ys, continuous change 
through spreading of thoughts ( Vichar Prasar ) was Vinoba's way of life. He 
evolved persistently every day. He used to compare life with the Ganga. The 
Ganga is permanent but the molecules of water you s ee every moment are 
new. The Ganga is thus eternal as well as changing.  
Here is another story about Vinoba (2). He once ask ed Meera and Arun, (two 
ashramites ): "Have you seen Mahatma Gandhi's room at Sevagram  (at Wardha)?" 
They obviously had seen it. Wardha is just 8 kilome ters from Pavnar. "Have you 
seen the things Bapu used to use?" They are preserv ed. "Yes, Baba." "Did you 
see a tree next to the room?" "Yes." Then Meera and  Arun realized what Vinoba 
was driving at. The chappal  (slippers), the charkha  (spinning wheel) and the 
other things which Gandhiji used to have remained u nchanged. They are today 
as they were when Gandhiji was alive. But the tree has grown. It has become a 
big tree. Because it continued growing every day. 
Pranav, that is what you should do. Grow every day.  
Vinoba wanted Gandhiji's thoughts to grow and not b ecome static. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 15   
05. Talks of Vinoba 
4th March, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
I was happy to learn from your grandpa that you rea d my letters with interest. 
You wanted to talk to me rather than phone or write  to me. I like that. Seeing 
is believing. A lot more can be said face to face. You will be surprised to know 
that Vinoba has written very few books but he has g iven hundreds of talks and 
that all his books are really compilations of his t alks. The style, therefore is 
more direct, which can be understood by villagers w ith whom he had his talks 
face to face in all parts of India. 
Another important point about Vinoba is that he alw ays thought and expressed 
himself in Marathi or Hindi. You will find quotatio ns from Jnaneshwar, 
Tukaram, Eknath and Ramdas in his speeches. They we re all saint poets from 
Maharashtra. He also quotes from Kabir, Mirabai, Tu lsidas, Thiruvalluvar, Andal, 
Mahadevi Akka, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Narsi Mehta an d other Bhakti poets 
from all over India. Besides Marathi, he was well-v ersed in Sanskrit, Hindi, 
Gujarati, Tamil, Bengali, Oriya, Kannada, Malayalam , English, French, Arabic, 
German and dozens of Indian languages. He did his b est to read all religious 
texts in their original languages. He published boo ks on the essence of the 
Bible, the Quran, Dhammapada, Gurubodh , Tao,  and Manusmriti . His abiding 
love and mastery however was the Gita , the Upanisads  and the Vedas.  
According to Vinoba, the people who influenced him most were Sankaracharya, 
Jnaneshwar, Mahatma Gandhi and his own mother. He t ranslated the Gita into 
Marathi. It is called Gitai or Mother in Gita. He w rote it for his mother, as she 
did not understand Sanskrit. Gitai is the most simp le and beautiful rendering of 
the Gita in the same meter in Marathi. It is consid ered a masterpiece in content 
as well as style. Vinoba's talks on the Gita are ra ted very high in the tradition of 
Sankarbhashya (Sankaracharya), Jnaneshwar (Jnaneshw ar) and Gitarahasya 
(Lokmanya Tilak ). The Gita was his life breath. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 16  Vinoba has gifted us with one beautiful thought by way of a simile. What is  
swas  (breathing) in individual life is viswas (trust) in social life. Without trust in 
each other we cannot live together or even sleep. W e will be worried about 
safety. Do you not see prime ministers and others s urrounded by body-guards? 
But you have totrust the body-guards. They can also  kill, as they did in the case 
of Indira Gandhi. Social life is impossible without  trust, Real beauty, of course, 
lies in the short pithy sentence where swas and vis was rhyme beautifully. It is 
not possible to translate it into English. 
Vinoba's speeches and writings are full of such pit hy sentences. The more you 
think about them, the more meaningful you find them . That is the Upanisidic  
style. The risis stated the sutra or the precise wo rd or mantra. You have to 
think over it again and again. You find newer meani ng everytime. That is the 
way you keep yourself changing continuously. Sutra  or the thread of truth is 
permanent; each generation, each individual has to find newer and newer 
meanings. This was the open-ended Hindu style of th ought. You will find it 
exciting, Pranav, once you start reading more and m ore about it. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 17   
06. Add emotions into your thoughts 
11th March, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba had his own way with words. Whatever work we  do we must put our 
emotions into it. Otherwise, it becomes drudgery. H e explains it this way. A 
currency note is a piece of paper, when you invest it, stamp it with the 
emblem, it becomes valuable. We must invest or stam p our emotions in our 
work to make it valuable (1). 
What is an idol? It is a piece of stone or wood or metal. By putting my emotions 
into its sculpting, I make it an idol of God. I hav e made a piece of stone into 
God. Stone can be broken, but how can you break my emotion? That is the 
beauty of Idol worship. The moment I remove my emot ions from the idol, it 
becomes again a piece of stone, metal or wood. 
Whatever we do, we must do with feeling. If you giv e wages, you take the 
work and pay the money. It is an exchange. But if y ou give  dakshina  
(offering), it has to be given with water as requir ed by custom. Your action or 
work must also be made moist or tender with your em otions. Then alone it 
becomes an offering. It becomes more than just givi ng. 
An approach, attitude or emotion towards your work makes all the difference, 
Vinoba explains it still further. Two people go to the bank of the river Ganga. 
The water of Ganga is H2O for one person. He takes a bath and cleans his body; 
he obtains from that bath only physical cleanliness . The other person while 
taking a bath in the same river imagines that this Ganga was born at the feet of 
Vishnu , passed through the hair of Siva hundreds of risis  and munis have taken 
bath in it for hundreds of years. Many great events  have taken place on its 
banks. I am bathing in such water of Ganga (which i s only H2O for the other 
person). The other person not only gets cleaned phy sically but he reaches a 
higher level of thinking. He takes a bath along wit h this emotional cleansing. 
His mind also gets clean with his body. The same ac tion gives different benefits My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 18  to different people. This way, even a dirty bull ta kes a bath in the Ganga and 
gets an H2O benefit of physical cleaning, but he ca nnot get this higher 
satisfaction. 
Vinoba thereafter says that when someone wears khad i, he not only satisfies his 
physical need of covering his body, but also keeps the home fires burning in 
many a poor weavers' houses. He helps them eat at l east once a day. He wears 
enough khadi cloth with this emotional involvement.  A woman who offers water 
to tulsi before eating is joining herself to the to tal living creation in the world. 
By her action she becomes aware of the ecosystem ar ound her. 
Vinoba explains a lot of rituals in this way and in vests them with a deeper 
meaning. You can find more in such things when you think about them. This is 
the beauty of the sutras in Hindu thought. 
As a Hindu, you are not bound by a book or a word. You can interpret words in 
your own way. That is why ideas have always remaine d totally free in India. 
Different philosophies and ideas have flourished to gether. All of them are right, 
from one view point or another. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 19   
07. Education and Spirituality : Development with d irection 
18th March, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Many people have wrong impressions about Gandhian t hought. Vinoba 
expressed all his ideas in the local idiom. The com mon man in India understood 
it very easily. But the English-educated have probl em in understanding it. 
Vinoba was a true son of the soil. His roots were d eep in the Vedas, the 
Ramayan and the Mahabharata. He had studied the bha kti poets from all over 
India. To a common Indian villager he could relate easily, having no barriers. 
We who learn in English have to make special effort s to understand him 
because our connection with this land is rather lim ited. 
People felt that Vinoba was against modern science.  In fact, he declared from 
time to time that the modern age would be the age o f Science and Spirituality, 
since Religion and Politics had become outdated. He  also said that Science and 
Technology are like an engine; taking you anywhere with speed. But they 
cannot decide the direction. The steering wheel has  to be of Spirituality  
(Adhyatma ). Without it, scientific power would become a powe r for mutual 
destruction. Many other thinkers of the West such a s Arthur Koestler, have 
expressed the same fear. Koestler even provides wor ld history with a new 
calendar. 6th August, 1945 is the crucial date when  the Atom Bomb was 
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan at the e nd of the Second World 
War. Since then, man has become capable of destroyi ng the human race out of 
existence (1). Koestler takes that date as the star ting point of a new calendar. 
Vinoba used to say that in Spirituality we must rea d the oldest scripture such as 
the Rgveda . And in Science we must read the latest book. He u sed to keep 
himself well informed till 1972. After that, he gav e up reading books. He had 
poor eye-sight and still poorer hearing. He was hit  on the ear by those at a 
temple in Baidyanath in Bihar. They wanted him to v isit the temple but not My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 20  with his Harijan disciples. He refused and was very  badly hit on the ear by 
these temple priests. 
Some people asked him on 24th March, 1956 at Vishak hapattanam in Andhra 
Pradesh whether he wanted to spread electrification  in the villages. They 
thought that as a Gandhian he would have objection to electric power. He 
replied very simply: "I want even atomic energy for  villages. But I am more 
keen on knowing to whom this power will be supplied . Would it go to the 
poorest man? Atomic power would first go to cities,  then to villages and then to 
richer villagers, who can pay for it. The poor peop le would not get it as they 
need it for lighting. The government would give pre ference for productive use 
first." 
Vinoba wanted Atomic energy to reach like solar pow er (sunlight). It reaches 
first to those who have no roof or no doors to thei r huts. It warms those first 
who have no clothes to wear. Vinoba said he wanted atomic power to reach like 
solar power, which reaches first to those who need it most. We want power 
generated by the progress of Science. But it must r each the needy man first 
even though he is the poorest. Increasing the avera ge supply of energy is not 
enough; the poorest must get it. (2). 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 21   
08. People's Power 
25th March, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba always expressed himself with mathematical p recision. He believed in 
People's power and not in Government power. He crea ted a beautiful simile 
about this, when he said that Government is like a zero. It has no value by 
itself. Put it ahead of the people and it acquires power. Put it after 1,2,3 it 
gets a power. The real value is that of 1,2,3 or of  people. If a government is 
supported by people, it is powerful; remove the peo ples' support and it 
disappears (1). Vinoba said this on 17th November, 1956 at Palani in Tamilnadu. 
We saw the reality of it on TV in November, 1989. W e saw it in East Germany, 
Romania, Czechoslovakia. We saw it in action 33 yea rs after he had made his 
statement about the relation between Government and  the People. 
Vinoba said that in a democracy the people are powe r. The Government has no 
power independent of its people. How did it come ab out? Vinoba said that it 
was the result of the thoughts planted in the minds  of the people for 
generations. Those thoughts were expressed in actio n. Vinoba's basic message 
was the need to spread good thoughts. He called it Vichar Prasar  
(dissemination of thoughts). 
Vinoba provided many examples to support his convic tion about the relation 
between the Government and the people. Who changed the society in their 
own times? Were they kings? Were they the Governmen t? No! they were 
thinkers. They were promoters of thoughts. Jean Jaq ues Rousseau and Voltaire 
laid the idea-base for the French Revolution of 178 9. Karl Marx offered the 
thoughts for the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the  Chinese Revolution of 1948. 
Gandhiji's ideas of non-violent non-cooperation mov ed the masses, and 
Independent India in 1947. 
People remember the Buddha and Mahavira but nobody remembers the kings 
who ruled at that time. So too we remember Kabir an d Tulsidas in North India; My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 22  Chaitanya Mahaprabhoo, Ramkrishna Paramhansa and Ra vindranath Thakur in 
Bengal; Sankaracharya, Ramanuja, Manikawachkar and Nammalvar in 
Tamilnadu. The Chola, Pandya or Pallava kingdoms ar e in history books, but 
these great men remain alive in the lives of the co mmon people through their 
ideas. 
It is the people's power which Shri Krishna used to  protect the villagers of 
Mathura. When there was a deluge of rain, Lord Ktis hna taught self-help to the 
people of Mathura and saved them from it. He joined  everyone in that task. He 
asked them to give him a hand in the task. Each one  was asked to help. The old 
and the young, men and women everyone joined him an d they achieved a 
miracle. Miracles can happen with the People's powe r. Lord Krishna planted the 
idea of self-help and self-reliance which moved the  people to action. Legend 
made it into a physical miracle. The story in the M ahabharata is that Krishna 
lifted the Govardhana mountain to save the people o f Mathura. 
Such is the power of thought. Ideas must be broadca st, they must be spread to 
the people. They must be deep casted in their minds . They sprout often in the 
most unlikely places. Such is their power. They tak e wings. Incidentally, Vinoba 
left his home for Varanasi on 25th March, 1916 and started the Brahmavidhya 
Mandir, an ashram for women who sought spiritual kn owledge as a group , at 
Pavnar on 25 th  March, 1957. Today is 33 rd  anniversary of that institution. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 23   
09. Change in 'I' is the change in 'We' 
1st April, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In one of his articles Vinoba has described a very interesting story from the 
Vedas. There were ten travelers passing through a d ense forest. They were 
naturally worried about their safety. They decided that since they were all 
walking through the forest they should keep track o f their number: Ten. Each 
one started counting and found that there were nine  people. All tried their 
hand and came to the same conclusion "Nine". They g ot terribly worried. Where 
did they lode one of them? 
After a great deal of argument they realized that t he missing number was "I". 
Each one of them had counted the others and had for gotten to count himself! 
That was why all the ten of them had by one voice d ecided that they were only 
nine, and that one of them was missing (1). 
Don't we behave in the same way? We always say, we must have clean homes, 
clean rooms, clean schools, clean streets and a cle an city. We should do this 
and we should do that. But things remain as they ar e. Why? 
The reason according to Vinoba is simple: " We" is the plural of "I". If "I" count 
myself out, "We" are out. We will do what I start. Many "I"s will have to come 
together to become "We". But who should start? "I".  Vinoba pointed out that 
in the Vedas  there is a sentence Sva tantrah Kasta. " Sva " the self alone is 
"tantra" capable of being Karta (doer). I alone am free, that is, self-capable. 
Everything should start with me. And I should start  things. All good things are 
started by someone "I". What "I" start, "We" comple te. 
Vinoba then proceeds to say that lots of people say  there are no people 
available for social work, because they count thems elves out, and then expect 
things to happen! See the world in yourself. " Sva-roop " is the " Visva-roop ". My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 24  Changing oneself, starting with oneself is in our h ands. Without bothering 
whether others will follow you or not start a good thing which you think is 
right. Leave the rest to God. He will take care of it. You are like a centre point 
of a circle. The people, the world is like the circ umference of a circle. You 
have to keep control over the centre point, which a lone is in your hands. The 
world will then remain within sight and control. 
What I will not do, we will not do. If I want a cha nge in "we", it must start with 
me. Because "we" is the plural of "I". 
I shall be telling you many such stories which will  bring home Vinoba's points. 
Hope you like them. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 25   
10. The greatest Democracy : Unity in Diversity 
8th April, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
We are living in the greatest democracy of the worl d. Many people call it the 
largest democracy in the world. They say this with a dig. They think we are the 
largest only in numbers. This obviously is a fact, which no one can deny. The 
total number of voters in India is equal to the tot al number of voters of West 
European and North American countries together. 500  million voters was our 
count in November, 1989. 
Still I call our democracy the greatest. Why? Our c ountry is full of different 
languages, religions, methods of worship, dresses a nd people. We are full of 
plurality. We are full of diversity. But somewhere deep down we are all one. 
There is this unity, Vinoba says, because Vedanta i s the basis of our philosophy. 
When the Constitution of India was being discussed in 1947, our founding 
fathers decided on adult franchise, meaning one-man  one-vote. It looks very 
common today. But there are many countries in the w orld where people have 
no voting rights at all. Even in England till 90 ye ars ago there was no voting 
right for women. Many European countries gave the v oting right to women 
much later. But the farmers of the Indian Constitut ion started with this idea. 
Many people still believe that only the educated sh ould have the right to vote. 
This idea of adult franchise is based on the concep t of equality amongst people. 
Equality is an ethical concept. It is not a fact. D ifferent people have different 
capacities even different heights, weights, physica l and mental strengths, 
educational qualifications, ownership of things, wa ys, form of worships, 
languages and so on. Such differences are innumerab le. They are all facts. Then 
why should they have equal voting power? This question cannot be logically 
answered. Inequality is a fact but equality is an e thical concept.  
This idea came to our leaders through their Western  education. How could 
Pandit Nehru and his servant have the same right to  decide about his My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 26  government? How could they have equal voting rights ? When this question was 
raised before Vinoba, he gave a beautiful answer. He spoke of Pandit Nehru as 
a great  adhyatmic , who knew that his soul (atman) and that of his se rvant's 
were equal and hence he insisted on equal voting ri ghts. This is easily 
understood by the common villager in India, better than the sophisticated 
history and development of ideas on adult franchise  in Europe. 
Vinoba's genius lay in connecting modern thoughts a nd ideas to age-old 
traditions of Vedanta  and Adhyatma  in our country. That is why, Pranav, people 
find tele-serials of the Ramayan  and the Mahabharat  gripping and relevant 
today. Everyone knows the epics already, but they d o not want to miss a single 
episode! There is no suspense, but there is a great  desire to follow our epics 
year after year. If you want to understand India, y ou must seek your roots in all 
these sources. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 27   
11. The person of Ideas 
15th April, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba did not claim to be a philosopher. In fact, he said, "I am a retail dealer" 
(1). He took ideas from all the great sages, and ot her religious thinkers and 
presented in simple language to us. 
His basic contribution lies in Samanvaya (reconcili ation). He has summarized 
many religious texts, selected ideas from each of t hem and presented them to 
our people, indicating their similarity (param samy a). 
He believed in ekam sat (Truth is One). he "sees" t hat all these numerous paths 
lead to one goal. That one is GOD, Brahman. Truth o r ultimate reality. In fact, 
he composed a sarvadharma prarthana, wherein he has  compiled the various 
names which various religions have given to their h ighest goals. 
It is called "Nam Mala". It is a common prayer in a ll the ashrams of Vinoba. It is 
also a recommended song in many schools of Maharash tra. 
Sankaracharya was Vinoba's first motivator. He lear nt his logical tools and 
intellectual arguments from Sankaracharya (Truth). His compassion (Prem and 
Karuna) he has taken from Jnaneshwar and Tulsidas. 
He was greatly inspired by the transparent sincerit y of Mahatma Gandhi. 
Gandhi and Vinoba were almost like father and son. Mahatma Gandhi rated him 
high, and whenever he had any philosophical or prac tical problems, he would 
refer them to Vinoba. From 1916 to 1948, except as the first individual 
satyagrahi in 1940, Vinoba remained studying and te aching in his ashram. He 
developed the Gandhian ideas of ahimsa, satya, khad i and trusteeship with his 
impeccable logic. He provided the intellectual base  to all Gandhian ideas. From 
1948 to 1970, he practised them through Bhoodan, Gr amadan, Sampattidan and 
Trusteeship. The last twelve years he devoted to ad hyatma and goraksha 
(protection of the cow). My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 28  Vinoba was a walking university. All these ideas ev olved in his mind in the 
course of his work. They grew with him. This is the  most important period of his 
life. He gave three talks a day and traveled for 14  years on foot to all parts of 
India. In this, he followed his first guru, Sankara charya. His perception of 
village India was thus based on actual contact and observation. He saw a unity 
in the diversity of India with his own eyes, and ex perienced it. No other Indian 
has matched that feat so far. 
Still, he never claimed the total view of a philoso pher. T he beauty of Indian 
philosophy is that it is called 'perception' or 'darsana '. It is never claimed as 
the whole Truth. Each one of us has to perceive thi s truth for himself or 
herself. No one gives you, a blue-print of it. It i s always evolving and you have 
to explore for yourself. "Who am I?" is the questio n. 
No Indian philosopher therefore claims any new phil osophy or thought 
construct. He interprets the old texts and puts for ward his viewpoint or 
darsana. Vinoba follows the same path. His emphasis  is, therefore, on ideas. He 
rejects blueprints or institutions. He treats them as traps or obstacles. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 29   
12. 'And also' - Duties and Philosophy 
22nd April, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba's capacity to put his thoughts in a few word s was something remarkable. 
All his arguments are so gentle and persuasive that  it is difficult to forget them. 
His interpretation of Indian thought is summarised by him in two words. He 
calls them "and also". In the original Hindi, it is  actually one word, "bhi ". 
Vinoba explains it in his "Talks on the Gita" (1) w ith a story of Pundalika. 
Pundalika was a great devotee of Pandurang at Pandh arpur in Maharashtra. 
Amongst The Vaishnavite temples in India, Pandharpu r occupies a position 
similar to Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh. Pundalik loo ked after his parents and 
served them with equally great devotion. Being plea sed with such service, Lord 
Pandurang came running to greet and bless him. But Pundalik would not be 
beguiled by Pandurang and refused to give up his du ty of service to his parents. 
Serving his old father and mother was for him, wors hip of GOD, true bhakti. He 
said to God, "Lord, you have come yourself to bless  me with this vision. This I 
understand. But I believe in the doctrine of AND AL SO. I cannot accept that you 
alone are God. To me you are God, and my parents to o are God. Since I am 
engaged in their services, I am unable to give you my attention immediately. 
Please forgive me." 
So he pushed towards Lord Pandurang a brick for him  to stand on and became 
absorbed again in his service to his parents. Legen d has it that Lord Pandurang 
is standing on that brick since then for ages for h is devotee to be free. 
Tukaram, a great saint poet of Maharashtra has take n up this example in one of 
his abhangs: 
"What mad love is this, that kept 
Vitthal waiting; 
What bravery to push a brick 
for Him to stand on." My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 30  Vinoba says that the inclusive principle of AND ALS O enlarges your mind. It 
allows you to continue your duty ( svadharma ) but does not exclude other 
responsibilities. A man never falls into the tangle  of conflicting philosophies, 
nor does he abandon his own principle ( svadharma ). He does not raise 
controversies like those Gita talks of " naanyadastiti vaadinah ." "Those who say 
that nothing else is" and "only this exists-there i s no other". On the other hand, 
Pundalika had a humble but firm attitude. "This is true. And that too is true. 
But for me, this is true." 
In Hindi , " bhi " means AND ALSO". Once you accept that there are o ther ways of 
looking at things, you become a pluralist. You beco me inclusive. You have 
space for others also. 
Vinoba, therefore, once suggested that in making In dia one nation we need not 
insist on one language. We can have Devnagari as th e common script for all 
Indian languages. And this common script should be used along with the 
existing scripts. Its utility and use will make it easier for people to accept the 
common script. It would also be one more bond bring ing all Indians together. 
Such is the interpretation of the words AND ALSO. I t is basic for any pluralist 
system like democracy. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 31   
13. The modern side of 'Bhakti' 
29th April, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba connected the old spiritual traditions like bhakti to modern times. This 
approach of finding out similarities and common bon ds was one of his lifelong 
missions. He found in the Gita this idea fulfilled.  He called it "abhidheyam 
param samyam." to see the ultimate equality in ever ything as the message of 
Brahman. 
When Dharmaraja reached at last the gates of heaven , there was only a dog 
with him. Bhima, Arjuna and the others had fallen b y the way side. He was told 
at the gate: "You can come in, but the dog is not a llowed to enter." Dharmaraja 
replied, "If my dog cannot enter, neither will I." One who performs devoted 
service, even if only a dog, is superior to those w ho are always thinking of 
themselves. The dog proved its superiority over Bhi m and Arjuna, who could 
not make it to the gates of heaven. No matter what sort of a person one is, if 
one goes into the presence of God, one becomes wort hy of honour. No matter 
what sort of wood is thrown into the fire, it will glow. Bhakti is the wonderful 
means for attaining Him. 
Those who plead, at a khadi exhibition, to the peop le to come in, say, "Do 
come in and have a look. Look at the fine texture, the bright colours, the 
beautiful patterns." Khadi provides work for millio ns who will otherwise have to 
go to sleep on empty stomachs. This message of God reaches the people once 
they enter Khadi exhibitions. This  Bhakti  for the common good illuminates the 
minds of people. They get connected to the communit y around them. 
Vinoba commends such an attitude in a bhakta (1). H e has said, he was once 
traveling in a train, passing over a bridge across the Jamuna. A passenger 
sitting next to him flung with great enthusiasm a c oin into the river. There was 
a rationalist in the compartment who observed, "The  country is poverty-
stricken and on the top of that there are people wh o throw coins out of My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 32  carriage windows." "You have not understood why he does it." I said, "The 
bhavana, the mental attitude with which he threw th e coin is worth at least 
two or three such coins, is it not? If the money wa s given for some good cause, 
it would, no doubt, have been better. But then he w as moved to do this 
because of the feeling that this is not a mere rive r, but the Lord's compassion 
flowing before us. Is there any room for this feeli ng in your economics?" 
When his eyes saw one of his country's rivers, his heart melted. If you can 
assess in terms of money the value of this feeling,  then I shall know how to 
estimate your patriotism. 
Does love of country mean mere bread? If on seeing one of the great rivers of 
our country, the idea awakens in one's mind that on e should immerse all of 
one's possessions in it, and dedicate them to it, h ow great is that love? In your 
creation, has the Lord a place? The river is a comb ination of hydrogen and 
Oxygen. The sun is a kind of big glass-lamp. One sh ould therefore bow low 
before a loaf of bread? It is a kind of white earth . Why does your mouth water 
at the sight of it? 
Here is the big bright sun just risen, here is the beautiful river flowing past - if 
you do not see God in them, where can you see Him? Wordsworth laments: 
The Rainbow comes and goes, 
And lovely is the Rose, 
The sunshine is a glorious birth, 
But yet know, wherever I go, 
That there hath, past away a glory from the earth."  
It is the attitude of mind towards things that make s all the difference. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 33   
14. Bhakti, Gyan and Seva 
6th May, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba's pravachans used to be with all kinds of pe ople. Once he was asked a 
question. Bhakti of God assumes that God and Bhakta  are a duality. They are 
two (Dwaita). How can he then equate Jnana (knowled ge of the ultimate 
reality) and Bhakti (devotion to the ultimate reali ty as one) in Adwaita? 
Jnanadeva says: "Only know Vitthal. This is bhakti,  this is jnana." Bhakti and 
jnana are two names for the same thing. Knowing the  Lord and loving Him are 
not two different things. 
An act performed through love is very different fro m an ordinary act. As the son 
comes home tired from the field, the mother looks a t him with natural love, 
and says, "You are tired, my child." Look, how much  power there is in this small 
action. Weave all the actions of your life with the  warp and woof of bhakti and 
jnana. This is what is called Purushottama-Yoga. 
Vinoba said, "The Vedas are not hidden in the Samhi tas (collection of Mantras) 
or in your books and treatises. They pervade the wh ole universe. Shakespeare 
speaks of: 
Tongues in trees, books in running brooks, sermons in stones.... 
The idea is that the Vedas are neither in Sanskrit nor in the samhitas, but in all 
creation. When we say, prabhate karadarsanam, all t he Vedas are in that palm, 
and they say, "serve." Consider whether your hands worked yesterday, 
whether they are fit to work again today and whethe r they carry the marks 
of service. When the hands are worn out with servic e, then the destiny that 
Brahma ordained for you becomes clear.  This is the meaning of looking at 
one's palm in the morning. Where are the Vedas? The y are in your hands. I am 
the Vedas  living and awake. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 34  The truth is that the essence of the Vedas is in ou r hands. We have to build our 
lives on the foundation of service, love and knowle dge. This is what is meant by 
saying that the Vedas are in our hands. (1) 
This is how Vinoba combines love, knowledge and act ion as a trinity. He draws 
this meaning out of Gita. Gita itself is considered  the essence of all Vedanta ( or 
Upanisads ).  
Vinoba's commentary on the Gita is considered one o f his more memorable 
works. He gave these lectures on the Gita every Sun day in Dhule Jail, where he 
was imprisoned by the British during 1932. They wer e recorded by Sane Guruji, 
another major Marathi author, who was imprisoned in  the same jail. They were 
delivered to the inmates of the jail, who included dacoits, murderers, thieves 
and other jail birds, along with political prisoner s such as Vinoba and Sane 
Guruji. He gave these lectures even to the women pr isoners, where Vinoba, a 
bramachari, was given a special permission by the j ailor. The jail rules were 
ignored and Vinoba delivered his Pravachans to all the prisoners in Dhule 
Jail.(2) 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 35   
15. The Experimenter 
13th May, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
An interesting facet of Vinoba's life is his contin uous growth. He was always 
evolving, changing and becoming a better person. 
He was an intelligent student. He was a voracious r eader. He was a leader in 
his student group. He developed his life with very simple living. The most 
important thing about him was that he remained a co ntinuous 
experimenter.  
As a young boy he was influenced by the books of Ve er Savarkar. The 1857 war 
of Independence  (which was called the Sepoys Mutiny by historians)  and the life 
of Mazzini (an Italian leader) were some of the boo ks that he circulated 
amongst his friends. They were all proscribed books  
In 1916, instead of going to Bombay for his Interme diate University 
Examination, he left for Varanasi. He was influence d hailed by the Bengali 
revolutionaries. His ascetic mind which called him to the Himalayas. He went to 
Varanasi, where he read Mahatma Gandhi's speech. He  saw the unity of his 
ascetic search and the revolutionary new approach o f Gandhi in the political 
field in 1916. That year marks the end of the first  chapter in his life. 
For the next thirty years he kept developing as a V edic scholar, experimenter in 
khadi, propagator of non-violent Satyagraha, workin g as a scavenger to end the 
idea of untouchability attached to scavenging and a  teacher who crystallized 
the Gandhian idea of a New Education. He was a rath er harsh, disciplined, 
intensely intelligent, scholarly individual who was  already recognized as an 
interpreter of the Gita. He became an ideal satyagr ahi in the mind of Gandhi. 
He was therefore chosen as the First Individuals sa tyagrahi by Gandhi in 1940. 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 36  Most of Vinoba's early ideas were already establish ed after thinking and working 
them over for thirty years. Thenceforth we come to the third and most creative 
stage of his life. 
Mahatma Gandhi died on 30th January, 1948. The poli tical aim of independence 
from Britain was achieved on 15th August, 1947. The  political process of the 
constitution making and governing was taken over by  leaders such as Jawaharlal 
Nehru, Sardar Patel, Rajaji and Dr. Rajendra Prasad . All of them had their 
political training with Gandhi. The Sovereign Democ ratic, Republic of India was 
established by the Constitution of 26th January, 19 50. 
But that was only the political part of Gandhi's Mi ssion. Vinoba was not cut out 
for it. He was attached to the rest of Mahatma's id eas. The political part was a 
transient one. The eternal part of Gandhi was his b elief in Truth, Non-violence 
and Sarvodaya . The rational and logical base of these Gandhian b eliefs was the 
forte of Vinoba. They used to call him the spiritua l heir of Mahatma Gandhi, 
while Jawaharlal Nehru was called the political hei r. 
The lasting part of Gandhi's Mission grew through t he person of Vinoba. That is 
where he stood, head and shoulders above others. He  had drunk at the 
fountain-head of Indian thought. He had gone deep i nto the roots of India. He 
struck his roots in the Upanisads , Vedas and the Gita. He traveled through 
every part of India and imbibed it basic spiritual base. He knew English well, 
but he was not westernized in any way. He remained till the end a true son of 
the soil. ( bhoomiputra ). 
More about it in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 37   
16. A True Son of the Soil 
20th May, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Being a true son of the soil, Vinoba's perceptions of problems affecting India 
were totally different from those of others who wer e modernized or 
Westernized, the looked at India with the eyes of a  westerner. British ideas, 
the English language, and Western modes of thinking  formed their base. Our 
political system, laws, rules and administration we re a legacy of the British 
rule. They were in favour of continuity. We, in Ind ia, are largely continuing the 
same ideas and the same mind-st even today. 
Gandhi was a revolutionary. He wanted to change Ind ia but you cannot have 
major changes unless you look at things with a like  those of Gandhiji view-
point. Vinoba's views were radically different from  those of other Indian 
leaders. 
The first thing Vinoba wanted to change was Educati on. After all, education is 
the basic industry which provides men for various s ocial needs. Vinoba believed 
that the education system devised by the British fo r their colonial aims should 
be changed. He said that the first thing after Inde pendence that the people and 
the government of India should have done was to clo se all educational 
institutions for a year. 
All our educationists should have sat together and decided what kind of India 
they wanted. Once that was decided, they should hav e decided on the kind of 
educational system necessary for it. What kind of I ndia do we want? It must 
start with the kind of man-making education we prov ide. Being an adwaita 
Vedanti, Vinoba wanted to start with "I". Who am I?  'We' Indians, is a plural of 
'I'. I have written to you about this idea earlier.  Do you remember it? 
This basic stage was avoided. A lot of ad hoc exper iments were made, 
committees were appointed new ideas of education we re tried out. But all of 
them were mere amendments. They did bring about som e changes. But the My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 38  basic stem remained the same. A revolution needs a totally new perspective, a 
new way of working. It never arrived. Successive ge nerations of Indians since 
1947 have come up from the same old colonial educat ional process. We are 
today producing people for use in Western countries . There is very little for 
local consumption. All is exported. We are seeing t his all around us. 
An awareness about our society, our people, our poo r and unlettered and who 
have not received any of the benefits of Independen ce. is totally missing from 
the minds of our educated people. The education tha t we have in India makes 
us more literate, more vocal, more skilled and more  selfish. Where is the 
consciousness about others who are less privileged?  Each one wants all the cake 
for himself. He does not bother about others. Then what was the purpose in 
having a struggle for Independence.? Gandhiji's ide a of Swaraj was not meant to 
change from white rulers to brown rulers. That was the political part and a 
small part of his Total Vision. And it is the Total  Vision that moved millions to 
participate in the freedom movement, which made Ind ependence possible. 
Vinoba wanted Swa-rajya  (Self-Rule). He was not happy just with 
Independence. That was only the first step. He want ed every individual to be 
free and self-( Swa )-governed ( rajya ). This self-government is possible only 
when an individual ( atman )sees himself as a part of society or the universe 
(Para -atman ). Vinoba expounded this idea in his book "Swa-rajy a Shastra", 
published in 1942. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 39   
17. Vinoba and Jayaprakash 
27th May, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba's ideas are not well known outside India bec ause of their essentially 
Indian perspective. He was introduced to the West a fter Jaya Prakash (JP) 
Narayan was attracted to his ideas in 1954. 
JP was a Marxist educated in America. He had first- hand experience of poverty 
in that country. When he came to India he was consi dered a confirmed Marxist. 
Like many others of his generation, he believed tha t he had all the answers for 
the problems facing India. He was drawn to Gandhiji  and the freedom struggle. 
He was a famous name in the Quit India Movement of 1942. JP continued his 
search for truth. After his contact with Gandhi, JP  started getting attracted to 
the roots of India. 
As a Marxist, JP knew that every individual must th ink about his fellow beings. 
He must be committed to his community. He knew that  this is necessary for the 
social existence of man. But why should he be good?  He had no answer to that 
question. He was attracted to Gandhi. Being a firm believer in God, Gandhi had 
all the reasons for being good. Vinoba with his rat ionality and reasoning, led 
him to Adhyatma, and the ultimate reality perceived  by many as God. J.P. 
therefore offered himself as a Jeevan Daani (life t ime sacrifier of the self) in 
1954. 
JP had this to say about Vinoba. "Vinoba is not a p olitician nor a social 
reformer or revolutionary. He is first and last man  of GOD. Service of man is 
to him nothing but an effort to unite with GOD. He endeavours every second 
to bolt himself out, to make himself empty so that GOD may fill up and make 
him His instrument." (1)  
Because of Vinoba's absence of conditioning by west ern ideas, he could think of 
Bhoodan  (the Land Gift Programme). Vinoba is synonymous wi th bhoodan  in 
India. Actually, it was not an intellectually thoug ht-out idea or hypothesis My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 40  which was worked out in practice. It was perceived by Vinoba through an 
incident in his life. In that sense it is truly a " scientific" discovery in the 
Western sense of the term. Scientific theories are constructed out of observed 
facts. 
Bhoodan  established Vinoba as an independent thinker who c ould arrive at new 
solutions to the problems facing India in 1950s. We  must be very clear about 
the basic facts. All economics is based on the idea  of economic man. He is 
selfish and greedy. He tries to maximize his person al benefits. He believes that 
society has a meaning for him only for his own bene fit. His selfish ends, 
benefits, are the only incentive which activates hi m to work. Why does a man 
work? The economic answer is simple: To maximize hi s personal benefits. All 
theories, perceptions and ideas of economics are ba sed on this idea of an 
Economic Man. 
Vinoba challenges this basis rationally with his Ve dantic perceptions, and is in a 
position to offer new solutions. It is not surprisi ng. From the focal point, the 
circumference of a circle can be reached in 360 dif ferent degrees or radii on 
the same plane. When you shift the starting angle, you can reach totally 
different conclusions. That is what we call the dif ference of 180. Vinoba 
challenged this basis, and therefore could "see" or  perceive the idea of 
bhoodan . I shall tell you about it in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 41   
18. Bhoodan-1 
3rd June, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In 1951, a conference of Gandhian workers, who were  not involved in any 
politics and who belonged to the larger part of Tot al Revolution, called the 
Sarvodaya Workers was held at Shivrampalli in Andhr a Pradesh. Vinoba 
attended that conference. He started from Sevagram in Maharashtra on March 
7, 1951 on foot. In 30 days he walked 300 miles and  reached Shivarampalli. 
The Telangana region of Andhra Pradesh was then in turmoil. The communists 
tried to have an armed resurrection like the Yenan in China. They were 
creating panic in the minds of people by dacoity an d murders. The Government 
adopted methods of tit for tat - violence was met w ith violence, bullet for 
bullet. People were terrorized by communists at nig ht and police during day. 
There was a cry for help. 
On April 15, 1951, on the Ramnavami day, in his eve ning meeting at Hyderabad, 
Vinoba said: All of us, you and I and every being, are indeed th e forms of 
Rama. If we abandon our egoism (I-ness) and reduce ourselves to zero, we 
shall become one with Rama and could then function as instruments of the 
Lord."  
On the early morning of April 18, 1951 Vinoba reach ed Pochampalli on foot. The 
village had a population of about three thousand. T he Nalagonda District of 
Telangana was regarded as the Head Quarters of the Communists. In the 
previous two years, 20 to 22 murders had taken plac e there. 
On reaching the village, Vinoba first went to the h arijan (untouchables) colony. 
He visited each house and saw the conditions person ally. The Harijans said, "We 
are very poor. We are jobless. If you give us some land, we could toil on it and 
earn our bread." Vinoba asked, "How much land would  you need?" They said, " 
We are 40 families and it would be enough if we get  80 acres." My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 42  Vinoba went into deep contemplation, as he could no t see any way out. He 
said, "I will talk to the Government authorities an d try to get this land allotted 
to you." But then it somehow occurred to him to ask  the many villagers in front 
of him; "Could some of you help these Harijan breth ren? They are ready to work 
hard on the land." 
One of them, Ramachandra Reddy, stood up to say, "M y father desired that half 
of our 200 acres of land should be donated to a fit ting person. For me, this is 
the auspicious opportunity. Kindly accept this gift  of a hundred acres of my 
land." 
This was the first spring of the Bhoodan  Ganga , and the date was April 18, 
1951. In the next thirteen years, 42,00,000 acres w ere gifted to Vinoba by 
villagers from all parts of India. All the State Go vernments in India put 
together, who confiscated by the law excess land be yond the ceiling limits, 
could not match this figure even in the next thirty  years. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 43   
19. Bhoodan-2 
10th June, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In my previous letter, I referred to the achievemen t of the land gifts movement 
(bhoodan ) and the efforts of the government. Many people ha ve dismissed this 
achievement of bhoodan  by saying that only useless land was donated. But 
possibly they do not know that under the law of lan d ceiling, the landlord 
whose land is being confiscated has the choice to d ecide which part of his land 
he will give. What kind of land will any "economic man" give when he is 
threatened by confiscation? It is easy to reject th e success of bhoodan because 
it is a totally new way of looking at Man and his M otives. You have to be alive 
and observant. Many new things are always happening  around us but we close 
our eyes and therefore do not see them. One thing i s very clear; the idea of 
communism never struck deep roots in rural India. 
Vinoba had serious doubts about the real power of t he state. He was not 
against laws. He said, "I am not blocking legislation, on the contrary, th e 
work I am doing will make legislation much easier. I am creating a climate of 
opinion in its favour. If I were to go further and declare that without making 
laws, nothing can be done, I should have betrayed m y Dharma.  My Dharma 
calls on me to believe that we can evoke such a spi rit in the hearts of the 
people, that without the aid of legislation and no matter what the law may say, 
they themselves will distribute the land. Do mother s need a law to induce them 
to nurse their babies? There is a power in the hear t of man which enriches his 
life, and that power is love. Man depends on love, he is born of love, he is 
nourished by love and when the time comes for him t o leave the world, he dies 
content if he can see his dear ones around him at t he last moment. If, in spite 
of this experience of the power of love, we have no t the courage to appeal to it 
in the wider life of society, and go on demanding l egislation instead, we shall 
not be able to help our government in the way it ex pects of us by building up My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 44  'people's power' ( lok shakti ); to build up a people's power which is different 
from the power of the state (1). 
Pranav, have you not seen this people's power recen tly in the Philippines, in 
Eastern Europe and everywhere else? Vinoba talked a bout it in 1954. We saw it 
after 35 years in 1989. If our Government, democrat ic as it is, decides to tackle 
the land problem, it will do so by legislative auth ority. There is nothing wrong 
in that, it is merely a different way of doing thin gs. But governmental help of 
this type will not nurture the power of the people,  although it may increase 
their prosperity. Our aim on the other hand is not merely that people should be 
prosperous, it is that they should realize their po wer. 
This is why Vinoba insisted on Lok Sakti  (People's Power). He used to say, 
"Government alone is like a Zero(0). People are lik e one. (1) If people are 
behind Government, its power is raised to Ten. (10) " Did I not refer to this in 
one of my earlier letters? 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 45   
20. Swarajya – Sarvodaya 
17th June, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
The Sarvodaya Conference held at Chandil in Singhbh um distict of Bihar was a 
major landmark in the life of Vinoba. There, for th e first time, in a very cogent 
manner, Vinoba expounded his ideas of the "Third Po wer", which is different 
from the "Power of Violence" (Himsa Shakti) and the  "Power of State" (Danda 
Shakti). He called it "People's Power" (Loka Shakti ). He delivered a major 
speech on it at the Chandil Conference on 9th March , 1953 (1). 
Vinoba firmly believed that his job was to awaken t his people's power, 
which is latent in every individual. Unless this la tent power is unleashed, 
real democracy will not prevail. People must be mad e strong. Unless the 
people are strong and self-reliant, they really can not control State Power. 
Vinoba even went to the extent of saying that he wa s more afraid of "good" 
government ( Su-rajya ) than "bad" government. The people fight the bad 
government, and throw it out, as they did in India in 1947. But if a really good 
government exists, it will make people crippled and  dependent on it. Vinoba 
saw a great danger in  Surajya.  After all, an individual is a reality which can be  
seen, but groups, families, castes, religions, part ies, countries, governments 
etc, are all social constructs. His stress on this individuality is of cautious far 
reaching importance. This individual's swarajya (se lf-government) is more 
important than Su-rajya (good government) by others . 
In Maharashtra, this idea is expressed in the follo wing words: 
Tyajet ekam Kulasyarthe, 
Gramasyarthe Kulam tyajet, 
Gramam Janapadasyarthe, 
Atmarthe prithivim tyajet. 
You should sacrifice an individual ( ekam ) for the family ( kulam ); the family for 
the village ( grama ); the village for the state ( janapada ); but for self-realisation My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 46  (amarthe ) sacrifice the world ( prithivi ). This sequence and its climax are a very 
major theoretical position in Hindu civilization. 
Where the individual is so important, how does one awaken his social 
consciousness of experience of power? Vinoba says t hat it is possible only 
through the spread of thought (Vichar Prasar ) and the discipline of thought 
(Vichar Sasan ). 
"By discipline of thought, I mean that ideas should  be clearly understood and 
expounded. Nothing should be accepted without under standing the principles 
involved. It should be a matter for regret when any one accepted our ideas 
without having understood them; we should be satisf ied with explaining our 
ideas without imposing our will on others. Some peo ple say that the Sarvodaya 
Samaj is a "loose organization." A loose organizati on would certainly be useless 
and serve no purpose. The Sarvodaya Samaj is not a loose organization; it is not 
an organization at all. It is a society based solel y on ideas. We compel none to 
carry them out without understanding them, and we w ill not obey anyone's 
orders without first considering and approving them . We meet only to exchange 
ideas. The Koran, in singing the praises of the sai nts, says that their work is 
marked by mutual consultation. We too must devote o urselves to mutual 
consultation and pooling of ideas. We should be hap py when people refuse to 
accept our ideas because they are not convinced; we  should be very unhappy if 
someone puts these ideas into practice without unde rstanding them. It seems 
to me that there is more strength in such an organi zation than in one which is 
efficient, clear-cut and bound by regulation. I am not saying that a strictly 
regulated legalistic organization has no power at a ll, but that its power is not 
Siva-Sakti, it is not a power for good. It is becau se we wish to create Siva-Sakti 
that we desire only the discipline of ideas."(3) 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 47   
21. On Institutions 
24th June, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In my previous letter I gave you Vinoba's idea abou t an organization based on 
ideas. This can be the freest possible 'organizatio n' if at all it can be called an 
organization. His pithy statement used to be aracha na (non-organisation) is 
rachana (organization). 
"(O)ne aspect of our work is dissemination of ideas . From this point of view, I 
can see why Lord Buddha established the Bhikshu Sangha  and Sankaracharya 
the Yati Sangha . I have, it is true, come to the conclusion that w e ourselves 
should not form any such Sangha , because experience shows that their defects 
are likely to outweigh their advantages. Neverthele ss we ought to reflect on 
the reasons why those great men felt the need of sanghas  and the ideas that 
lay behind them. 
We want our ideas to flow out to people like a pere nnial spring of water, and 
therefore, we need messengers to carry them. Withou t such messengers, the 
Sarvodaya Samaj cannot do its work. We must take every opportunity for 
meeting people and coming into close touch with the m. People are not likely to 
accept our ideas at the first hearing; our workers must be filled with such 
enthusiasm that they will enjoy repeated discussion s with the same groups. 
Their faith and confidence in the power of ideas mu st be strong enough for 
that. 
The fact is that many of us have got entangled in v arious institutions. These 
institutions have their own importance no doubt. Ne vertheless, let us show our 
regard for what they stand for without becoming att ached to the institutions as 
such. Let them continue their work, but let some of  their members be always 
moving about among the people. If we do not organiz e our work on some such 
lines, our ideas will lose their vigour and the dis cipline of ideas will not be 
effective. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 48  "But if you are not bold enough for this, if you wi ll quail before the prospect of 
carrying the message to every village and turn inst ead to short-cuts by 
proposing legislation ( for bhoodan ), then I must tell you that making laws, and 
relying on laws, is not our job. By all means let there be laws, good laws, as 
quickly as possible. But if we get involved in the law making, we shall be 
forsaking our own calling, our own  Dharma , for an alien vocation. Our own 
job, our Dharma , is to travel round the villages and to maintain o ur faith in our 
ideas. Do not say that the work will never be done by discussion of ideas. The 
work will never be done in any other way. It can on ly be done through 
acceptance of the idea. The power of the idea, the discipline of the idea, our 
first tool."(1) 
Sankaracharya, the ace Jnanayogi of India being his  Guru, Vinoba's faith in 
dissemination of ideas was very deep rooted. He bel ieved that organizations 
and institutions have a role, but a limited one. Th ey are carriers of ideas. They 
have to be discarded from time to time. 
We often build institutions around ideas, but do no t allow them access to the 
sun and wind. Such ideas get fossilized. They loose  their flexibility and capacity 
to grow. Living organisms are continually replacing and chan ging themselves. 
They retain their strength. There is no other way for groups of people to 
remain agile and relevant. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 49   
22. Sarvodaya Samaj-1 
1st July, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
After the power and purpose of disseminating ideas is discussed, Vinoba turns 
his attention to Sarvodaya Samaj  which in his view was the strongest entity. 
"Sarvodaya Samaj  will not be an organisation at all. It will be a f ellowship of 
those who believe in the power of the idea. We do n ot want to create merely a 
disciplined group. We must, work to make it more fr uitful of ideas and more 
ready to accept ideas as the basis of living." (1) 
Pranav, have you noticed that whenever Vinoba state s anything he uses the 
plural. He believed that in ancient India all the t hinking was done as 
individuals. He wanted to implant the idea of think ing together as a group. In 
the Koran, it is said that saints work with mutual consultations. " Amra Hum 
Shoora Bain Hum " (koran). this has an echo in the Bhgvadgita as we ll. " Matshila 
Madgatah Pranah Bodhayant-parasparam  (Bhagvadgita 10.9). This fellowship 
concept is Vinoba's fusion of ideas from ancient re ligions. 
Together with this fellowship of believers in the p ower of the idea, Vinoba 
wanted complete decentralization of decision-making  powers. Decentralization 
is a very basic idea in Hindu civilization. Even Go d becomes gods and gets 
decentralized in every house. There is no need to v isit a common Mandir. There 
is no compulsion to visit a Church or a Masjid. Eac h one conceptualizes his own 
idea of God. Vinoba wanted that every human being s hould be empowered. 
Therefore, he wanted the unit of administration to be as small as possible. He 
pleaded for Gram Swarajya ." We want to see the power to manage its own 
affairs vested in the village, that is is in the ha nds of the villagers. They should, 
for example, stand up and decide for themselves wha t things they will produce, 
and they should inform the government what things t hey wish to exclude. If the 
government cannot or will not stop these things com ing in, the villagers must 
be bold enough to oppose it... My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 50  "Even if Delhi were to acquire the intellect of Lor d Brahma, with four brains 
and eyes for all the four points of the compass it could never plan for and 
manage all the affairs of every village with benefi t to them all. Therefore, 
we should have village planning instead of national  planning. I said, "instead 
of". It would be far better if 'national planning' really meant 'village planning' 
and that Delhi should give the villagers whatever h elp they may need in their 
planning. Whatever we do is in the direction of dec entralization of the 
authority." (2) 
This concept of decentralization as a core concept of planning was never 
accepted by the Government in New Delhi. Vinoba was  pleading for this 
decentralization in 1953, when Jawaharlal was movin g in the opposite 
direction. We were imitating GOSPLAN or Central Pla nning as practiced in the 
U.S.S.R. in 1920. The edifice of Central Planning i s collapsing in the entire 
block of East European countries and in Soviet Russ ia. It has simply not stood 
the test of practicability. It has just vanished. I t is time we looked at Vinoba's 
economic ideas without blinkers. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 51   
23. Sarvodaya Samaj-2 
8th July, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba had a strong belief in the strength of words , in the strength of ideas. He 
was not much in favour of creating institutions or structures. He did not set 
much store by the capacity of governments to bring about changes in society. 
He believed that a person inspired by an idea can b e a change agent. He can 
create his temporary structure, use it and discard it when the time comes. He 
wanted Sarvodaya  workers to be on the move, open to new ideas and c apable 
of changing themselves. His greatest attraction was  for the formless, structure 
less realm of ideas. After all, that is what Brahman  is all about. Each one has to 
search on his own for Brahman . 
Vinoba often quoted Kakasaheb Kalelkar, another con temporary and leading 
Gujarati author equally at home in Marathi, who onc e said that A- Sarkari  (non-
governmental) work alone is Asarkari  (effective). He believed in voluntary 
action of the people. He wanted Sarvodaya people to  spread out, move and 
sprout throughout the length and breadth of India. "This work of ours is not of a 
sectarian nature. We should not even call ourselves  'the Sarvodaya Group, 
because that also gives a wrong impression. Let us think of ourselves as human-
beings and nothing else. Otherwise, even this Sarvodaya  Samaj , with all its 
freedom from institutionalism, will little by littl e become a sect, a narrow 
group in which we will be separated from others. Le t us never allow our 
tongues to slip into labeling people as 'socialist' , congresswala ' or 
'sarvodayawala '. Such terms will of course continue to be used, b ecause there 
are many who wish to work under party names and fin d them useful. But we 
belong to no party. We are 'the third power'... the third power (is) the power 
which is opposed to power of violence, distinct fro m the power of the 
state...This third power is inherent in man, and we  seek to realize it on the 
widest possible scale. And therefore it is not for us to form a separate sect, My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 52  it is for us to identify ourselves with the common run of humanity and to 
work among men simply as fellow human beings." (1)  
Vinoba's emphasis on not having institutions was ve ry fundamental. After all, 
we only 'experience' life as individuals. Group, fa mily, caste, religion, country, 
nation, union, company are all theoretical construc ts. They are all concepts the 
reality which we experience is only the individual.  It is the individual who has 
to change himself to change society. If a man is no t changed, nothing changes. 
A man can be changed only by changing his thoughts.  This can be achieved only 
by the spread of ideas. It needs continuous "deep-c asting." It is not done in a 
day, but you should go on doing it every day. Then alone lasting changes can 
come about. Vinoba's idea was to concentrate on cha nging the ideas, the 
thoughts or the inner core or heart of the individu al. It was called hridaya 
parivartan  (change of heart) by Gandhiji. Changing the core o f man's being is 
the message of all religions, but more so of Samata na Dharma. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 53   
24. Science + Spiritual Wisdom = Self-knowledge 
15th July, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba believed that the future of mankind depends on Science and spirituality. 
His own personal development was based on both. 
"My father was a scientist, my mother's bent was to wards spiritual knowledge. 
At school, science was my favorite subject, but I w as also attracted by spiritual 
literature. These two streams of knowledge, the sci entific and spiritual mingled 
together in my life. In my view they deserve equal respect and have one and 
the same significance. The subject matter of the on e is the external physical 
world, while that of the other is the inner world o f man. Together they present 
a complete and integrated picture of the nature of the universe.. I became 
convinced that the only way to establish the kingdo m of God on earth is to 
unite Science and self-knowledge."(1) 
Vinoba believed that we must read the most up-to-da te books on science and 
the most ancient texts for self-knowledge. He was n ot an ascetic in the old 
Indian sense of a person who is a seeker of self-kn owledge alone. He wanted 
science for progress, but self-knowledge too. He be lieved that continuous 
questioning, a continuous quest must be pursued in both science and self-
knowledge. 
"Man, like a bird, has two wings - science and spir itual wisdom, and he needs 
both together for his happiness. The design of ever y machine provides two 
forces, one to generate energy for movement and the  other to guide and 
control it. One cannot work without the other. A ca r has an engine and a 
steering wheel, so does a human being. We walk with our feet and not with 
our eyes, but the eyes show us where to go. Self-kn owledge or wisdom is 
the eye, science is the feet. With no eyes, man wou ld not know where he is 
going; with no feet, he would be able to look about  him but would have to My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 54  sit still at home. Nothing can be done in this worl d without science, but 
science cannot go in the right direction without se lf-knowledge."  
(2) Vinoba clearly spelt out the role of science in  India. He was aware that India 
was weak in science, and must learn from the West, as she had the right to do. 
But the progress of Science in India, in his view, had to be for three things. 
"First, we must resolve; that our human problems sh all be solved by ethical and 
non-violent methods; that our villages shall be tru ly free to manage their own 
affairs in peace; and that we shall all live togeth er in mutual goodwill and 
without conflict. Secondly, we must determine to us e science as a tool of 
service, not as a weapon of destruction, to increas e our harvests, not our 
armaments. Thirdly, we must decide on the merits of  each case, whether to 
use our scientific know how to build large-scale or  small-scale machines. If we 
keep these three points in mind, science will serve  us well."(3) 
The initial policy framework of India was thus enco ded by Vinoba in these three 
points. He was a moral and spiritual influence over  the minds of the rulers of 
India till his death. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 55   
25. Power of the Word 
22nd July, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba was a great believer in the fusion of scienc e and spirituality (Self-
knowledge). The bridge between the knowledge of the  outer world (science) 
and the knowledge of the inner world (self-knowledg e) is the word. He has 
referred to this power of the word in many of his s peeches. 
"The Sanskrit word of poet, kavi  has a deep meaning. The kavi  is the seer of 
revolution, whose vision pierces beyond the immedia te. These two eyes of ours 
see what lies immediately around us, and shows us a ll the beauty of the world 
for our enjoyment. But their powers are limited. Be yond this present world is 
another world of interest and delight which they ca nnot reach; but man is blind 
to the beauty of that world because his two eyes ar e open only to this 
immediate world. It is only when this third eye ope ns that he becomes aware of 
a world of energies at work behind, beyond and with in the common 
experiences of the visible world. It is this vision , this awareness, that inspires 
great literature and which deserves our reverence.. ... 
"The great poets - Valmiki, Vyasa, Dante, Shakespea re, Homer, Rabindranath - 
have enriched the world's life forever by the power  of their creative and 
transforming thought. They brought peace and vigour  and hope, when peace 
and vigour and hope were needed. Their insights, th eir thought, their 
transcendent vision, are the hidden springs from wh ich have arisen the world's 
great revolutions.... 
"The power of science, the power of self-knowledge,  the power of the word - 
these three forces have shaped the world we know an d will mould it in future 
Science changes the material aspects of life and cr eates an environment which 
makes its impact on the mind of man also. However, it does not influence the 
mind directly. The word, on the other hand, directl y touches the heart; self-
knowledge illuminates life from within. The light o f science comes from My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 56  without, the light of self-knowledge comes from wit hin, and the Word is the 
bridge between the two, bringing them together and shedding light on both. To 
use the image of Tulsidas, both the inner world and  the outer can be illumined 
if the lamp of the Name ( Hari nam ) is sent upon the threshold of the door - 
which is the tongue. 
Such is the power of the word, of speech ( vani ) which is God's supreme gift to 
man. It is a gift potent for good and for evil; use  it wrongly and society is 
doomed; use it well, and society goes forward for e verybody's well-being. As 
the Rigveda  says, the wise man winnows his speech as the house wife winnows 
grain, rejecting the chaff and stones, and choosing  the healthy corn. A society 
whose speech is clean and pure, strong and simple, is a happy society. For 
speech is the binding force joining the inner world  with the outer, and science 
with self-knowledge, and all the energies of the wo rld with one another. The 
word is the subtle power, and many other powers are  hidden within it." (1) 
The word is the clothing of the idea and thought. V inoba constantly wanted to 
propagate thought. His idea of Sarvodaya Samaj  was the fellowship of people 
who believed in the power of thought. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 57   
26. Religious Institutions 
29th July,1990 
My dear Pranav, 
I have told you Pranav, that Vinoba took his susten ance by striking roots deep 
into the Upanisads , the Vedas  and the Sastras . He always talked of self-
knowledge, atman and paramatman . The picture that comes before one's mind 
is that of a Godman. He was not in that mould. He w as essentially a thinker, a 
jnan-yogi  and, more importantly, a constant Karmayogi . His living was ascetic, 
but it was not to impress others. It was a part of his belief system. 
It is therefore very interesting to see his reactio n to the established Mathas 
hierarchies and Devasthanams . He visited many of them. He was beaten at 
Vaidyanath in Bihar and was sent away without darshan  at Jagnannathpuri in 
Orissa. But his reaction was very interesting. 
Basically, he was a rebel, and all these institutio ns, Mathas , Peethas , were a 
logical anathema to him. He gave a lecture at Chatu rvedamangalam in Ramnad 
in Tamilnadu. He raised certain issues concerning t houghts, ideas and these 
institutions. He criticized them for not re-checkin g their ideas, dropping the 
dead ones and absorbing new ones. He quoted the Ved as where it is stated that 
you should winnow the thoughts and ideas like grain  and keep only the good 
corn. It is no use repeating old sayings as mantrams . You must constantly check 
their validity. He wanted the outdated part of the Vedas  also to be rejected. 
He wanted new ideas to be added to the Vedas, and t o retain what is good in 
them. 
He told the Dharmacharyas that they should not beco me mere postmen, who 
deliver letters and messages. He gives a smile. A learned father told his son to 
hold an umbrella in the morning for protection from  the sun in the eastern 
direction. However his son must have sense enough t o change the direction 
in the afternoon, and hold an umbrella in the weste rn direction. Simply 
because father said, it should not compel him to ho ld it so in the evening.  My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 58  Vinoba said that it is the obstinate behaviour of b elievers that created non-
believers. 
The heads of the mathas  did not undertake to the spread of real religion. They 
only looked after their properties. Their propertie s were gifted by people for 
the spreading of religion. The maintenance of such properties became an end in 
itself. Vinoba wanted Dharma to be constantly sprea ding and growing. Why 
should the saints of Tamilnadu be as Nalavar (four greats) and not grow in 
numbers? Why are the Gurus of the Sikhs restricted to ten? Why not more? We 
must be capable of finding new ways to live and be religious. 
Those who are bound to institutions do not find suc h new ways. Vivekananda, 
Gandhi, Aurobindo, Sankaracharya, Tolstoy were the people who really spread 
Dharma . The established mathas, swamis  and churches opposed these thinkers. 
Vinoba wanted to know why such religious institutio ns were unable to stop 
thefts in their near vicinities? Why was the great Mahaveera, who did not even 
wear a stitch of cloth on him (Digambara), is kept in an idol form with gold, 
diamonds and valuables in Bihar? The idol was kept with armed guards and 
enclosed by several walls and locked gates. Vinoba was very critical of such 
institutionalization, and avoided it throughout his  life. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 59   
27. Ahimsa - The Way of Living 
5th August, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Another idea Vinoba propounds on the basis of Vedan ta is that of Ahimsa (Non-
violence). In fact, his life story has been compile d by disciples and it 
summarises Vinoba's life in two words; Ahimsa / Kho j (search for non-violence). 
In his inimitable style, Vinoba puts to you the nec essity of Ahimsa in the 
following words. Again you will see that he expound s it from the basic 
assumptions of Vedanta. 
"Each one of us is in a body, and our body separate s us from all other bodies. If 
I fall ill, I alone experience the illness. Another  man may imagine my troubles, 
he cannot feel my bodily aches and pains. Neither c an he reap the benefit of 
the sound sleep that I enjoyed last night. Since ou r bodies are separate, they 
are a source of our divisions.... 
"Because each one of us is bound to a body, we feel  bound also to those with 
whom we have some bodily relationship: fathers, mot hers, children. Around our 
bodies we build up circle of relatives. The caste i nto which I am born is mine 
too; I associate with it and keep others at a dista nce. This is the basic reason 
for all those divisions of race, caste, creed, lang uage, province, nation etc., by 
which the world is broken into fragments. I put mys elf into group, in other 
words I put what is "mine" on one side and the rest  of the world on the other. 
Then I go on enlarging my circle. As things stand, "I" am a human being so I 
exclude animals, birds, etc., from "my" group. I am  an Indian, so I exclude 
other nations and peoples.... 
"Who am "I"? The ancient Hindu sages answered: I am  Brahman" that is all 
inclusive, cattle and donkeys and all. This experie nce of the unity of life is 
termed Vedanta. It means that I must try to treat a ll beings with equal 
respect....This idea that equal honour is due to al l is the basis of Ahimsa, non-
violence.... My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 60  "Ahimsa is a way of living. Vedanta is a way of thi nking. Vedanta tells us what 
is; ahimsa conduct tells us how to act...How shall we understand this idea, I am 
Brahman and realise its meaning? I have ears, eyes,  nose. I have a mind, sense 
and an intellect. And "I" am one who recognises the se facilities, I am the 
"witness' (Sakshi) who observes them all. This "I" who recognises all this is other 
than mind....This is the method of Vedanta, to thin k of the self as the ' 
witness'. (1) 
Once you start enlarging your definition of "I" you  include more and more in it. 
In the end you include all life. That is where you become a greater and better 
human being. 
Today, when we talk of ecology, when we study the i nteraction of all living 
things, it is basically an attempt to enlarge your idea of "I". We will achieve 
nothing so long as we do not have this inward exper ience, that inspite of all 
diversities of appearance, we are all one. The secr et is to let "we" drive out "I". 
Let us at least say that "I" should be into "we". T his was Vinoba's basis for all 
social service. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 61   
28. Teachers: The source of light 
12th August, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba had many fresh ideas about education and tea chers. He presented his 
idea of Acharyakul at Kahalgram in Bihar on 8th Mar ch, 1968. He wanted a 
special role for teachers. He wanted to have Achary a-kul to establish the power 
of the people as opposed to the power of violence, and distinct from that of 
law. He wanted teachers to be pioneers of this non- violent revolution. He 
wanted education to be accepted on par with the jud iciary with the same kind 
of independence. 
Acharya, according to him, did not mean only teache r. The root of the word is 
char; the same root is found in acharan (practice),  vicharan (traveling), vichar 
(thought, deliberation), sanchar (arduous progress) , prachar (spreading 
knowledge). All these meanings contribute to the id eal of an Acharya. The word 
Kula means a family. All of us teachers are members  of one family. 
Every aspect of the work we mean to do - to commit ourselves to knowledge; to 
strive for mental purity; to watch over the develop ment of our students with 
affectionate care; to study the problems of society  with a disinterested 
endeavour to reach agreed conclusions for the guida nce of the public - all of 
these are part of the task of establishing the unit y of the family that is the 
family of teachers. 
Vinoba said, these are the reasons which led him to  choose the name 
Acharyakul. Kula is a beautiful word, and it is one  of those words which have 
links with both Arabic and Sanskrit. It implies 'al l' (Kul) teachers; there is no 
question of high or law, of great or small. All tea chers are to be equally 
honoured; all will work together, those are the con ditions of success in the 
teaching profession. 
"The purpose of Acharyakul is not to acquire power;  there are other 
associations for that. The purpose is to make us te achers more aware of our My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 62  duties, and more ready to fulfil them, and so enabl e us to regain our rightful 
place in society. There is so much darkness around us, how can it be removed? 
If our surrondings seem dark, it is because we have  no light. Light knows no 
darkness. (1)" 
What is the nature of our (teachers) strength? Is i t not in the nature of light? 
The light of knowledge, of wisdom, of thought and r eflection. What power in 
the world can stand before it? When science has mad e so much progress, when 
the intellect has such far-reaching power, it will be disaster for humanity if the 
heart remains small. The problems of today arise fr om this discrepancy: big 
brains and small hearts. 
Intellectual progress is going to continue, and sci entific knowledge is going to 
expand even further. There is no alternative, if we  have to survive, except to 
expand our hearts. The world outlook of "Jai Jagat"  is the only fitting one for 
our generation; for the world is ours, and we are w orld citizens, "World-men" 
(Vishwa - manushah) as the Reg-Veda called it long ago. 
Vinoba's Jai jagat we shall discuss some other time . 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 63   
29. Dignity of Labour 
19th August, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba had one life-long idea in all his speeches: insistence on physical labour 
by everyone. This was a legacy from Gandhiji. In an cient times Manu, the first 
law giver of the world, has downrated manual labour  in the Smrti. You will 
therefore find in India that our brahminical educat ion system has always given 
very low rating for actual manual or physical work.  The more one is educated 
the more one despises physical work. This attitude continues till today. It was 
Gandhiji who wanted to establish the dignity of lab our in our social life. 
Washing your own clothes, cleaning your own utensil s, doing all your things by 
yourself is considered below one's dignity. This at titude was attacked by 
Gandhiji in his Ashrams. Vinoba carried it further;  he took up the job of 
cleaning latrines even in jail. This was revolution ary idea then, it is 
revolutionary even today. He attacked untouchabilit y and the aversion for 
physical work in one stroke. 
Vinoba believed that physical labour, bread labour,  is something which each 
one of us must do every day. The Upnisads have said , "Annam Bahukurvit." 
Increase the production of food. Let this be your v ow. The same idea is stated 
by St. Paul. "He who will not work, neither shall h e eat." This is necessary for 
health and also for the control of emotions. Physic al labour is great equaliser. 
Vinoba wanted schools to have half-time for labour and half time for learning 
other things. He wanted teachers to set an example to their students. He 
thought village power, people's power. With the pow er of knowledge wielded 
by a teacher can withstand the destructive power of  politicians. 
Vinoba wanted teachers to evolve into an Acharya-ku la. Their power of 
knowledge would emerge when they unite. If they div ide themselves, then their 
power will be dissipated. The answers to the proble ms facing India can only be 
given by teachers. But such teachers must first ren ounce politics. They should My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 64  not be members of any political party. According to  Vinoba, "party" takes care 
of only some 'part' of society. A knowledgeable man , a teacher must think of 
the whole and not of a part. He must avoid party po litics. The teacher must 
throw in his lot with the common man and Lokaniti ( people's power). Unless he 
renounces politics he cannot influence politics. He  will be effective only when 
he rejects the values of the power structure and ch ooses those of the people. 
It is difficult, Pranav, for most people to underst and this perception: that 
unless you renounce politics you cannot influence i t. But Acharyas like Vasistha 
were the Kulgurus of Dasratha and Rama. They were r espected for their 
knowledge, their sage advice, and were acceptable t o all. They held no 
political power. Many amongst us who view India wit h western eyes find it 
difficult to understand this role. Mahatma Gandhi, Jayaprakash Narayan, Vinoba 
were such Acharyas. They never held political posts . They refused the values of 
the power structure. But they tremendously influenc ed India. 
Vinoba wanted this role of Acharyas to be instituti onalised by forming an 
Acharyakula. He wanted teachers to play this role. He wanted teachers to 
define Dharma or the context for politicians to beh ave within those limits. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 65   
30. Essence of Learning 
26th August, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba was basically a teacher. He has given us a w onderful idea in his book on 
education. 
He says that in all 14 languages listed in the Cons titution of India there is no 
word for teaching. In English, there are two separa te words "teach" and "learn". 
In Indian languages the root word is learn. For "te aching", derived words are 
coined on the basis of the root word "learn". 
We can learn. We can help learning. In Indian langu ages, teaching is not a 
separate verb. Teaching expresses the ego of teache rs. You cannot teach 
anyone, you can only make learning possible. These days, the word for teacher 
is facilitator. He makes learning possible. 
It is not merely a matter of words or semantics. It  is a matter of attitude. 
Vinoba further said there is nobody who is unlearne d. Every one learns every 
day. There are no uneducated persons, there are man y people who are not in a 
position to read or write. Reading and writing are facilities or tools for 
learning. They are not learning itself. They are ve ry useful, but they are only 
tools. And in any event they are not the only tools . 
We see so many people who cannot read or write. But  they can grow crops. 
They can get better crops. They can repair cars, th ey can drive cars. They can 
cook, they can carry loads, they can clean houses, roads, and so on. They can 
look after patients. They can grow trees, plants an d tend gardens. In other 
words, they can "do" so many useful things. All the se things are useful for all of 
us. How can you call them not learned? This is a cr ucial factor in our social 
attitudes. 
Vinoba narrates an episode in the life of Prophet M ohammed. He was once in 
deep meditation. He wanted to see God. God wrote a letter to him. He was My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 66  unlettered, and so he said, "I am an unlettered per son." I want to see you. Then 
God gave him a Darsan. Mohammed told this story to his people and said, "Look 
if I had learned alphabet, I would have been happy with the letter, I would 
have missed seeing the God for myself." Vinoba narr ated this story in a meeting 
for farmers. He said, "You physically cultivate you r farms, you do the tilling to 
level the land, Sun shines on that land and then yo u wait to see God. How many 
of you have seen God? All of them raised their hand s. There was not a single 
farmer who doubted whether he had seen God or not. When it rains, the 
farmers feel that God has not only come to meet the m but to touch them. He 
touches them physically with thousands of drops of water in the showers of 
rain. They not only see God, they also feel Him. Th ey are not in doubt about 
the existence of God. They are learned enough to kn ow it. They experience 
God. 
Vinoba expressed his thoughts, beliefs, arguments f or the villagers in small or 
big meetings. He touched their hearts directly. He moved them. That was his 
work. That was his style as a public educator, an A charya in the true sense of 
the term. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 67   
31. 'Gungrahan' Enlarge the good qualities of other s 
2nd September, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba has given us in his books and lectures many interesting ideas. He was a 
great scholar and very intelligent person. While st ating some ideas, he has also 
told us about the changes that he went through. The se views or spot-lights on 
his personal development are very enlightening. He continued growing till the 
end of his life. 
Madhav Deva, a Saint - poet of Assam, has divided p eople into four categories: 
Lowly, Middle, Good and Best. The lowly (Adham) is one who sees only faults in 
others; the middle category (Madhyam) recognises bo th the faults and the 
merits of others; the good (Uttam) looks at only th e good points of others; and 
the Best (Uttamottam) looks at the good qualities i n others through a 
magnifying glass. Mirabai and Guru Nanak also talk about Gunagrahan, seeing 
the good points in others. 
Vinoba says that in the early years of his life he used to find fault with others. 
He used to test their intelligence a found some fau lt or other in everyone. Then 
he decided that everyone has some faults or the oth er. So he gave up seeing 
faults in others. He started looking for faults in himself. As Tukaram has said, 
"Why should I look to the faults of others? Do I ha ve any less?" It is better to 
look a one's own faults only. 
Vinoba then called on Gandhiji who told him that he  should enlarge the good 
qualities in others and also enlarge one's own faul ts. Vinoba argue with 
Gandhiji. He said: You are a seeker after Truth. Th en we should stick to truth. 
Why are you asking me to enlarge the good things in  others and bad things in 
me? Gandhiji replied: What you say is mathematicall y correct. We should not 
enlarge or reduce. We should stick to reality. But human beings have to see 
things in perspective. Our eyes cannot see things f rom a distance in their actual 
size. We must have perspective. The good things in others are at a distance. To My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 68  understand them correctly in the right scale we mus t look at them with 
enlargement. While we see our faults always as smal l ones, to get a right 
perspective we must enlarge them to remove them." 
Vinoba thereafter accepted this idea. He said: "In the end I started seeing only 
good things in others and in myself." He did not wa nt to waste his time in 
finding fault with any one! 
Vinoba wanted all of us to be like a magnet. A magn et attracts all the pieces of 
iron or steel, wherever it is moved. Similarly, we should try to see only the 
good points in others. That really makes us better persons. We have less 
tensions and less quarrels. Vinoba recommends that situation as the expression 
of one's best behaviour. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 69   
32. Nai Talim , Lok-Shikshak 
9th September, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
I have written to you many letters so far, and trie d to introduce some ideas 
which Vinoba talked about in his life time. Inciden tally, 11th September is the 
birth date of Vinoba. I have told you that he was b orn at Gagode in the Raigad 
District of Maharashtra on that day in 1895. He wou ld have been 95 if he were 
alive. He died on 15th November, 1982 at the age of  87. 
Vinoba developed his ideas of Nai Talim (New Educat ion) when he was 
implementing that idea of Gandhiji. His book on edu cation has so many 
thought-provoking ideas. He was always fascinated b y new ideas, and he 
wanted Nai Talim to remain Nitya Nai Talim (continu ous new education). 
Change is the only permanent part of life. He there fore wanted education to be 
continuously in flux. 
Vinoba considered himself first and foremost a stud ent. His teaching was really 
a by-product. He was continuously searching for a m eaning in life. He went on 
changing. He always wanted to remain alert for chan ges in the life around him. 
His basic values were firm. But he was continuously  learning new ones. 
He was a Lok-shikshak (teacher of the people). 
Whatever he learnt, he went on disseminating to oth ers. 
He was not happy with the educational structure in India. Immediately after 
independence, he wanted to close the educational in stitutions, give a holiday 
to children to play and wanted educationists to thi nk of new kind of education 
necessary for Independent India. Nobody listened to  him. We went on 
producing students who were fit for jobs but not so  much for work. 
All over the world, education is in the hands of th e government. Vinoba was 
opposed to that. He said that education is used by government for 
indoctrination. A fascist government will teach fas cist ideas, a communist My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 70  government will teach communist ideas. He wanted go vernments to pay for 
education but not to control it. The curriculum sho uld be decided by Acharyas, 
and they must be beyond party politics. Vinoba once  said that great Loka 
shikshaks like Jnanadeva, Tulsidas and Kamban did n ot have in their days 
authority to decide the curriculum for students. Bu t what they taught and 
wrote, still remains a part of our folk memory. Tul si Ramayan is a part of the 
education of the people in the North. So is Jnanade va in Maharashtra and 
Kamban in Tamilnadu. There were kings and emperors in their times; nobody 
remembers those kings and emperors today! 
Incidentally, Pranav, 1290 AD is the year when Jnan eshwar completed his 
commentary on the Gita. He was a contemporary of Ch aucer. His Marathi is still 
a cultural bedrock of Marathi civilization. In 1990 , after seven hundred years 
you cannot understand Marathi without knowing Jnana deva. Vinoba was greatly 
influenced by Jnanadeva. 
Vinoba once wondered why the present Director of Ed ucation, a government 
official has power to decide what people should rea d or learn. This right was 
not given even to Jnanadeva. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 71   
33. Think globally, act locally 
16th September, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
While Vinoba was talking about Acharyakul and Jai J agat, his vision was 
covering the entire world. During the Independence movement prior to 1947, 
the main slogan or idea kept before the people was Jai Hind (Victory for India). 
Prior to British rule in India, the nation state wa s a new idea even in Europe. 
There were small kingdoms, and geographically they did not cover very large 
areas. They considered their small kingdoms as thei r private property. The 
rulers were answerable to none. they always succumb ed before foreign 
invaders. The village was self-contained unit. It m ade very little difference to 
the common man as to who their ruler was. Villagers  were self-reliant and 
happy within the confines of a few similar villages . 
Culturally, India was an entity for thousands of ye ars. The Ramayan and the 
Mahabharat was the cultural base for all Indians. T his picture changed during 
British rule. The political leaders from all over I ndia started coming together, 
and therefore their aim was to have one United Indi a hence the slogan Jai Hind. 
As soon as India became Independent, the purpose of  Jai Hind was achieved. At 
that point of time, many changes were taking place in the world. Air travel was 
spreading fast, telephones, telegraphs and satellit es were reducing distances. 
The competition between Western countries and Commu nist countries was 
increasingly becoming more and more hostile. The ar ms race was on. 
That was the time when Vinoba was preaching that al l these scientific and 
technological advances were making the world small and the human brain big. 
But its mind, its heart still remained small. The a tom bomb which was dropped 
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6th August, 1945 chang ed the world completely. 
It was now possible for man to annihilate the entir e human race. In such a 
situation, Jai Hind became comparatively small ambi tion. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 72  The entire world became a small global village. It was therefore necessary to 
have the aim of Jai Jagat (Victory for the World). Today, all world leaders, 
ecologists, scientists and others are talking of On e World. This was emphasised 
by Vinoba in the 1960s. 
His teaching therefore was: "Think Globally; Act Lo cally". Indian darsaniks 
(perceptors) have always talked of one world or "Va suhdaiva Kutumbakam" (All 
the world is one family). But it always remained a philosophical idea, a matter 
of words. It had no guidance for Action. Vinoba was  very particular about this 
Action (Karma). Acting locally was very important f or him. He therefore 
evolved his idea from Bhoodan to Gramdan. I will te ll you about Gramdan as 
envisaged by Vinoba some other time. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 73   
34. Women's Power 
23rd September, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
You should not be surprised if I tell you that Vino ba was the earliest thinker in 
Idia who started the talk about Stree Shakti or Wom en's power. This was in 
1954, when he started the Brahmavidya Mandir at Pav nar. 
Traditionally, the search for Brahman has been acti vity only for men. Women 
were kept away from sadhana. In fact, you will find  a common belief that 
woman was a hindrance in the way of achieving succe ss at a high spiritual level. 
It was Bhagwan Mahaveera who ordained women for the  spiritual quest. But it 
was only for one's own salvation. It was an individ ual effort. 
Vinoba started Brahmavidya Mandir for women, who fo llow brahmachrya 
(celibacy) and try to understand brahman as a group  quest. His disciples from 
Brahmavidya Mandir, all women have set up an ashram  in Gauhati, Assam. It is 
called the Maitri ashram. There are three other ash rams which were started at 
various places. Two of his women disciples continue d padayatra for 12 years in 
all parts of India to spread the word of Sarvodaya and Brahmavidya. 
It is significant that when Vinoba died on 15th Nov ember, 1982, his funeral pyre 
as lit by Mahadevitai, a woman disciple. This token  action itself was considered 
a great change from the tradition. 
Womens' Lib became a fashion and cult in America an d Europe in the 1960s. It 
came to India in the 70s, and a lot of imitation ha s taken place in India. Burning 
bras, walking naked in the street and crying hoarse  about womens' rights and 
womens' liberation (Stree Mukti) a rage of the day.  
It was Vinoba who broke the barriers of womens' spi ritual liberation. He did not 
believe in Stree Mukti (womens' liberation). Libera tion from what? From whom? 
In a society where the family is still a very stron g base of the social fabric, this 
liberation is basically upper-class talk. Vinoba wa nted women to realise their My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 74  power (Shakti) and he called this idea, awakening o f women's power (Stree 
Shakti Jagaran). He believed in empowering women, m aking them aware of 
their own strength. He was not satisied with small actions of defiance. He 
wanted them to realise their own power, and use it constructively. He wanted 
some woman to be the second Shankaracharya. 
The great influence of Vinoba's mother on his mind is very clear in all his life-
time work. He translated the Gita into Marathi in t he simplest form. The book, 
Gitai, is the largest selling book in Marathi. Vino ba did it for his mother, as she 
did not know Sanskrit. In all his speeches, there a re several instances of his 
own development, and of his mother's influence on h im. he was in favour of 
Stree Sakti as a Matri Sakti. He wanted spiritual s alvation and self-realisation as 
a goal for women, through nurturing Matri. Sakti. 
Even in education, Vinoba said, that the mother is the best teacher next to 
God. As Lord Krishna wanted "Matr hasten bhoojanam"  (feeding by mother's 
hand) as the highest boon, Vinoba advocated "Matra Mukhn-jaam" (education 
through the mother). People very rarely note this s piritual attainment for 
women as a group, as Vinoba's innovation. It has co me into existence without 
noise or opposition, just as the blade of grass gro ws. It does not make any noise 
in the process. But it does a lot of good for all l iving things. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 75   
35. 'Gramdan' 
30th September, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Some time back I wrote to you that I would describe  the idea of gramdan given 
by Vinoba. Actually, this idea grew out of the conc ept of Bhoodan. 
In bhoodan, Vinoba was asking people to donate one- sixth of their land to 
representative of Daridranarayan. He told people; " I am your sixth brother. I am 
a Brahmin. Give me my sixth share as a representati ve of the poor, landless 
labourers." He collected 4.2 million acres of land,  and most of it was 
distributed. 
Vinoba expressed an idea that as air and sunshine a re free gifts of God, we 
should also consider land as His Gift. 
"Sab bhoomi gopalki (All land belongs to Gopal - Lo rd Krishna)." Nobody can be 
the owner of land for all are sons of Mother earth.  We are all sons of the soil. 
"Mata bhoomih putro aham prithivyah" (Earth is our mother and we are all her 
sons). We are all bhoomiputras. We must share her f avours. We do not own our 
mother. We serve her. That was his message in Bhood an. 
In Bihar in 1953, Vinoba took the next step. It was  called gramdan. He wanted 
an entire village to renounce the ownership of all lands and declare them 
property of the whole village. Nobody could buy or sell or mortgage it. All debts 
created on its basis would be extinguished. People of village would cultivate it. 
It would be equitably distributed for cultivation. Government help, finance, 
fertilizers, etc. would go to the village. This ide a would have revolutionized the 
entire rural landscape. Rural indebtedness, unequal  distribution, disputes 
between the landless and the landlords would have a ll changed. It was an idea 
of Total Revolution. 
Many villages, blocks talukas in Bihar Orissa were declared as gramdani villages. 
But this movement or idea did not take off. It rema ined a dream.  My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 76  Vinoba obviously was not upset by its failure. He w anted to collect 500 million 
acres in bhoodan. He collected about 50 million. He  started many Gramdans, 
but they did not survive. Redistribution of 50 mill ion acres of land was still a 
great achievement. Nobody ever thought it possible.  Vinoba made it possible. 
What power did he have? Was he the elected represen tative of the people? Did 
he have state power? Did he have an army to enforce  his demands? Was this 
accepted by all? Did it fit into our idea of econom ic man? Answers to all these 
questions are in the negative. But Vinoba got an id ea at Pochampalli in Andhra 
Pradesh on 18th April, 1951. He could perceive its significance in the Indian 
context. He could appeal to the people of India. He  could appeal to their 
spiritual roots in their own language. He could "se e" a new idea. He was a 
darsanik. He could achieve it. He achieved it witho ut bloodshed, without 
money. He achieved it peacefully, by appealing to t he hearts of the people. 
In other countries of the world, the redistribution  of land has been done with 
force, with bloodshed, and with pain all around. Vi noba lighted a new path in 
this context. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 77   
36. Bhoodan-3 
7th  October, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Many people in India considered bhoodan and gramada n a failure. They said 
that only useless land was given in Bhoodan. The go vernment tried the way of 
law; it officially allowed the landlords to give aw ay discarded land but the land 
problem is not solved. But bhoodan was a novel way to solve it. What was not 
possible to imagine could be achieved. Intellectual s and academics moulded in 
the western way of thinking could not understand th is phenomenon. But it 
happened. 
Since the 1930s in India, Marxist thought was a ver y powerful influence on the 
minds of Indian intellectuals. Vinoba read his Marx , but did not copy. The 
ethical appeal of marxism, which was for equality a mongst men was accepted 
by him. But he did not accept Marxian insistence on  the State as the Agent of 
Change. He rejected the State as an instrument of c hange. He did not accept 
the view that the world is full of 'haves' and 'hav e nots'. He believed that 
everyone is a 'have'. 
This division of people between 'haves' and 'have n ots' leads to class war. 
Marxist analysis believes that this class conflict between the 'haves' and the 
'have nots', the rich and the poor is inevitable. T he poor can win only when 
they defeat the rich. Equality cannot be establishe d without annihilating class 
enemies. Millions of people have been killed in Sov iet Russia, China and other 
countries in the world have paid a heavy price for this theory of class war. 
Intellectuals, who almost invariably never even get  hurt in violent conflicts 
were great supporters of this idea of Class War. Th is became an accepted 
'religion' in many countries. India also made half- hearted efforts in that 
direction by making our country a 'Socialist' repub lic in 1976. 
Because of the inherent strength of Indian toleranc e and the liberal educational 
influence of the British, India did not go communis t. India blundered through a My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 78  socialist phase. This great 'economic' ideology has  been rejected now all over 
Europe. Their economies are in ruin. People paid th e price for it with their 
blood. Philosophy based on economics collapsed with  their economies. 
The States and their leaders became dictators, powe r-mad, and ruined their 
economies. The intellectuals gave respectability to  their crimes in the name of 
Socialism. The communists wanted a similar revoluti on in India. They started it 
in Telangana in Andhra Pradesh. That is where Vinob a offered an alternative. 
He took the ethical fervour of Marx, moulded it in the crucible of Indian reality, 
and offered bhoodan. 
Democracy survived in India. It flourished here, pe ople got a better deal, a 
better life without violence, bloodshed and state t error. It was achieved in 
non-violent ways. 
Vinoba never claimed success for bhoodan. He said h e wanted to plant ideas for 
a better tomorrow. If they fail, he would not worry . New thoughts would 
sprout, new ideas, better ideas would come and repl ace the old ones. Ideas 
never fail. They change life, they change the socie ty. They try to make the life 
of the people better. Vinoba was happy with this ac tion. Effects and results are 
for others to judge and evaluate. As a Karmayogi, h e was not interested in the 
fruits of his karma. He did his duty. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 79   
37. Ten Tyakten Bhujitha (Enjoy in renouncing wealt h) 
14th October, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Sampattidan, jeevandan and trusteeship were some of  the other ideas 
propounded by Vinoba. As a matter of fact, Mahatma Gandhi first stated the 
idea of trusteeship. The upnishadic injunction "Ten  tyakten bhunjitah ma 
gradha kasya chiddhamanam" is found in the Isopanis ad. It is a part of daily 
prayer in many ashrams of Gandhiji and Vinoba. It m eans enjoy in renouncing 
wealth. Don't be acquisitive. 
All great religions have preached this idea. Gandhi  wanted those who have 
wealth or possessions to use them for the benefit o f others. They should take 
least for themselves. Vinoba did not want to collec t money from the people. He 
said: Keep your money with you. Only announce that a certain portion of your 
yearly income would be spent for others. This you w ill do on your own, without 
force and without fail. Vinoba did not want to coll ect money, keep accounts 
and build organisations and structures for that pur pose. He wanted it to be 
done by those who owned wealth. In his Sampattidan (wealth gift) he wanted 
the claim of Daridranarayan to be willingly accepte d as a duty, out of self-
conviction and not by force. 
Those who have no wealth, may have physical or ment al strength. They must 
give part of that for others. He firmly believed th at no one was a "have-not". He 
did not want human relations to be built only on so me as 'givers', and others as 
'takers'. He wanted everyone to be a giver. Each on e has something to give to 
others. Everyone must learn to give. He did not wan t a society to be of 'donors' 
and 'beggars'. As children of God, all must give an d all must take. Then only will 
there be a society of equals. 
Jeevandan, giving life for public purposes, was a s imilar idea. Jayaprakash 
Narayan was the first Jeevandaani. Vinoba became th e second. Pleasure in My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 80  giving, pleasure in distributing what you have, ple asure in sharing is a higher 
form of pleasure. 
Daan does not mean alms. It is not begging, Sankara charya said, "Daanam 
samavibhajanam" (Gifting is equal distribution). By  his bhoodan movement 
Vinoba did not want people to be permanent clients or receivers. They must 
also give. Everyone must give, because everyone is a 'have'. 
This classless concept was not acceptable to the in tellectuals. Those who 
believed in class war, class hatred and class annih ilation went on merrily with 
State power, repression, violence and misery for ma ny, with pleasure, perhaps 
for few rulers. In the name of the poor and the exp loited, they exploited others 
more rapaciously! 
Vinoba wanted everybody to give. He was not happy o nly with donations of 
their wealth and possessions. He considered people' s talent also as wealth. He 
wanted everyone to be a trustee for others. Trustee ship must start with you. It 
is not an armchair philosophy to be advocated for o thers, excluding yourself. It 
must start with you. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 81   
38. Gandhi and Vinoba : A Unique Pair 
21st October, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
So far, I have always written to you about what Vin oba said or did and argued. I 
have not written adequately about the great influen ce of Gandhiji on Vinoba. 
Gandhi and Vinoba were a unique pair of very differ ent men who became a 
continuum. Vinoba is called the spiritual successor  of Gandhi. 
What did Gandhi Think of Vinoba? Gandhi told C. F. Andrews as early as in 1971 
(just one year after Vinoba joined his Satyagraha A shram ay Ahmedabad), that 
"He (Vinoba) is a rare gem. He has come to enrich u s (inmates of the then 
Satyagraha Ashram at Sabarmati, Ahmedabad) with his  virtue. He has come not 
to receive but to give." This turned out to be prop hetic. After Gandhiji's death, 
all Gandhian thoughts and ideas were enhanced and u sed by Vinoba through 
bhoodan, gramdan, trusteeship, etc. He gave deeper meanings to the actions 
and ideas of Gandhi. 
What was Vinoba's attitude towards Gandhi? "It was indeed God's boundless 
grace that brought me to Gandhiji, impelled me to s it at his feet. It would be 
impossible indeed to try and describe what I have g ained under him at the 
ashram. It gave me the eye to see. It has been the source of all my inspiration 
and vision. My inner self witnessed that I have str iven conscientiously and 
diligently to act upon Gandhiji's path of non-viole nce to my best....Whatever of 
his thought and teachings I have been able to like and assimilate, I have been 
trying to practise in full awareness each and every  moment of my life. I have no 
doubt that after his passing away, I am doing only his work. I also believe my 
line of thinking reflects his line of thinking in e ssence." 
According to Rang Rao Divakar, another Gandhian, Vi noba was not a blind 
follower of Gandhi, nor even an obedient disciple o r a devoted imitator. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 82  Vinoba said, "Bapu (Gandhiji) never conceived himse lf in the role of a Guru nor 
did he consider anyone his disciple, although I att ach great importance to the 
institution of Guru." 
Once a friend asked Vinoba, whether he should addre ss Bapu as Gandhi or 
Gandhiji. Vinoba said: " If you consider him as a h uman being, a human being 
worthy of respect, you should call him Gandhiji. If  you think of him as a 
thought, it would be sufficient to address him as G andhi. For me, Gandhiji is no 
longer a person, he is an idea. He is an idea perso nified... 
"We must take from great men only their ideas. We m ust not become too 
attached to what is incidental in their lives. We s hould also derive from their 
words the noblest meaning they can bear. That is to  say we should look for 
their subtle import. In this age of science the Man u of the Puranas, or even 
Marx, won't do. I submit in all humility that even Gandhi taken at face value, 
won't do." 
Such were the two great sons of India whose existen ce stretched as continuum 
from 1916 to 1982, almost 60 years of this century.  
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 83   
39. Thought is greater than man 
28th October, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In my previous letter, I gave you some perspective about the relationship 
between Gandhi and Vinoba. You must have also notic ed that I have all along 
been referring to Vinoba as Vinoba, simply because,  to my mind, Vinoba is a 
thought. He was a person, whom I have seen only onc e in 1976 but he 
impressed me deeply since 1951. I considered him a thinker, and a 
communicator of ideas par excellence. He has molded  my mind with a logical 
base. He has convinced me about God or Brahman in t he most rational manner. 
I am writing these letters to induce you to read mo re of his writings and take 
what you like from them. The separation of a person  and his thought is very 
essential. 
Vinoba himself has put it very beautifully. The con cept, thought or idea is 
greater than the thing or man. The thing is perisha ble, the concept abides. The 
thing that is the individual man, the concept, that  is, the idea he symbolizes. 
The individual becomes great because of the indwell ing thought, which is 
great. The individual becomes the mouthpiece for th e thought. The strength 
lies in the thought. And just as the existence of t he individual helps the 
thought, it may also cause harm to it. After the in dividual is gone, the pure 
thought alone remains. That is why Tulsidas says th at the name of Rama is 
greater than the Rama, implying that what can be ac hieved by an individual as 
great as Rama can be achieved in a much larger meas ure by the power of his 
name. Those whom Rama liberated in his life can be counted; but the number 
of people who were liberated and will be liberated by the name of Rama is not 
countable. Rama turned Ayodhya into a paradise. The  name of Rama turned 
every village into Ayodhya. The story of Rama is to ld in every village. How far 
could an embodied Rama go? But the name of Rama has  reached everywhere. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 84  Saints after death become much more powerful than w hen they were while 
living. For with the perishing of the mortal body, their short-comings also 
vanish. When their thoughts become free of the body  they pervade the 
atmosphere, and inspire all. Those hearts which hav e the right kind of 
'receivers' can hear their voice. As the Sastras sa y, the word is imperishable. It 
is relayed into the air, and if we are fitted with a right kind of receiver we can 
hear it. This is the way men get inspiration. 
Pranav, have you seen how Vinoba used this latest i nformation and produced a 
logical base? 
Vinoba said that Gandhi never stuck to his words. H e was always evolving. His 
mind was ever occupied with the quest for truth. We  should, following him, do 
our thinking afresh in the context of every fresh s ituation. Like Gandhi, Vinoba 
was always evolving, because he was always alive, l earning and absorbing 
experiences. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 85   
40. Cow Protection ( Goraksha ) 
4th November, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In 1970, Vinoba finally settled down at Pavnar. He stopped his Padyatra and 
started withdrawing himself from active campaigns. His views were always 
sought by politicians. After the land redistributio n, he took up the cause of 
Goraksha (Cow Protection). 
"The cow is a poem of pity" said Gandhiji. The cow occupies a very important 
place in the religious beliefs of Hindus. Hindus wo rship the cow as a symbol of 
God. Vinoba said that Indian socialism does not sto p with equality between 
human beings but extends to all living beings. The cow is a symbol of all non-
human beings. Feelings of equality and faternity wh ich were preached by all 
other religions were limited to human beings. In Vi noba's view, it was a 
speciality of Hinduism that it included in its comp assion the cow as a symbol of 
other life forms. Hindus worship trees, serpents an d cows and other 
manifestations of life. Ethically, this is a superi or position. Vinoba used to say 
that beginning with cannibalism man progressed towa rds vegetarianism in 
stages, and Ahimsa became a higher value system. Ma ny communities and 
regions in India became vegetarian. This aspect of Indian life was very dear to 
vinoba. 
To talk about cow protection is considered amongst educated Indians as 
something old, backward and anti-quatedly religious . Vinoba looked at cow-
slaughter both as an ethical and an economic menace . He was not a 
ritualistically religious person. He believed in Go d, he believed in prayers, but 
there were no other rituals, no idol worship in his  daily life. He was basically a 
Vedantist. He attached great importance to the cow as a symbol of human 
compassion for fellow life forms. He used to say th at his socialism extended to 
cows and did not allow him to exploit and kill them . My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 86  Being basically turned to village India, Vinoba kne w the importance of the cows 
in village economy. If you give land to a landless person, but if he has no 
bullocks, what can he cultivate? Cows provide milk,  manure and traction power 
in the form of bullocks. A recent study by the Indi an Institute of Management at 
Bangalore has estimated that the energy generated f or traction by bullocks in 
India is equivalent to the energy generated by all other means put together; 
oil, hydro, nuclear etc. That is the importance of the cow as a giver of Food, 
and a renewable source of traction power. It is oft en the only asset a poor man 
has in India. 
Poor farmers cannot resist the temptations of marke t forces. They sell their 
cows for slaughtering. In other words, they sell th eir renewable source of an 
energy generating asset. The land becomes meaningle ss without bullocks. The 
only choice for a poor villager is to become a land less labourer dependent on 
others, or migrate to city slums. Vinoba could not accept this. He, therefore, 
started a campaign for Goraksha (Cow Protection). 
Realistically speaking, it need not have been neces sary to organise a campaign. 
Cow protection in enshrined in the Constitution of India as a Directive Principle. 
The Supreme Court has given a judgement that Anti-c ow-slaughter laws passed 
by some states are constitutionally valid. Many Sta tes have passed such laws. 
Beef does not have much market in India, as it is n ot acceptable to Hindus. 
Still, very large scale cow-slaughter goes on cater ing to export markets. Vinoba 
was pained by all this as a Bhoomiputra, who found it difficult to see that the 
means of livelihood was snatched away by market for ces from the poor 
villagers, and the Government stood inactive. More in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 87   
41. Satyagraha 
11 th  November, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
As I wrote to you last time, Vinoba was looking at Goraksha both in its 
emotional economic aspects. He was not looking at i t from the religious 
sentiment of Hindu. 
He said, that next to that of his mother he was bro ught up on the milk of the 
cow. He could not understand how cows could be slau ghtered in India. He twice 
staked his life on this issue. He talked to politic ians, ministers and the prime 
minister and tried to convince them about it. Ban o n cow slaughter is a 
directive principle of the Constitution. As a Gandh ian, he had been brought up 
on the belief that Goraksha and Khadi were two majo r policy thrusts of the 
Independence movement. All those who fought for the  freedom of India under 
the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi had accepted this as an action point and 
many state governments have passed laws banning cow -slaughter. How could 
the state power in India be non-responsive to the p eople's wishes? 
Satyagraha or fasting unto death was undertaken by Gandhiji several times as a 
political pressure-point. After the declaration of the democratic republic in 
1951, Vinoba was not in favour of Satyagraha or fas ting for every political or 
social demand. In fact, many Gandhians blamed Vinob a for not using this form 
of expression. They called him an inactive academic . He remained firm in his 
views that in a democratic society Satyagraha or fa sting unto death should not 
normally have any role. We can change the governmen t or its policies by 
mobilisation of the people's power. The tools devel oped for use against colonial 
power cannot be used against rulers chosen by the p eople. But he made two 
exceptions and on both occasions for Goraksha. 
His behavior was wholly in consonance with his thin king pattern. The people's 
will was already expressed in the Constitution and the State laws. It was the 
will of the people which their government was not i mplementing. It affected My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 88  the poor millions in villages who were robbed of th eir means of livelihood by 
market forces, and the government was doing nothing  about it. Vinoba felt that 
he was on a strong moral ground when he was fasting  unto death for cow 
protection. He said that even if he were to die the  government may not do a 
thing. He was not worried about that. He saw it as his duty to stake his life for 
his beliefs. The results he was ready to leave in t he hands of God. He said if he 
died he would die for the cow, which was like a mot her to him. 
After all, Vinoba was a true Gandhian. Gandhi walke d the streets of Naokhali 
when communal violence was raging there. All other politicians were busy in 
New Delhi celebrating India's independence! Vinoba walked from village to 
village in Telangana when communists were killing p eople for redistribution of 
land. His life was in great danger. Still, he belie ved in the innate goodness of 
people. Even communists believed in his sincerity. He met them on their 
ideological ground, started bhoodan and marginalize d them. Staking his life for 
the cow was thus a logical step for Vinoba. The poo rest man in the country was 
involved in this. Vinoba's entire life as a Gandhia n thinker was involved in it. 
More about all that in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 89   
42. Emergency in India 
18th November, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
25th June, 1975 was a black day in the life of Mode rn India. A democratically 
elected Prime Minister with a very huge majority wa s unseated by a High Court 
on 12th June, 1975. Values, by which a democratic s ociety stands, the 
constitution stands, were at stake. The Prime minis ter chose to disregard the 
court order. Indira Gandhi imposed an "Emergency" i n India to save her personal 
rule. The whole country became a jail. All politica l opponents were imprisoned. 
A black period in India's political life began. 
Vinoba was respected by Jawaharlal. He was respecte d by Jayprakash. He was 
also respected by Indira Gandhi, who was clinging t o power against democratic 
traditions. Vinoba and Jayprakash were very close J eevandani associates. JP 
had started his Total Revolution agitation. He was jailed, and so were lakhs of 
people. 
For Vinoba, this was an hour of trial. Many of his close associates felt that he 
did not rise to the occasion. Many people denounced  him. They called him 
"Sarkari Sant" (government patronised saint). Intel lectuals, academics and 
politicians attacked him for his non-action. They e ven said he was a partisan 
and afraid of speaking against the government. 
Throughout his life Vinoba had been talking against  politics (Rajniti) and in 
favour of Lokaniti (People's power). He always advi sed the Sarvodaya Samaj 
people against voting, and joining political partie s. They must do only 
lokashikshan (awakening of the people) about their rights. He never accepted 
government as a change agent in the society. He was  for Swarajya (Self-rule) 
and not Surajya (good government). All these facts were known to the people 
and accepted by them. Vinoba's aversion to electora l politics was very well 
known. 
But because of the Emergency, when the political sy stem faced great 
difficulties, politicians wanted Vinoba to help by siding with them against Indira My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 90  Gandhi. They wanted him to be partisan in their fav our. In fact, he was 
observing silence (maun) for one year from 25 Decem ber, 1974, six months 
before the Emergency. 
As I told you in my earlier letter, Vinoba started his fast unto death for 
Goraksha in 1976. Cow-slaughter was an issue on whi ch if the people's view or 
opinion were taken, it would be in favour of a ban.  No true democratic leader 
who knows the people's nerve can go against the peo ple's will. Vinoba staked 
his life for cow protection. Indira Gandhi, who cou ld bundle all opposition 
leaders into jail and could not care less, rushed t o Pavnar, promised Central 
Government action and ended Vinoba's fast. As a pol itician she did nothing 
thereafter. With the people's support, one man with  his life at stake could 
move the government which was impervious to politic al opposition. Jayprakash 
said, "This proves that Vinoba has a great moral in fluence on the country, even 
a dictatorial government cannot ignore him." (1) 
In 1977 elections, Indira Gandhi lost her support a ll over the country. Vinoba 
fasted unto death for the second time in 1979 when Morarji Desai was a prime 
minister. Morarji promised to support Vinoba who en ded his fast, but Morarji 
lost his power in 1979. The Central Law on Cow-slau ghter did not come about. 
People's power was asserted at both times first in 1977 and then in 1980. The 
people had voted for a political ideology. They had  not voted for Total 
Revolution. But one frail man who put his life behi nd the people's will proved 
successful twice! Both Prime Ministers were complet e politicians. Why did they 
submit to his pressure? Because it was the people's  will. And democracy means 
people's will. Vinoba proved it without party polit ics. Party politics was not his 
language. That was not his way. He proved that in a  democracy if the genuine 
people's will is projected the government has to co me to terms with it. The 
government can be changed. The real need is to proj ect the desires of the 
people and not those of some people, factions or po liticians. Changing people 
in power means very little. We must change their th inking. 
With love, 
Yours, L. N. Godbole My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 91   
43. Anushasan Parva (Chapter on Discipline) 
25th November, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
There is one more episode in Vinoba's life which I must tell you about. 
Immediately after emergency was declared by Indira Gandhi on 25th June, 
1975, Shri Vasant Sathe, then Minister for Informat ion and Broadcasting went to 
meet Vinoba at Pavnar. Vinoba was observing his one  year of silence from 25th 
December, 1974. Sathe went to Vinoba to seek his op inion about the 
emergency. 
Vinoba showed Sathe a page from the MahabharatA tit led "Anushasan Parva" 
(chapter on discipline). Since he would not speak, Sathe as Minister of 
Information and Broadcasting told the world through  AIR, Doordarshan and the 
newspapers, that Vinoba had indicated his approval emergency by calling it a 
Chapter of Discipline. Everyone swallowed this inte rpretation by Sathe. That 
was the reason why Vinoba was called "Sarkari Saint " (government patronised 
saint). 
This one action of Vinoba was used by politicians i n power to full extent. Sarva 
Seva Sangh, which always transacted its business wi th unanimous resolutions, 
split. Most people went along with Jayprakash Naray an and very few remained 
with Vinoba. 
For all members of Sarvodaya Samaj this was a testi ng time. The 1977 election 
victory was attributed to the slogan of Total Revol ution. They felt that JP was 
right, and that they were vindicated. People electe d the Janata Party to 
power. Indira Gandhi was totally routed in the gene ral election of 1977. 
Humiliation was heaped on Vinoba. He remained stead fast in his views. He 
showed no bitterness. His love for JP, and JP's lov e for him remained 
unchanged. 
Within 28 months, the Janata Party could not surviv e in power. In the 1980 
election, Indira Gandhi came back to power. Vinoba after his year of silence My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 92  explained that what he meant by Anushasan (discipli ne) was the anushasan 
decided by Acharyakula. This he had described in de tail earlier in his concept 
of Acharyakula. The Acharyas who are non-partisan, not interested in political 
power but in social welfare should decide the rules  of discipline and the 
government should only implement them. This he had decribed in detail earlier 
in his concept of Acharya Kula in 1968. 
A man who shunned politics all his life, who advise d against politics was 
dragged into party politics by clever politicians. His name was misused, but he 
remained steadfast. The words "Anushasan Parva" and  "Sarkari Saint" became 
popular epithets to describe Vinoba. Sadly it all t urned meaningless. JP died 
with remorse for the exploitation of the idea of To tal Revolution. Politicians we 
interested in power: total revolution and JP were t ools in their hands. 
Politicians also used JP for partisan ends and dump ed his advice once they were 
in power. People's power turned sour. It all happen ed in just three years. JP 
died as a disheartened man. Like Gandhi, he was kil led, though metaphorically, 
by his followers. 
Vinoba, inspite of much vilification, remained aloo f and effective till the end. 
He did not get into politics, though many of his fo llowers ditched him during 
emergency. He remained Vinoba till the end. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 93   
44. Vinoba's Holistic Approach 
2nd December, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Vinoba always believed in reconciling different vie wpoints and different 
darsans, using the technique of gentle persuasion. "Abhidheyam param samyam" 
(The aim was to achieve maximum equality) was his m otto. 
He was a great student of religious literature. Jna neshwar, Tukaram, Tulsidas, 
Kabir, Mirabai, Madhav Deva, Thiruvalluvar and many  other Bhaktas were his 
source of inspiration. He learnt Arabic to read the  Koran. 
One of his important achievements is his edited ver sion of all the great 
religious texts. He kept the most significant parts  of each book, according to 
his views. He published these books in Marathi and Hindi. Later, they were also 
translated into other languages. It seems a very si mple and easy job. In reality 
it was not so. 
Vinoba summarised Naam Ghosha in 1962 and in 1963 h e published "Koran Saar" 
(summary of Koran) in Marathi. In 1964 he prepared Texts of Manushasanam 
(summary of Manu Smriti), Vedanta Sudha, Vinayanjal i and Gurubodhsar. 
In 1967 he completed his book, "Essence of Christia nity". In 1968 he published ' 
Rgveda saar' and in 1969, Ashtadashi (eighteen Upan isads) Chayan. He 
published 'Samanasutta' (Jain Texts) in 1975. 
He had given up his name and started signing as "Ra m Hari since 25th August, 
1974. 
Some religious people consider all these efforts as  sacrilegous. But Vinoba was 
a deeply religious man. His efforts did not give of fence to anybody, as he was 
interested in finding out genuine similarities and was perceptive to good from 
all sources. His Sarvadharma Prarthana is a classic  example of this idea of 
finding the highest common factor in all religious teachings. It is a string of 
God's names as believed in by all religions. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 94  In September 1962, Vinoba was allowed access to Ass am through East Pakistan, 
as he was walking on foot for his bhoodan. Pakistan  never had good relations 
with India. Vinoba was in a position to appeal to t he heart of East Pakistani 
farmers as easily as he was in a position to do so everywhere else in India. And 
they responded equally well. 
Vinoba said that his idea of India consisted of A B  C as triangle, where A stood 
for Afghanistan, B for Burma, and C for Ceylon. He considered this landmass or 
sub-continent as one cultural unit. Its religions m ay be different, but culture 
remains the same. It is like a "common European hom e" for Europe. On 13th 
September, 1962 he suggested the idea of India-Paki stan Confederation as a 
solution to the problem of political divisions. He explained this idea in Rangpur 
in East-Pakistan (now Bangladesh). He wanted it as a first step towards World 
Confederation or Jai Jagat. 
Vinoba's holistic approach and very deep perception  is clear in all his minor and 
major campaigns. His capacity to interpret old idio ms in new contexts was 
remarkable. I have written to you from time to time  about it. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 95   
45. Spiritualizing Politics 
9th December, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
Gopal Krishna Gokhale, a great statesman and parlia mentarian was a prominent 
leader in the early part of the twentieth century. He was contemporary of 
Lokmanya Bal Gangadhar Tilak. Their approaches to t he betterment of India 
were poles apart. Gokhale was a "gradualist", and h e wanted the constitutional 
way to be used for the improvement of life in India . Tilak wanted Swaraj. Once 
India were free she can take care of herself. 
Mahatma Gandhi came under the spell of Gokhale who wanted to "spiritualise" 
politics. Gandhi followed him, interested not only in achieving Swaraj but was 
careful about the means. He was careful not only ab out ends but also the 
means. He insisted on Truth and non-violence and Sa tyagraha as the method of 
achieving independence. All political actions of Ga ndhi were consistent with his 
emphasis on using the right means to achieve the ri ght ends. 
Vinoba took this idea of "spiritualising" politics a step further. He said, "Politics 
assumed the semblance of spiritualisation before po litical power was gained. As 
soon as political power came within grasp, this sem blance vanished.... 
"people tell me that treading the path of Gandhiji I should take up the task of 
spiritualising politics. I tell them that I want to  end politics itself. I have no 
desire to turn a stone into Shiva and then worship it. Put the stone into your 
pocket, I say, and worship the God that dwells in y ou. There was a time for 
spiritualization of stone. That time is now gone. I t will not do now to worship 
the stone with sandal paste and ignore the starving  millions before us.... 
...While reflecting on the spiritualization of poli tics it occurs to me that in the 
process politics does not remain intact, it is dest royed. Its place is taken by 
Lokaniti (people's power). With freedom has come th e rule of the people. 
Politics cannot survive its spiritualization. Just as when you try to ignite wood it 
burns up. You cannot apply fire to wood and at the same time make it retain its My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 96  character as wood. It is not possible to retain bot h the processes of combustion 
and wood. Only in burning up will wood give light a nd warmth. When business 
in conducted by reference to majority and minority,  we cannot spiritualize 
politics and at the same time keep it in tact. It i s now appropriate to say, "that 
politics is outdated. The days of politics are over ." (1) 
As a student of Mathematics and a very consistent l ogician, Vinoba formulated 
the following proposition: 
Science + Politics = Destruction or Annihiliation 
Science + Spirituality = Sarvodaya (2) 
More in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 97   
46. Devnagari Script-1 
16th December, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
You know that in India we have many regional langua ges, hundreds of dialects, 
besides English and other international languages. Each language group has its 
own beauty and script. In addition to this, it has a great possessive feelings 
amongst the people. After all, language is a very g reat emotional bond. It is a 
basis of fellow feeling and togetherness. 
India is blessed with several languages. Each group  claims to be superior to the 
others. Literature and the cultural traditions of a  society are expressed through 
its language. 
English was the official language of the British an d it was thrust on the various 
peoples of our country from 1835. As a common facto r of oppression, it was a 
point of hatred during the freedom struggle. But du e to its rich cultural 
heritage, it also became a link language between ed ucated Indians. As 
transportation acquired speed, people started freel y moving about in the four 
corners of the country. English became a strong lin k language, and it continues 
to be so even today. But we should not forget that it still is a language 
mastered by only about 5% of Indians. The rest of t he people transact their 
business in their regional languages. 
With the advent of democracy it was but natural tha t the people wanted their 
government to function in their own language. In de mocracy it cannot be 
otherwise. In every nationality, language is a majo r factor. The new India was 
divided into various linguistic states before 1960.  
Vinoba organised his bhoodan padayatra during those  turbulent days when 
people rose in great agitation in favour of their l anguage and of linguistic 
states. All the major Indian languages are rich in their cultural heritage. Most 
of the Indian languages have a strong association w ith Sanskrit. They include My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 98  Telugu, Malayalam and Kannada. The real distinction  is with Tamil, but that too 
is studded with Sanskrit words. 
In America there are several states but one languag e, "American". So is the case 
in other European countries, USSR, China, and Japan . To have one common 
language for India is very difficult. English and H indi are the two official 
languages. How does one bring about national cohesi on? 
Vinoba suggested an idea. He said that while in Eur ope each language exists in 
a separate nation, India is one nation with several  major languages. Many 
Indian languages are spoken by many more people tha n languages in the 
European countries. Vinoba considered this diversit y as an asset and not as a 
problem. 
He made another suggestion. He said that all Indian  languages should adopt 
Devanagari as an addional script. Please note, Pran av, that Vinoba is not talking 
of a common script in place of the existing ones. H e said, that Devanagari 
should be used as an additional script. He suggeste d some changes in the 
present Devanagari script and called it Lokanagari. " 
I will write more about it in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 99   
47. Devnagari Script-2 
23rd December, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
In my previous letter I wrote to you about Vinoba's  idea of a common 
alternative script. In practice, it means Gujarati would be written in its present 
script as wee as it can be written in Devanagari. S o would Telugu, Kannada, 
Tamil, Malayalam and other languages to be written.  
All North Indian languages from Kashmiri, Assamese,  to Marathi have developed 
from Sanskrit. Hindi, Marathi and Sanskrit have a c ommon Devanagari script. It 
involves almost 30 crores of people. Bengali, Oriya , Assamese and Gujarati, 
could easily adopt Devanagari. 
Languages will continue to be separate, but once th ey are expressed in a 
common script you will start realising that there a re many common words, 
constructions and proverbs in the Indian languages than one has imagined. 
"Maitri" a journal brought out by Brahmavidya Mandi r at Pavnar, publishes its 
Kannada edition in Devanagari script. Bhoomiputra, a Gujarati journal 
published from Baroda devotes a few pages to Gujara ti articles in the 
Devanagari script. 
I have also made some efforts in this direction. I am the Editor of the House 
Magazine published by the company for which I work.  We include articles in 
Bengali, Kannada and Gujarati in the Devanagari scr ipt. Most of them are easily 
understood by people who do not know these language s. Since they can read 
the script they can understand the contents to a la rge extent. Often the same 
root word sounds different because it is pronounced  differently. Script poses no 
such problem. 
This should not really surprise people. In Europe, the Roman script with some 
small adaptations is used for all printed materials , road signs, and so on. 
Languages are very different, but the script used i s more or less the same. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 100  Devanagari as an alternative script for all Indian languages was advocated by 
Vinoba. Once people start reading each others langu age they will see many 
common factors in them. Culturally, India is one na tion. It is an Ancient Hindu 
culture where most of the rituals and practices are  common. This commonality 
is very essential to our culture. 
Vinoba was advocating this idea of a common script when there was a clamour 
for reorganisation of the country on the basis of l anguages. In his own way, he 
had an important dream. He said that since China an d Japan still use a 
pictographic script, they also need to adopt an add itional script. If India uses a 
common script, China and Japan may also find that D evanagari is a more 
standardised script, suitable for modern machine la nguages with only one sign 
for one alphabet. Computer users are already findin g Sanskrit an easier 
language for computing than others. 
Vinoba said, "If the Roman is the script of the Wes t, Devanagari will be the 
script of the East tomorrow." 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 101   
48. Bhagvadgita-1 
30th December, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
The Gita had a great influence on Vinoba. It has be en commented upon by 
many people in India and abroad. Shankaracharya wro te his commentary on it. 
So did Lokmanya Tilak, Mahatma Gandhi and Vinoba. E ach one interpreted it in 
his own way. The influence of the Gita on Vinoba wa s manifold. 
Vinoba rated the Gita on par with his mother. In Ma rathi alone there are 65 
translations of it. Vinoba's mother wanted to have one done by him. He could 
not complete it in her lifetime. He published his t ranslation, in samashloki (the 
same meter) in 1931. He called it Gitai (Mother Git a). The most important part 
of it is its Introduction. Vinoba says," Gitai is l ike my mother. I am her child 
who does not know. She picks me up as and when I st umble and cry." Vinoba;s 
is the most simple and direct translation of the Gi ta giving the full rich meaning 
of the original. This is Gitai, the largest selling  Marathi Book to date. It was not 
translated into any other languages till Vinoba's d eath. It is a standard text 
book in all his six ashrams and his students learne d it in Marathi. 
The second important book by Vinoba on the Gita is the Gita-Pravachane or 
(Talks on Gita). It has been translated into almost  all the languages of India and 
in English. This very lucid and logical interpretat ion of the Gita, with 
remarkable precision. It is a record of Pravachans (talks) Vinoba gave to jail 
mates in Dhule jail from February 1932 to June 1932 , on every Sunday. It was 
taken down verbatim by Sane Guruji. It has a very r emarkable, directly 
appealing and simple style of its own. Vinoba gives  here his interpretation of 
the Gita. The most important concept he expounds in  it is akarma (non-action). 
That is his personal contribution. Pranav, you must  read this whole book when 
you can. It will make a lasting impression on you. It has changed the course of 
many lives in India. Both Gitai and Gita Pravachane  were considered as finite 
works and Vinoba did not change them. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 102  Vinoba's third book on the Gita is Gitai Shabdarth.  (Literal meanings of words in 
the Gitai) is a compilation, where he has gone deep  into the implications of 
many key words. 
The last book on Gita is Gitai Chintanika. This is a remarkable book. It was 
continuously evolving. Vinoba used to create many n ew interpretations and 
ideas on the Gitai virtually every day. This was th e book of a man who was 
continuously evolving, ever changing, yet essential ly the same. From the 
viewpoint of the study of Vinoba as an individual t his is an important book 
So Pranav, you will eventually see Vinoba as fully immersed by the Gita. The 
Mahabhashya of Shankaracharya, the Gitarasya of Til ak, Aurobindo's 
commentary, the Jnaneshwari of jnandeva were all a staple diet for him. Still, 
he tackled the Gita in four different ways. 
Gita is a veritable treasure-house of distilled wis dom from the Upanisads. It has 
influenced many lives. Vinoba's life was one illust rious example of that 
influence. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 103   
49. Bhagvadgita-2 
6th January, 1990 
My dear Pranav, 
As Vinoba was greatly influenced by the Gita, he us ed to say that Vinoba as a 
human body would vanish, but Gitai, perhaps would r emain. His humility was 
remarkable. He does not say that Gita Pravachane or  the Gitai Chintanika will 
remain. They are his commentaries or interpretation s. They are his darsanas. 
The reality is Gita. And Gitai is its translation. Even amongst his Gita books he 
wants to be remembered for his translation of the G ita. Such small glimpses of 
a person makes him small or big in the eyes of othe rs. 
In his early years Vinoba was a hard-headed thinker . He was like an uncut 
diamond. He mellowed after his bhoodan padayatra. H e used to be very 
abrasive and curt in his communication with others.  In later years, his intellect 
remained sharp but his expression mellowed. His sut ra was : Satya (truth), 
Prem (love) and Karuna (compassion). 
Annual literary conference of Marathi used to depen d on the donation of the 
rich, and therefore these annual conferences were i rregular. The Ashadhi Yatra 
was an ancient event where all the saint poets of M aharashtra used to 
assemble. This Yatra of Pandharpur has taken place with clock-work precision 
for the last two thousand years. People observe a f ast on Mahaekadashi. They 
go to Pandharpur on foot and on empty stomachs. Thi s yatra was actually a 
literary conference where saint poets would meet ea ch other. 
In order to highlight the dependence of modern lite rary conferences on donors 
and their irregularity compared to the clock-work r egularity of the Maha 
Ekadashi Yatra, Vinoba expressed his views in one s entence. He said that 
modern conferences are based on rice, while Ashadhi  is based on fasting. 
Ashadhi therefore meets regularly. The real pungenc y of Vinoba's sentence can 
be felt only in Marathi. My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 104  At the end of his talks on Gita Vinoba used a beaut iful simile. As long as a man 
is searching for meaning in his life he continues t alking of "I", (or "main" in 
Hindi). He goes on calling "Main, Main" like a livi ng goat. He is full of this ego or 
pride in himself. But as he approaches nearer the u ltimate reality (Brahman), 
and dies, he discards this body as "I". Like the sa me proverbial goat he starts 
calling "tuhi" "tuhi", "you" "you" (twam, twam) onl y. The intestines of the goat 
when used for musical sitar the same goat changes t he tune from "Main", "Main" 
to "Tuhi", "Tuhi". Pranav, when you read this in th e Indian context in Hindi or 
Marathi, you will realise how beautifully Vinoba ha s played on the words "Main" 
and "tuhi". He took this quote from Dadu, a saint p oet in Hindi (1). 
He ended his talks on that note. That again is the Mahavakya of Shankaracharya 
and Adwait philosophy : "Tat Twan Asi" "That thou a rt". 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 105   
50. Panch-Jana Shakti 
13th January, 1991 
My dear Pranav, 
Another concept Vinoba created is in relation to so cial organisation. As usual, 
being basically a walking university, he put it bef ore the common people in 
their own idiom. The impact was long-lasting. Words  have to be few, but when 
used effectively they linger in people's minds for a long time. Vinoba had a 
great felicity with words. 
Vinoba compared society with a hand (1). We have fi ve fingers. He said that 
these fingers are part of the same hand but they ha ve different roles. First take 
the thumb; he called it Jana-sakti or people's powe r. It is the sturdiest finger, a 
collective sturdy power of the people. 
Then there is the small finger. It is the smallest.  It is the power of good men, or 
Sajjan Sakti. It is an inner urge, it keeps society  on the right path. Yet it is 
small in size and looks weak. These Sajjans are the  sevaks or servants of the 
people. They have a mission to live life according to the dictates of conscience 
and moving in the right direction. The base consist s of moral and ethical 
principles such as Satya (Truth) and Ahimsa (Nonvio lence). The servants of the 
people live by these principles and so acquire a di stinctive power. Though 
apparently weak, they have the major role of a smal l finger. 
The third is the index finger. This stands for the role of Acharyas. They show 
the right path to society. Thinkers and scholars ha ve to guide all. While keeping 
themselves aloof, they study the events in the worl d disinterestedly and place 
their opinions before the world. They have to be al oof, discerning and weighing 
good and bad points, pointing out the right way. 
The middle finger is reserved for the enterprising and the rich. This represents 
Mahajan-Sakti. Businessmen, industrialists and entr epreneurs who are a power 
by themselves. Gandhiji put the idea of trusteeship  for such people. They My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 106  should not consider themselves as owners of wealth but as trustees of the 
wealth for society. 
The fifth finger is called "Anamika" in Sanskrit. I t means 'nameless'. That is the 
role of Danda-Sakti or Government. By itself, it do es nothing, but it co-
ordinates all the other fingers. Its role is to bri ng together all these powers in 
society. That is the role of Government. Today, it may have assumed 
supremacy of power, but its real role is that of an amika. It should occupy less 
and less importance and should remain power in name  only. Hence Vinoba 
compared it with anamika. 
All these five fingers make a hand a complete power . It can move mountains, 
provided it works like a hand as a united whole. Ea ch finger is a power in itself 
but effective only when they are together. 
Vinoba called this Pancha (five) Jana-Sakti (people s' power). Jana, Sevakjana or 
Sajjana (social workers), Vidvatjana (Acharyas), Ma hajana (rich people) and the 
government. Together they make a Pancha-jana-sakti.  
More in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 107   
51. Sarvodaya 
20th January, 1991 
My dear Pranav, 
All said and done, the name of Vinoba is linked in the minds of people with 
bhoodan. His other contributions, which are mainly in the field of ideas did not 
get adequate exposure. Even bhoodan was treated as a Gandhian fad. Nobody 
could understand what it meant. 
Vinoba was a Sarvodayi. He believed in the developm ent of all (sarva). He was 
not a champion of class or of any one part of socie ty. Poor or rich, worker or 
owner everyone needs to develop. Vinoba wanted the all-round development of 
everyone. And his ideas were not restricted to mone tary or material prosperity. 
A man must develop his own 'self'. He must enlarge it and cover the universe, 
bringing all living beings into it. 
Any movement, therefore, Vinoba could consider as u ltimately aimed at this 
self-realisation, this Atmajnana. Seeing this conne xion of the self (atma) to the 
Universe (Brahman) was his aim from the beginning. 
Vinoba was therefore in a position to see all the b asic assumptions differently. 
He did not divide the people into categories of 'ha ves' and 'have-nots'. He 
treated all as 'haves'. He did not, therefore,look at people as classes or as parts 
of society. He did not believe in class conflict, c lass-war or 'party politics'. He 
was for all. 
Once you start looking for the good of all, the met hod of thinking in terms of 
majority / minority is not adequate for social deci sions. Sarva Seva Sangh 
therefore used to take decisions on unanimity. This  approach proved 
inadequate when emergency divided the Sarvodaya mov ement into two camps. 
Still, the validity of unanimity or at least a cons ensus in decision-making does 
not become irrelevant. Even today, in the competiti ve, party-ridden political 
system, within a party decisions are taken by conse nsus. The concept of 
polarisation, antagonism and adversorial relations is essentially a western My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 108  Darshana. In China and Japan, harmony is considered  more important than 
justice. To divide issues, people or ideas into yes  / no, right / wrong, and 
generally in categories is a western way of thinkin g. 
Japanese Management differs from American Managemen t on this basic 
assumption. We see it in every sphere. Productivity  is inspired and not 
extracted. Unity of interest is established and nur tured. There are many 
applications and uses of this Darsana in our day-to -day life. 
This innate Indianness was a special aspect of Vino ba's ideas. He did not insist 
on anything. He was busy sowing ideas and spreading  ideas. Many people were 
inspired by their innate strength. They succeeded o r failed according to their 
strength. 
Vinoba put his emphasis on the concept of Sarvodaya  in all walks of life. In his 
life, for thirteen years of Bhoodan-Yatra and anoth er four years on foot, he 
gave almost 20,000 talks. And what were his Sarvoda ya topics? Vinoba put it 
beautifully,; "When you build a house, you keep a b ed-room, a study and a 
kitchen, but do you keep a separate room for air? Y ou need air everywhere. 
similarly, Sarvodaya needs no separate room, it is everywhere. It has a place in 
every sphere and walk of life. I am moving for a to tal revolution. Nothing short 
of total revolution will do for me. Each and every aspect of life has to be 
touched with the alchemy of Sarvodaya to achieve to tal revolution (1). 
More in my next letter. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 109   
52. VINOBA: The Man of Ideas 
27th January, 1991 
My dear Pranav, 
It all started as a joke. Vinoba is a great influen ce on my life. Veer Savarkar 
and Vinoba Bhave are the two Marathi authors, think ers, revolutionaries and 
literary writers, who have dominated my life. For m any, they appear to be at 
two different ideological poles. I do not think so.  Both have influenced my 
thinking. 
Whenever I talk to people I quote from Savarkar or Vinoba. But more often, 
Vinoba. Your grandfather and my guru Dr. N. H. Atth reya, used to tell me every 
now and then that I should write in English about V inoba and his ideas. I kept 
promising him that I would but failed repeatedly to  do so. 
In January, 1990 one Sunday morning, he told me in his own gentle persuasive 
style that I should write to him a letter every wee k, regularly telling him 
something about Vinoba, his life and his ideas. Tha t was something which I 
could not resist. Then, as a smart move, I said: it  was not much use writing 
about a great man to an elderly person. I could wri te to his grandson. It would 
be more useful to him, and for a longer time-span. He readily agreed. 
That is how this letter -writing started on Sunday,  the 4th February, 1990. It 
continued for a whole year and this is the last let ter, dated 27th January, 1991. 
The main purpose of writing these letters is not to  write anything definitive 
about ideas. This is not a scholarly work. It is an  introduction to a fascinating, 
truly Indian, bhoomiputra mind. If these letters in duce you to read any of the 
original books or talks by Vinoba their purpose wil l be more than fulfilled. 
Vinoba had many enchanting original ideas. He was a  true bhoomiputra. He was 
exposed to Western thought but his understanding of  India was that of an 
insider. Even Mahatma Gandhi started looking at Ind ian life, after his South 
African journey, from the eyes of a Westerner. Vino ba was totally desi. He was My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 110  a Vishwa-Manusha but rooted deep in Indian soil. He  was not parochial, but a 
deep Hindu thinker. 
Vinoba's ideas therefore have a special fragrance o f India's mother earth . My 
purpose was to introduce a truly Indian Mind of hig h calibre to you, Pranav. If 
you read his talks and books in the later years of your life, and even if you 
reject every idea in these letters the basic purpos e of dissimination of ideas, 
Vichar Sasan, and Vichar -Prasar is achieved. Vinob a himself used to say that 
very little remains once a person is dead. Vinobaji  died on 15th November, 
1982. Now he remains as pure thought or idea. I hav e throughout referred to 
him as Vinoba. Vinobaji was a human being whom I re spected, and met only 
once in 1976 when he was being vilified all around.  I have interpreted his 
Goraksha fast unto death in one of my letters. His human body (Deha ) is no 
more. What remains is pure, bodyless thought. That is why I have called him 
Vinoba and not Vinobaji. 
As a Hindu I have to pay three debts: Deva-rna, Pit r-rna and Acharya-rna. These 
letters are my offering to Vinoba as a "Acharya Tar pana by Vichar - Parasar. 
With love, 
Yours, 
L. N. Godbole 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 111  REFERENCES 
Birth definition of 'Brahma'  
1) Vichar  Pothi : (Random  Reflections) by  Vinoba  T r.  by  Vasant  Nargolkar, Sarva  
Saugha  Sangh Prakashan, Raj  Ghat, Varanasi (1971)  P.47  Item 233. 
2) The  Problems  of  Philosophy, Bertrand  Russel, Ox ford  University  Press, 1976, PP. 1 - 
6. 
 
In search of Meaning  
1) Random  Reflections : P. 115  Item 522 (649) Origin al  Marathi  Item  reference. 
2) Random  Reflections : P. 17  Item 17 (101)  Origina l  Marathi  reference. 
3) Ahinsecha  Shudh (Marathi), Paramdham  Prakashan, P avnar  1988.  P. 162 
4) Vichar  Pothi (Marathi)  P. 53  Item 442  
 
Learning : The change in ourselves  
1) Shikshan  Vichar : By  Vinoba, Paramdham  Prakashan , Pavnar, 1977  PP. 10 - 12 
 
Education : Ever eternal, ever changing  
1) Maitri, 12  Feb, 1990  Brahma  Vidya  Mandir, Pavna r, P. 66  
2) Maitri, 12  Feb, 1990  P. 67. 
 
Add emotions into your thoughts  
1) Vinoba  Saraswat (Marathi), Sahitya  Akademi, 1987  PP. 12 - 19 
 
Education & Spirituality : Development with directi on  
1) Janus  Arthur  Koestler  Hutchinson  of  London  19 79, P. 1 
 
People's Power  
1) Lokaniti (Marathi)  Paramdham  Prakashan, Pavnar, P . 11 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 112   
Change in 'I' is the change in 'We'  
1) Vinoba  Saraswat (Marathi), Sahitya  Akademi, 1987,  P. 277 
 
The person of Ideas  
1) Ahimsecha  Shodh (Marathi), Ed. Kalindi, Paramdham  Prakashan, Pavnar,1988, P. 172 
 
PRARTHANA  
1) Aum  Tat  sat  Shri  Narayan  Tu  Purushottam  Guru   Tu  
2) Siddha  Buddha  Tu  Skanda  Vinayak  Savita  Pavak  Tu  
3) Brahma  Mazda  Tu  Yahva  Shakti  Tu  Eshupita  Pra bhu  Tu  
4) Rudra  Vishnu  Tu  Ram_Krishna  Tu  Raheem  Tao  Tu   
5) Vasudeo  Go  Vishvaroop  Tu  Chidanand  Hari  Tu  
6) Adviteeya  Tu  Akal  Nirbhay  Atmalinga  Shiva  Tu 
 
SARVA DHARMA VACHAN  
1) Aum  Dehe, Prane  Mane 
Varaneeya  Te  Savityache 
Tej  Devache, Dhyavuya 
Prero  Buddhis  Amuchya  (Thrice) 
 
2) He  Prabho,  Neye  Maj 
Asatatoon  Satyakade 
Tamantoon  Jyotikade 
Mrutyntoon  Amrutakade  
 
3) Jaisa  Varaneeya  Prabhu, Taisa  Chi  Satyen  Guru 
Su_Manachi  Tya  Denagi, Jo  Kari  Deva  Karya  Jag i 
Tya  Daivi  Shakti  Vari, Jo  Deenanche  Sahya  Kar i 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 113  4) Namoo  Siddhas 
Namoo  Arthatas 
Samyag  Darshana  Jnana  Chritrya 
Ha  Mokshamarga 
 
5) Paap  Te  Talave, Shubh  Acharave 
Svachitta  Shodhave, Mhanatibuddha 
 
6) Shejaryavar Prem Karoo 
Shatruvarahi Prem Karoo 
Parasparavar Prem Karoo  
 
7) Arambhi  Devachenaav, Krupala  Jo  Kanava  Loo 
Stuti  Tya  Devachi, Prabhu  Jo  Vishvacha 
Krupalu  Kanavalu  Swami/Shevatchya  Divasacha 
Tuzi  Karv  Bhakti, Tuzich  Re  Yachana 
Saral  Marga  Dakheev  Tu  Amha 
Tyan  Vari  Karitoshi  Krupa  Tyancha; 
Na  Jyan  Vari  Tvza  Prakop  Utare 
Nawa  Bhramit  Je  Tyancha  
 
8) Auinay  Door  Kari  Deva 
Man  Mavalo, Trishna  Jiro 
Bhoot  Daya  Pasaro 
 
'And Also' - Duties and Philosophy  
1) Talks on the Gita, by Vinoba, Sarva Seva Sangh Prak ashan, Rajhghat, Varanasi,  
8th  Ed.1982, PP. 19 & 20. 
 
The modern side of 'Bhakti'  
1) Talks  on  the  Gita  Vinoba, Sarva  Seva  Sangh  P rakashan  Rajghat, Varanasi 1. 1982  
PP. 75 & 76 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 114  Bhakti, Gyan and Seva  
1) Talks  on  the  Gita, Vinobaji, Sarva  Seva  Sangh  Prakashan  Rajghat, Varanasi 1, 
P. 185 - 187  
2) Ahinsecha  Shodh, Vinoba, Paramdham  Prakashan, Pav nar, 1988  P. 77 
 
Vinoba and Jayaprakash  
1) Specially  written  introduction  to  the  English  Edition  of  "Talks  on  the  Gita" 
published  by George  Allen  and  Unwin  Ltd., Lond on, 1954 
 
Bhoodan-1  
1) Vinoba's  life  and  Mission, Kanti  Shah (Tr. L.O.  Joshi),Sarva  Seva  Sangh Prakashan, 
Rajghat, Varanasi-1, 1979  PP.43 - 45 . 
 
Bhoodan-2  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba, (Tr. Marjorie Sykes), Sarv a Seva Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1972, PP. 23 & 24. 
 
Swarajya - Sarvodaya  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba ( Tr.Marjorie Sykes), Sarva   Seva  Sangh  Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi  221 001, PP.  26 & 27  
2) Gitarahasya, Bal  Gangadhar  Tilak, Tilak  Bandhu, Pune-411 002, P. 383 (Mahabharat, 
Adi  Parva, 115 - 36  and  Sabha  Parva  61.11)  
3) The  Third  Power, Vinoba (Tr. Marjorie  Sykes), PP . 26 & 27 
 
On Institutions  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba, (Tr. Marjorie Sykes), Sarv a Seva Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1972. PP. 27 - 29 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 115   
Sarvodaya Samaj-1  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba (Tr. Marjorie Sykes), Sarva  Seva Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1972. P. 32 
2) ibid  PP. 30 & 31 
 
Sarvodaya Samaj-2  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba (Tr. Marjorie Sykes), Sarva  Seva Sangh, Rajghat, Varanasi, 
1972,  P. 35 
 
Science + Spiritual wisdom = Self-Knowledge  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba (Tr. Marjorie Sykes), Sarva  Seva Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1972 P. 40.  
2) ibid P. 48  
3) ibid P. 49 
 
Power of the Word  
1) The  Third  Power, Vinoba, (Tr.Marjorie  Sykes), Sa rva  Seva  Sangh  Prakashan, 
Rajghat, Varanasi, 1972, P. 76 
 
Religious Institutions  
1) Based  on  his  lecture  at  Chaturvedamangalam  in   Tamilnadu  on  19.02.1957, 
Bhoodan  Ganga, Part  9, Paramdham  Vidya - Peeth  Prakashan, Pavnar  1958, P. 183. 
 
Ahimsa : The way of living  
1) Based  on  pages  50 - 59  of  The  Third  power  b y  Vinoba (Tr. Marjorie  Sykes), Sarva  
Seva Sangh  Prakashan, Rajghat, Varanasi, 1972. 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 116   
Teachers: the source of light  
1) The Third Power, Vinoba, (Tr. Marjorie Sykes), Sarv a Seva Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1972,  P. 103 
 
Dignity of Labour  
1) Based on The Third Power, Vinoba, (Tr. Marjorie  Sy kes), Sarva  Seva  Sangh Prakashan, 
Rajghat, Varanasi, 1972, PP. 104-107 
 
Essence of learning  
1) Based on Shikshan Vichar (Marathi), Vinoba, Paramdh am Prakashan, Pavnar, 1977, 
PP. 213 &  214 
 
Nai Talim , Lok-Shikshan  
1) Based on: Shikshan Vichar (Marathi), Paramdham  Pra kashan, Pavnar, 1977, P. 138  
 
Thought is greater than man  
1) Based  on  Vinoba  on  Gandhi, Edited  by  Kanti  S hah, Sarva  Seva  Sangh Prakashan, 
Rajghat, Varanasi, 1985  P. 9 - 11. 
 
Emergency  
1) Vinoba's  Life  and  Mission, Kanti  Shah, Sarva  S eva  Sangh  Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1979 P. 127 
 
Spiritualizing Politics  
1) Vinoba on Gandhi, Ed. by Kanti Shah, Sarva Seva San gh Prakashan, Rajghat, Varanasi, 
1985, PP. 25 & 26  
2) ibid  P. 90 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 117  Bhagvadgita-2  
1) Talks  on  Gita, Vinoba, Sarva  Seva  Sangh  Prakas han, Rajghat, Varanasi, 1982, P. 232 
 
Panch-Jana Shakti  
1) Vinoba, Life  &  Mission, Ed. Kanti  shah, Sarva  S eva  Sangh  Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1979, P. 114 
 
Satyagraha  
1) Vinoba, Life & Mission Ed. By Kanti Shah, Sarva Sev a Sangh Prakashan, Rajghat, 
Varanasi, 1979, P. 84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 118   
APPENDIX 1 
Who is Vinoba Bhave?  
(M. K. Gandhi) 
He is an undergraduate having left college after my  return to India in 1916. He 
is a Sanskrit scholar. He joined the Ashram almost at its inception. He was 
among the first members. In order to better qualify  himself he took one year's 
leave to prosecute further studies in Sanskrit. And  practically at the same hour 
at which he had left the Ashram a year before, he w alked into it without 
notice. I had forgotten that he was due to arrive t hat day. He has taken part in 
every menial activity of the Ashram from scavenging  to cooking. Though he has 
a marvelous memory and is a student by nature, he h as devoted the largest 
part of his time to spinning in which he has specia lized as very few have. He 
believes in universal spinning being the central ac tivity which will remove the 
poverty in the villages and put life into their dea dness. Being a born teacher he 
has been of the utmost assistance to Ashadevi in he r development of the 
scheme of education through handicrafts. Sri Vinoba  has produced a text - book 
taking spinning as the handicraft. It is original i n conception. He has made 
scoffers realize that spinning is the handicraft pa r excellence which lends itself 
to being effectively used for basic education. 
He has revolutionized takli spinning and drawn out its hitherto unknown 
possibilities. For perfect spinning probably he has  no rival in all India. 
He has abolished every trace of untouchability from  his heart. He believes in 
communal unity with the same passion that I have. I n order to know the best 
mind of Islam he gave one year to the study of the Quran in the original. He 
therefore learnt Arabic. He found this study necess ary for cultivating a living 
contact with the Muslims living in his neighbourhoo d. 
He has an army of disciples and workers who would r ise to any sacrifice at his 
bidding. He is responsible for producing a young ma n who has dedicated himself 
to the service of lepers. Though an utter stranger to medicine, this worker has My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 119  by singular devotion mastered the method of treatme nt of lepers and is now 
running several clinics for their care. Hundreds ow e their cure to his labours. 
He has now published a handbook in Marathi for the treatment of lepers. 
Vinoba was for years Director of the Mahila Ashram (an Ashram for women) in 
Wardha. His devotion to the cause of Daridranarayan  (the God of the poor) took 
him first to a village near Wardha, and now he has gone still further and lives in 
Pavnar, five miles from Wardha, from where he has e stablished contact with 
villagers through the disciples he has trained. 
He believes in the necessity of the political indep endence of India. He is an 
accurate student of history. But he believes that r eal independence of the 
villagers is impossible without his constructive pr ogramme of whih khadi 
(handspun, hand-woven cloth) is the centre. He beli eves that the chrakha 
(spinning wheel) is the most equitable outward symb ol of non-violence which 
has become an integral part of his life. He has tak en an active part in the 
previous Satyagraha (non-violent civil disobedience  ) campaigns. He has never 
been in the limelight on the political platform. Wi th many co-workers he 
believes that silent constructive work with civil d isobedience in the background 
is far more effective than the already heavily crow ded political platform. And 
he thoroughly believes that non-violent resistance is impossible without a heart 
belief in and practice of constructive-work. 
*(The above was published in the 'Harijan' of Octob er 20, 1940. It was written 
by Gandhiji to introduce to the public Sri Vinoba B have, whom he had chosen, 
as the best representative on non-violent civil res istance to war. Sri vinoba was 
to start the campaign of individual civil disobedie nce, and in the first instance 
it was to be confined to him only.) 
**The correspondence that ensued you find in append ix 2. 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 120   
APPENDIX 2 
Vinoba's "Report"  
Most revered Bapuji  
I left the Ashram a year ago to recoup my health. I  had intended to stay in Wai 
for two or three months and then return, but though  a whole year has passed 
away, nothing has been heard from me. Questions, th erefore, may have arisen 
whether I am ever to come back and even whether I a m alive or dead. I must 
admit, I am myself entirely to blame in the matter.  I had, however, written a 
letter or two to Mama Phadake requesting him to wri te to me immediately if 
any satyagraha was to be launched. I had told him, I would give up everything 
to join it, but otherwise I would stay on, out of t he Ashram. If anybody 
suspected that I was a deserter, even there the fau lt is mine alone, because I 
am averse to correspondence. I must, however, state  here that the Ashram has 
not only captivated me, but I have also the ingrain ed conviction that I was 
really born for the Ashram. Why then, did I loiter away a whole year outside 
the Ashram precincts? 
Early in my life, when I was only ten, I took a sol emn vow to observe 
Brahmacharya and dedicate my life to the country. L ater on, during my high 
school days, I was fascinated by the teachings of t he Bhagavad-Gita. My father, 
however, asked me to take up French as my second la nguage, but that did not 
abate my zest to learn the Gita. I began to study S anskrit privately at home 
that very day, and I was resolved upon studying the  Vedanta and other books on 
philosophy whenever possible. When, with your permi ssion, I came to Wai, I 
saw that there was an excellent opportunity for me to study the Vedanta. One 
Shri Narayan Shastri Marathe, a Brahmachari all his  life, is teaching the Vedanta 
and other scriptures here. I was seized with a pass ion to learn the Upanishads, 
etc., from him. Now let me write what I have done d uring all this time. 
My work with respect to my craving for knowledge wh ich kept me out so long: My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 121  Study of (1) the Upanishads, (2) the Gita, (3) Brah masutra Shankarbhasya, (4) 
Manusmriti, and (5) Patanjali Yogadarshan. I went t hrough, besides, (1) 
Nyayasutra, (2) Vaisheshiksutra and (3) Yajnavalkya smriti. My desire to study 
our religious books has now been fully gratified. I  can now read whatever I want 
to in Sanskrit without any extraneous aid. 
Then about the recuperation of health for which I w ent to Wai. I had made it a 
rule to walk ten to twelve miles. Then Began grindi ng 6 to 8 seers (12 to 15 lbs) 
cereals with a hand-mill. At present I do 300 namas kars and take a walk every 
day for physical exercise. This has improved my hea lth. 
Regarding my diet: I have never taken other condime nts, but, for the first six 
months I used to take salt. I am now on a salt less  and spice less diet. I have 
started taking milk. Many experiments proved that I  cannot go without milk. 
But my desire to give it up, if possible, persists.  For a month, I had nothing but 
milk, lemon and bananas, but I found that I was get ting weak. This is my 
present diet: Milk 1lbs., jowar chapattis 2, banana s 4 or 5, lemon 1, when 
available. When I come to the Ashram, I intend to r egulate my diet on your 
advice. I am not tempted by any other food for the sake of its taste only. All 
the same, I cannot help feeling that my present die t is rather too luxurious. My 
daily expense over food, item by item is about: ban anas and lemon 4 pice, 
chapattis 2, milk 5, total 11. I want to know from you what changes I should 
make. You will please write me. 
Other things done: 
Took classes in (1) the Gita. Free tuition to six s tudents of the whole gospel 
with full exposition of the verses. (2) Jnaneshwari  (a big Marathi exposition on 
the Gita by Jnaneshwar ), 6 chapters, 4 students at tended. (3) 9 Upanishads to 
two students. (4) Hindi propaganda: I do not know H indi well myself. But I used 
to read a Hindi newspaper to some students. (5) Eng lish to two students. (6) 
Excursions : nearly 400 miles on foot. Saw fortress es of historical fame such as 
Rajgarh, Sinhagarh, Torangarh etc. (7) Used to hold  during my tramps 
discourses on the Gita, which have come to 50 in al l till now. Even now, I 
propose to foot it to Bombay and then take a train for Ahmedabad to rejoin the My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 122  Ashram. A student, 26 years old, has been throughou t with me in my journeys 
and he too is at present footing it out in my compa ny. He is not inclined to 
study the Gita from anyone except myself. The lates t date of my entry into the 
Ashram is Chaitra Sudi 1 (the New year's day in Maharashtra falling general ly in 
April). (8) I started at wai an institution called the Vidyarthi Mandal (student's 
association ) and founded a library in connection w ith it. We, fifteen students 
and myself, formed a club of hand-grinders and our earnings were used in 
buying books for the library. We offered the same r ate (1 pice for 2 lbs) as the 
local grinding mill, and thus could draw customers.  Sons of even high-class 
families were members of the club. Wai is a centre of orthodoxy and since the 
hand-grinders were all Brahmin students studying in  the high school, we were 
ridiculed by the public as faddists and fools. All the same, our grinding club 
continued for two months, and 400 books have been s tocked in the library. (9) I 
tried very much to propagate the principles of the Ashram; I attended its 
annual celebration. (This celebration means nothing  more than a meeting for 
comparison of the notes of members as to the work a ccomplished and the work 
to be done.) I put before them the idea of spreadin g Hindi and I have every 
reason to believe that the institution will take up  the work. Since you have 
begun an effort for the propagation of Hindi, I may  say that this institution in 
Baroda will be prepared to associate with you in th e work. 
And finally, I must state how I have behaved as an inmate of the Ashram. These 
are our vows: Control of the palate: I have already  dealt with this vow during 
my reference in this letter to my dietetic experime nts. Non-possession: a 
wooden dish (thali), bowls, one lota (a small jug) belonging to the Ashram, 
dhoti, a blanket and books comprise all my paraphem alia. I have taken a vow 
not to use a shirt, a cap and a coat. I wrap my upp er body also with a dhoti. I 
use only hand-woven clothes. Swadeshi (exclusive us e of articles made in one's 
own country): I do not use a single foreign made ar ticle ( but only if swadeshi is 
not taken in the expanded sense which you gave it i n your speech at Madras). 
Truth, non-violence, Brahmacharya : I am sure that I have strictly observed 
these vows to the best of my understanding of them.  My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 123  What more shall I write? In my dreams and in my wak ing hours, only one 
question haunts me: "Will God design to take servic e from me?" I followed the 
rules of the Ashram (except one) and so, though the  body may be roaming 
outside, I am, in reality, always in the Ashram. It  is the ideal of my life. The 
one exception, alluded to above, is about self-cook ing, i.e., about making 
chapattis myself. I tried to observe that rule also , but could not do so in my 
excursions. 
If any question of offering Satyagraha arises, say,  against the hardships of the 
third-class passengers in railways, I will come imm ediately; otherwise, I have 
given you above the latest date of my arrival in th e Ashram. 
What are the changes that have been made in the Ash ram? How many students 
are there? What is your scheme of national educatio n? And what changes should 
I make in my diet? I am longing for advice on all t hese points. And you must 
write the reply yourself, in your own hand; that is  the earnest and insistent 
prayer of this 'Vinoba', your son, whom you are no other than his revered 
father. 
I will leave this town in a few days. 
Vinoba's Pranam.  
 
Gandhiji's Reply  
I do not know in what terms to praise you. Your lov e and your character 
fascinate me and so also your self - examination. I  am not fit to measure your 
worth. I accept your own estimate and assume the po sition of a father to you. 
You seem almost to have met a long-felt wish of min e. In my view a father is, 
in fact, a father only when he has a son who surpas ses him in virtue. A real son, 
likewise, is one who improves on what the father ha s done; if the father is 
truthful, firm of mind and compassionate, the son w ill be all this in a greater 
measure. This is what you have made yourself. I don 't see that you owe your 
achievement to any effort of mine. Hence, I accept the role you offer to me as 
a gift of love. I shall strive to be worthy of it; and, if ever I become another My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 124  Hiranyakashyapu, oppose me respectfully as Prahlad,  who loved God, disobeyed 
him. 
It is true as you say that, though outside the Ashr am, you have scrupulously 
observed its rules. I never doubted that you would return. Besides, I had your 
written messages, read out by Mama. May God grant y ou long life, and use you 
for the uplift of India. 
I don't see any need for changes in your diet just yet. Do not give up milk for 
the present. On the contrary, increase the quantity , if necessary. 
About the railways, no Satyagraha is required. What  is wanted is intelligent 
workers to carry on propaganda. On the issue in Khe da District, Satyagraha may 
possibly have to be offered. I am something of a tr amp these days. In a day or 
two, I shall have to leave for Delhi. 
More when you arrive. Everyone is looking forward t o seeing you. 
Blessings from Bapu. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 125   
APPENDIX 3 
Books By & On Vinoba 
IN MARATHI 
• Lokmanya Tilak Yanchya Jaminkichya Khatyadr Hakikat  (1916) 
• Upanishadaancha abhyas (1929) 
• Gitni (1932) 
• Madhukar (1936) 
• Abhangvate (1940)  
• Santancha Prasad (1945)  
• Gitai Kosha (1946) 
• Dyanadevachi Bhajane (1946)  
• Namdevachi Bhajane (1946) 
• Tera Divas (1948) 
• Eknathachi Bhajane (1951) 
• Nama Mala (1952) 
• Simhavalokan (1953) 
• Vichar Pothi (1954) 
• Shikshan Vichar (1955) 
• Krant Darshan (1956) 
• Deeksha (1956) 
• Jagatik itihasache ozerten Darshan (1956) 
• Sampatti Daan (1957) 
• Sahityakanchi hitguj (1957) 
• Gita Chintanika (1958) 
• Samya-Sutra (1958) 
• Bhoodan Ganga (1958)  My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 126  • Maharastriyanshi Hitaguj (1958) 
• Sthitapradnya Darshan (1959) 
• Subashite (1960) 
• Mama Kosha - Navneet (1962) 
• Thoughts on Education (1962) 
• Gitai neethi katha (1963) 
• Shanti sena (1963) 
• Jagatik itihasache ozerten darshan (1963) Vinayak t atha Annasaheb 
• Bapat (1964) 
• Sarvodayachi Trividh Ghoshana (1964) 
• Trividh Karyakram Maharashtrateel Karyakartgaha Udd eshan- (1965) 
• Satpurushachya Katha (1965)  
• Sarvodayache Ghochara patra (1965) 
• Sanyamachi santali (1965) 
• Acharya kula (1967) 
• Pandit Nehru Sanskriti Darshan (1967)  
• Rigveda saar (1968) 
• Teesri shakti (1969) 
• Vinobancha Sahavasathen Majen Balapan (1969) 
• Tukaramachi Bhajane (1973)  
• Senapatinchya Samadhivar Yanchaya Atthavan (1974) 
• Mahamajinchya Sahavasathya Kahte and athavan (1974)  
• Vishnu sahasranaam (1975)  
• Vinayanjali (1978) 
• Stree Shakti (1982) 
• Christ Dharma saar (1983) 
• Ahimsecha Shodh (1988) My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 127  • Vinoba Charitra (1989) 
• Loknitee (1990) 
• Karan Saar (1991) 
• Gita Pravachane (1992) 
• Atma gyan annee vigyan (1993)  
• Ashram path (1993) 
• Gitai Marathi Gadyanuwad  
• Eshavasya vrutti 
• Ram naam ek chintan 
• Vinobachi Maraprayan Yatra 
• Goshthi roop Gita 
• Vinobanchi .Sahiya Drishi 
• Samyastrue  vritti sanskrit 
 
IN HINDI 
• Sarvodaya ki aur (1954)  
• Sarvodaya ki adhen (1956)  
• Prakkritik chiktsa kyo (1957) 
• Nisengopchon ashram uruli kanchan ka sankshipt para chay (1957) 
• Gurubodhsar (1957) 
• Sahitkanshi Hitaguj (1957) 
• Stita pradnya lakshan (1959) 
• Bhagwat Dhamma saar (1961) 
• Ashobhaniya posters (1961) 
• Shanti sena (1963) 
• Sarvodaya aur Samyavada (1965)  
• Sanyam ki Santali (1965) My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 128  • Adhatma tattava (1968) 
• Ekadash vrat (1968) 
• Sapta Shaktiyan (1968) 
• Rigveda Saar (1968) 
• Teesri Shakti (1969) 
• Ashtradashi (1969)  
• Manu Shasanam (197 4) 
• Agyan Nivritti Sadhana ke Sahastra Pahalu (1974) 
• Vishnu Shasranama (1975) 
• Acharya kul prasnopanishad (1981)  
• Vinoba Jeevan aur karya(1984) 
• Nari ki Mahima (1992) 
 
IN GUJARATI  
• Saraj Sastra (1940) 
• Samya Sutra (1958) 
• Shanti ridayavayashta (1959)  
• Sarvodyan Rajnitee (1962)  
• Shanti Sena (1963) 
• Adhyatma Darshan (1963) 
• Adhyatma Darshan (1963) 
• Darvodaya Vicharna (1965)  
• Acharya Kula Third Power (1969) 
 
IN ENGLISH  
• Random Reflections (1931) 
• Talks on Gita (1932) My Dear Pranav 
 
www.mkgandhi.org   Page 129  • Swaraj Sastra (1940) 
• Ishavasya Upanicad (1945) 
• The Steadfast Vision (1946) 
• Sarvodaya and Communism (1957) 
• Sarvodaya and Business Community by Donal Groom (19 58) 
• Dhammapada (1961) 
• Thoughts on Education (1962) 
• Democratic Values (1962) 
• Vinoba and his mission (1962) 
• The Essence of Quoran (1963)  
• Shanti Sena (1963) 
• The Rigveda Saar (1968) 
• The Essence of Chrisitan Teachings (1972)  
• Vinoba on Gandhi (1973) 
• Vishnu Saahasranama (1975) 
• Women Power (1982) 
• Random Reflections (1963) 
• Talks on Gita 