1
MY GOD
BY
M. K. GANDHI
NAVAJIVAN PUBLISHING HOUSE
AHMEDABAD - 380 014
Rupees Five
© Navajivan Trust, 1962
First Edition, 5,000 Copies, February 1962
This Reprint, 5,000 Copies, July 2011
Total : 45,000 Copies
Price of this book is
subsidised by Navajivan Trust
ISBN 81-7229-068-3
Printed and Published by
Jitendra T. Desai
Navajivan Publishing House
Ahmedabad-380 014
INDIA
Phone : 079 - 27540635, 27542634
Fax : 079 - 27541329
E-mail : jitnavjivan10@gmail.com
Website : www.navajivantrust.org4 MY GOD
CONTENTS
Chapter page
TO THE READER
1. MEANING OF GOD
2. REALITY OF GOD
3. NATURE OF GOD
4. TRUTH IS GOD
5. AHIMSA—UNSEEN POWER OF GOD
6. FAITH AND REASON
7. REALIZATION OF GOD
8. PRAYERS TO GOD
9. VOICE OF GOD
10. LAWS OF GOD
11. GOD AND EVIL
12. VISITATIONS OF GOD
13 PATHWAYS TO GOD
14. SERVICE OF GOD
15. THE TRUE DEVOTEE
16. ‘HOUSES OF GOD’
17. INCARNATIONS OF GOD
18. WHAT GOD HAS MEANT TO ME5CHAPTER 1
MEANING OF GOD
There is an indefinable mysterious Power that
pervades everything. I feel it, though I do not see
it. It is this unseen Power which makes itself felt
and yet defies all proof, because it is so unlike all
that I perceive through my senses. It transcends
the senses.
But it is possible to reason out the existence of
God to a limited extent. Even in ordinary affairs
we know that people do not know who rules or
why, and how he rules. And yet they know that
there is a power that certainly rules. In my tour
last year in Mysore I met many poor villagers and
1 found upon inquiry that they did not know who
ruled Mysore. They simply said some god ruled it.
If the knowledge of these poor people was so
limited about their ruler I, who am infinitely
lesser than God, than they than their ruler, need
not be surprised if I did not realize the presence
of God, the King of kings. Nevertheless I do feel
as the poor villagers felt about Mysore that there
is orderliness in the universe, there is an
unalterable Law governing every thing and every
being that exists or lives. It is not a blind law; for
no blind law can govern the conduct of living
beings, and thanks to the marvellous researches
of Sir J. C. Bose, it can now be proved that even
matter is life. That Law then which governs all6 MY GOD
life is God. Law and the Lawgiver are one. I may
not deny the Law or the Law giver, because I
know so little about It or Him. Even as my denial
or ignorance of the existence of an earthly power
will avail me nothing, so will not my denial of God
and His Law liberate me from its operation;
whereas humble and mute acceptance of divine
authority makes life's journey easier even as the
acceptance of earthly rule makes life under it
easier.
I do dimly perceive that whilst everything
around me is ever changing, ever dying, there is
underlying all that change a living power that is
changeless, that holds all together, that creates,
dissolves and re-creates. That informing power or
spirit is God. And since nothing else I see merely
through the senses can or will persist, He alone
is.
And is this power benevolent or malevolent? I
see it is purely benevolent. For I can see that in
the midst of death life persists, in the midst of
untruth truth persists, in the midst of darkness
light persists. Hence I gather that God is Life,
Truth, Light. He is Love. He is the Supreme
Good.
But He is no God who merely satisfies the
intellect, if He ever does. God to be God must
rule the heart and transform it. He must express
Himself in every smallest act of His votary. This
can only be done through a definite realization
more real than the five senses can ever produce.7
Sense perceptions can be, often are, false and
deceptive, however real they may appear to us.
Where there is realization outside the senses it is
infallible. It is proved not by extraneous evidence
but in the transformed conduct and character of
those who have felt the real presence of God
within.
Such testimony is to be found in the
experiences of an unbroken line of prophets and
sages in all countries and climes. To reject this
evidence is to deny oneself.
This realisation is preceded by an immovable
faith. He who would in his own person test the
fact of God's presence can do so by a living faith.
And since faith itself cannot be proved by
extraneous evidence, the safest course is to
believe in the moral government of the world and
therefore in the supremacy of the moral law, the
law of Truth and Love. Exercise of faith will be
the safest where there is a clear determination
summarily to reject all that is contrary to Truth
and Love.
I cannot account for the existence of evil by any
rational method. To want to do so is to be coequal
with God. I am therefore humble enough to
recognize evil as such. And I call God long
suffering and patient precisely because He
permits evil in the world. I know that he has no
evil in him, and yet if there is evil, He is the
author of it and yet untouched by it.
I know too that I shall never know God if I doMEANING OF GOD8 MY GOD
not wrestle with and against evil even at the cost
of life itself. I am fortified in the belief by my own
humble and limited experience. The purer I try to
become, the nearer I feel to be to God. How much
more should I be, when my faith is not a mere
apology as it is today but has become as
immovable as the Himalayas and as white and
bright as the snows on their peaks? Meanwhile I
invite the corres-pondent to pray with Newman
who sang from experience:
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,
Lead Thou me on;
The night is dark and I am far from home,
Lead Thou me on;
Keep Thou my feet, I do not ask to see
The distant scene; one step enough for
me.
Young India,  11-10-1928, pp. 340-41
CHAPTER 2
REALITY OF GOD
The word Satya (Truth) is derived from Sat,
which means 'being'. Nothing is or exists in
reality except Truth. That is why Sat or Truth is
perhaps the most important name of God. In fact
it is more correct to say that Truth is God, than
to say that God is Truth. But as we cannot do
without a ruler or a general, such names of God
as 'King of kings' or ‘The Almighty’ are and will
remain generally current. On deeper thinking,
however, it will be realized, that Sat or Satya is9
the only correct and fully significant name for
God.
And where there is Truth, there also is
knowledge which is true. Where there is no
Truth, there can be no true knowledge. That is
why the word Chit or Knowledge is associated
with the name of God. And where there is true
Knowledge, there is always Bliss (Ananda) . There
sorrow has no place. And even as Truth is eternal,
so is the Bliss derived from it. Hence we know
God as Sat-Chit-Ananda,  One who combines in
Himself Truth, Knowledge and Bliss.
Devotion to this Truth is the sole justification
for our existence. All our activities should be
centred in Truth. Truth should be the very breath
of our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's
progress is reached, all other rules of correct
living will come without effort, and obedience to
them will be instinctive. But without Truth it is
impossible to observe any principles or rules in
life.
From Yeravda Mandir,  (1945), pp. p.1-2
It is easy enough to say, 'I do not believe in
God. For God permits all things to be said of Him
with impunity. He looks at our acts. And any
breach of His law carries with it, not its
vindictive, but its purifying, compelling,
punishment. God's existence cannot be, does not
need to be, proved. God is. If He is not felt, so
much the worse for us. The absence of feeling is a
disease which we shall some day throw off nolensREALITY OF GOD10 MY GOD
volens.
Young India,  23-9-1926, p. 333
This belief in God has to be based on faith
which transcends reason. Indeed, even the so-
called realization has at bottom an element of
faith without which it cannot be sustained. In the
very nature of things it must be so. Who can
transgress the limitations of his being? I hold that
complete realization is impossible in this
embodied life. Nor is it necessary. A living
immovable faith is all that is required for
reaching the full spiritual height attainable by
human beings. God is not outside this earthly
case of ours. Therefore exterior proof is not of
much avail, if any at all. We must ever fail to
perceive Him through the senses, because He is
beyond them. We can feel Him, if we will but
withdraw ourselves from the senses. The divine
music is incessantly going on within ourselves,
but the loud senses drown the delicate music,
which is unlike and infinitely superior to
anything we can perceive or hear with our senses.
Harijan,  13-6-1936, pp. 140-41
I have seen and believe that God never appears
to you in person, but in action which can only
account for your deliverance in your darkest
hour.
Harijan,  10-12-1938, p. 37311
CHAPTER 3
NATURE OF GOD
To me God is Truth and Love; God is ethics and
morality; God is fearlessness. God is the source of
Light and Life and yet He is above and beyond all
these. God is conscience. He is even the atheism
of the atheist. For in His boundless love God
permits the atheist to live. He is the searcher of
hearts. He transcends speech and reason. He
knows us and our hearts better than we do
ourselves. He does not take us at our word for He
knows that we often do not mean it, some
knowingly and others unknowingly. He is a
personal God to those who need His personal
presence. He is embodied to those who need His
touch. He is the purest essence. He simply is to
those who have faith. He is all things to all men.
He is in us and yet above and beyond us. One may
banish the word 'God' from the Congress but one
has no power to banish the Thing itself. What is
a solemn affirmation, if it is not the same thing as
in the name of God? And surely conscience is but
a poor and laborious paraphrase of the simple
combination of three letters called God. He
cannot cease to be because hideous immoralities
or inhuman brutalities are committed in His
name. He is long suffering. He is patient but He
is also terrible. He is the most exacting personage
in the world and the world to come. He metes out
the same measure to us as we mete out to our
neighbours – men and brutes. With HimNATURE OF GOD12 MY GOD
ignorance is no excuse. And withal He is ever
forgiving for He always gives us the chance to
repent. He is the greatest democrat the world
knows, for He leaves us ‘unfettered’ to make our
own choice between evil and good. He is the
greatest tyrant ever known, for He often dashes
the cup from our lips and under cover of free will
leaves us a margin so wholly inadequate as to
provide only mirth for Himself at our expense.
Therefore it is that Hinduism calls it all His sport
– Lila, or calls it all an illusion – Maya.  We are
not. He alone is. And if we will be, we must
eternally sing His praise and do His will. Let us
dance to the tune of His bansi – flute, and all
would be well.
Young India,  5-3-1925, p. 81
I talk of God exactly as I believe Him to be. I
believe Him to be creative as well as non-creative.
This too is the result of my acceptance of the
doctrine of the manyness of reality. From the
platform of the Jains I prove the non-creative
aspect of God, and from that of Ramanuja the
creative aspect. As a matter of fact we are all
thinking of the Unthinkable, describing the
Indescribable, seeking to know the Unknown, and
that is why our speech falters, is inadequate and
even often contradictory. That is why the Vedas
describe Brahman as 'not this', 'not this'. But if He
or It is not this, He or It is. If we exist, if our
parents and their parents have existed, then it is
proper to believe in the Parent of the whole13
creation. If He is not, we are nowhere. And that
is why all of us with one voice call one God
differently as Paramatma, Ishwara, Shiva,
Vishnu, Rama, Allah, Khuda, Dada Hormuzda,
Jehova, God, and an infinite variety of names. He
is one and yet many; He is smaller than an atom,
and bigger than the Himalayas. He is contained
even in a drop of the ocean, and yet not even the
seven seas can compass Him. Reason is powerless
to know Him. He is beyond the reach or grasp of
reason. But I need not labour the point. Faith is
essential in this matter. My logic can make and
unmake innumerable hypotheses. An atheist
might floor me in a debate. But my faith runs so
very much faster than my reason that I can
challenge the whole world and say, ‘God is, was
and ever shall be.’
But those who want to deny His existence are
at liberty to do so. He is merciful and
compassionate. He is not an earthly king needing
an army to make us accept His sway. He allows us
freedom, and yet His compassion commands
obedience to His will. But if any of us disdain to
bow to His will, He says: So be it, my sun will
shine no less for thee, my clouds will rain no less
for thee. I need not force thee to accept my sway.’
Of such a God let the ignorant dispute the
existence. I am one of the millions of wise men
who believe in Him and am never tired of bowing
to Him and singing His glory.NATURE OF GODYoung India,  21-1-1926, pp. 30-31
Perfection is the attribute of the Almighty, and
yet what a great democrat He is ! What an
amount of wrong and humbug He suffers on our
part. He even suffers us insignificant creatures of
His to question His very existence, though He is
in every atom about us, around us and within us.
But He has reserved to Himself the right of
becoming manifest to whomsoever He chooses.
He is a Being without hands and feet and other
organs, yet he can see Him to whom He chooses
to reveal Himself.
Harijan,  14-11-1936, p. 314
CHAPTER 4
TRUTH IS GOD
I claim to be a votary of truth from my
childhood. It was the most natural thing to me.
My prayerful search gave me the revealing maxim
'Truth is God', instead of the usual one 'God is
Truth'. That maxim enables me to see God face to
face as it were. I feel Him pervade every fibre of
my being.
Harijan,  9-8-1942, p. 264
In my early youth I was taught to repeat what
in Hindu scriptures are known as one thousand
names of God. But these one thousand names of
God were by no means exhaustive. We believe–
and I think it is the truth–that God has as many
names as there are creatures and, therefore, we
1415
also say that God is nameless and since God has
many forms, we also consider Him formless, and
since He speaks to us through many tongues we
consider Him to be speechless and so on. And so
when I came to study Islam I found that Islam too
had many names for God. I would say with those
who say God is Love, God is Love. But deep down
in me I used to say that though God may be Love,
God is Truth, above all. If it is possible for the
human tongue to give the fullest description of
God, I have come to the conclusion that for
myself, God is Truth. But two years ago I went a
step further and said that Truth is God. You will
see the fine distinction between the two
statements, viz., that God is Truth and Truth is
God. And I came to that conclusion after a
continuous and relentless search after Truth
which began nearly fifty years ago. I then found
that the nearest approach to Truth was through
love. But I also found that love has many
meanings in the English language at least and
that human love in the sense of passion could
become a degrading thing also. I found too that
love in the sense of Ahimsa had only a limited
number of votaries in the world. But I never
found a double meaning in connection with truth
and even atheists had not demurred to the
necessity or power of truth. But in their passion
for discovering truth, the atheists have not
hesitated to deny the very existence of God–from
their own point of view rightly. And it wasTRUTH IS GOD16 MY GOD
because of this reasoning that I saw that rather
than say that God is Truth I should say that Truth
is God. I recall the name of Charles Bradlaugh
who delighted to call himself an atheist, but
knowing as I do something of him, I would never
regard him as an atheist. I would call him a God-
fearing man, though I know that he would reject
the claim. His face would redden if I would say,
“Mr. Bradlaugh, you are a truth-fearing man, and
so a God-fearing man.” I would automatically
disarm his criticism by saying that Truth is God,
as I have disarmed criticisms of many a young
man. Add to this the great difficulty that millions
have taken the name of God and in His name
committed nameless atrocities. Not that
scientists very often do not commit cruelties in
the name of truth. I know in the name of truth
and science inhuman cruelties are perpetrated on
animals when men perform vivisection. There are
thus a number of difficulties in the way, no matter
how you describe God. But the human mind is a
limited thing, and you have to labour under
limitations when you think of a being or entity
who is beyond the power of man to grasp.
And then we have another thing in Hindu
philosophy, viz., God alone is and nothing else
exists, and the same truth you find emphasized
and exemplified in the Kalma of Islam. There you
find it clearly stated –-that God alone is and
nothing else exists. In fact the Sanskrit word for
Truth is a word which literally means that which17
exists– Sat. For this and several other reasons
that I can give you I have come to the conclusion
that the definition, ‘Truth is God’, gives me the
greatest satisfaction. And when you want to find
Truth as God the only inevitable means is Love,
i.e. non-violence, and since I believe that
ultimately the means and the end are convertible
terms, I should not hesitate to say that God is
Love.
‘What then is Truth ?’
A difficult question, but I have solved it for
myself by saying that it is what the voice within
tells you. How, then, you ask, different people
think of different and contrary truths? Well,
seeing that the human mind works through
innumerable media and that the evolution of the
human mind is not the same for all, it follows that
what may be truth for one may be untruth for
another, and hence those who have made these
experiments have come to the conclusion that
there are certain conditions to be observed in
making those experiments. Just as for conducting
scientific experiments there is an indispensable
scientific course of instruction, in the same way
strict preliminary discipline is necessary to
qualify a person to make experiments in the
spiritual realm. Every one should, therefore,
realize his limitations before he speaks of his
Inner Voice. Therefore we have the belief based
upon experience, that those who would make
individual God, must go through several vows, asTRUTH IS GOD18 MY GOD
for instance, the vow of truth, the vow of
Brahmacharya (purity) – for you cannot possibly
divide your love for Truth and God with anything
else–the vow of non-violence, of poverty and non-
possession. Unless you impose on yourselves the
five vows you may not embark on the experiment
at all. There are several other conditions
prescribed, but I must not take you through all of
them. Suffice it to say that those who have made
these experiments know that it is not proper for
every one to claim to hear the voice of conscience,
and it is because we have at the present moment
everybody claiming the right of conscience
without going through any discipline whatsoever
and there is so much untruth being delivered to a
bewildered world, all that I can, in true humility,
present to you is that truth is not to be found by
anybody who has not got an abundant sense of
humility. If you would swim on the bosom of the
ocean of Truth you must reduce yourself to a zero.
Further than this I cannot go along this
fascinating path.
Young India,  31-12-1931, pp. 427-28
Ahimsa is my God, and Truth is my God. When
I look for Ahimsa, Truth says, ‘Find it through
me.’ When I look for Truth, Ahimsa says, ‘Find it
out through me.’
Young India,  4-6-1925, p. 191
The Law of Truth
Generally speaking, observation of the law of
Truth is understood, merely to mean that, we19
must speak the truth. But we in the Ashram
should understand the word Satya or Truth in a
much wider sense. There should be Truth in
thought, Truth in speech, and Truth in action. To
the man who has realized this Truth in its
fulness, nothing else remains to be known,
because all knowledge is necessarily included in
it. What is not included in it is not Truth, and so
not true knowledge; and there can be no inward
peace without true knowledge. If we once learn
how to apply this never-failing test of Truth, we
will at once be able to find out what is worth
doing, what is worth seeing, what is worth
reading.
But how is one to realize this Truth, which may
be likened to the philosopher's stone or the cow of
plenty ? By single-minded devotion (abhyasa)  and
indifference to all other interests in life
(vairagya)  – replies the Bhagavadgita. In spite,
however, of such devotion, what may appear as
truth to one person will often appear as untruth
to another person. But that need not worry the
seeker. Where there is honest effort, it will be
realized that what appear to be different truths
are like the countless and apparently different
leaves of the same tree. Does not God Himself
appear to different individuals in different
aspects ? Yet we know that He is one. But Truth
is the right designation of God. Hence there is
nothing wrong in every man following Truth
according to his lights. Indeed it is his duty to doTRUTH IS GOD20 MY GOD
so. Then if there is a mistake on the part of any
one so following Truth, it will be automatically
set right. For the quest of Truth involves tapas  –
self-suffering, sometimes even unto death. There
can be no place in it for even a trace of self-
interest. In such selfless search for Truth nobody
can lose his bearings for long. Directly he takes to
the wrong path he stumbles, and is thus
redirected to the right path. Therefore the
pursuit of Truth is true bhakti  (devotion). It is the
path that leads to God. There is no place in it for
cowardice, no place for defeat. It is the talisman
by which death itself becomes the portal to life
eternal.
In this connection it would be well to ponder
over the lives and examples of Harishchandra,
Prahlad, Ramachandra, Imam Hasan and Imam
Hussain, the Christian saints, etc. How beautiful
it would be, if all of us, young and old, men and
women, devoted ourselves wholly to Truth in all
that we might do in our waking hours, whether
working, eating, drinking, or playing, till
dissolution of the body makes us one with Truth
? God as Truth has been for me a treasure beyond
price; may be so to every one of us.
From Yeravda Mandir,  (1945), pp. 2-4
CHAPTER 5
AHIMSA–UNSEEN POWER OF GOD
Scientists tell us that without the presence of
the cohesive force amongst the atoms that21
comprise this globe of ours, it would crumble to
pieces and we cease to exist; and even as there is
cohesive force in blind matter, so must there be in
all things animate and the name for that cohesive
force among animate beings is Love. We notice it
between father and son, between brother and
sister, friend and friend. But we have to learn to
use that force among all that lives, and in the use
of it consists our knowledge of God. Where there
is love there is life; hatred leads to destruction.
Young India,  5-5-1920, p. 7
I have found that life persists in the midst of
destruction and, therefore, there must be a higher
law than that of destruction. Only under that law
would a well-ordered society be intelligible and
life worth living. And if that is the law of life, we
have to work it out in daily life. Wherever there
are jars, wherever you are confronted with an
opponent, conquer him with love–in this crude
manner I have worked it out in my life. That does
not mean that all my difficulties are solved. Only
I have found that this law of love has answered as
the law of destruction has never done... .The more
I work at this law, the more I feel the delight in
life, the delight in the scheme of this universe. It
gives me a peace and a meaning of the mysteries
of nature that I have no power to describe.
Young India,  1-10-1931, pp. 286-87
Non-violence is the greatest force at the
disposal of mankind. It is mightier than the
mightiest weapon of destruction devised by theAHIMSA–UNSEEN POWER OF GOD22 MY GOD
ingenuity of man. Destruction is not the law of
the humans. Man lives freely only by his
readiness to die, if need be, at the hands of his
brother, never by killing him. Every murder or
other injury, no matter for what cause, committed
or inflicted on another is a crime against
humanity.
Harijan,  20-7-1935, pp. 180-81
Non-violence is an active force of the highest
order. It is soul-force or the power of Godhead
within us. Imperfect man cannot grasp the whole
of that essence–he would not be able to bear its
full blaze, but even an infinitesimal fraction of it,
when it becomes active within us, can work
wonders. The sun in the heavens fills the whole
universe with its life-giving warmth. But if one
went too near it,  it would consume him to ashes.
Even so, it is with Godhead. We become Godlike
to the extent we realize non-violence; but we can
never become wholly God.
Non-violence is like radium in its action. An
infinitesimal quantity of it embedded in a
malignant growth, acts continuously, silently and
ceaselessly till it has transformed the whole mass
of the diseased tissue into a healthy one.
Similarly, even a little of true non-violence acts in
a silent, subtle, unseen way and leavens the
whole society.
Harijan,  12-11-1938, p. 327
Non-violence succeeds only when we have a
living faith in God. Buddha, Jesus, Mahomed–23
they were all warriors of peace in their own style.
We have to enrich the heritage left by these world
teachers. God has His own wonderful way of
executing His plans and choosing His
instruments. The Prophet and Abu Bakr trapped
in a cave were saved from their persecutors by a
spider which had woven its web across the mouth
of that cave. All the world teachers, you should
know, began with a zero!
Harijan,  28-1-1939, p. 443
Where love is there God is also.
Satyagraha in South Africa,  (1928), p. 36
CHAPTER 6
FAITH AND REASON
Seeing God face to face is to feel that He is
enthroned in our hearts even as a child feels a
mother's affection without needing any demon-
stration. Does a child reason out the existence of
a mother's love? Can he prove it to others? He
triumphantly declares, ‘It is.’ So must it be with
the existence of God. He defies reason. But He is
experienced. Let us not reject the experience of
Tulasidas, Chaitanya, Ramadas and a host of
other spiritual teachers even as we do not reject
that of mundane teachers.
Young India,  9-7-1925, p. 239
It is faith that steers us through stormy seas,
faith that moves mountains and faith that jumps
across the ocean. That faith is nothing but a
living, wide-awake consciousness of God within.FAITH AND REASON24 MY GOD
He who has achieved that faith wants nothing.
Bodily diseased, he is spiritually healthy;
physically pure, he rolls in spiritual riches.
Young India,  24-9-1925, p. 331
Rationalists are admirable beings, rationalism
is a hideous monster when it claims for itself
omnipotence. Attribution of omnipotence to
reason is as bad a piece of idolatry as is worship
of stock and stone believing it to be God. I plead
not for the suppression of reason, but for a due
recognition of that in us which sanctifies reason
itself.
Young India,  14-10-1926, p. 359
There are some who in the egotism of their
reason declare that they have nothing to do with
religion. But it is like a man saying that he
breathes but that he has no nose. Whether by
reason, or by instinct, or by superstition, man
acknowledges some sort of relationship with the
divine. The rankest agnostic does acknowledge
the need of a moral principle, and associates
something good with its observance and
something bad with its non-observance.
Young India,  23-1-1930, p. 25
Without faith this world would come to naught
in a moment. True faith is appropriation of the
reasoned experience of people whom we believe
to have lived a life purified by prayer and
penance. Belief, therefore, in prophets or
incarnations who have lived in remote ages is not
an idle superstition but a satisfaction of an inmost
spiritual want.Young India,  14-4-1927, p. 120
Everyone has faith in God though everyone
does not know it. For, everyone has faith in
himself and that multiplied to the nth degree is
God. The sum total of all that lives is God. We
may not be God but we are of God–even as a little
drop of water is of the ocean. Imagine it torn
away from the ocean and flung millions of miles
away. It becomes helpless torn from its
surroundings and cannot feel the might and
majesty of the ocean. But if some one could point
out to it that it is of the ocean, its faith would
revive, it would dance with joy and the whole of
the might and majesty of the ocean would be
reflected in it.
Harijan,  3-6-1939, p. 151
My own experience has led me to the
knowledge that the fullest life is impossible
without an immovable belief in a Living Law in
obedience to which the whole universe moves. A
man without that faith is like a drop thrown out
of the ocean bound to perish. Every drop in the
ocean shares its majesty and has the honour of
giving us the ozone of life.
Harijan,  25-4-1936, p. 84
CHAPTER 7
REALIZATION OF GOD
I believe it to be possible for every human being
to attain that blessed and indescribable sinless
2526 MY GOD
state in which he feels within himself the
presence of God to the exclusion of everything
else.
Young India,  17-11-1921, p. 368
For me Truth is the sovereign principle, which
includes numerous other principles. This Truth is
not only truthfulness in word, but truthfulness in
thought also, and not only the relative-truth of
our conception, but the Absolute Truth, the
Eternal Principle, that is God. There are
innumerable definitions of God, because His
manifestations are innumerable. They overwhelm
me with wonder and awe and for a moment stun
me. But I worship God as Truth only. I have not
yet found Him, but I am seeking after Him. I am
prepared to sacrifice the things dearest to me in
pursuit of this quest. Even if the sacrifice
demanded be my very life, I hope I may be
prepared to give it. But as long as I have not
realized this Absolute Truth, so long must I hold
by the relative truth as I have conceived it. That
relative truth must, meanwhile, be my beacon, my
shield and buckler. Though this path is strait and
narrow and sharp as the razor's edge, for me it
has been the quickest and easiest. Even my
Himalayan blunders have seemed trifling to me
because I have kept strictly to this path. For the
path has saved me from coming to grief, and I
have gone forward according to my light. Often in
my progress I have had faint glimpses of the
Absolute Truth, God, and daily the conviction is27
growing upon me that He alone is real and all
else is unreal.
Autobiography,  (1948), p. 6
The further conviction has been growing upon
me that whatever is possible for me is possible
even for a child, and I have sound reasons for
saying so. The instruments for the quest of Truth
are as simple as they are difficult. They may
appear quite impossible to an arrogant person,
and quite possible to an innocent child. The
seeker after Truth should be humbler than the
dust. The world crushes the dust under its feet,
but the seeker after Truth should so humble
himself that even the dust could crush him. Only
then, and not till then, will he have a glimpse of
Truth.
Autobiography,  (1948), p. 7
If we have faith in us, if we have a prayerful
heart, we may not tempt God, may not make
terms with Him... .Not until we have reduced
ourselves to nothingness can we conquer the evil
in us. God demands nothing less than complete
self-surrender as the price for the only real
freedom that is worth having. And when a man
thus 'loses himself, he immediately finds himself
in the service of all that lives. It becomes his
delight and his recreation. He is a new man never
weary of spending himself in the service of God's
creation.
Young India,  20-12-1928, p. 420
Man's highest endeavour lies in trying to findREALIZATION OF GOD28 MY GOD
God. . .He cannot be found in temples or idols or
places of worship by man's hands, nor can He be
found by abstinences. God can be found only
through love, not earthly, but divine.
Harijan,  23-11-1947, p. 425
To see the universal and all-pervading Spirit of
Truth face to face one must be able to love the
meanest of creation as oneself. And a man who
aspires after that cannot afford to keep out of any
field of life. That is why my devotion to Truth has
drawn me into the field of politics; and I can say
without the slightest hesitation, and yet in all
humility, that those who say that religion has
nothing to do with politics do not know what
religion means.
Identification with everything that lives is
impossible without self-purification, without self-
purification the observance of the law of Ahimsa
must remain an empty dream; God can never be
realized by one who is not pure of heart. Self-
purification, therefore, must mean purification in
all the walks of life. And purification being highly
infectious, purification of oneself necessarily
leads to the purification of one’s surroundings.
But the path of self-purification is hard and
steep. To attain to perfect purity one has to
become absolutely passion-free in thought, speech
and action; to rise above the opposing currents of
love and hatred, attachment and repulsion. I
know that I have not in me as yet that triple
purity, in spite of constant, ceaseless striving for29
it. That is why the world’s praise fails to move
me, indeed it very often stings me. To conquer the
subtle passions seems to me to be harder far than
the physical conquest of the world by the force of
arms. ... So long as a man does not of his own free
will put himself last among his fellow creatures,
there is no salvation for him. Ahimsa is the
farthest limit of humility.
Autobiography,  (1948), pp. 615-16
Realization of God is impossible without
complete renunciation of the sexual desire.
Young India,  24-6-1926, p. 230
CHAPTER 8
PRAYERS TO GOD
I believe that prayer is the very soul and
essence of religion, and therefore prayer must be
the very core of the life of man, for no man can
live without religion.... Bradlaugh, whose atheism
is well known, always insisted on proclaiming his
innermost conviction. He had to suffer a lot for
thus speaking the truth, but he delighted in it and
said that truth is its own reward. Not that he was
quite insensible to the joy resulting from the
observance of truth. This joy however is not all
worldly, but springs out of communion with the
divine. That is why I have said that even a man
who disowns religion cannot and does not live
without religion.
I have talked of the necessity for prayer, and
therethrough I have dealt with the essence ofPRAYERS TO GOD30 MY GOD
prayer. We are born to serve our fellowmen, and
we cannot properly do so unless we are
wideawake. There is an eternal struggle raging in
man's breast between the powers of darkness and
of light, and he who has not the sheet-anchor of
prayer to rely upon will be a victim to the powers
of darkness. The man of prayer will be at peace
with himself and with the whole world, the man
who goes about the affairs of the world without a
prayerful heart will be miserable and will make
the world also miserable. Apart therefore from its
bearing on man’s condition after death, prayer
has incalculable value for man in this world of the
living. Prayer is the only means of bringing about
orderliness and peace and repose in our daily
acts. Take care of the vital thing and other things
will take care of themselves. Rectify one angle of
a square, and the other angles will be
automatically right.
Young India,  23-1-1930, pp. 25-26
In my opinion, Rama, Rahaman, Ahuramazda,
God or Krishna are all attempts on the part of
man to name that invincible force which is the
greatest of all forces. It is inherent in man,
imperfect though he be, ceaselessly to strive after
perfection. In the attempt he falls into reverie.
And, just as a child tried to stand, falls down
again and again and ultimately learns how to
walk, even so man, with all his intelligence, is a
mere infant as compared to the infinite and
ageless God. This may appear to be an31
exaggeration but is not. Man can only describe
God in his own poor language. The power we call
God defies description. Nor does that power
stand in need of any human effort to describe
Him. It is man who requires the means whereby
he can describe that power which is faster than
the ocean. If this premise is accepted, there is no
need to ask why we pray. Man can only conceive
God within the limitations of his own mind. If
God is vast and boundless as the ocean, how can
a tiny drop like man imagine what He is ? He can
only experience what the ocean is like, if he falls
into and is merged in it. This realization is
beyond description. In Madame Blavatsky's
language man, in praying, worships his own
glorified self. He can truly pray, who has the
conviction that God is within him. He who has
not, need not pray. God will not be offended, but
I can say from experience that he who does not
pray is certainly a loser. What matters then
whether one man worships God as a Person and
another as Force ? Both do right according to
their lights. None knows and perhaps never will
know what is the absolutely proper way to pray.
The ideal must always remain the ideal. One need
only remember that God is the Force among all
the forces. All other forces are material. But God
is the vital force or spirit which is all-pervading,
all-embracing and therefore beyond human ken.
Harijan, . 18-8-1946, p. 267
For those who are filled with the presence ofPRAYERS TO GOD32 MY GOD
God in them, to labour is to pray. Their life is one
continuous prayer or act of worship. For those
others who act only to sin, to indulge themselves,
and live for self, no time is too much. If they had
patience and faith and the will to be pure, they
would pray till they feel the definite purifying
presence of God within them. For us ordinary
mortals there must be a middle path between
these two extremes. We are not so exalted as to
be able to say that all our acts are a dedication,
nor perhaps are we so far gone as to be living
purely for self. Hence have all religions set apart
times for general devotion. Unfortunately these
have nowadays become merely mechanical and
formal, where they are not hypocritical. What is
necessary is the correct attitude to accompany
these devotions.
Young India,  10-6-1926, p. 211
My religion teaches me that whenever there is
distress which one cannot remove, one must fast
and pray.
Young India,  25-9-1924, p. 319
I can give my own testimony and say that a
heartfelt prayer is undoubtedly the most potent
instrument that man possesses for overcoming
cowardice and all other bad old habits. Prayer is
an impossibility without a living faith in the
presence of God within.
Young India,  20-12-1928, p. 420
He and His Law are one. To observe His Law
is, therefore, the best form of worship. A man who33
becomes one with the Law does not stand in need
of vocal recitation of the name. In other words, an
individual with whom contemplation on God has
become as natural as breathing is so filled with
God’s spirit that knowledge or observance of the
Law becomes second nature, as it were, with him.
Harijan,  24-3-1946, p. 56
Never own a defeat in a sacred cause and make
up your minds henceforth that you will be pure
and that you will find a response from God. But
God never answers the prayers of the arrogant,
nor the prayers of those who bargain with Him....
If you would ask Him to help you, you would go to
Him in all your nakedness, approach Him without
reservations, also without fear or doubts as to
how He can help a fallen being like you. He who
has helped millions, who have approached Him, is
He going to desert you? He makes no exceptions
whatsoever and you will find that every one of
your prayers will be answered. The prayer of
even the most impure will be answered. I am
telling you this out of my personal experience, I
have gone through the purgatory. Seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven and everything will be added
unto you.
Young India,  4-4-1929, p. 111
CHAPTER 9
VOICE OF GOD
Having made a ceaseless effort to attain self-
purification, I have developed some little capacityVOICE OF GOD34 MY GOD
to hear correctly and clearly the ‘still small Voice
within’.
The Epic Fast,  (1933), p. 34
My claim, to hear the voice of God is no new
claim. Unfortunately there is no way that I know
of proving the claim except through results. God
will not be God if He allowed Himself to be an
object of proof by His creatures. But He does give
His willing slave the power to pass through the
fieriest of ordeals. I have been a willing slave to
this most exacting Master for more than half a
century. His voice has been increasingly audible
as years have rolled by. He has never forsaken me
even in my darkest hour. He has saved me often
against myself and left me not a vestige of
independence. The greater the surrender to Him,
the greater has been my joy.
Harijan,  6-5-1933, p. 4
For me the Voice of God, of Conscience, of
Truth or the Inner Voice or ‘the still small Voice’
mean one and the same thing. I saw no form. I
have never tried, for I have always believed God
to be without form. But what I did hear was like
a Voice from afar and yet quite near. It was as
unmistakable as some human voice definitely
speaking to me, and irresistible. I was not
dreaming at the time I heard the Voice. The
hearing of the Voice was preceded by a terrific
struggle within me. Suddenly the Voice came
upon me. I listened, made certain that it was the
Voice, and the struggle ceased. I was calm. The35
determination was made accordingly, the date
and the hour of the fast were fixed. Joy came over
me. This was between 11 and 12 midnight. I felt
refreshed and began to write the note about it
which the reader must have seen.
Could I give any further evidence that it was
truly the Voice that I heard and that it was not an
echo of my own heated imagination ? I have no
further evidence to convince the sceptic. He is
free to say that it was all self-delusion or
hallucination. It may well have been so. I can offer
no proof to the contrary. But I can say this – that
not the unanimous verdict of whole world against
me could shake me from the belief that what I
heard was the true Voice of God.
But some think that God Himself is a creation
of our own imagination. If that view holds good,
then nothing is real, everything is of our own
imagination. Even so, whilst my imagination
dominates me, I can only act under its spell.
Realest things are only relatively so. For me the
Voice was more real than my own existence. It
has never failed me, and for that matter, any one
else.
And every one who wills can hear the Voice. It
is within every one. But like everything else, it
requires previous and definite preparation.
Harijan,  8-7-1933, p. 4
Men have always been found throughout the
world claiming to speak for the Inner Voice. But
no harm has yet overtaken the world throughLAWS OF GOD36 MY GOD
their shortlived activities. Before one is able to
listen to that Voice, one has to go through a long
and fairly severe course of training, and when it
is the Inner Voice that speaks, it is unmistakable.
The world cannot be successfully fooled for all
time. There is, therefore, no danger of anarchy
setting in because a humble man like me will not
be suppressed and will dare to claim the
authority of the Inner Voice, when he believes
that he has heard it.
Harijan,  18-3-1933, p. 9
I believe that we can all become messengers of
God, if we cease to fear man and seek only God’s
Truth. I do believe I am seeking only God’s Truth
and have lost all fear of man.
Young India,  25-5-1921, p. 161.
CHAPTER 10
LAWS OF GOD
God’s laws are eternal and unalterable and not
separable from God Himself. It is an
indispensable condition of His very perfection.
Young India,  24-11-1927, p. 393
God Himself has reserved no right of revision
of His own laws nor is there any need for Him for
any such revision. He is all-powerful, all-knowing.
He knows at the same time and without any effort
the past, the present and the future. He has
therefore nothing to reconsider, nothing to revise,
nothing to alter and nothing to amend.37
Young India,  25-11-1926, 415
We do not know all the laws of God nor their
working. Knowledge of the tallest scientist or the
greatest spiritualist is like a particle of dust. If
God is not a personal being for me like my earthly
father, He is infinitely more. He rules me in the
tiniest detail of my life. I believe literally that not
a leaf moves but by His will. Every breath I take
depends upon His sufferance.
Harijan,  16-2-1934, p. 4
He and His Law are one. The Law is God.
Anything attributed to Him is not a mere
attribute. He is the attribute. He is Truth, Love
and Law and a million things that human
ingenuity can name.
Harijan,  16-2-1934, p. 4
The laws of Nature are changeless, unchange-
able, and there are no miracles in the sense of
infringement or interruption of Nature's laws.
But we limited beings fancy all kinds of things
and impute our limitations to God. We may copy
God, but not He us. We may not divide Time for
Him, Time for Him is eternity. For us there is
past, present and future. And what is human life
of a hundred years but less than a mere speck in
the eternity of Time?
Harijan,  17-4-1937, p. 87GOD AND EVIL38 MY GOD
CHAPTER 11
GOD AND EVIL
In a strictly scientific sense God is at the
bottom of both good and evil. He directs the
assassin's dagger no less than the surgeon’s knife.
But all that good and evil are, for human
purposes, from each other distinct and
incompatible, being symbolical of light and
darkness, God and Satan.
Harijan,  20-2-1937, p. 9
I do not regard God as a person. Truth for me
is God, and God’s Law and God not different
things or facts, in the sense that an earthly king
and his law are different. Because God is an Idea,
Law Himself. Therefore, it is impossible to
conceive God as breaking the Law. He, therefore,
does not rule out actions and withdraw Himself.
When we say He rules our actions, we are
simply using human language and we try to limit
Him. Otherwise He and His Law abide
everywhere and govern everything. Therefore, I
do not think that He answers in every detail
every request of ours, but there is no doubt that
He rules our action, and I literally believe that
not a blade of grass grows or moves without Hiswill. The free will we enjoy is less than that of a
passenger on a crowded deck.
“Do you feel a sense of freedom in your
communion with God?”
I do. I do not feel cramped as I would on a boat
full of passengers. Although I know that my
freedom is less than that of a passenger, I
appreciate that freedom as I have imbibed
through and through the central teaching of the
Gita that man is the maker of his own destiny in
the sense that he has freedom of choice as to the
manner in which he uses that freedom. But he is
no controller of results. The moment he thinks he
is, he comes to grief.
Harijan,  23-3-1940, p. 55
A correspondent writes:
“I am reading your Gitabodh  these days and
trying to understand it. I am puzzled by what
Lord Krishna says in the 10th discourse: ‘In
dicer’s play I am the conquering double eight.
Nothing either good or evil, can take place in this
world without my will.’ Does God then permit
evil? If so, how can He punish the evil-doer ? Has
God created the world for this purpose ? Is it
impossible then for mankind to live in peace ?”
To say that God permits evil in this world may
not be pleasing to the ear. But if He is held
responsible for the good, it follows that He has to
be responsible  for the evil too. Did not God
3940 MY GOD
permit Ravana to exhibit unparalleled strength ?
Perhaps, the root cause of the perplexity arises
from a lack of the real understanding of what God
is. God is not a person. He transcends
description. He is the Law-maker, the Law and
the Executor. No human being can well arrogate
these powers to himself. If he did, he would be
looked upon as an unadulterated dictator. They
become only Him whom we worship as God.
Harijan,  24-2-1946, p. 24
CHAPTER 12
VISITATIONS OF GOD
This earthly existence of ours is more brittle
than the glass bangles that ladies wear. You can
keep glass bangles for thousands of years if you
treasure them in a chest and let them remain
untouched. But this earthly existence is so fickle
that it may be wiped out in the twinkling of an
eye. Therefore, whilst we have yet breathing
time, let us get rid of the distinctions of high and
low, purify our hearts and be ready to face our
Maker when an earthquake or some natural
calamity or death in the ordinary course
overtakes us.
Harijan,  2-2-1934, p. 5
I share the belief with the whole world –
civilized and uncivilized – that calamities (such as
the Bihar earthquake of 1934) come to mankind as
chastisement for their sins. When that conviction
comes from the heart, people pray, repent and41
purify themselves.... I have but a limited
knowledge of His purpose. Such calamities are
not a mere caprice of the Deity or Nature. They
obey fixed laws as surely as the planets move in
obedience to laws governing their movement.
Only we do not know the laws governing these
events and, therefore, call them calamities or
disturbances.
Harijan,  2-2-1934, p. 1
There is a divine purpose behind every physical
calamity. That perfected science will one day be
able to tell us beforehand when earthquakes will
occur, as it tells us today of eclipses, is quite
possible. It will be another triumph of the human
mind. But such triumphs even indefinitely
multiplied can bring about no purification of self
without which nothing is of any value.
Harijan,  8-6-1935, p. 132
I ask those who appreciate the necessity of
inward purification to join in the prayer that we
may read the purpose of God behind such
visitations, that they may humble us and prepare
us to face our Maker whenever the call comes,
and that we may be ever ready to share the
sufferings of our fellows whoever they may be.
Harijan,  8-6-1935, p. 132
When we know that God Himself is the
mystery of mysteries why should anything that
He does perplex us ? If He acted as we would
have Him do or if He acted exactly like us, we
would not be His creatures and He our Creator.PATHWAYS TO GOD42 MY GOD
The impenetrable darkness that surrounds us is
not a curse but a blessing. He has given us power
to see the step in front of us and it would be
enough if Heavenly Light reveals that step to us.
We can then sing with Newman ‘One step enough
for me’. And we may be sure from our past
experience that the next step will always be in
view. In other words the impenetrable darkness
is nothing so impenetrable as we may imagine.
But it seems impenetrable when in our
impatience we want to look beyond that one step.
And since God is love, we can say definitely that
even the physical catastrophes that He sends now
and then must be a blessing in disguise and they
can be so only to those who regard them as a
warning for introspection and self-purification.
“My Dear Child”, (1959), pp. 104-05
CHAPTER 13
PATHWAYS TO GOD
Religions are different roads converging to the
same point. What does it matter that we take
different roads, so long as we reach the same
goal? In reality, there are as many religions as
there are individuals.
Hind Swaraj,  (1946), pp. 36, 35
All faiths are a gift of God, but partake of
human imperfection, as they pass through the
medium of humanity. God-given religion is
beyond all speech. Imperfect men put it into such
language as they can command, and their words43
are interpreted by other men equally imperfect.
Whose interpretation must be held to be the right
one? Every one is right from his own standpoint,
but it is not impossible that every one is wrong.
Hence the necessity for tolerance, which does not
mean indifference towards one’s own faith, but a
more intelligent and purer love for it. Tolerance
gives us spiritual insight, which is as far from
fanaticism as the north pole is from the south.
True knowledge of religion breaks down the
barriers between faith and faith and gives rise to
tolerance. Cultivation of tolerance for other faiths
will impart to us a truer understanding of our
own.
Young India,  (Bulletin), 2-10-1930, p. 2
For me the different religions are beautiful
flowers from the same garden, or they are
branches of the same majestic tree. Therefore
they are equally true, though being received and
interpreted through human instruments equally
imperfect.
Harijan,  30-1-1937, p. 407
The finer the line you draw, the nearer it
approaches Euclid’s true straight line, but it
never is the true straight line. The tree of
Religion is the same, there is not that physical
equality between the branches. They are all
growing, and the person who belongs to the
growing branch must not gloat over it and say,
‘Mine is the superior one.’ None is superior, none
is inferior, to the other.PATHWAYS TO GOD44 MY GOD
Harijan,  13-3-1937, p. 38
Belief in one God is the corner-stone of all
religions. But I do not foresee a time when there
would be only one religion on earth in practice. In
theory, since there is one God, there can be only
one religion. But in practice, no two persons I
have known have had the same and identical
conception of God. Therefore, there will, perhaps,
always be different religions answering to
different temperaments and climatic conditions.
Harijan,  2-2-1934, p. 8
The Allah of Islam is the same as the God of
Christians and the Ishwara of Hindus. Even as
there are numerous names of God in Hinduism,
there are as many names of God in Islam. The
names do not indicate individuality but
attributes, and little man had tried in his humble
way to describe mighty God by giving Him
attributes, though He is above all attributes,
Indescribable, Inconceivable, Immeasurable.
Living faith in this God means acceptance of the
brotherhood of mankind. It also means equal
respect for all religions.
Harijan,  14-5-1938, pp. 110-11
I believe in the fundamental truth of all great
religions of the world. I believe that they are all
God-given, and I believe that they were necessary
for the people to whom these religions were
revealed. And I believe that, if only we could all
of us read the scriptures of the different faiths
from the standpoint of the followers of those45
faiths we should find that they were at bottom all
one and were all helpful to one another.
Harijan,  16-2-1934, pp. 5-6
I believe that all the great religions of the
world are true more or less. I say ‘more or less’
because I believe that everything that the human
hand touches, by reason of the very fact that
human beings are imperfect, becomes imperfect.
Perfection is the exclusive attribute of God and it
is indescribable, untranslatable. I do believe that
it is possible for every human being to become
perfect even as God is perfect. It is necessary for
us all to aspire after perfection, but when that
blessed state is attained, it becomes
indescribable, indefinable. And, I therefore,
admit, in all humility, that even the Vedas, the
Koran, and the Bible are imperfect word of God
and, imperfect beings that we are, swayed to and
fro by a multitude of passions, it is impossible for
us even to understand this word of God in its
fullness.
Young India,  22-9-1927, p. 319
Religion is a very personal matter. We should
by living the life according to our lights share the
best with one another, thus adding to the sum
total of human effort to reach God.
Harijan,  28-11-1936, p. 330SERVICE OF GOD46 MY GOD
CHAPTER 14
SERVICE OF GOD
I cannot imagine anything nobler or more
national than that for, say, one hour in the day,
we should all do the labour that the poor must do,
and thus identify ourselves with them and
through them with all mankind. I cannot imagine
better worship of God than that in His name I
should labour for the poor even as they do.
Young India,  20-10-1921, p. 329
Religion is service of the helpless. God
manifests Himself to us in the form of the
helpless and the stricken.
Young India,  14-8-1924, p. 267
Daridranarayana is one of the millions of
names by which humanity knows God who is
unnameable, and unfathomable by human
understanding, and it means God of the poor, God
appearing in the hearts of the poor.
Young India,  4-4-1929, p. 110
And no one can see God face to face who has
aught of the I in him. He must become a cypher if
he would see God. Who shall dare say in this
storm-tossed universe, ‘I have won’? God
triumphs in us, never, we.
Young India,  25-6-1925, p. 223
A life of service must be one of humility. He,
who would sacrifice his life for others, has hardly
time to reserve for himself a place in the sun.
Inertia must not be mistaken for humility, as ithas been in Hinduism. True humility means most
strenuous and constant endeavour entirely
directed towards the service of humanity. God is
continuously in action without resting for a single
moment. If we would serve Him or become one
with Him, our activity must be as unwearied as
His.
From Yeravda Mandir,  (1945), p. 47
There may be momentary rest in store for the
drop which is separated from the ocean, but not
for the drop in the ocean, which knows no rest.
The same is the case with ourselves. As soon as
we become one with the ocean in the shape of
God, there is no more rest for us, nor indeed do
we need rest any longer. Our very sleep is action.
For we sleep with the thought of God in our
hearts. This restlessness constitutes true rest.
This never-ceasing agitation holds the key to
peace ineffable. This supreme state of total
surrender is difficult to describe, but not beyond
the bounds of human experience. It has been
attained by many dedicated souls, and may be
attained by ourselves as well.
From  Yeravda Mandir,  (1945), pp. 47-48
Self-realization I hold to be impossible without
service of and identification with the poorest.
Young India,  21-10-1926, p. 364
Man’s ultimate aim is the realization of God,
and all his activities, social, political, religious,
4748 MY GOD
have to be guided by the ultimate aim of the
vision of God. The immediate service of all human
beings becomes a necessary part of the
endeavour,” simply because the only way to find
God is to see Him in His creation and be one with
it. This can be only done by service of all. I am
part and parcel of the whole, and I cannot find
Him apart from the rest of humanity. My
countrymen are my nearest neighbours. They
have become so helpless, so resource-less, so inert
that I must concentrate on serving them. If I
could persuade myself that I should find Him in a
Himalayan cave I would proceed there
immediately. But I know that I cannot find Him
apart from humanity.
Harijan,  29-8-1936, p. 226
CHAPTER 15
THE TRUE DEVOTEE
Prayer is a confession of one's unworthiness
and weakness. God has a thousand names, or
rather, He is Nameless. We worship or pray to
Him by whichever name that pleases us. Some
call Him Rama, some Krishna, others call Him
Rahim, and yet others call Him God. All worship
the same spirit, but as all foods do not agree with
all, all names do not appeal to all. Each chooses
the name according to his associations, and He
being the In-Dweller, All-Powerful andOmniscient knows our innermost feelings and
responds to us according to our deserts.
Worship or prayer, therefore, is not to be
performed with the lips, but with the heart. And
that is why it can be performed equally by the
dumb and the stammerer, by the ignorant and the
stupid. And the prayers of those whose tongues
are nectared but whose hearts are full of poison
are never heard. He, therefore, who would pray
to God, must cleanse his heart. Rama was not
only on the lips of Hanuman, He was enthroned
in his heart. He gave Hanuman exhaustless
strength. In His strength he lifted the mountain
and crossed the ocean.
The Gita has defined the bhakta  in three places
and talked of him generally everywhere. But a
knowledge of the definition of a bhakta  is hardly
a sufficient guide. They are rare on this earth. I
have therefore suggested the Religion of Service
as the means. God of Himself seeks for His seat
the heart of him who serves his fellow-men. That
is why Narasinha Mehta who ‘saw and knew’ sang
‘He is a true Vaishnava  who knows to melt at
other’s woe.’ Such was Abu Ben Adhem. He
served his fellowmen, and therefore his name
topped the list of those who served God.
But who are suffering and the woe-begone? The
suppressed and the poverty-stricken. He who
would be a bhakta,  therefore, must serve these by
4950 MY GOD
body, soul and mind. How can he who regards the
‘suppressed’ classes as untouchables serve them
by the body ? He who does not even condescend to
exert his body to the extent of spinning for the
sake of the poor, and trots out lame excuses does
not know the meaning of service.... He who spins
before the poor inviting them to do likewise
serves God as no one else does. ‘He who gives me
even a trifle such as a fruit or a flower or even a
leaf in the spirit of bhakti  is My servant,’ says the
Lord in the Bhagavadgita. And He hath His
footstool where live ‘the humble, the lowliest and
the lost.’ Spinning, therefore, for such is the
greatest prayer, the greatest worship, the
greatest sacrifice.
Young India,  24-9-1925, pp. 331-32
CHAPTER 16
‘HOUSES OF GOD’
I do not regard the existence of a temple as a
sin or superstition. Some form of common
worship, and a common place of worship appear
to be a human necessity. Whether the temples
should contain images or not is a matter of
temperament and taste. I do not regard a Hindu
or a Roman Catholic place of worship containing
images as necessarily bad or superstitious, and a
mosque or a Protestant place of worship being
good or free of superstition merely because of
their exclusion of images. A symbol such as a
cross or a book may easily become idolatrous, and51
therefore superstitious. And the worship of the
image of Child Krishna or Virgin Mary may
become ennobling and free of all superstition. It
depends upon the attitude of the heart of the
worshipper.
Young India,  5-11-1925, p. 378
I know of no religion or sect that has done or is
doing without its House of God, variously
described as a temple, a mosque, a church, a
synagogue or an agiari.  Nor is it certain that any
of the great reformers including Jesus destroyed
or discarded temples altogether. All of them
sought to banish corruption from temples as well
as from society. Some of them, if not all, appear to
have preached from temples. I have ceased to
visit temples for years, but I do not regard myself
on that account as a better person than before. My
mother never missed going to the temple when
she was in a fit state to go there. Probably her
faith was far greater than mine, though I do not
visit temples. There are millions whose faith is
sustained through these temples, churches and
mosques. They are not all blind followers of a
superstition, nor are they fanatics. Superstition
and fanaticism are not their monopoly. These
vices have their root in our hearts and minds. To
reject the necessity of temples is to reject the
necessity of God, religion, and earthly existence.
Harijan,  11-3-1933, p. 5
Temple-going is for the purification of the soul.
The worshipper draws the best out of himself. In‘HOUSES OF GOD’52 MY GOD
greeting a living being, he may draw the best out
of the person greeted, if the greeting is selfless. A
living being is more or less fallible like oneself.
But in the temple, one worships the living God,
perfect beyond imagination. Letters written to
living persons often end in heart-breaking, even
when they are answered, and there is no
guarantee of their being always answered.
Letters to God who, according to the devotee’s
imagination, resides in temples, require neither
pen nor ink nor paper, not even speech. Mere
mute worship constitutes the letter which brings
its own unfailing answer. The whole function is a
beautiful exercise of faith. Here there is no waste
of effort, no heart-breaking, no danger of being
misunderstood. The writer must try to
understand the simple philosophy lying behind
the worship in temples or mosques or churches.
He will understand my meaning better if he will
realize that I make no distinction between these
different abodes of God. They are what faith has
made them. They are an answer to man’s craving
somehow to reach the UNSEEN.
Harijan,  18-3-1933, p. 6
We the human family are not all philosophers.
We are of the earth very earthy, and we are not
satisfied with contemplating the Invisible God.
Somehow or other we want something which we
can touch, something which we can see,
something before which we can kneel down. It
does not matter whether it is a book, or an empty53
stone building, or a stone building inhabited by
numerous figures. A book will satisfy some, an
empty building will satisfy some others, and many
others will not be satisfied unless they see
something inhabiting these empty buildings. Then
I ask you to approach these temples not as if they
represented a body of superstitions. If you will
approach these temples with faith in them, you
will know that each time you visit them you will
come away from them purified, and with your
faith more and more in the living God.
Harijan,  23-2-1937, p. 401
Bitter experience has taught me that all
temples are not houses of God. They can be
habitations of the devil. These places of worship
have no value unless the keeper is a good man of
God. Temples, mosques, churches are what man
makes them to be.
Young India, 19-5-1927, p. 161
[To a Roman Catholic Bishop]
When you kneel before Virgin Mary and ask for
her intercession, what do you do? You ask to
establish contact with God through her. Even so a
Hindu seeks to establish contact with God
through a stone image. I can understand your
asking for the Virgin’s intercession. Why are
Musalmans filled with awe and exultation when
they enter a mosque ? Why, is not whole universe
a mosque? And what about the magnificent
canopy of heaven that spreads over you ? Is it any
less than a mosque ? But I understand andINCARNATIONS OF GOD54 MY GOD
sympathize with the Muslims. It is their way of
approach to God. The Hindus have their own way
of approach to the same Eternal Being. Our
media of approach are different, but that does not
make Him different.
Harijan, 13-3-1937, p. 39
Idol-worship
I have said I do not disbelieve in idol-worship.
An idol does not excite any feeling of veneration
in me. But I think that idol-worship is part of
human nature. We hanker after symbolism.
'Young India,  6-10-1921, p. 318
I am both an idolater and an iconoclast in what
I conceive to be the true senses of the terms. I
value the spirit behind idol-worship. It plays a
most important part in the uplift of the human
race. And I would like to possess the ability to
defend with my life the thousands of holy temples
which sanctify this land of ours. I am an
iconoclast in the sense that I break down the
subtle form of idolatry in the shape of fanaticism
that refuses to see any virtue in any other form of
worshipping the Deity save one’s own. This form
of idolatry is more deadly for being more fine and
evasive than the tangible and gross form of
worship that identifies the Deity with a little bit
of a stone or a golden image.
Young India,  28-8-1924, p. 284
CHAPTER 17
INCARNATIONS OF GOD55
In Hinduism, incarnation is ascribed to one
who has performed some extraordinary service of
mankind. All embodied life is in reality an
incarnation of God, but it is not usual to consider
every living being an incarnation. Future
generations pay this homage to one who in his
own generation, has been extraordinarily
religious in his conduct. I can see nothing wrong
in the procedure; it takes nothing from God’s
greatness, and there is no violence done to truth.
There is an Urdu saying which means ‘Adam is
not God but he is a spark of the Divine!’ And
therefore he who is the most religiously behaved
has most of the divine spark in him. It is in
accordance with this train of thought that
Krishna enjoys, in Hinduism, the status of the
most perfect incarnation.
This belief in incarnation is a testimony of
man’s lofty spiritual ambition. Man is not at peace
with himself till he has become like unto God.
The endeavour to reach this state is the supreme,
the only ambition worth having. And this is self-
realization.
Young India,  6-8-1931, pp. 205-06
I have no knowledge that the Krishna of Maha-
bharat ever lived. My Krishna has nothing to do
with any historical person. I would refuse to bow
my head to the Krishna who would kill because
his pride is hurt, or the Krishna whom the non
Hindus portray as a dissolute youth. I believe inINCARNATIONS OF GOD56Krishna of my imagination as a perfect
incarnation, spotless in every sense of the word,
the inspirer of the Gita and the inspirer of the
lives of millions of human beings. But if it was
proved to me that the Mahabharata is history in
the same sense that modern historical books are,
that every word of the Mahabharata is authentic
and the Krishna of the Mahabharata actually did
some of the acts attributed to him, even at the
risk of being banished from the Hindu fold I
should not hesitate to reject that Krishna as God
incarnate. But to me the Mahabharata is a
profoundly religious book, largely allegorical, in
no way meant to be a historical record. It is the
description of the eternal duel going on within
ourselves, given so vividly as to make us think for
the time being that the deeds described therein
were actually done by the human beings. Nor do
I regard the Mahabharata as we have it now as a
faultless copy of the original. On the contrary I
consider that it has undergone many
amendations.
Young India,  1-10-1925, p. 336
God is not a person. To affirm that He descends
to earth every now and again in the form of a
human being is a partial truth which merely
signifies that such a person lives near to God.
Inasmuch as God is omnipresent, He dwells
within every human being and all may, therefore,
be said to be incarnations of Him. But this leads57
us nowhere. Rama, Krishna, etc. are called
incarnations of God because we attribute divine
qualities to them. In truth they are creations of
man’s imagination. Whether they actually lived or
not does not affect the picture of them in men’s
minds. The Rama and Krishna of history often
present difficulties which have to be overcome by
all manner of arguments.
The truth is that God is the force. He is the
essence of life. He is pure and undefiled
consciousness. He is eternal. And yet, strangely
enough, all are not able to derive either benefit
from or shelter in the all-pervading living
presence.
Electricity is a powerful force. Not all can
benefit from it. It can only be produced by
following certain laws. It is a lifeless force. Man
can utilize it if he labours hard enough to acquire
the knowledge of its laws.
The living force which we call God can
similarly be found if we know and follow His law
leading to the discovery of Him in us.
Harijan,  22-6-1947, p. 200
CHAPTER 18
WHAT GOD HAS MEANT TO ME
I have not seen Him, neither have I known
Him. I have made the world’s faith in God my
own, and as my faith is ineffaceable, I regard that
faith as amounting to experience. However, as it
may be said that to describe faith as experience isWHAT GOD HAS MEANT TO ME58 MY GOD
to tamper with truth, it may perhaps be more
correct to say that I have no word for
characterizing my belief in God.
Autobiography,  (1940), p. 341
I am endeavouring to see God through service
of humanity, for I know that God is neither in
heaven, nor down below, but in every one.
Young India,  4-8-1927, pp. 247-48
It is an unbroken torture to me that I am still
so far from Him, who, as I fully knew, governs
every breath of my life, and whose offspring I am.
I know that it is the evil passions within that
keep me so far from Him, and yet I cannot get
away from them.
Autobiography,  (1948), p. 8
What I want to achieve,–what I have been
striving and pining to achieve these thirty years,–
is self-realization, to see God face to face, to
attain Moksha . I live and move and have my being
in pursuit of this goal. All that I do by way of
speaking and writing, and all my ventures in the
political field, are directed to this same end.
Autobiography,  (1948), pp. 4-5
On all occasions of trial He has saved me. I
know that the phrase 'God saved me' has a deeper
meaning for me today, and still I feel that I have
not yet grasped its entire meaning. Only richer
experience can help me to a fuller understanding.
But in all my trials–of a spiritual nature, as a
lawyer, in conducting institutions, and in59
politics,–I can say that God saved me. When every
hope is gone, ‘when helpers fail and comforts flee’,
I find that help arrives somehow, from I know not
where. Supplication; worship, prayer are no
superstition they are acts more real than the acts
of eating, drinking, sitting or walking. It is no
exaggeration to say that they alone are real, all
else is unreal.
Autobiography,  (1948), p. 96
I have no special revelation of God’s will. My
firm belief is that He reveals Himself daily to
every human being but we shut our ears to the
still small voice. We shut our eyes to the Pillar of
Fire in front of us. I realize His omnipresence.
Young India,  25-5-1921, pp. 161-62
When I admire the wonder of a sunset or the
beauty of the moon, my soul expands in worship
of the Creator. I try to see Him and His mercies
in all these creations. But even the sunsets and
sunrises would be mere hindrances, if they did
not help me to think of Him. Anything which is a
hindrance to the flight of the soul, is a delusion
and a snare; even, like the body, which often does
hinder you in the path of salvation.
Young India,  13-11-1924, p. 378
I do not want to foresee the future. I am
concerned with taking care of the present. God
has given me no control over the moment
following.
Young India , 26-12-1924, p. 430
God saves me so long as He wants me in thisWHAT GOD HAS MEANT TO ME60 MY GOD
body. The moment His wants are satisfied, no
precautions on my part will save me.
Bapu’s Letters to Mira,  (1949), p. 91
I am in the world feeling my way to light ‘amid
the encircling gloom’. I often err and
miscalculate.... My trust is solely in God. And I
trust men only because I trust God. If I had no
God to rely upon, I should be, like Timon, a hater
of my species.
Young India, 4-12-1924, p. 398
If I did not feel the presence of God within me,
I see so much of misery and disappointment every
day that I would be a raving maniac and my
destination would be the Hooghli.
Young India,  6-8-1925. p. 275
I know the path. It is straight and narrow. It is
like the edge of a sword. I rejoice to walk on it. I
weep when I slip. God’s word is: ‘He who strives
never perishes.’ I have implicit faith in that
promise. Though, therefore, from my weakness I
fail a thousand times, I will not lose faith but
hope that I shall see the Light when the flesh has
been brought under perfect subjection as some
day it must.
Young India,  17-6-1926, p. 215
I have had my share of disappointments,
uttermost darkness, counsels of despair, counsels
of caution, subtlest assaults of pride, but I am able
to say that my faith,–and I know that it is still
little enough, by no means as great as I want it to
be,–has ultimately conquered every one of these61
difficulties up to now. If we have faith in us, if we
have a prayerful heart, we may not tempt God,
may not make terms with Him.
Young India,  20-12-1928, p. 420
My uniform experience has convinced me that
there is no other God than Truth.. ..The little
fleeting glimpses... that I have been able to have
of Truth can hardly convey an idea of the
indescribable lustre of Truth, a million times
more intense than that of the sun we daily see
with our eyes. In fact, what I have caught is only
the faintest gleam of that mighty effulgence. But
this much I can say with assurance as a result of
all my experiments, that a perfect vision of Truth
can only follow a complete realization of Ahimsa.
Young India,  7-2-1929, p. 42
Prayer has been the saving of my life. Without
it I should have been a lunatic long ago. My
autobiography will tell you, that I have had my
fair share of the bitterest public and private
experi-ences. They threw me into temporary
despair, but if I was able to get rid of it, it was
because of prayer. Now I may tell you, that prayer
has not been part of my life in the sense that
truth has been. It came out of sheer necessity, as
I found myself in a plight when I could not
possibly be happy without it. And the more my
faith in God increased, the more irresistible
became the yearning for prayer. Life seemed to be
dull and vacant without it.
Young India,  24-9-1931, p. 274WHAT GOD HAS MEANT TO ME62 MY GOD
I started with disbelief in God and prayer, and
until at a late stage in life I did not feel any thing
like a void in life. But at that stage I felt that as
food was indispensable for the body, so was
prayer indispensable for the soul. In fact food for
the body is not so necessary as prayer for the
soul. For star-vation is often necessary in order to
keep the body in health, but there is no such thing
as prayer-starvation.. ..In spite of despair staring
me in the face on the political horizon, I have
never lost my peace. In fact I have found people
who envy my peace. That peace, I tell you, comes
from prayer; I am not a man of learning but I
humbly claim to be a man of prayer.
Young India,  24-9-1931, p. 274
I am giving you a bit of my experience and that
of my companions when I say that he who has
experienced the magic of prayer may do without
food for days together but not a single moment
without prayer. For without prayer there is no
inward peace.
Young India,  23-1-1930, p. 25
I have learned this one lesson – that what is
impossible with man is child’s play with God, and
if we have faith in that Divinity which presides on
the destiny of the meanest of His creation, I have
no doubt that all things are possible; and in that
final hope, I live and pass my time and endeavour
to obey His will.
Young India,  19-11-1931, p. 361
I must go with God as my only guide. He is a63
jealous Lord. He will allow no one to share His
authority. One has, therefore, to appear before
Him in all one’s weakness, empty-handed and in
a spirit of full surrender, and then He enables you
to stand before a whole world and protects you
from all harm.
Young India,  3-9-1931, p. 247
I am impatient to realize the presence of my
Maker, who to me embodies Truth, and in the
early past of my career I discovered that if I was
to realize Truth, I must obey, even at the cost of
my life, the law of Love.
Nation’s Voice, p. 319
God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on
this earth, and He tries you through and through.
And when you find that your faith is failing or
your body is failing you, and you are sinking, He
comes to your assistance somehow or other and
proves to you that you must not lose your faith
and that He is always at your beck and call, but
on His terms, not on your terms. So I have found.
I cannot really recall a single instance when, at
the eleventh hour, He has forsaken me.
Speeches and Writings of Mahatma Gandhi,  (1933), p. 1069
I will not be a traitor to God to please the
whole world.
Harijan,  18-2-1933, p. 4
God having cast my lot in the midst of the
people of India, I should be untrue to my Maker
if I failed to serve them. If I do not know how to
serve them I shall never know how to serveWHAT GOD HAS MEANT TO ME64 MY GOD
humanity.
Young India,  18-6-1925, p. 211
And as I know that God is found more often in
the lowliest of His creatures than in the high and
mighty, I am struggling to reach the status of
these. I cannot do so without their service. Hence
my passion for the service of the suppressed
classes. And as I cannot render this service
without entering politics, I find myself in them.
I recognize no God except the God that is to be
found in the hearts of the dumb millions. They do
not recognize His presence; I do. And, I worship
the God that is Truth or Truth which is God,
through the service of these millions.
Young India,  11-9-1924, p. 298
My God is myriad-formed and while sometimes
I see Him in the spinning wheel, at other times I
see Him in communal unity, then again in the
removal of untouchability; and that is how I
establish communion with Him according as the
spirit moves me.
Harijan,  8-5-1937, p. 99
I am surer of His existence than of the fact that
you and I are sitting in this room. Then I can also
testify that I may live without air and water but
not without Him. You may pluck out my eyes, but
that cannot kill me. You may chop off my nose,
but that will not kill me. But blast my belief in
God, and I am dead. You may call this a
superstition, but I confess it is a superstition that
I hug, even as I used to do the name of Rama in65
my childhood when there was any cause of danger
or alarm. That was what an old nurse had taught
me.
Harijan,  14-5-1938, p. 109
My aspiration is limited. God has not given me
the power to guide the world on the path of non-
violence. But I have imagined that He has chosen
me as His instrument for presenting non-violence
to India for dealing with her many ills. The
progress already made is great. But much more
remains to be done.
'Harijan,  23-7-1938, p. 193
There is not a moment when I do not feel the
presence of a Witness whose eye misses nothing
and with whom I strive to keep in tune.
Harijan,  24-12-1938, p. 395
I have never found Him lacking in response. I
have found Him nearest at hand when the horizon
seemed darkest–in my ordeals in jails when it
was not all smooth sailing for me. I cannot recall
a moment in my life when I had a sense of
desertion by God.
Harijan,  24-12-1933, p. 395
Rightly or wrongly, I know that I have no other
resource as a Satyagrahi than the assistance of
God in every conceivable difficulty, and I .would
like it to be believed that what may appear to be
inexplicable actions of mine are really due to
inner promptings. It may be a product of my
heated imagination. If it is so, I prize that
imagination as it has served me for a chequered66 MY GOD
life extending over a period of now nearly over
fifty-five years, because I learned to rely
consciously upon God before I was fifteen years
old.
Harijan,  11-3-1939, p. 46