 
My Non-violence 
 
 
 
By : M. K. Gandhi 
 
 
Compiled By : Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyaya 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 70/- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Printed & Published by : 
Jitendra T Desai 
Navajivan Publishing House 
Ahmedabad 380 014 (INDIA) 
  My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 2  
EDITOR'S NOTE 
Truth and non-violence are the twin pillars on which rested the entire 
framework of the magnificent edifice of Mahatma Gandhi's glorious life and 
work, which, according to the eminent scientist Einstein, was so spectacular 
that "generations to come, it may be, will scarce believe that such a one as this 
ever in flesh and blood walked upon this earth." To the Mahatma, of course, 
truth and non-violence were the two sides of the same coin. Hence one can 
understand the importance of non-violence in the working of Mahatma Gandhi's  
Weltanschauung  or the philosophy of life. 
Propagation of non-violence was no novel or unprecedented act of the 
Mahatma. As he himself has rightly said, "I have nothing new to teach the 
world. Truth and non-violence are as old as the hills. All I have done is to try 
experiments in both on as vast a scale as I could." Verily, Gandhiji was pioneer 
in the field of applying the talisman of Ahimsa or non-violence, which until then 
was accepted by saints as a means to attain individual Moksha or salvation from 
this material world, for the solution of day-to-day problems of the common 
man. To him life was an undivided whole and it could not be partitioned into 
water-tight compartments. Therefore, a true revolutionary as he was, he made 
it a mission of his life to see that the age-old dictum of non-violence gets its 
rightful place in the community of the future and all the relations and activities 
of the society are carried on on the basis of this universal doctrine. 
To tell the truth, non-violence today has become a more pressing cry of the 
entire humanity than in any particular phase of the human history. The 
tremendous advent in the sphere of physical science has created such lethal 
weapons, before which the extinction of the human civilization, nay, even the 
species itself is a matter of a few seconds. In the ancient times when science 
and technology were in their infant stage, men could afford to be violent. But 
in the mid-twentieth century, when the world has been divided into two 
warring camps, armed to teeth with the latest models of armaments of total 
annihilation, the very urge of self-preservation has made it imperative on our My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 3 part to embrace non-violence. Acharya Vinoba Bhave, the well-reputed 
protagonist of non-violence in modern India, has rightly remarked that this is an 
age when we must have to make proper synthesis of Vijnana and Atmajnana, 
i.e. science and self-knowledge. Not only Gandhians like Vinoba but so many 
others from all over the world have echoed the same voice and have said that 
without the guidance of the Spirit the present civilization is like a ship without 
a rudder. And what is the guidance of Spirit if it is not non-violence, i.e. pure 
love? 
In trying to understand Gandhiji and his non-violence we should not overlook 
one important aspect of the truth. Gandhiji was no philosopher in the dogmatic 
sense of the term. He did not cut himself adrift from the daily problems and 
struggles of the mankind and take refuge in a solitary physical and mental 
corner to formulate his philosophy of non-violence. His was the unique 
technique of taking active role in the process of the solution of the everyday 
problems of the downtrodden and in this process he evolved, like a lotus that 
blooms petal after petal, his non-violence. Hence in the restricted sense of the 
term, his was a realistic philosophy and that is why he was not tired of calling 
himself a practical idealist. Whatever he has uttered in this respect war first 
experimentally proved by him and therefore it is a negation of truth if one says 
that the teachings of Gandhiji are meant for the Mahatmas alone and not for 
the man on the street. To such critics the entire life and work of Gandhiji are 
glaring testimonies. 
It is but natural that such an important subject should be a matter of deep 
interest for all, who are concerned with the wellbeing of the mankind. The 
Navajivan Publishing House has rendered a unique service to the cause of non-
violence by publishing the two volumes of Non-violence in Peace and War by 
Gandhiji, being the collection of his speeches and writings from 1921 to his last 
day. But as the said two volumes run near about 1000 pages, it was felt 
essential to present the basic thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi on non-violence in a 
handy single volume and the following pages are the outcome of that effort. 
The editor knows full well how difficult it is to undertake the job of abridging My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 4 the writings and speeches of a person, who was not in the habit of using one 
single word that was not absolutely essential. Moreover he was always 
conscious of his limitations as an editor. But the urge of producing one such 
volume for the common reader interested to know the views of the Mahatma on 
non-violence, has provoked him to undertake this arduous job. While editing 
strict vigilance has been maintained to see that the author's ideas are not 
distorted. At a few places only the editor has inserted a word or two of his own 
for the purpose of maintaining the continuity of thought and correct syntax. 
But such words have been given within brackets, so that they can be 
distinguished from the writings of Gandhiji. The editor is aware that his efforts 
are not up to the mark and, therefore, he invites all suggestions for the 
improvement of the volume. 
Before concluding I must make a special reference to the all-out help and co-
operation I have received from Shri Jivanjibhai Desai, the Managing Trustee of 
the Navajivan Trust, without whose active interest in this venture it would not 
have been possible for me to prepare this volume. I hope that along with me 
the readers of the present volume would also appreciate his noble effort and 
sincere endeavour in popularizing the  summum bonum  of the greatest votary of 
peace of our age. 
Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhaya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 5  
01. THE DOCTRINE OF THE SWORD 
I do believe that, where there is only a choice between cowardice and 
violence, I would advise violence. Thus when my eldest son asked me what he 
should have done, had he been present when I was almost fatally assaulted in 
1908, whether he should have run away and seen me killed or whether he 
should have used his physical force which he could and wanted to use, and 
defended me, I told him that it was his duty to defend me even by using 
violence. 
But I believe that non-violence is infinitely superior to violence, forgiveness is 
more manly than punishment. Forgiveness adorns a soldier. But abstinence is 
forgiveness only when there is the power to punish; it is meaningless when it 
pretends to proceed from a helpless creature. A mouse hardly forgives a cat 
when it allows itself to be torn to pieces by her. I therefore appreciate the 
sentiment of those who cry out for the condign punishment of General Dyer and 
his ilk. They would tear him to pieces, if they could. But I do not believe India 
to be helpless. I do not believe myself to be a helpless creature. Only I want to 
use India's and my strength for a better purpose. 
Let me not be misunderstood. Strength does not come from physical capacity. 
It comes from an indomitable will. An average Zulu is any way more than a 
match for an average Englishman in bodily capacity. But he flees from an 
English boy, because he fears the boy's revolver or those who will use it for 
him. He fears death and is nerveless in spite of his burly figure. We in India may 
in a moment realize that one hundred thousand Englishmen need not frighten 
three hundred million human beings. A definite forgiveness would, therefore, 
mean a definite recognition of our strength. With enlightened forgiveness must 
come a mighty wave of strength in us, which would make it impossible for a 
Dyer and a Frank Johnson to heap affront on India's devoted head. It matters 
little to me that for the moment I do not drive my point home. We feel too 
down-trodden not to be angry and revengeful. But I must not refrain from My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 6 saying that India can gain more by waiving the right of punishment. We have 
better work to do, a better mission to deliver to the world. 
I am not a visionary. I claim to be a practical idealist. The religion of non-
violence is not meant merely for the Rishis and saints. It is meant for the 
common people as well. Non-violence is the law of our species as violence is 
the law of the brute. The spirit lies dormant in the brute, and he knows no law 
but that of physical might. The dignity of man requires obedience to a higher 
law — to the strength of the spirit. 
I have therefore ventured to place before India the ancient law of self-
sacrifice. For Satyagraha and its offshoots, non-co-operation and civil 
resistance, are nothing but new names for the law of suffering. The Rishis, who 
discovered the law of non-violence in the midst of violence, were greater 
geniuses than Newton. They were themselves greater warriors than Wellington. 
Having themselves known the use of arms, they realized their uselessness, and 
taught a weary world that its salvation lay not through violence but through 
non-violence. 
Non-violence in its dynamic condition means conscious suffering. It does not 
mean meek submission to the will of the evil-doer, but it means putting of one's 
whole soul against the will of the tyrant. Working under this law of our being, it 
is possible for a single individual to defy the whole might of an unjust empire to 
save his honour, his religion, his soul, and lay the foundation for that empire's 
fall or its regeneration. 
And so I am not pleading for India to practise nonviolence because she is weak. 
I want her to practise nonviolence being conscious of her strength and power. 
No training in arms is required for realization of her strength. We seem to need 
it, because we seem to think that we are but a lump of flesh. I want India to 
recognize that she has a soul that cannot perish, and that can rise triumphant 
above every physical weakness and defy the physical combination of a whole 
world. What is the meaning of Rama, a mere human being, with his host of 
monkeys, pitting himself against the insolent strength of ten-headed Ravana 
surrounded in supposed safety by the raging waters on all sides of Lanka? Does My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 7 it not mean the conquest of physical might by spiritual strength? However, 
being a practical man, I do not wait till India recognizes the practicability of 
the spiritual life in the political world. India considers herself to be powerless 
and paralyzed before the machine guns, the tanks and the aeroplanes of the 
English, and takes up non-co-operation out of her weakness. It must still serve 
the same purpose, namely, bring her delivery from the crushing weight of 
British injustice, if a sufficient number of people practise it. 
If India takes up the doctrine of the sword, she may gain momentary victory. 
Then India will cease to be the pride of my heart. I am wedded to India because 
I owe my all to her. I believe absolutely that she has a mission for the world. 
She is not to copy Europe blindly. India's acceptance of the doctrine of the 
sword will be the hour of my trial. I hope I shall not be found wanting. My reli-
gion has no geographical limits. If I have a living faith in it, it will transcend my 
love for India herself. My life is dedicated to the service of India through the 
religion of non-violence which I believe to be the root of Hinduism. 
Young India,  11-8-1920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 8  
02. ‘ONE STEP ENOUGH FOR ME’ 
Mr. Stokes approves of non-co-operation, but dreads the consequences that 
may follow complete success, i.e. evacuation of India by the British. He 
conjures up before his mind a picture of India invaded by the Afghans from the 
North-West, plundered by the Gurkhas from the Hills. For me I say with 
Cardinal Newman: 'I do not ask to see the distant scene; one step enough for 
me.' The movement is essentially religious. The business of every god-fearing 
man is to dissociate himself from evil in total disregard of consequences. He 
must have faith in a good deed producing only a good result: that, in my 
opinion, is the Gita doctrine of work without attachment. God does not permit 
him to peep into the future. He follows truth although the following of it may 
endanger his very life. He knows that it is better to die in the way of God than 
to live in the way of Satan. Therefore, whoever is satisfied that the 
Government represents the activity of Satan has no choice left to him but to 
dissociate himself from it. 
However, let us consider the worst that can happen to India on a sudden 
evacuation of India by the British. What does it matter that the Gurkhas and 
the Pathans attack us? Surely we would be better able to deal with their 
violence than we are with the continued violence, moral and physical, 
perpetrated by the present Government. Mr. Stokes does not seem to eschew 
the use of physical force. Surely the combined labour of the Rajput, the Sikh 
and the Mussalman warriors in a united India may be trusted to deal with 
plunderers from any or all the sides. Imagine, however, the worst: Japan 
overwhelming us from the Bay of Bengal, the Gurkhas from the Hills, and the 
Pathans from the North-West. If we do not succeed in driving them out, we 
make terms with them, and drive them out at the first opportunity. This will be 
a more manly course than a helpless submission to an admittedly wrongful 
state. 
But I refuse to contemplate the dismal outlook. If the movement succeeds 
through non-violent non-co-operation — and that is the supposition Mr. Stokes My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 9 has started with — the English, whether they remain or retire, will do so as 
friends and under a well-ordered agreement as between partners. I still believe 
in the goodness of human nature, whether it is English or any other. I therefore 
do not believe that the English will leave in ' a night 
And do I consider the Gurkha and the Afghan being incorrigible thieves and 
robbers without ability to respond to purifying influences? I do not. If India 
returns to her spirituality; it will react upon the neighbouring tribes; she will 
interest herself in the welfare of these hardy but poor people, and even 
support them, if necessary, not out of fear but as a matter of neighbourly duty. 
She will have dealt with Japan simultaneously with the British. Japan will not 
want to invade India, if India has learnt to consider it a sin to use a single 
foreign article that she can manufacture within her own borders. She produces 
enough to eat, and her men and women can, without difficulty, manufacture 
enough cloth to cover their nakedness and protect themselves from heat and 
cold. We become prey to invasion, if we excite the greed of foreign nations by 
dealing with them under a feeling of dependence on them. We must learn to be 
independent of every one of them. 
Young India , 29-12-1920 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 10  
03. OUR NEIGHBOURS 
It is no part of the duty of a non-violent non-co-operator to assist the 
Government against war made upon it by others. A non-violent non-co-operator 
may not secretly or openly encourage or assist any such war. He may not take 
part directly or indirectly in it. But it is no part of his duty to help the 
Government to end the war. On the contrary, his prayer would be, as it must 
be, for the defeat of a power which he seeks to destroy. I therefore, so far as 
my creed of non-violence is concerned, can contemplate an Afghan invasion 
with perfect equanimity, and equally so far as India's safety is concerned. The 
Afghans have no quarrel with India. They are a god-fearing people. I warn non-
co-operators against judging the Afghans by the few savage specimens we see 
in Bombay or Calcutta. 
Young India,  18-5-1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 11  
04. THE FRONTIER FRIENDS 
If we had charge of the Frontier, I know what we would have done. We would 
certainly have died in the attempt to defend the unarmed population of the 
district. We would have, if necessary, armed the population for self-defence. 
But what is more, we would have won over the tribesmen and turned them 
from marauding bands into trustworthy neighbours. 
I know that the process of reforming the tribesmen is slow and tedious. It 
provides poor comfort to those that are robbed of their possessions or their 
dear ones. 
I cannot imagine greater humiliation for a self-respecting man to be dependent, 
for the safety of himself or his family, on those who he thinks prey upon him. I 
would prefer total destruction of myself and my all to purchasing safety at the 
cost of my manhood. This feeling of helplessness in us has really arisen from 
our deliberate dismissal of God from our common affairs. We have become 
atheists for all practical purposes. And therefore we believe that in the long 
run we must rely upon physical force for our protection. In the face of physical 
danger we cast all our philosophy to the winds. Our daily life is a negation of 
God. If then we would but have a little trust in God, i. e. ourselves, we shall 
find no difficulty with the tribesmen. Only in that case we will have to be 
prepared at times to surrender our possessions and under certain circumstances 
our lives rather than our honour. We must refuse to believe that our neighbours 
are savages, incapable of responding to the finer in man. 
Thus consistently with our self-respect there are but two courses open to us, to 
prepare, in so far as we wish to defend ourselves however weakly, against 
robbery and plunder, or to believe in the capacity of our neighbours to respond 
to the nobler instinct in man and to endeavour to reform the tribesmen. I 
apprehend that the two processes will go hand in hand. We must avoid the 
third at any cost, i. e. reliance in the British bullet to protect us from harm. It 
is the surest way to national suicide. 
Young India,  25-5-1921 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 12  
05. SOLDIERS 
One correspondent asks on their behalf as to what would happen to them under 
Swaraj. As for the first, the Working Committee has shown them the way. Every 
soldier can easily become a weaver and carder. Carding requires strength of 
arm which every soldier must have. And a carder in Bombay earns anything 
between two to three rupees per day. Many weavers of the Punjab have left 
the handloom for the sword of the hireling. I consider the former to be 
infinitely preferable to the latter. I refuse to call the profession of the sepoy 
honourable when he has no choice as to the time when and the persons or 
people against whom he is called upon to use his sword. The sepoy's services 
have more often been utilized for enslaving as than for protecting us, whereas 
the weaver today can truly become the liberator of his country and hence a 
true soldier. 
What will happen during Swaraj is easily answered. The soldiers will not then 
be hirelings, but they will form the national militia for defensive and protective 
purposes alone. They will have a voice in the moulding of the affairs of the 
nation. And they will certainly never be sent to cut down inoffensive Turks or 
Arabs in the West or equally inoffensive Chinese or Burmese in the East. 
Young India,  27-10-1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 13  
06. WHY DID I ASSIST IN THE LAST WAR? 
A correspondent asks some pertinent questions in the following pungent 
fashion: 
"When the Zulus broke out for liberty against the British usurpers, you helped 
the British in suppressing the so-called rebellion. Is it a rebellion to try to shake 
off the foreign yoke? Was Jean D'arc a rebel? Was George Washington a rebel? Is 
De Valera one ? You may say that the Zulus had recourse to violence. I then ask, 
was the end bad or the means? The latter may have been so, but certainly not 
the former; so you will be kind enough to explain the riddle. In the last war, 
when the gallant Germans and Austrians were fighting so bravely against a 
world combination, you raised recruits for the British to fight against the 
nations that had done India no harm. Whenever there is a war between two 
races, one has to hear both parties before coming to a decision either for or 
against any of them. In the last war we had a one-sided version only, and that 
from a nation certainly not renowned for truthfulness or honesty. You have all 
along been an advocate of passive resistance and non-violence. Why then did 
you induce people to take part in a war the merits of which they knew not, and 
for the aggrandizement of a race so miserably wallowing in the mire of 
imperialism? You may say you had faith in the British bureaucracy. Is it possible 
for any person to have faith in an alien people, all whose acts have run so 
glaringly counter to their promises? It cannot have been so with a person of 
such high attainments as yourself. So you will please answer the second riddle. 
"There is another point to which I should like to refer. You are an advocate of 
non-violence. Under the present circumstances we should be strictly non-
violent. But when India will be free, should we strictly eschew arms even if a 
foreign nation invaded us? Would you also boycott railways and telegraphs and 
steamers even when they will have ceased to promote exports of the products 
of our soil?" 
I hear and read many charges of inconsistency about myself. But I do not 
answer them as they do not affect anyone but myself. The questions, however, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 14 raised by the correspondent are of general importance and deserve notice. 
They are by no means new to me. But I do not remember having answered them 
in the columns of Young India.  
Not only did I offer my services at the time of the Zulu Revolt but before that, 
at the time of the Boer War, and not only did I raise recruits in India during the 
late war, but I raised an ambulance corps in 1914 in London. If, therefore, I 
have sinned, the cup of my sins is full to the brim. I lost no occasion of serving 
the Government at all times. Two questions presented themselves to me during 
all those crises. What was my duty as a citizen of the empire as I then believed 
myself to be, and what was my duty as an out-and-out believer in the religion 
of Ahimsa — non-violence ? 
I know now that I was wrong in thinking that I was a citizen of the empire. But 
on those four occasions I did honestly believe that, in spite of the many 
disabilities that my country was labouring under, it was making its way towards 
freedom, and that on the whole the government from the popular standpoint 
was not wholly bad, and that the British administrators were honest though 
insular ancj dense. Holding that view, I set about doing what an ordinary 
Englishman would do in the circumstances. I was not wise or important enough 
to take independent action. I had no business to judge or scrutinize ministerial 
decisions with the solemnity of a tribunal. I did not impute malice to the 
ministers either at the time of the Boar War, the Zulu Revolt or the late war. I 
did not consider Englishmen, nor do I now consider them, as particularly bad or 
worse than other human beings. I considered and still consider them to be as 
capable of high motives and actions as any- other body of men, and equally 
capable of making mistakes. I therefore felt that I sufficiently discharged my 
duty as a man and a citizen by offering my humble services to the empire in the 
hour of its need whether local or general. That is how I would expect every 
Indian to act by his country under Swaraj. I should be deeply distressed, if on 
every conceivable occasion every one of us were to be a law Unto oneself and 
to scrutinize in golden scales every action of our future National Assembly. I 
would surrender my judgment in most matters to national representatives, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 15 taking particular care in making my choice of such representatives. I know that 
in no other manner would a democratic government be possible for one single 
day. 
The whole situation is now changed for me. My eyes, I fancy, are opened. 
Experience has made me wiser. I consider the existing system of government to 
be wholly bad and requiring special national effort to end or mend it. It does 
not possess within itself any capacity for self-improvement. That I still believe 
many English administrators to be honest does not assist me, because I consider 
them to be as blind and deluded as I was myself. Therefore I can take no pride 
in calling the empire mine or describing myself as a citizen. On the contrary, I 
fully realize that I am a pariah — untouchable of the empire. I must, therefore, 
constantly pray for its radical reconstruction or total destruction, even as a 
Hindu pariah would be fully justified in so praying about Hinduism or Hindu 
society. 
The next point, that of Ahimsa, is more abstruse. My conception of Ahimsa 
impels me always to dissociate myself from almost every one of the activities I 
am engaged in. My soul refuses to be satisfied so long as it is a helpless witness 
of a single wrong or a single misery. But it is not possible for me — a weak, 
frail, miserable being —to mend every wrong or to hold myself free of blame 
for all the wrong I see. The spirit in me pulls one way, the flesh in me pulls in 
the opposite direction. There is freedom from the action of these two forces, 
but that freedom is attainable only by slow and painful stages. I can attain 
freedom not by a mechanical refusal to act, but only by intelligent action in a 
detached manner. This struggle resolves itself into an incessant crucifixion of 
the flesh so that the spirit may become entirely free. 
I was, again, an ordinary citizen no wiser than my fellows, myself believing in 
Ahimsa and the rest not believing in it at all but refusing to do their duty of 
assisting the government because they were actuated by anger and malice. 
They were refusing out of their ignorance and weakness. As a fellow worker it 
became my duty to guide them aright. I therefore placed before them their 
clear duty, explained the doctrine of Ahimsa to them, and let them make their My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 16 choice, which they did. I do not repent of my action in terms of Ahimsa. For, 
under Swaraj too I would not hesitate to advise those who would bear arms to 
do so and fight for the country. 
That brings to me the second question. Under Swaraj of my dream there is no 
necessity for arms at all. But I do not expect that dream to materialize in its 
fullness as a result of the present effort, first because, the effort is not 
directed to that end as an immediate goal, and secondly because, I do not 
consider myself advanced enough to be able to prescribe a detailed course of 
conduct to the nation for such preparation. I am still myself too full of passion 
and other frailties of human nature to feel the call or the capacity. All I claim 
for myself is that I am incessantly trying to overcome every one of my 
weaknesses. I have attained great capacity, I believe, for suppressing and 
curbing my senses, but I have not become incapable of sin, i.e. of being acted 
upon by my senses. I believe it to be possible for every human being to attain 
that blessed and indescribable sinless state in which he feels within himself the 
presence of God to the exclusion of everything else. It is, I must confess, as yet 
a distant scene. And therefore it is not possible for me to show the nation a 
present way to complete non-violence in practice. 
Young India , 17-11-1921 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 17  
07. MY PATH 
I am conscious of the fact that the truth for which I stand has not yet been fully 
accepted by India. It has not yet been fully vindicated. My work in India is still 
in the experimental stage. In such circumstances any foreign adventure on my 
part would be altogether premature. I should be fully satisfied if the 
experiment demonstrably succeeds in India. 
My path is clear. Any attempt to use me for violent purposes is bound to fail. I 
have no secret methods. I know no diplomacy save that of Truth. I have no 
weapon but non-violence. I may be unconsciously led astray for a while but not 
for all time. I have therefore well-defined limitations, within which alone I may 
be used. Attempts have been made before now to use me unlawfully more than 
once. They have failed each time so far as I am aware. 
I am yet ignorant of what exactly Bolshevism is. I have not been able to study 
it. 1 do not know whether it is for the good of Russia in the long run. But I do 
know that in so far as it is based on violence and denial of God, it repels me. I 
do not believe in short — violent — cuts to success. -Those Bolshevik friends 
who are bestowing their attention on me should realize that, however much I 
may sympathize with and admire worthy motives, I am an uncompromising 
opponent of violent methods even to serve the noblest of causes. There is, 
therefore, really no meeting ground between the school of violence and myself. 
But my creed of non-violence not only does not preclude me but compels me 
even to associate with anarchists and all those who believe in violence. But 
that association is always with the sole object of weaning them from what 
appears to me to be their error. For experience convinces me that permanent 
good can never be the outcome of untruth and violence. Even if my belief is a 
fond delusion, it will be admitted that it is a fascinating delusion. 
Young India,  11-12-1924 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 18  
08. WHAT OF THE WEST? 
A European friend thus writes: 
"What can be done, what would you suggest that could be tried, in favour of 
the starving millions of the West? By starving millions I mean the masses of the 
European and American proletariat who are being driven to the abyss, who live 
a life not worth the name, full of the direct privations, who can nourish no 
dream of future relief by any form of Swaraj, who are perhaps more hopeless 
than the millions of India, because the faith in God, the consolation of religion, 
has left them to be replaced by nothing but hatred. 
"The iron hands which press down the Indian nation are at work there also. The 
devilish system is at work in each of these independent countries; politics do 
not count as there is a close solidarity of greed. Vice is devastating these 
masses who naturally try to escape the hell of their life at any cost, at the cost 
of making it a greater hell, and who have no longer the outlet of religious 
hopes, as Christianity by siding for centuries with the powerful and the greedy 
has lost all credit. 
"Of course I expect Mahatmaji to answer that the only way to salvation for 
these masses, if there is any left, if the whole Western world is not already 
doomed, lies in the application of a disciplined non-violent resistance carried 
on, on a large scale. But there are no traditions of Ahimsa in the European soil 
and mind. Even the spreading of the doctrine would encounter huge 
difficulties; what about its right understanding and application!" The problem 
underlying the question so sincerely put by the friend lies outside my orbit. I 
therefore attempt an answer merely in courteous recognition of friendship 
between the questioner and myself. I confess that no value attaches to my 
answer, save what we attach to every considered argument. I know neither the 
diagnosis of the European disease nor the remedy in the same sense that I claim 
to know both in the case of India. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 19 I, however, feel that fundamentally the disease is the same in Europe as it is in 
India, in spite of the fact that in the former country the people enjoy political 
self-government. No mere transference of political power in India will satisfy 
my ambition, even though I hold such transference to be a vital necessity of 
Indian national life. The peoples of Europe have no doubt political power, but 
no Swaraj. Asian and African races are exploited for their partial benefit, and 
they, on their part, are being exploited by the ruling class or caste under the 
sacred name of democracy. At the root, therefore, the disease appears to be 
the same as in India. The same remedy is, therefore, likely to be applicable. 
Shorn of all the camouflage, the exploitation of the masses of Europe is 
sustained by violence. 
Violence on the part of the masses will never remove the disease. Anyway up to 
now experience shows that success of violence has been short-lived. It has led 
to greater violence. What has been tried hitherto has been a variety of violence 
and artificial checks dependent mainly upon the will of the violent. At the 
crucial moment these checks have naturally broken down. It seems to me, 
therefore, that sooner or later the European masses will have to take to non-
violence, if they are to find their deliverance. That there is no hope of their 
taking to it in a body and at once does not baffle me. A few thousand years are 
but a speck in the vast time circle. Someone has to make a beginning with a 
faith that will not flinch. I doubt not that the masses, even of Europe, will 
respond, but what is more emergent in point of time is not so much a large 
experiment in non-violence as a precise grasp of the meaning of deliverance. 
From what will the masses be delivered? It will not do to have a vague 
generalisation and to answer: 'from exploitation and degradation Is not the 
answer this that they want to occupy the status that capital does today? If so, it 
can be attained only by violence. But if they want to shun the evils of capital, 
in other words, if they would revise the viewpoint of capital, then they would 
strive to attain a juster distribution of the products of labour. This immediately 
takes us to contentment and simplicity, voluntarily adopted. Under the new 
outlook multiplicity of material wants will not be the aim of life; the aim will My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 20 be rather their restriction consistently with comfort. We shall cease to think of 
getting what we can, but we shall decline to receive what all cannot get. It 
occurs to me that it ought not to be difficult to make a successful appeal to the 
masses of Europe in terms of economics, and a fairly- successful working of 
such an experiment must lead to immense and unconscious spiritual results. I 
do not believe that the spiritual law works on a field of its own. On the 
contrary it expresses itself only through the ordinary activities of life. It thus 
affects the economic, the social and the political fields. If the masses of Europe 
can be persuaded to adopt the view I have suggested, it will be found that 
violence will be wholly unnecessary to attain the aim, and that they can easily 
come to their own by following out the obvious corollaries of non-violence. It 
may even be that what seems to me to be so natural and feasible for India may 
take longer to permeate the inert Indian masses than the active European 
masses. But I must reiterate my confession that all my argument is based on 
suppositions and assumptions and must, therefore, be taken for what it is 
worth. 
Young India,  3-9-1925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 21  
09. TO AMERICAN FRIENDS 
It is a privilege for me to enjoy the friendship of so many unknown American 
and European friends. It pleases me to note that the circle is ever widening, 
perhaps more especially in America. I had the pleasure of receiving a warm 
invitation about a year ago to visit that continent. The same invitation has now 
been repeated with redoubled strength and with the offer to pay all expenses. I 
was unable then, as I am now, to respond to the kind invitation. To accept it is 
an easy enough task, but I must resist the temptation, for I feel that I can make 
no effective appeal to the people of that great continent unless I make my 
position good with the intellectuals of India. 
I have not a shadow of doubt about the truth of my fundamental position. But I 
know that I am unable to carry with me the bulk of educated India. I can, 
therefore, gain no effective help for my country from the Americans and 
Europeans so long as I remain isolated from educated India. I do want to think 
in terms of the whole world. My patriotism includes the good of mankind in 
general. Therefore my service of India includes the service of humanity. But I 
feel that I should be going out of my orbit, if I left it for help from the West. I 
must be satisfied for the time being with such help as I can get from the West, 
speaking to it from my smaller Indian platform. If I go to America or to Europe, 
I must go in my strength, not in my weakness, which I feel today — the 
weakness, I mean, of my country. For, the whole scheme for the liberation of 
India is based upon the development of internal strength. It is a plan of self-
purification. The peoples of the West, therefore, can best help the Indian 
movement by setting apart specialists to study the inwardness of it. Let the 
specialists come to India with an open mind and in a spirit of humility as befits 
a searcher after Truth. Then perhaps they will see the reality instead of a 
glorified edition that, in spite of all my desire to be absolutely truthful, I am 
likely to present if I go to America. I believe in thought-power more than in the 
power of the word, whether written or spoken. And if the movement that I seek 
to represent has vitality in it and has divine blessing upon it, it will permeate My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 22 the whole world without my physical presence in its different parts. Anyway at 
the present moment I see no light before me. I must patiently plod in India 
until I see my way clear for going outside the Indian border. 
After pressing the invitation, the American friend puts a number of questions 
for my consideration: 
"Are not the present-day interests of all mankind, everywhere, so inextricably 
interwoven that no single country like India can be moved far oat of its present 
relationships to the others"? 
I do believe with, the writer that no single country can remain in isolation for 
any length of time. The present plan for securing Swaraj is to attain not a 
position of isolation but one of full self-realization and self-expression for the 
benefit of all. The present position of bondage and helplessness hurts not only 
India, not only England, but the whole world. 
"Is not your message and method essentially a world gospel — which will find its 
power in responsive souls, here and there, in many countries, who will thereby, 
gradually, remake the world?" If I can say so without arrogance and with due 
humility, my message and methods are indeed, in their essentials, for the 
whole world, and it gives me keen satisfaction to know that it has already 
received a wonderful response in the hearts of a large and daily growing 
number of men and women of the West. 
"If you demonstrate your message in the language only of the East and in terms 
only of Indian emergencies, is there not grave danger that inessentials will be 
confused with fundamentals, that some features which correspond only to 
extreme situations in India will be wrongly understood to be vital in the 
universal sense?" I am alive to the danger pointed out by the - writer, but it 
seems to be inevitable. I am in the position of a scientist who is in the midst of 
a very incomplete experiment and who, therefore, is unable to forecast large 
results and larger corollaries in a language capable of being understood. In the 
experimental stage, therefore, I must run the risk of the experiment being 
misunderstood, as it has been and probably still is in many places. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 23 "Ought you not to come to America (which, in spite of all her faults, is perhaps, 
potentially, the most spiritual of all living peoples) and tell the world what your 
message means in terms of Western, as well as Eastern, civilization?" 
People in general will understand my message through its results. The shortest 
way, therefore, perhaps, of making it effectively heard is to let it speak for 
itself, at any rate for the time being. 
"For example, should the Western followers of your inspiration preach and 
practise the spinning wheel?" 
It is certainly not necessary for the Western people to preach and practise the 
spinning wheel unless they will do so out of sympathy, or for discipline, or with 
a view to applying their matchless inventive faculty to making the spinning 
wheel a better instrument, while retaining its essential characteristic as a 
cottage industry. But the message of the spinning wheel is much wider than its 
circumference. Its message is one of simplicity, service of mankind, living so as 
not to hurt others, creating an indissoluble bond between the rich and the 
poor, capital and labour, the prince and the peasant. That larger message is 
naturally for all. 
"Is your condemnation of railroads, doctors, hospitals, and other features of 
modern civilization essential and unalterable? Should we not, first, try to 
develop a spirit great enough to spiritualize the machinery and the organized, 
scientific and productive powers of modern life?" 
My condemnation of railroads etc. whilst true where it stands, has little or no 
bearing on the present movement which disregards none of the institutions 
mentioned by the writer. In the present movement I am attacking neither 
railroads nor hospitals; but in an ideal State they seem to me to have little or 
no place. The present movement is just the attempt the writer desires. Yet it is 
not an attempt to spiritualize the machinery — because that seems to me an 
impossible task — but to introduce, if it is at all possible, a human or the 
human spirit among the men behind the machinery. Organization of machinery 
for the purpose of concentrating wealth and power in the hands of a few and 
for the exploitation of many, I hold to be altogether wrong. Much of the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 24 organization of machinery of the present age is of that type. The movement of 
the spinning wheel is an organized attempt to displace machinery from that 
state of exclusiveness and exploitation and to place it in its proper state. Under 
my scheme, therefore, men in charge of machinery will think not of themselves 
or even of the nation to which they belong but of the whole human race. Thus 
Lancashire men will cease to use their machinery for exploiting India and other 
countries, but on the contrary, they will devise means of enabling India to 
convert in her own villages her cotton into cloth. Nor will Americans, under my 
scheme, seek to enrich themselves by exploiting the other races of the earth 
through their inventive skill. 
'*Is it not possible, in conditions so favourable as America's, to clarify and 
advance the evolution of the best human consciousness into such purpose and 
power, courage and beneficence, as shall liberate the souls of India's millions, 
and of all men everywhere?" 
It is undoubtedly possible. Indeed it is my hope that America will seek the 
evolution of the best human consciousness; but that time is perhaps not yet. 
Probably it will not be before India has found her own soul. Nothing will please 
me more than to find America and Europe making the difficult path of India as 
easy as it is possible for them to do. They can do so by withdrawing the 
temptations in India's way and by encouraging her in her attempt to revive her 
ancient industries in her own villages. 
"Why is it that people like myself, in every country, are grateful to you and 
eager to follow you? Is it not for two reasons, chiefly: 
First: Because the next and basic need throughout the world is for a new 
spiritual consciousness — a realization, in the thought and feeling of average 
people, of the equal divinity of all human beings, and the unity, brotherhood, 
of all? 
Second: Because you, more than any other widely known roan, have this 
consciousness, together with the power to arouse it in others?" 
I can only hope that the writer's estimate is true. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 25 "It is a world need — is it not ? — to which you have the best answer that God 
has vouchsafed to man. How can your mission be fulfilled in India alone? If my 
arm or leg could be vitalized to an extent far beyond the balance of my body, 
would that make for my general health, or even for the permanent best good of 
the one favoured member?" 
I am fully aware that my mission cannot be fulfilled in India alone, but I hope I 
am humble enough to recognize my limitations and to see that I must keep for 
the time being to my restricted Indian platform till I know the result of the 
experiment in India itself. As I have already replied, I should like to see India 
free and strong so that she may offer herself as a willing and pure sacrifice for 
the betterment of the world. The individual, being pure, sacrifices himself for 
the family the latter for the village, the village for the district, the district for 
the province, the province for the nation, the nation for all. 
"May I even submit — with deep reverence for your message — that possibly 
your own vision and inspiration would benefit by adjustment to the world 
instead of only, or chiefly, to India?" I recognize the considerable force of the 
foregoing statement. It is not at all impossible that a visit to the West may give 
me not a wider outlook — for I have endeavoured to show that it is the widest 
possible — but it may enable me to discover new methods of realizing the out-
look. If such is my need, God will open the way for me. 
"Is the political form of government, in India or anywhere, so important as the 
average individual's soul force — his courageous expression of the best 
inspiration he can derive from the divine spirit within and all about him ?" The 
average individual's soul force is any day the most important thing. The 
political form is but a concrete expression of that soul force. I do not conceive 
the average individual's soul force as distinguished and existing apart from the 
political form of government. Hence I believe that after all a people has the 
government which it deserves. In other words, self-government can only come 
through self-effort. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 26 "Is not the basic need, everywhere, for the clarification and development of 
this soul force in individuals — beginning, -possibly, with a few people and 
spreading like a divine contagion to the many?" It is indeed. 
"You teach, rightly, that the faithful development of such soul force in India 
will assure India's freedom. Will it not everywhere shape all political, economic 
and international institutions including the issues of peace or war? Can those 
forms of human civilization be made radically superior in India to the rest of 
the world — now, when all mankind are neighbours ? "I have already answered 
this question in the preceding paragraphs. I have claimed in these pages before 
now that India's freedom must revolutionize the world's outlook upon peace and 
war. Her impotence affects the whole of mankind. 
“You know, better than I or anyone, how all these questions should be 
answered. I chiefly seek to express my eager faith in your gospel, my hungry 
desire for your leadership in solving the urgent problems of America and of all 
mankind. Therefore, will you graciously remember that, if (or when) the time 
may come that India's progress in the directions you have so inspiringly outlined 
appears to pause — waiting for the Western world to come up along-side — then 
we of the West stand urging you to give us a few months of your time and your 
personal presence. My own feeling is that, if you will call us and instruct us, we 
(your uncounted followers scattered obscurely over the wide earth) will join 
our lives to yours in the discovery and realization of a new and noble, world-
wide Commonwealth of the Spirit, in which man's age-old dreams of 
Brotherhood. Democracy, Peace, and Soul Progress shall characterize the daily 
life of average people — In India, England, America, and everywhere." 
I wish I had confidence in my leadership on the world platform. I have no false 
modesty about me. If I felt the call within, I would not wait a single second but 
straightway respond to an invitation so cordial as this. But with my limitations 
of which I am painfully conscious, I feel somehow that my experiment must be 
restricted to a fragment. What may be true of the fragment is likely to be true 
of the whole. It is true indeed that India's progress in the direction I desire 
seems to have come to a pause; but I think that it only seems so. The little My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 27 seed that was sown in 1920 has not perished. It is, I think, taking deep root. 
Presently it will come out as a stately tree. But if I am labouring under a 
delusion, I fear that no artificial stimulus that my visit to America may 
temporarily bring, can revive it. I am pining for the assistance of the whole 
world. I see it coming. The urgent invitation is one of the many signs. But I 
know that we shall have to deserve it before it comes upon us like a mighty 
flood, a flood that cleanses and invigorates. 
Young India,  17-9-1925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 28  
10. COMPULSORY MILITARY TRAINING 
An Allahabad graduate writes: 
"I am a registered graduate of the Allahabad University. I am entitled to vote 
for a candidate seeking election to the Allahabad University Court. 
Exception has been taken to my opposition to making military training 
compulsory in the universities. On this point I seek your opinion through the 
columns of  Young India. My view briefly is this: I admit that under a Swaraj 
Government our young men would be required to take to the army as a career 
and we shall have to encourage that spirit. But under an alien government I 
feel there is absolutely no security that these university corps would not be 
used against the Indian nation, as the Indian army has been used in the past. 
Moreover, would it not be adding another link to the chain of moral slavery, if 
our young men are  compelled  to take up military training? Does it not clash 
with the ideal of a university, where at least we can expect a free atmosphere 
for growth? Would it not cast our ideals in a militarist mould? My information 
about foreign universities is limited, but so far as I could gather I understand 
there is no compulsion even in universities of free countries like England and 
America. Even if we ignore political considerations, should we not allow the 
individual his freedom of conscience to preserve which large numbers of 
Englishmen went to jail during the war? All of them were not afraid to die. 
These are considerations which deserve fullest attention. On the other hand, 
compulsion in physical training I would gladly support — as a matter of fact, I 
advocate. I feel that, if it is made compulsory, all the requirements of a 
university would be met. 
We should not shut the doors of the university against those who hold different 
views on life or politics. There is already too much of cramping in these 
institutions." As a pacifist by religion I heartily endorse ail that my 
correspondent says about compulsory military training in the universities. But 
the argument seems to be sound even from the purely utilitarian and national My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 29 standpoint. Not only can there be no security against the use being made of 
university corps for purposes antagonistic to the national interest, but whilst 
the Government retain its anti-national character there is every likelihood of 
these corps being used against the nation on due occasions. What, for instance, 
could prevent a future Dyer from using these university men for enacting 
another Jalianwalla Bagh? May not young men themselves offer their services 
for an expedition against the innocent Chinese or the equally innocent Tibetans 
when their subjection is felt necessary in the interest of imperial commerce? 
Some of the young volunteers who served during the war justified their action 
by saying that thereby they gained experience in the art of war—just the reason 
which consciously or unconsciously prompted some of the Frontier expeditions. 
Those who run empires successfully have an instinctive knowledge of human 
nature. It is not deliberately bad or wicked. It acts excellently under a high 
impulse. And thousands of young men, who, before they join any corps, must 
take the oath of allegiance and must on scores of occasions salute the Union 
Jack, will naturally want to give a good account of their loyalty and willingly 
shoot down their fellowmen upon receiving from their superiors orders to fire. 
Whilst, therefore, even as an out-and-out believer in Ahimsa I can understand 
and appreciate military training for those who believe in the necessity of the 
use of arms on given occasions, I am unable to advocate the military training of 
the youth of the country under the Government so long as it remains utterly 
irresponsive to the needs of the people; and I should be against compulsory 
military training in every case and even under a national Government. Those 
who do not wish to take the military training should not be debarred from 
joining public universities. Physical culture stands on a different basis 
altogether. It can be and should be part of any sound educational scheme even 
as many other subjects are. 
Young India,  24-9-1925 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 30  
11. FROM EUROPE 
When I think of my littleness and my limitations on the one hand and of the 
expectations raised about me on the other, I become dazed for the moment; 
but I come to myself as soon as I realize that these expectations are a tribute 
not to me, a curious mixture of Jekyll and Hyde, but to the incarnation, 
however imperfect but comparatively great, in me of the two priceless 
qualities of truth and non-violence. I must, therefore, not shirk the responsibi-
lity of giving what aid I can to fellow seekers after Truth from the West. 
I have already dealt with a letter from America. I have before me one from 
Germany. It is a closely reasoned letter. It has remained with me for nearly a 
month. At first I thought I would send a private reply and let it be published in 
Germany if the correspondent desired it. But having re-read the letter I have 
come to the conclusion that I should deal with it in these columns. I give the 
letter below in full: 
"Not only India but also the rest of the earth has heard your message of 
Satyagraha and Swadeshi. A great number of young people in Europe believe in 
your creed. They see in it a new attitude to political things put into action, of 
which till now they had only dreamed. 
But also among the young people who are convinced of the truth of your 
message are many who dissent from some details of your demands on men 
which seem wrong to them. In their -name is this letter written. 
In answer to a question you declared on the 21st of March, 1921, that 
Satyagraha demands absolute non-violence, and that even a woman who is in 
danger of being violated must not defend herself with violence. On the other 
hand, it is known that you recommended the punishment of General Dyer by 
the English Government, which shows that you see the necessity for law 
guaranteed through violence. From this I can but conclude that you do not 
object to capital punishment and so do not condemn killing in general. You 
value life so low that you allow thousands of Indians to lose theirs for My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 31 Satyagraha; and doubtless you know that the least interference with the life of 
men — imprisonment — is mainly based on the same principle as the strongest 
— killing — for in each case men are caused by an outside force to diverge from 
their Dharma. A man who thinks logically knows that it is the same principle 
that causes his imprisonment for a few days or his execution, and that the 
difference is only in the size, not in the kind, of interference. He knows, too, 
that a man who stands for punishment in general must not shrink from killing. 
You see in non-cooperation not an ideal only but also a safe and quick way to 
freedom for India, a way possible only where a whole population has to revolt 
against a Government that has the force of arms. But when a whole State wants 
to get its rights from another State, the principle of non-co-operation is 
powerless, for this other one may get a number of other States to form an 
alliance with it even when some of the other States remain neutral. Not until a 
real League of Nations exists, to which every State belongs, can non- co-
operation become a real power, since no State can afford to be isolated from 
all the others. That is why we fight for the League of Nations; but that is also 
the reason why we try to retain a strong police force, lest internal revolts and 
disorder should make all foreign policy impossible. That is why we understand 
that other Governments are doing what they forbade us to do, arming themsel-
ves in case of an attack by their enemies. They are, for the time being, obliged 
to do so, and we really ought to do the same if we do not want to be 
continually violated. We hope that you will see our point. If you do, we should 
be very much obliged to you if you would say so in answer to this letter, or it is 
necessary that the youth of Europe learns your true attitude to these questions. 
But please do not think that we want you to forswear something that is one of 
the main points of your creed — Satyagraha. 
But we see Satyagraha not in an absolute non-violence which never, nowhere, 
has been really carried out, even by you, or even by Christ himself who drove 
the usurers out of the temple. With us Satyagraha is the unreserved disposition 
to brotherhood and sacrifice which you are showing us so splendidly with the 
Indian People; and we hope to be growing into the same state of mind, since it My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 32 has been understood that a system may be wicked but never a whole class or a 
whole people (you wrote about this on the 13th of July, 1921), and that one 
ought to feel pity but not hatred for the blind defenders of wickedness. Men 
who come to understand this are taking their first steps on the new way to 
brotherhood between all men; and this way will lead to the goal, to the victory 
of truth, to Satyagraha. 
We ask you in your answer not only to advice us to fight for our country in the 
way we think right, but we would very much like to know what you think to be 
right, especially how you justify an entire non-violence which we see as a 
resignation to all real fighting against wickedness and for this reason wicked in 
itself — as we would call a policeman wicked who let a criminal escape 
unpunished. 
Our conviction is that we ought to follow our own Dharma first, and before all 
that we ought to live the life designed for us by God, but that the right and the 
duty is given to us to interfere with the life of our fellow-men when they ask us 
to do so or when we see in such interference a way to fight a threatening evil 
for all the world. We believe that, otherwise one is not right in interfering, for 
only God can see through the soul of men and judge what is the right way for 
men; and we believe that there is no greater sacrilege to be found than to 
assume the place of God — which sacrilege we believe the English people to be 
guilty of, as they think to have the mission to interfere with people all over the 
world. 
For this reason we do not understand how you can recommend to married 
people to deny themselves to each other without mutual agreement, for such 
an interference with the rights given by marriage can drive a man to crimes. 
You ought to advice divorce in those cases. 
Please answer our these questions. We are so glad to have the model given by 
you that we want very much to be quite clear about the right way to live up to 
your standard." 
In my travels I have not the file of  Young India  before me, but there is no 
difficulty about my endorsing the statement that "Satyagraha demands absolute My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 33 non-violence, and that even a woman who is in danger of being violated must 
not. defend herself with violence. “Both these statements relate to an ideal 
state, and therefore are made with reference to those men and women who 
have so far purified themselves as to have no malice, no anger, no violence in 
them. That does not mean that the woman in the imagined case would quietly 
allow herself to be violated. In the first instance, such a woman would stand in 
no danger of violence; and in the second, if she did, without doing violence to 
the ruffian she would be able completely to defend her honour. 
But I must not enter into details. Even women who can defend themselves with 
violence are not many. Happily, however, cases of indecent assaults are not 
also very many. Be that as it may, I believe implicitly in the proposition that 
perfect purity is its own defence. The veriest ruffian becomes for the time 
being tame in the presence of resplendent purity. 
The writer is not correctly informed about my attitude in regard to General 
Dyer. He would be pleased to know that not only did I not recommend any 
punishment of General Dyer, but even my colleagues, largely out of their 
generous regard for me, waived the demands for punishment. What, however, I 
did ask for, and I do press for even now, is the stopping of the pension to 
General Dyer. It is no part of the plan of non-violence to pay the wrongdoer for 
the wrong he does, which practically would be the case if I became a willing 
party to the continuation of the pension to General Dyer. But let not me be 
misunderstood. I am quite capable of recommending even punishment to 
wrong-doers under conceivable circumstances; for instance, 1 would not 
hesitate under the present state of society to confine thieves and robbers, 
which is in itself a kind of punishment. But I would also admit that it is not 
Satyagraha, and that it is a fall from the pure doctrine. That would be an 
admission, not of the weakness of the doctrine but the weakness of myself. I 
have no other remedy to suggest in such cases in the present state of society. I 
am therefore satisfied with advocating the use of prisons more as reformatories 
than as places of punishment. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 34 But I would draw the distinction between killing and detention or even corporal 
punishment. I think that there a difference not merely in quantity but also in 
quality. I can recall the punishment of detention. I can make reparation to the 
man upon whom I inflict corporal punishment. But once a man is killed, the 
punishment is beyond recall or reparation, God alone can take -life, because He 
alone gives it. 
I hope there is no confusion in the writer's mind when he couples the self-
immolation of a Satyagrahi with the punishment imposed from without. But in 
order to avoid even a possibility of it, let me make it clear that the doctrine of 
violence has reference only to the doing of injury by one to another. Suffering 
injury in one's own person is, on the contrary, of the essence of non-violence 
and is the chosen substitute for violence to others. It is not because I value life 
low that I can countenance with joy thousands voluntarily losing their lives for 
Satyagraha, but because I know that it results in the long run in the least loss of 
life, and, what is more, it ennobles those who lose their lives and morally 
enriches the world for their sacrifice. I think that the writer is correct in saying 
that non- co-operation is not merely an ideal but also "a safe and quick way to 
freedom for India". I do suggest that the doctrine holds good also as between 
States and States. I know that I am treading on delicate ground if I refer to the 
late war. But I fear that I must, in order to make the position clear. It was a 
war of aggrandizement, as I have understood, on either part. It was a war for 
dividing the spoils of the exploitation of weaker races —- otherwise 
euphemistically called the world commerce. If Germany today changed her 
policy and made a determination to use her freedom, not for dividing the 
commerce of the world but for protecting, through her moral superiority, the 
weaker races of the earth, she could certainly do that without armament. It 
would be found that before general disarmament in Europe commences, as it 
must someday unless Europe is to commit suicide, some nation will have to 
dare to disarm herself and take large risks. The level of nonviolence in that 
nation, if that event happily comes to pass, will naturally have risen so high as 
to command universal respect. Her judgments will be uneming, her decisions 
will be firm, her capacity for heroic self-sacrifice will be great, and she will My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 35 want to live as much for other nations as for herself. I may not push this 
delicate subject any further. I know that I am writing in a theoretical way upon 
a practical question without knowing all its bearings. My only excuse is, if I 
understand it correctly, that that is what the writer has wanted me to do. 
I do justify entire non-violence, and consider it possible in relation between 
man and man and nations and nations; but it is not " a resignation from all real 
fighting against wickedness On the contrary, the non-violence of my conception 
is a more active and more real fighting against wickedness than retaliation 
whose very nature is to increase wickedness. I contemplate a mental, and 
therefore a moral, opposition to immoralities. I seek entirely to blunt the edge 
of the tyrant's sword, not by putting up against it a sharper-edged weapon, but 
by disappointing his expectation that I would be offering physical resistance. 
The resistance of the soul that I should offer instead would elude him. It would 
at first dazzle him, and at last compel recognition from him, which recognition 
would not humiliate him but would uplift him. It may be urged that this again is 
an ideal state. And so it is. The propositions from which I have drawn my 
arguments are as true as Euclid's definitions, which are none the less true, 
because in practice we are unable even to draw Euclid's line on a blackboard. 
But even a geometrician finds it impossible to get on without bearing in mind 
Euclid's definitions. Nor may we, the German friend, his colleagues and myself, 
dispense with the fundamental propositions on which the doctrine of 
Satyagraha is based. 
There remains for me now only one ticklish question to answer. In a most 
ingenious manner the writer has compared the English arrogation of the right of 
becoming tutors to the whole world to my views on relations between married 
people. But the comparison does not hold good. The marriage bond involves 
seeing each other only by mutual agreement. But surely abstention requires no 
consent. Married life would be intolerable, as it does become, when one 
partner breaks through all bonds of restraint. Marriage confirms the right of 
union between two partners to the exclusion of all the others when in their 
joint opinion they consider such union to be desirable. But it confers no right My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 36 upon one partner to demand obedience of the other to one's wish for union. 
What should be done when one partner on moral or other grounds cannot 
conform to the wishes of the other is a separate question. Personally, if divorce 
was the only alternative, I should not hesitate to accept it, rather than 
interrupt my moral progress — assuming that I want to restrain myself on purely 
moral grounds. 
Young India,  8-10-1925 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 37  
12. WAR OR PEACE? 
The way of peace is the way of truth. Truthfulness is even more important than 
peacefulness. Indeed, lying is the mother of violence. A truthful man cannot 
long remain violent. He will perceive in the course of his search that he has no 
need to be violent, and lie will further discover that so long as there is the 
slightest trace of violence in him, he will fail to find the truth he is searching. 
There is no half way between truth and non-violence on the one hand, and 
untruth and violence on the other. We may never be strong enough to be 
entirely non-violent in thought, word and deed. But we must keep non-violence 
as our goal and make steady progress towards it. The attainment of freedom, 
whether for a man, a nation or the world, must be in exact proportion to the 
attainment of non-violence by each. Let those, therefore, who believe in non-
violence as the only method of achieving real freedom keep the lamp of non-
violence burning bright in the midst of the present impenetrable gloom. The 
truth of a few will count; the untruth of millions will vanish even like chaff 
before whiff of wind. 
Young India , 20-5-1926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 38  
13. HAS NON-VIOLENCE LIMITS? 
The following is an extract from a detailed letter from a correspondent who 
gives his full name and address: 
"You may know what is happening to Congress workers in Madras. During the 
last two days the Justice Party men have excelled themselves in their 
abominations. Shri... accompanied by Shri... was canvassing votes for Shri..., 
the Congress candidate. A group of Justice men who kept following Shri — and 
others when they came near the Justice candidate's house suddenly surrounded 
the Congress workers and spat upon ... and ...'s faces. You know, none better, 
what indignity it is to be spat upon. Has communalism been able to demoralize 
public life and work to such a depth? The object of addressing you these few 
words is to ask you to enunciate your theory of non-violence with reference to 
what a Congressman should do under circumstances of such grave indignity and 
insult. There have also been assaults upon*... So far as our attitude towards the 
Government is concerned, we admit it is expedient to be non-violent in 
conduct. But is that attitude to be continued in relation to our own misguided 
and cruel countrymen who take to assaulting, spitting, and to throwing night-
soil on peaceful Congress workers? May I also bring to your notice that Congress 
sympathizers are many, while the paid hooligans are counted on one's fingers, 
so that, if we only want to put a stop to hooliganism, we can do it effectively 
by resorting to violent methods? But we happen to be members of an 
organization pledged to non-violence. The provocation is increasing every day, 
and it may not be possible for Congress workers to restrain the youthful 
followers from taking the law into their own hands. Therefore, may I ask you to 
state «f private defence is compatible with non-violence and with what 
qualifications it should be exercised? The hooligan tactics of the Justice Party 
are testing our faith in non-violence very severely. Therefore we in Madras will 
greatly benefit by your advice at this critical moment." I have purposely erased 
names of men and places; for, their discovery is not required for my purpose. 
Time for expedient non-violence passed away long ago. Those who Cannot be My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 39 non-violent at heart are under no obligation to be non-violent under the 
circumstances mentioned by the correspondent. Though non-violence is the 
creed of the Congress, nobody now refers to the creed for being or remaining 
non-violent. Every Congressman who is nonviolent, is so because he cannot be 
otherwise. My advice, therefore, emphatically is that no one need refer to me 
or any other Congressman for advice in the matter of nonviolence. Everyone 
must act on his own responsibility, and interpret the Congress creed to the best 
of his ability and belief. I have often noticed that weak people have taken 
shelter under the Congress creed or under my advice, when they have simply, 
by reason of their cowardice, been unable to defend their own honour or that 
of those who were entrusted to their care. I recall the incident that happened 
near Bettiah when non-co-operation was at its height. Some villagers were 
looted. They had fled, leaving their wives, children and belongings to the 
mercy of the looters. When I rebuked them for their cowardice in thus 
neglecting their charge, they shamelessly pleaded nonviolence. I publicly 
denounced their conduct and said that my non-violence fully accommodated 
violence offered by those who did not feel non-violence and who had in their 
keeping the honour of their womenfolk and little children. Non-violence is not a 
cover for cowardice, but it is the supreme virtue of the brave. Exercise of non-
violence requires far greater bravery than that of swordsmanship. Cowardice is 
wholly inconsistent with non-violence. Translation from swordsmanship to non-
violence is possible and, at times, even an easy stage. Non-violence, therefore, 
presupposes ability to strike. It is a conscious, deliberate restraint put upon 
one's desire for vengeance. But vengeance is any day superior to passive, 
effeminate and helpless submission. Forgiveness is higher still. Vengeance too is 
weakness. The desire for vengeance comes out of fear of harm, imaginary or 
real. A dog barks and bites when he fears. A man who fears no one on earth 
would consider it too troublesome even to summon up anger against one who is 
vainly trying to injure him. The sun does not wreak vengeance upon little 
children who throw dust at him. They only harm themselves in the act. 
I do not know whether the statements made by the correspondent about the 
misdeeds of the Justice Party men are true. Perhaps there is another side to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 40 the story. But, assuming the truth of the statements, I can only congratulate 
those who were spat upon, or assaulted, or had night-soil thrown upon them. 
No injury has happened to them, if they had the courage to suffer the insult 
without even mental retaliation. But it was wholly wrong on their part to suffer 
it, if they felt irritated but refrained out of expedience from retaliating. A 
sense of self-respect disdains all expediences. But I wonder what kind of 
punishment could be meted out by distinguished Congressmen who, as the 
correspondent states, were too numerous for the few hooligans of the Justice 
Party. Were they to return night-soil with night-soil, spitting with spitting, and 
abuse with abuse? Or would the self-respect of this numerous party be better 
consulted by ignoring the few hooligans? When non- co-operation was the 
fashion, I know what was done to hooligans who tried to disturb meetings. They 
were held down by volunteers who caused them no hurt, but, if they continued 
to howl, their howling was ignored. I know that even in those days in several 
cases the law of nonviolence was broken, and any man who dared to disturb the 
meetings or put in a word of opposition was howled down by the violent 
majority or sometimes even roughly handled to the discredit of the majority 
and the movement which they so thoughtlessly betrayed and misrepresented. I 
suggest also to this Congressman and to those whom he may represent that, if 
the object is to win over the Justice Party or any other Party to the Congress, 
then they should be treated gently even though they may act harshly. If it to 
suppress all opponents, then double retaliation or Dyerism is the chosen 
remedy. Whether that can bring us any nearer Swaraj is of course another 
question. 
But all my advice is useless where conviction is wanting. Let every 
Congressman, therefore, weigh all the pros and cons, then make his definite 
choice and act accordingly, irrespective of consequences. He will then have 
acted truly even though it may be mistakenly. A thousand mistakes 
unconsciously made are better than the most scrupulously correct conduct 
without conviction behind to back it. It is like a whited sepulchre. Above all we 
must be true to ourselves, if we will be true to the country and lead it to its 
chosen goal. Let there be no cant about nonviolence. It is not like a garment to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 41 be put on and off at will. Its seat is in the heart, and it must be an inseparable 
part of our very being. 
Young India,  12-8-1926 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 42  
14. MY ATTITUDE TOWARDS WAR 
Rev. B. de Ligt has written in a French journal called Evolution a long open 
letter to me. He has favoured me with a translation of it. The open letter 
strongly criticizes my participation in the Boer War and then the Great War of 
1914, and invites me to explain my conduct in the light of Ahimsa. Other 
friends too have put the same question. I have attempted to give the 
explanation more than once in these columns. 
There is no defence for my conduct weighed only in the scales of Ahimsa. I 
draw no distinction between those who wield the weapons of destruction and 
those who do red cross work. Both participate in war and advance its cause. 
Both are guilty of the crime of war. But even after introspection during all 
these years, I feel that, in the circumstances in which I found myself, I was 
bound to adopt the course I did both during the Boer War and the Great 
European War and for that matter the so-called Zulu 'Rebellion' of Natal in 
1906. 
Life is governed by a multitude of forces. It would be smooth sailing, if one 
could determine the course of one's actions only by one general principle whose 
application at a given moment was too obvious to need even a moment's 
reflection. But I cannot recall a single act which could be so easily determined. 
Being a confirmed war resister I have never given myself training in the use of 
destructive weapons in spite of opportunities to take such training. It was 
perhaps thus that I escaped direct destruction of human life. But so long as I 
lived under a system of government based on force and voluntarily partook of 
the many facilities and privileges it created for me, I was bound to help that 
government to the extent of my ability when it was engaged in a war, unless I 
non-co-operated with that government and renounced to the utmost of my 
capacity the privileges it offered me. 
Let me take an illustration. I am a member of an institution which holds a few 
acres of land whose crops are in imminent peril from monkeys. I believe in the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 43 sacredness of all life, and hence I regard it as breach of Ahimsa to inflict any 
injury on the monkeys. But I do not hesitate to instigate and direct an attack on 
the monkeys in order to save the crops. I would like to avoid this evil. I can 
avoid it by leaving or breaking up the institution. I do not do so because I do 
not expect to be able to find a society where there will be no agriculture and 
therefore no destruction of some life. In fear and trembling, in humility and 
penance, I therefore participate in the injury inflicted on the monkeys, hoping 
some day to find a way out. 
Even so did I participate in the three acts of war. I could not, it would be 
madness for me to, sever my connection with the society to which I belong. 
And on those three occasions I had no thought of non-co-operating with the 
British Government. My position regarding that Government is totally different 
today, and hence I should not voluntarily participate in its war, and I should 
risk imprisonment and even the gallows, if I was forced to take up arms or 
otherwise take part in its military operations. 
But that still does not solve the riddle. If there was a national Government, 
whilst I should not take any direct part in any war, I can conceive occasions 
when it would be my duty to vote for the military training of those who wish to 
take it. For I know that all its members do not believe in non-violence to the 
extent I do. It is not possible to make a person or a society non-violent by 
compulsion. 
Non-violence works in a most mysterious manner. Often a man's actions defy 
analysis in terms of non-violence: equally often his actions may wear the 
appearance of violence when he is absolutely non-violent in the highest sense 
of the term and is subsequently found so to be. All I can then claim for my 
conduct is that it was, in the instances cited, actuated in the interests of non-
violence. There was no thought of sordid national or other interest. I do not 
believe in the promotion of national or any other interest at the sacrifice of 
some other interest. 
I may not carry my argument any further. Language at best is but a poor vehicle 
for expressing one's thoughts in full. For me non-violence is not a mere My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 44 philosophical principle. It is the rule and the breath of my life. I know I fail 
often, sometimes consciously, more often unconsciously. It is a matter not of 
the intellect but of the heart. True guidance comes by constant waiting upon 
God, by utmost humility, self-abnegation, by being ever ready to sacrifice one's 
self. Its practice requires fearlessness and courage of the highest order. I am 
painfully aware of my failings. 
But the Light within me is steady and clear. There is no escape for any of us 
save through truth and non-violence. I know that war is wrong, is an 
unmitigated evil. I know too that it has got to go. I firmly believe that freedom 
won through bloodshed or fraud is no freedom. Would that all the acts alleged 
against me were found to be wholly indefensible rather than that by any act of 
mine non-violence was held to be compromised or that I was ever thought to be 
in favour of violence or untruth in any shape or form. Not violence, not 
untruth, but non-violence, Truth is the law of our being. 
Young India , 13-9-1928 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 45  
15. SWORD  v. SPIRIT 
A friend sends the following interesting extract from an old number of  My 
Magazine: "No conqueror ever gained more by wars than did Napoleon, Emperor 
of the French, who, beginning as a poor Corsican Lieutenant, for a little while 
dominated Europe, altering boundaries, upsetting thrones. Yet Napoleon knew 
that it was folly to rely on force. * There are only two powers in the world,' he 
said, not after he had been defeated and exiled, but while he appeared to be 
at the height of his success, 'those powers are the spirit and the sword. In the 
long run  the sword will always be conquered by the spirit.'  
But why, we may ask, did Napoleon, if he saw so plainly the uselessness of war, 
continue to make war? Why did he use the sword until it was wrenched out of 
his hand at Waterloo? Partly because Napoleon, like the rest of us, could not 
always practise what he preached, but partly because other kings and emperors 
would not let him alone. They were not as wise as he. When he pleaded for 
peace they would not believe he was sincere. To the Emperor of Austria after a 
fierce battle he addressed this personal appeal : 
'Thousands of Frenchmen and Austrians have been killed. The prospect of 
continuance of such horrors distresses me so greatly that I make a personal 
appeal to you. Amid grief and surrounded by 15,000 corpses, I implore Your 
Majesty, I feel bound to give you an urgent warning. You are far from the 
scene, your heart cannot be so deeply moved as mine is on the spot. 
*Let us give our generation peace and tranquillity. If the men of the later days 
are such fools as to come to blows, they will learn wisdom after a few years of 
fighting and will then live at peace with one another.' " 
Would that India, which through her Congress has subscribed to the policy of 
non-violence, will adhere to it and demonstrate to a world groaning under the 
curse of the sword that the spirit does triumph over the sword in national 
affairs as it has ever been shown to have triumphed in individual affairs. 
Young India , 14-2-1929 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 46  
16. FOR CONSCIENCE' SAKE 
Pax International  is a monthly journal issued at Geneva, (12 rue de Vieux-
College) on behalf of the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom. 
I have before me a copy of the November number of this monthly which has the 
following paragraph: 
"In Jugoslavia 72 members of the religious body of Nazarenes have been 
condemned by the military court of the Save District to ten years' imprisonment 
for refusing to take up arms. All of the condemned have already served five 
years' imprisonment for the same offence. All friends of peace in the whole 
world should protest against these inhuman sentences and demand the revision 
of the sentence." 
It is a remarkable awakening in the Western world, this peace movement. That 
ten years' servitude for the mere refusal to take up arms is possible under a 
system in respect of 72 honourable men who follow the law of love rather than 
the law of hate which the system promulgates, is proof of its barbarity. 
Whether the world conscience disapproves of these savage sentences or not and 
whether such disapproval produces an effect on the Jugoslavian Government or 
not, it is certain that the system must be at its last gasp that needs for its 
sustenance the infliction of barbarous sentences on innocent and honourable 
citizens. I tender my respectful congratulations to the brave Nazarenes whom, 
let me hope, the conscience of Jugoslavia itself will not allow to lie buried in 
its goals for ten long years. 
Young India , 14-2-1929 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 47  
17. OUR CHOICE 
An American correspondent has sent me a cutting from an old number of  The 
World Tomorrow  (August, 1928). It is a remarkable article on 'Pacifism and 
National Security' by John Nevin Sayre, which is worthy of perusal by every 
patriot. The following opening paragraphs show which way the writer would 
lead us: 
"Pacifism, first of all, asks people to consider whether national armament can 
really conduce to security in a civilization which uses the-tools of twentieth 
century science. No matter what may be said for defence by armament in the 
past, we believe that it is an utterly obsolete and extremely dangerous way of 
attempting to attain security now. In the world in which we live and -in the 
decades immediately ahead, it is open to the double objection of (1) mounting 
cost, and (2) diminishing effectiveness of defence. 
Within the span of forty years, that is, within the lifetime of many, of my 
readers, the United States has increased the annual expenditure for its navy 
from 15 million to 318 million dollars. The last session of Congress passed 
appropriations which mean that, every time the hands of the clock traverse 
twenty-four hours, the United States spends 2,000,000 dollars for upkeep of the 
army and navy. A leading article in  The New York Times,  published in March 
1927, was headed, War — Man's Greatest Industry'. The writer asserted that 
preparation to be ready for war constitutes what is actually the greatest 
industry in the world.' 
There is also an increasing human cost not measurable in dollars. The machines 
of war have to be tended by men. The munitions of war have to be 
manufactured by men, and approach is being made more and more toward the 
drafting of industry and of whole populations for war service. Once wars were 
fought by professional armies which constituted but a relatively small part of 
any people ; today military strategists plan to conscript the activity of the 
entire man power of a nation. A proposed French law gives power to the State 
to conscript also the women. Compulsory military training in time of peace and My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 48 the invasion of schools and colleges by military departments run by the 
Department of War are requisitioning study time of youth, and tending to 
regiment youth's thinking. The post office, the newspapers, the radio, the 
movies, artists, and men of science are in danger of being drawn in to give 
their support to the building of War's preparedness machine. All this means an 
increasing cost to human liberty, to freedom of thought and discussion, to the 
possibility of social advance. It should be fully weighed in estimating the price 
to be paid for putting over an 'adequate' security programme. Armed 
preparedness is a huge cost in the present, and for the future it is mounting. 
Even worse is the fact that increase of expenditure for armament does not in 
the modern world purchase increase of security. It may do so, possibly, for a 
score of years, but the policy is subject to a law of diminishing returns, and 
leads straight towards a climax of disaster. Senator Borah in discussing ' what is 
preparedness?' recently called attention to the huge public debts and 
constantly increasing tax burdens which governments are putting on their 
peoples throughout the world. 'The things with which governments will have to 
contend in the future,' he said, 'are the economic distress and political unrest 
of their own people.' 'A big armament programme,' he warns us, ' will be 
courting trouble.' It will widen the breach between the citizen and his 
Government. It will further discourage and exasperate those who already have 
more than they can bear. It will not be preparedness, for that which 
accentuates economic distress is unpreparedness." 
The fashion nowadays is to take for granted that whatever America and England 
are doing is good enough for us. But the figures given by the writer of the cost 
to America of her armament are too terrible to contemplate. War has become a 
matter of money and resourcefulness in inventing weapons of destruction. It is 
no longer a matter of personal bravery or endurance. To compass the 
destruction of men, women and children, it might be enough for me to press a 
button and drop poison on them in a second. 
Do we wish to copy this method of defending ourselves? Even if we do, have we 
the financial ability? We complain of ever-growing military expenditure. But if My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 49 we would copy America or England, we would have to increase the burden 
tenfold. 
Do we first want to copy the Western nations and then in the dim and distant 
future, after having gone through the agony, retrace our steps? Or do we want 
to strike out an original path, or rather retain what to me is our own 
predominantly peaceful path and there through win and assert our freedom? 
We are restrained from violence through our weakness. What is wanted is a 
deliberate giving up of violence out of strength. To be able to do this requires 
imagination coupled with a penetrating study of the world drift. Today the 
superficial glamour of the West dazzles us, and we mistake for progress the 
giddy dance which engages us from day to day. We refuse to see that it is 
surely leading us to death. Above all we must recognize that to compete with 
the Western nations on their terms is to court suicide. Whereas if we realize 
that notwithstanding the seeming supremacy of violence, it is the moral force 
that governs the universe, we should train for non-violence with the fullest 
faith in its limitless possibilities. If we are to be saved and are to make a 
substantial contribution to the world's progress, ours must emphatically and 
predominantly be the way of peace. 
Young India,  22-8-1929 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 50  
18. MILITARY PROGRAMME 
George Joseph has been one of my dearest comrades. When I was having rest in 
Yeravda, he was editor of  Young India.  Before that at my instance he was 
editor of the now defunct  Independent.  He had sacrificed a lucrative practice 
for the sake of the country. He went to gaol for the same cause. He is an 
earnest and honest worker. He is therefore entitled to a respectful hearing, the 
more so when such a man differs from you, and, rejecting the old, recommends 
with the fervour of a convert the adoption of a new policy. 
He condemns Khadi, he is "quite satisfied that the removal of untouchability is 
not primarily a problem of statesmanship." His programme in one simple 
sentence is ‘Militarize India’. Here is an extract from the speech: 
We cannot all become soldiers. There is enough room for us. But it should be 
possible for us to set about the idea of training about 5,000 men every year in 
this presidency in urban units. The men will go to drill two or three times a 
week, go out to camp three weeks in the year. Such training should be made 
available not only for the students who are at college, but also for men of 
sufficient social and educational status, the educational standard being the 
membership of the School Leaving class. If you see in every street such people 
going about in khaki, there will be a new element in our life. This kind of 
training would make people to stand straight, to think straight, and to speak 
straight. It will be a great enrichment of our life. " 
My experience teaches me differently. I have known men in khaki rolling in 
gutters instead of standing straight. I have seen a Dyer thinking crooked and 
speaking not straight but nonsense. I have known a commander-in- chief being 
unable to think at all, let alone thinking straight. Let those who are enamoured 
of military training have it by all means; but to suggest it 'as a new constructive 
programme' betrays impatience and hasty thinking. There is not much danger of 
'the new programme' taking root in the Indian soil. Moreover, it is against the 
new order of things that is coming into being even in the West which has grown 
weary of the war-god. The military spirit in the West bids fair to kill the very My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 51 humanity in men and reduce him to the level of the beast. What is wanted and 
what India has, thank God, learnt in a measure undreamt of before is the spirit 
of unarmed resistance before which the bayonet runs to rust and gunpowder 
turns to dust. The vision that Joseph puts before us of an armed government 
bending a minority to its will by a clatter of arms is a negation of the 
democratic spirit and progress. If that is the promise of the new programme, 
we have the armed coercion even now, not indeed of a mere minority but of an 
overwhelming majority. What we want, I hope, is a government not based on 
coercion even of a minority, but on its conversion. If it is a change from white 
military rule to a known one, we hardly need make any fuss. At any rate the 
masses then do not count. They will be subject to the same spoliation as now if 
not even worse. When George Joseph has lived down his impatience, I know 
him to be too honest not to retrace his steps and become the fine democrat 
that, to my great joy, I had discovered him to be on the Madras beach in 1919. 
Let us then turn to what he has to say about Khadi: As long as I was within the 
fold of the Congress, the only thing the constructive programme represented 
was khaddar, removal of untouchability, and in later years prohibition. Now I 
must frankly tell you that I have come deliberately to the conclusion that not 
one of these goes to the root of the fundamental need of this nation. Khaddar 
does not. I think it will not survive the creator of the movement, Gandhiji. I 
have come to that conclusion because of the fundamental economic defect 
which is attached to khaddar. It costs far too much to produce and to buy, and 
is, consequently, unjust to the consumer. Khaddar which costs about a rupee a 
yard will not stand against the cloth produced by the machine industries costing 
as. 6. My experience of khaddar is that it results in injustice to the producer 
also. The women, the spinners, who are at the root of khaddar, working for 10 
hours a day, have got to be content with a wage of as. 3. I suggest that an 
industry based on the payment of as. 3 as wages to the fundamental producer 
thereof cannot succeed, because it amounts to sweating of labour. The 
sweating of labour consists essentially in paying to the labourer less than is 
sufficient for her physical maintenance. It is no answer to say that the country 
is stricken with famine, that there are millions of people without occupation, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 52 and to say that for these as. 3 is better than no income whatever. I refuse to 
accept that argument. That cannot be an argument which can appeal to any 
human employer of labour, or any-statesman with a forward-looking view, in 
reference to the affairs of his country. It is no consolation to be told that I shall 
be right in offering as. 3 wages a day, when I know as a matter of economic 
necessity that the wages would not be sufficient to maintain the worker, much 
less her family. That is to my mind the hopeless, ineradicable and inexorable 
vice that attaches to khaddar. That is why today, in spite of 7 or 8 years of 
labour by Gandhiji, and 'n spite of lakhs of money poured like water into the 
organization of the industry, the production of khaddar is infinitely small 
compared to the magnitude of the problem that has got to be solved, that JS to 
produce clothing for the whole of India, and to put an end to the importation of 
Rs. 60 crores worth of cloth every year." 
Here George Joseph's impatience for reform has betrayed him into lapse of 
memory. For he brings no new argument in support of his summary rejection of 
Khadi, but quotes as facts what he himself used to refute as fallacies. 
Arguments may be revised on further consideration, but facts may not be unless 
they are proved to have been false. Khadi as conceived for the use of millions 
does not cost more than foreign cloth for the simple reason that the millions 
must, if Khadi is to be used by them, be their own manufacturers and 
consumers. These pages have shown that in Bardoli, Bijolia and several other 
places Khadi is being so manufactured and consumed, even as in millions of 
homes people cook and eat their own food. It is possible to demonstrate, in 
terms of metal, that rice or bread cooked in a few factories would cost less 
than they cost today in the millions of homes. But nobody on that account 
would dare suggest that the millions should cease to cook and should send their 
raw rice and wheat to be cooked in centralized factories. 
Again it is not true to say that women spinners work ten hours per day. 
Whatever spinning they do is done during their spare hours, and what they get 
is not a day's wage but in the majority of cases a substantial addition to their 
daily earnings from their daily avocation. The earning from spinning is waste My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 53 turned into wealth and not the price of 'sweated labour' as Joseph puts it. And 
let me correct Joseph by saying that no spinner even working for 10 hours per 
day can earn 3 as per day. Spinning has never been conceived as a full-day 
occupation. Lastly, it is untrue to say that "lakhs of money have been poured 
like water into the organization of the industry." No organization on a 
nationwide scale has been known to cost less in organizing than this has. What 
is true is that a paltry 25 lakhs have been invested as capital for organizing this 
great and daily growing cottage industry which brings water to thousands of 
parched lips. Joseph must think cheap of his countrymen when he prophesies 
that an organization which employs at least 1,500 willing workers in 1,500 
villages, an organization which brings daily relief to nearly 1,50,000 women, an 
organization which commands the self-sacrificing labours of a Mithubai Petit, 
the Naoroji Sisters, of a Banker, a Jamnalal, a Rajagopalachari, and Abbas 
Tyebji, a Venkatappayya, a Pattabhi, a Gangadharrao, a Vallabhbhai, a 
Lakshmidas, a Rajendra prasad, a Jairamdas, a Mahadev, a Kripalani, a Satish 
Chandra Dasgupta, a Suresh Banerji, aye a Jawaharlal, and a host of others, 
doctors, merchants and laymen too numerous to mention though known to 
fame, will die after the death of one man. It will be a tragic miracle, if all 
these men and women find the morning after my death that Khadi was a 'huge 
blunder'. 
And the pity of it all is that Joseph does not suggest an alternative. Not even if 
every educated Indian was dressed in khaki and knew how to shoot straight, 
would the problem of growing poverty and the forced partial unemployment of 
millions of the peasantry be solved without a special programme devised for 
the purpose. For better or worse Khadi is that programme till a better is 
evolved. 
Young India,  19-12-1929 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 54  
19. SUPERSTITIONS DIE HARD 
Mr. Henry Eaton writes from California: 
"In America many of us are sure that once Britain is out of India, Russia will step 
in. We cannot visualize the India of the present, the India with her caste system 
and her primitive methods of manufacture and agriculture, defending herself 
against Western invasion. You have no national organization for protection. 
There is no unity in India. Unity had been essential to the rise of Western 
culture and civilization. There also seems to be no progress, as we look on 
progress in the West, in India. You yourself advocate the return to the old 
methods of weaving. Have you, with your great intelligence, no realization of 
the inevitability of change, of moving forward? 
You cannot go back from old age to childhood. How then can you go back from 
enlightened methods of weaving to unenlightened methods and hope to gain 
anything? While you work in the old way that is hard, you realize that there is a 
new way that is easy, and you cannot be satisfied with the old hard way. You 
see how Japan had risen to power by adopting the new way and even China is 
awakening. India alone seems not to realize the importance of the new ways of 
the world. How is it that you, her great leader, do not preach progress to your 
people?" 
This letter betrays two superstitions. One of them is that India is unfit: to 
govern herself because she cannot defend herself and is torn with internal 
dissensions. The writer gratuitously assumes that, if Britain withdraws, Russia is 
ready to pounce upon India. This is an insult to Russia. Is Russia's one business 
to rule over those peoples who are not ruled by Britain? And if Russia has such 
nefarious designs upon India, does not the writer see that the same power that 
will oust the British from domination is bound to prevent any other domination? 
Personally, I should rely more upon the capacity of the nation to offer civil 
resistance to any aggressor as it did last year with partial success in the case of 
the British occupier. Complete success awaits complete assimilation of non-My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 55 violence in thought, word and deed by the nation. An ocular demonstration of 
the success of nation-wide Satyagraha must be a prelude to its world-wide 
acceptance and hence as a natural corollary to the admission of the futility of 
armament. The only antidote to armament, which is the visible symbol of 
violence, is Satyagraha, the visible symbol of non-violence. But the writer is 
oppressed also by the fear of our dissensions. In the first place, they are grossly 
exaggerated in transmission to the West. In the second place, they are 
hardened during foreign control. Imperial rule means  divide et impera.  They 
must, therefore, melt with the withdrawal of the frigid foreign rule and the 
introduction of the warmth-giving sunshine of real freedom. 
Lastly, I do not subscribe to the belief that everything old is bad. Truth is old 
and difficult. Untruth has many attractions. But I would gladly go back to the 
very old Golden Age of Truth. Good old brown bread is any day superior to the 
pasty white bread which has lost much of its nutritive value in going through 
the various processes of refinement. The list of old and yet good things can be 
endlessly multiplied. The spinning wheel is one such thing, at any rate for 
India. 
When India becomes self-supporting, self-reliant, and proof against temptations 
and exploitation, she will cease to be the object of greedy attraction for any 
power in the West or the East and will then feel secure without having to carry 
the burden of expensive armament. Her internal economy will be India's 
strongest bulwark against aggression. 
Young India,  2-7-1931 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 56  
20. THEORY AND PRACTICE OF NON-VIOLENCE 
The bulk of the questions asked at these meetings centred naturally round non-
violence, and I (M. D.) summarize them here, including therein some of the 
questions and answers at the Paris meeting. 
By way of introduction I shall give his (Gandhiji's) distinction between the 
methods of violence and nonviolence: "In the method we are adopting in India, 
fraud, lying, deceit, and all the ugly brood of violence and untruth have 
absolutely no room. Everything is done openly and above board, for Truth hates 
secrecy. The more open you are the more truthful you are likely to be. There is 
no such thing as defeat or despair in the dictionary of a man who bases his life 
on Truth and Non-violence. And yet the method of non-violence is not in any 
shape or form a passive or inactive method. It is essentially an active 
movement, much more active than the one involving the use of sanguinary 
weapons. Truth and Non-violence are perhaps the activest forces you have in 
the world. A man who wields sanguinary weapons and is intent upon destroying 
those whom he considers his enemies, does at least require some rest, and has 
to lay down his arms for a while in every twenty-four hours. He is, therefore, 
essentially inactive, for a certain part of the day. Not so the votary of Truth 
and Non-violence, for the simple reason that they are not external weapons. 
They reside in the human breast, and they are actively working their way 
whether you are awake or whether you are asleep, whether you are walking 
leisurely or playing an active game. The panoplied warrior of Truth and Non-
violence is ever and incessantly active." 
How then can one be effectively non-violent? By simply refusing to take up 
arms? Einstein had made the call to the people not to take part in war. Was 
that enough ? Questions which were raised again and again at various meetings 
and answered in a language inspired by the audience and the occasion. 
About Einstein's call he said with a humour which no one could have mistaken: 
"My answer can be only one that, if Europe can take up the method 
enthusiastically, nothing could be better. Indeed, if I may say so about a great My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 57 man, I would say that Einstein has stolen the method from me. But, if you want 
me to elaborate the thing, I would say that merely to refuse military service is 
not enough. To refuse to render military service when the particular time 
arrives is to do the thing after all the time for combating the evil is practically 
gone. Military service is only a symptom of the disease which is deeper. I 
suggest to you that those who are not on the register of military service are 
equally participating in the crime if they support the State otherwise. He or she 
who supports a State organized in the military way — whether directly or 
indirectly— participates in the sin. Each man, old or young, takes part in the sin 
by contributing to the maintenance of the State by paying the taxes. That is 
why I said to myself during the war that, so long as I ate wheat supported by 
the army whilst I was doing everything short of being a soldier, it was best for 
me to enlist in the army and be shot; otherwise I should retire to mountains 
and eat food grown by nature. Therefore all those who want to stop military 
service can do so by withdrawing all co-operation. Refusal of military service is 
much more superficial than non-co- operation with the whole system which 
supports the State. But then one's opposition becomes so swift and so effective 
that you' run the risk of not only being marched to jail, but of being thrown into 
the streets." 
Then may not one accept the non-military services of the State? The statement 
of the position had moved Pierre Ceresole deeply, and he asked this question in 
a way which was most touching. "We represent our truth, you represent  the 
truth. The argument is often being advanced here, and we should like to be 
enlightened by you." 
"Now," said Gandhiji, "you have touched the tenderest spot in human nature. I 
was faced with the very question as author of the non-co-operation movement. 
I said to myself, there is no State either run by Nero or Mussolini which has not 
good points about it, but we have to reject the whole, once we decide to non-
co-operate with the system. There are in our country grand public roads and 
palatial educational institutions, said I to myself, but they are part of a system 
which crushes the nation. I should not have anything to do with them. They are My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 58 like the fabled snake with a brilliant jewel on its head, but which has fangs full 
of poison. So I came to the conclusion that the British rule in India had crushed 
the spirit of the nation and stunted its growth, and so I decided to deny myself 
all the privileges — services, courts, titles. The policy would vary with different 
countries, but sacrifice and self-denial are the essential points. What Einstein 
has said would occur only once a year and only with very few people. But I 
suggest it as your first duty to non-co-operate with the State." 
But is there not a deep difference between an independent nation and a 
subject nation? India may have a fundamental quarrel with an alien 
government, but how can the Swiss quarrel with the State? 
"Difference there undoubtedly is," said Gandhiji. "As a member of a subject 
nation I could best help by shaking rid of my subjection. But here I am asked as 
to how best to get out of a military mentality. You are enjoying the amenities 
on condition that you render military service to the State. There you have to 
get State rid of the military mentality." 
But Pierre Ceresole still had his doubts. The argument had irresistible appeal 
for him; but how did his own particular mission fit in, if he was to pursue the 
method to its extreme logical conclusions? A question was asked at the great 
meeting in Geneva about Gandhiji's opinion regarding the work of the 
International Red Cross Society organized in Switzerland and the thousands of 
lives of prisoners that it had saved, and Gandhiji's answer to the question 
contained for Pierre Ceresole the solution of all his difficulties and a message 
of cheer for the International Service that he had organized. "I am ashamed to 
have to own that I do not know the history of this wonderful and magnificent 
organization. If it has saved prisoners by the thousands, my head bows before 
it. But having paid this tribute, may I say that this organization should cease to 
think of giving relief after the war but think of giving relief  without  the war? If 
war had no redeeming feature, no courage and heroism behind it, it would be a 
despicable thing, and would not need speeches to destroy it. But what I would 
suggest to you is infinitely nobler than war in all its branches including Red 
Cross organization. Believe me there are many more million prisoners slaves of My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 59 their passions and conditions of life, and believe me that there are millions 
wounded by their own folly, and millions of wrecked homes on the face of the 
earth. The peace societies of tomorrow would, therefore, have enough work 
cut out for them when they take up international service, and may Switzerland 
give the lead to the world in this great, task." 
In answer to a similar question at another meeting he said: "Non-co-operation 
in military service and service in non-military matters are not compatible.  
Definitely military service is an ill-chosen word. You are all the while giving 
military service by deputy because you are supporting a State which is based on 
military service. In Transvaal and other countries some are debarred from 
military service, but they have to pay money to the State. You will have to 
extend the scope of non-co-operation to your taxes. There is no limit to 
extending our service to our neighbours across our State-made frontiers. God 
never made those frontiers." 
Q. Since disarmament chiefly depends on great powers, why should 
Switzerland, which is a small State and a neutral State, be asked to disarm 
itself? 
A. It is from the neutral ground of your country that I am speaking to all other 
powers and not only to Switzerland. If you won't carry this message to other 
parts of Europe, I shall be absolved from all blame. And seeing that Switzerland 
is a neutral territory and a non-aggressive nation, there is all the more reason 
why Switzerland should not need an army. Secondly, it is through your 
hospitality and by reason of your occupying the vantage ground that you have 
all nationals coming to you. It should be possible for you to give to the world a 
lesson in disarmament and show that you are brave enough to do without an 
army. 
Q. How could a disarmed neutral country allow other nations to be destroyed? 
But for our army which was waiting ready at our frontier during the last war we 
should have been ruined. 
A. At the risk of being considered a visionary or a fool I must answer this 
question in the only manner I know. It would be cowardly of a neutral country My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 60 to allow an army to devastate a neighbouring country. But there are two ways 
in common between soldiers of war and soldiers of non-violence, and if I had 
been a citizen of Switzerland and a President of the Federal State, what I 
would have done would be to refuse passage to the invading army by refusing 
all supplies. Secondly, by re-enacting a Thermopylae in Switzerland, you would 
have presented a living wall of men and women and children, and inviting the 
invaders to walk over your corpses. You may say that such a thing is beyond 
human experience and endurance. I say that it is not so. It was quite possible. 
Last year in Gujarat women stood  lathi charges unflinchingly, and in Peshawar 
thousands stood hails of bullets without resorting to violence. Imagine these 
men and women staying in rout of an army requiring a safe passage to another 
country. The army would be brutal enough to walk over them, you might say. I 
would then say, you will still have done your duty by allowing yourself to be 
annihilated. An army at dares to pass over the corpses of innocent men and 
women would not be able to repeat that experiment. You may, if you wish, 
refuse to believe in such courage on the part of the masses of men and women, 
but then you would have to admit that non-violence is made of sterner stuff'. It 
was never conceived as a weapon of the weak, but of the stoutest hearts. 
Q. Is it open to a soldier to fire in the air and avoid violence? 
A. A soldier, who having enlisted himself flattered himself that he was avoiding 
violence by shooting in the air, did no credit to his courage or to his creed of 
nonviolence. In my scheme of things such a man would be held to be guilty of 
untruth and cowardice both — cowardice in that in order to escape punishment 
he enlisted and untruth in that he enlisted to serve as soldier and did not fire 
as expected. Such a thing discredits the cause of waging war against war. The 
war-resisters have to be like Caesar's wife — above suspicion. Their strength lies 
in absolute adherence to the morality of the question. 
Young India,  31-12-1931      M. D. 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 61  
21. THE GREATEST FORCE 
Three concrete questions were, the other day, incidentally asked by friends: 
1. What could ill-armed Abyssinia do against well- armed Italy, if she were 
non-violent? 
2. What could England, the greatest and the most powerful member of the 
League, do against determined Italy, if she (England) were non-violent in 
your sense of the term? 
3. What could India do, if she suddenly became nonviolent in your sense of 
the term? 
Before I answer the questions let me lay down five simple axioms of non-
violence as I know it: 
a) Non-violence implies as complete self-purification as is humanly possible. 
b) Man for man the strength of non-violence is in exact proportion to the 
ability, not the will, of the nonviolent person to inflict violence. 
c) Non-violence is without exception superior to violence, i. e. the power at 
the disposal of a non-violent person is always greater than he would have 
if he was violent. 
d) There is no such thing -as defeat in non-violence. The end of violence is 
surest defeat. 
e) The ultimate end of non-violence is surest victory - if such a term may be 
used of non-violence. In reality, where there is no sense of defeat, there 
is no sense of victory. 
The foregoing questions may be answered in the light of these axioms. 
If Abyssinia were non-violent, she would have no arms, would want none. She 
would make no appeal to the League or any other power for armed 
intervention. She would never give any cause for complaint. And Italy would 
find nothing to conquer if Abyssinians would not offer armed resistance, nor 
would they give co-operation, willing or forced. Italian occupation in that case My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 62 would mean that of the land without its people. That, however, is not Italy's 
exact object. She seeks submission of the people of that beautiful land. 
If Englishmen were as a nation to become nonviolent at heart, they would shed 
imperialism, they would give up the use of arms. The moral force generated by 
such an act of renunciation would stagger Italy into willing surrender of her 
designs. England would then be a living embodiment of the axioms I have laid 
down. The effect of such conversion would mean the greatest miracle of all 
ages. And yet if non-violence is not an idle dream, some such thing has some 
day to come to pass somewhere. I live in that faith. 
The last question may be answered thus. As I have said India as a nation is not 
non-violent in the full sense of the term. Neither has she any capacity for 
offering violence, not because she has no arms. Physical possession of arms is 
the least necessity of the brave. Her non-violence that of the weak; she betrays 
her weakness in many of her daily acts. She appears before the world today as 
a decaying nation. I mean here not in the mere political sense but essentially in 
the non-violent, moral sense. She lacks the ability to offer physical resistance. 
She has no consciousness of strength. She is conscious only of her weakness. If 
she were otherwise, there would be no communal problems, nor political. If 
she were non-violent in the consciousness of her strength, Englishmen would 
lose their role of distrustful conquerors. 
Harijan,  12-10-1935 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 63  
22. A TALK ON NON-VIOLENCE 
Now the talk centred on a discussion which was the main thing that had drawn 
the distinguished members to Gandhiji. 
"Is non-violence from your point of view a form of direct action?" inquired Dr. 
Thurman. "It is not one form, it is the only form," said Gandhiji. "I do not of 
course confine the words 'direct action' to their technical meaning. But without 
a direct active expression of it, nonviolence to my mind is meaningless. It is the 
greatest and the activest force in the world. One cannot be passively non-
violent. Ahimsa means ' love' in the Pauline sense, and yet something more than 
the ' love' defined by St. Paul, although I know St. Paul's beautiful definition is 
good enough for all practical purposes. Ahimsa includes the whole creation, and 
not only human. One person who can express Ahimsa in life exercises a force 
superior to all the forces of brutality. 
Q. And is it possible for any individual to achieve this? 
Gandhiji: Certainly. If there was any exclusiveness about it, I should reject it at 
once. 
Q. Is any idea of possession foreign to it? 
Gandhiji: Yes. It possesses nothing, therefore it possesses everything. 
Q. Is it possible for a single human being to resist the persistent invasion of the 
quality successfully? 
Gandhiji: It is possible. Perhaps your question is more universal than you mean. 
Isn't it possible, you mean to ask, for on single Indian, for instance, to resist the 
exploitation of 300 million Indians? Or do you mean the onslaught of the whole 
world against a single individual personally? 
Dr. Thurman: Yes, that is one half of the question. I wanted to know if one man 
can hold the whole violence at bay. 
Gandhiji: If he cannot, you must take it that he is not a true representative of 
Ahimsa. Supposing I cannot produce a single instance in life of a man who truly My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 64 converted his adversary, I would then say that it is because no one had yet 
been found to express Ahimsa in its fullness. 
Q. Then it overrides all other forces? 
Gandhiji: Yes, it is the only true force in life. 
Forgive now the weakness of this question," said Dr. Thurman, who was 
absolutely absorbed in the discussion. "Forgive the weakness, but may I ask how 
are we to train individuals or communities in this difficult art?" 
Gandhiji: There is no royal road, except through living the creed in your life 
which must be a living sermon. Of course, the expression in one's own life 
presupposes great study, tremendous perseverance, and thorough cleaning of 
one's self of all the impurities. If for mastering of the physical sciences you 
have to devote a whole lifetime, how many lifetimes may be needed for 
mastering the greatest spiritual force that mankind has known? But why worry 
even if it means several lifetimes? For, if this is the only permanent thing in 
life, if this is the only thing that counts, then whatever effort you bestow on 
mastering it is well spent. Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven and everything 
else shall be added unto you. The Kingdom of Heaven is Ahimsa. 
Mrs. Thurman had restrained herself until now. But could not go away without 
asking the question with which, she knew, she would be confronted any day. 
"How am I to act, supposing my own brother was lynched before my very eyes?" 
"There is such a thing as self-immolation," said Gandhiji. "Supposing I was a 
Negro, and my sister was ravished by a White or lynched by a whole 
community, what would be my duty? — I ask myself. And the answer comes to 
me: I must not wish ill to these, but neither must I co-operate with them. It 
may be that ordinarily I depend on the lynching community for my livelihood. I 
refuse to co-operate with them, refuse even to touch the food that comes from 
them, and I refuse to co-operate with even my brother Negroes who tolerate 
the wrong. That is the self-immolation I mean. I have often in my life resorted 
to the plan. Of course a mechanical act of starvation will mean nothing. One's 
faith must remain undimmed whilst life ebbs out minute by minute. But I am a My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 65 very poor specimen of the practice of non-violence, and my answer may not 
convince you. But I am striving very hard, and even if I do not succeed fully in 
this life, my faith will not diminish." 
Harijan,  14-3-1936 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 66  
23. A DISCOURSE ON NON-VIOLENCE 
Negro's the Same Problem 
Readers of  Harijan  will perhaps remember how the central topic of the 
members of the Negro delegation who saw Gandhiji about a year ago was non-
violence. Two Negro gentlemen, who came for the recent world's meeting of 
the committees of the Y. M. C. A., also had the same question to discuss, which 
shows how remarkably similar are their problems to ours: I am going to take up 
Dr. Tobias' questions first, though he saw Gandhiji later and on his day of 
silence. For the long discourse with Prof. Mays was a kind of commentary on 
the brief replies given in writing to Dr. Tobias, and both together make up one 
of the interesting talks Gandhiji often gives on the subject of non-violence. 
"Your doctrine of non-violence has profoundly influenced my life," said Dr. 
Tobias. "Do you believe in it as strongly as ever?" 
"I do indeed," said Gandhiji. "My faith in it is growing." 
"Negroes in U. S. A. — 12 million — are struggling to obtain such fundamental 
rights as freedom from mob- violence, unrestricted use of the ballot, freedom 
from segregation, etc. Have you, out of your struggle in India, a word of advice 
and encouragement to give us?" 
"I had to contend against some such thing, though on a much smaller scale, in 
South Africa. The difficulties are not yet over. All I can say is that there is no 
other way than the way of non-violence — a way, however, not of the weak and 
ignorant but of the strong and wise." 
"Travancore indicates that your full identification with the untouchables is 
bearing fruit. Do you think Travancore's example will be followed by other 
States in the near future?" 
"I shall be surprised if it is not." 
"What word shall I give to my Negro brethren as to the outlook for the future?" My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 67 "With right which is on their side and the choice of non-violence as their only 
weapon, if they will make it such, a bright future is assured." 
 
A Misnomer 
"Passive resistance," said Gandhiji, "is a misnomer for non-violent resistance. It 
is much more active than violent resistance. It is direct, ceaseless, but three-
fourths invisible and only one-fourth visible. In its visibility it seems to be 
ineffective, e. g. the spinning wheel which I have called the symbol of non-
violence. In its visibility it appears ineffective, but it is really intensely active 
and most effective in ultimate result. This knowledge enables me to detect 
flaws in the way in which the votaries of non-violence are doing their spinning. 
I ask for more vigilance and more untiredness. Non-violence is an intensely 
active force when properly understood and used. A violent man's activity is 
most visible, while it lasts. But it is always transitory. What can be more visible 
than the Abyssinians done to death by Italians? There it was lesser violence 
pitted against much greater. But if the Abyssinians had retired from the field 
and allowed themselves to be slaughtered, their seeming inactivity would have 
been much more effective though not for the moment visible. Hitler and 
Mussolini on the one hand and Stalin on the other are able to show the 
immediate effectiveness of violence. But it will be as transitory as that of 
Ghenghis ' slaughter. But the effects of Buddha's non-violent action persist and 
are likely to grow with age. And the more it is practised, the more effective 
and inexhaustible it becomes, and ultimately the whole world stands agape and 
exclaims, 'a miracle has happened.' All miracles are due to the silent and 
effective working of invisible forces. Non-violence is the most invisible and the 
most effective." 
 
Can Masses be Trained? 
"I have no doubt in my mind about the superiority of non-violence," said Prof. 
Mays. “But the thing that bothers me is about its exercise on a large scale, the 
difficulty of so disciplining the mass mind on the point of love. It is easier to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 68 discipline individuals. What should be the strategy when they break out? Do we 
retreat or do we go on?" 
"I have had that experience," said Gandhiji, "in the course of our movement 
here. People do not gain the training by preaching. Non-violence cannot be 
preached. It has to be practised. The practice of violence can be taught to 
people by outward symbols. You shoot at boards, then at targets, then at 
beasts. Then you are passed as an expert in the art of destruction. The non-
violent man has no outward weapon and, therefore, not only his speech but his 
action also seems ineffective. I may say all kinds of sweet words -to you 
without meaning them. On the other hand I may have real love in me and yet 
my outward expression may be forbidding. Then outwardly my action in both 
cases may be the same and yet the effect may be different. For the effect of 
our action is often more potent when it is not patently known. Thus the 
unconscious effect you are making on me I may never know. It is, nevertheless, 
infinitely greater than the conscious effect. In violence there is nothing 
invisible. Non-violence, on the other hand, is three-fourths invisible, and so the 
effect is in the inverse ratio to its invisibility. Non-violence, when it becomes 
active, travels with extraordinary velocity, and then it becomes a miracle. So 
the mass mind is affected first unconsciously, then consciously. When it 
becomes consciously affected there is demonstrable victory. In my own 
experience, when people seemed to be weakening there was no consciousness 
of defeat in me. Thus I was fuller of hope in the efficacy of non-violence after 
the renunciation of civil disobedience in 1922, and today I continue to be in the 
same hopeful mood. It is not a mere emotional thing. Supposing I saw no signs 
of dawn coming, I should not lose faith. Everything has to come in its proper 
time. 
"I have discussions here -with my co-workers about the scavenging work we are 
doing. 4 Why can't we do it after Swaraj?' they say. 'We may do it better after 
Swaraj.' I say to them, 'No. The reform has to come today, it must not wait for 
Swaraj; in fact the right type of Swaraj will come only out of such work.' Now I 
cannot show you, as perhaps I cannot show some of my co-workers, the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 69 connection between Swaraj and scavenging. If I have to win Swaraj non-
violently, I must discipline my people. The maimed and the blind and the 
leprous cannot join the army of violence. There is also an age-limit for serving 
in the army. For a non-violent struggle there is no age-limit; the blind and the 
maimed and the bed-ridden may serve, and not only men but women also. 
When the spirit of non-violence pervades the people and actually begins to 
work, its effect is visible to all. 
“But now comes your poser. There are people, you say, who do not believe in 
non-violence as you do. Are you to sit quiet? The friends ask: 'If not now, when 
will you act?' I say in reply: 'I may not succeed in my lifetime, but my faith that 
victory can only come through non-violence is stronger than ever. When I spoke 
on the cult of the spinning wheel at Faizpur, a newspaper correspondent 
imputed astuteness to me. Nothing could be farther from my mind. When I 
came to Sevagram I was told the people might not co-operate and might even 
boycott me. I said: 'That may be. But this is the way nonviolence works. If I go 
to a village which is still farther off, the experiment may work better. This 
thing has come in my search after the technique of non-violence. And each day 
that passes makes my faith brighter. I have come here to bring that faith to 
fruition and to die in the process if that is God's will. Non-violence to be worth 
anything has to work in the face of hostile forces. But there may be action in 
inaction. Arid action may be worse than inaction. "
 
Violence in a Spirit of Love? 
"Is it ever possible to administer violence in a spirit of love?" 
"No. Never. I shall give you an illustration from my own experiment. A calf was 
lame and had developed terrible sores; he could not eat and breathed with 
difficulty. After three days' argument with myself and my co-workers I put an 
end to its life. Now that action was non-violent because it was wholly unselfish, 
inasmuch as the sole purpose was to achieve the calf's relief from pain. Some 
people have called this an act of violence. I have called it a surgical operation. 
I should do exactly the same thing with my child, if he were in the same My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 70 predicament. My point is that non-violence as the supreme law of our being 
ceases to be such the moment you talk of exceptions." 
"How is a minority to act against an overwhelming majority?" asked Prof. Mays. 
"I would say that a minority can do much more in the way of non-violence than 
a majority. I had an English friend called Symonds. He used to say: 'I am with 
you so long as you are in a minority. After you are in a majority we are quits.' I 
had less diffidence in handling my minority in South Africa than I had here in 
handling a majority. But it would be wholly wrong for that reason to say that 
non-violence is a weapon of the weak... The use of non-violence requires 
greater bravery than that of violence. When Daniel defied the laws of the 
Meads and Persians, his action was non-violent." 
 
Consequences to the Enemy 
“Should the thought of consequences that might accrue to the enemy as a 
result of your non-violence at all constrain you?" 
"Certainly. You may have to suspend your movement X did in South Africa when 
the Government was faced with the revolt of European labour. The latter asked 
me to make common cause with them. I said 'no'." 
"And non-violence will never rebound on you, whereas violence will be self-
destroyed?" interposed the Professor. 
"Yes. Violence must beget violence. But let me tell you that here too my 
argument has been countered by a great man who said: 'Look at the history of 
non-violence. Jesus dies on the cross, but his followers shed blood.' This proves 
nothing. We have no data before us to pass judgment. We do not know the 
whole of the life of Jesus... The followers perhaps had not imbibed fully the 
message of nonviolence. But I must warn you against carrying the impression 
with you that mine is the final word on non-violence. I know my own 
limitations. I am but a humble seeker after truth. And all I claim is that every 
experiment of mine has deepened my faith in non-violence as the greatest My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 71 force at the disposal of mankind. Its use is not restricted to individuals merely, 
but it can be practised on a mass scale." 
Harijan,  20-3-1937      M. D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 72  
24. OUR FAILURE 
It is my conviction that the phenomenal growth of Congress is due to its 
acceptance and enforcement, however imperfect, of the policy of non-
violence. Time has arrived to consider the nature of Congress non-violence. Is it 
nonviolence of the weak and the helpless, or of the strong and the powerful? If 
it is the former, it will never take us to our goal and, if long practised, may 
even render us or ever unfit for self-government. The weak and helpless are 
non-violent in action because they must be. But in reality they harbour violence 
in their breasts and simply await opportunity for its display. It is necessary for 
Congressmen individually and collectively to examine the quality of their non-
violence. If it does not come out of real strength, it would be best and honest 
for the Congress to make such a declaration and make the necessary changes in 
its behaviour. 
By this time, i. e. -after seventeen years' practice of non-violence, the Congress 
should be able to put forth non-violent army of volunteers numbering not a few 
thousands but lakhs who would be equal to every occasion where the police and 
the military are required. Thus, instead of one brave Paslhupatinath Gupta who 
died in the attempt to secure peace,* we should be able to produce hundreds. 
And a non-violent army acts unlike armed men, as well in times of peace as of 
disturbances. They would be constantly engaged in constructive activities that 
make riots impossible . Theirs will be the duty of seeking occasions for bri nging 
warring communities together, carrying on peace propaganda, engaging in 
activities that would bring and keep them in touch with every single person, 
male and female, adult and child, in their parish or division. Such an army 
should be ready to cope with any emergency, and in order to still the frenzy of 
mobs should risk their lives in numbers sufficient for the purpose. A few 
hundred, may be a few thousand, such spotless deaths will once for all put an 
end to the riots. Surely a few hundred young men and women giving themselves 
deliberately to mob fury will be any day a cheap and braver method of dealing 
with such madness than the display and use of the police and the military. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 73 It has been suggested that when we have our independence riots and the like 
will not occur. This seems to me to be an empty hope, if in the course of the 
struggle for freedom we do not understand and use the technique of non-
violent action in every conceivable circumstance. To the extent that the 
Congress ministers have been obliged to make use of the police and the 
military, to that extent, in my opinion, we must admit our failure. That the 
ministers could not have done otherwise is unfortunately only too true. I should 
like every Congressman, I should like the Working Committee, to ask 
themselves why we have failed, if they think with me that we have. 
Harijan,  26-3-1938 
 
1 Later on a correction appeared in the  Harijan , that though Shri Gupta was seriously 
injured, he did not die. —Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 74  
25. QUALIFICATIONS OF A PEACE BRIGADE 
Some time ago I suggested the formation of a peace brigade whose members 
would risk their lives in dealing with riots, especially communal. The idea was 
that this brigade should substitute the police and even the military. This reads 
ambitious. The achievement may prove impossible. Yet, if the Congress is to 
succeed in its non-violent struggle, it must develop the power to deal 
peacefully with such situations. 
Let us, therefore, see what qualifications a member of the contemplated peace 
brigade should possess. 
1. He or she must have a living faith in non-violence. This is impossible 
without a living faith in God. A nonviolent man can do nothing save by the 
power and grace of God. Without it he won't have the courage to die with-
out anger, without fear and without retaliation. Such courage comes from 
the belief that God sits in the hearts of all, and that there should be no 
fear in the presence of God. The knowledge of the omnipresence of God 
also means respect for the lives of even those who may be called 
opponents or goondas. This contemplated intervention is a process of 
stilling the fury of man when the brute in him gets the mastery over him. 
2. This messenger of peace must have equal regard for all the principal 
religions of the earth. Thus, if he is a Hindu, he will respect the other 
faiths current in India. He must, therefore, possess a knowledge of the 
general principles of the different faiths professed in the country. 
3. Generally speaking this work of peace can only be done by local men in 
their own localities. 
4. The work can be done singly or in groups. Therefore no one need wait for 
companions. Nevertheless one would naturally seek companions in one's 
own locality and form a local brigade. 
5. This messenger of peace will cultivate, through personal service, contacts 
with the people in his locality or chosen circle, so that when he appears to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 75 deal with ugly- situations, he does not descend upon the members of a 
riotous assembly as an utter stranger liable to be locked upon as a suspect 
or an unwelcome visitor. 
6. Needless to say, a peace-bringer must have a character beyond reproach 
and must be known for his strict impartiality. 
7. Generally there are previous warnings of coming storms. If these are 
known, the peace brigade will not wait till the conflagration breaks out, 
but will try to handle the situation in anticipation. 
8. Whilst, if the movement spreads, it might be well if there are some whole-
time workers, it is not absolutely necessary that there should be. The idea 
is to have as many good and true men and women as possible. These can 
be had only if volunteers are drawn from those who are engaged in various 
walks of life but have leisure enough to cultivate friendly relations with 
the people living in their circle and otherwise possess the qualifications 
required of a member of the peace brigade. 
9. There should be a distinctive dress worn by the members of the 
contemplated brigade so that in course of time they will be recognized 
without the slightest difficulty. 
These are but general suggestions. Each centre can work out its own 
constitution on the basis here suggested. 
Harijan,  18-6-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 76  
26. IF I WERE A CZECH 
If I have called the arrangement with Herr Hitler 'peace without honour ', it was 
not to cast any reflection on British or French statesmen. I have no doubt that 
Mr. Chamberlain could not think of anything better. He knew his nation's 
limitations. He wanted to avoid war, if it could be avoided at all. Short of going 
to war, he pulled his full weight in favour of the Czechs. That it could not save 
honour was no fault of his. It would be so every time there is a struggle with 
Herr Hitler or Signor Mussolini. 
It cannot be otherwise. Democracy dreads to spill blood. The philosophy for 
which the two dictators' stand calls it cowardice to shrink from carnage. They 
exhaust the resources of poetic art in order to glorify organized murder. There 
is no humbug about their word or deed. They are ever ready for war. There is 
nobody in Germany or Italy to cross their path. Their word is law. 
It is different with Mr. Chamberlain or M. Daladicr. They have their Parliaments 
and Chambers to please. They have parties to confer with. They cannot 
maintain themselves on a perpetual war footing, if their language is to have a 
democratic accent about it. 
Science of war leads one to dictatorship pure and simple. Science of non-
violence can alone lead one to pure democracy. England, France and America 
have to make their choice. That is the challenge of the two dictators. 
Russia is out of the picture just now. Russia has a dictator who dreams of peace 
and thinks he will wade to it through a sea of blood. No one can save what 
Russian dictatorship will mean to the world. 
It was necessary to give this introduction to what I want to say to the Czechs 
and through them to all those nationalities which arc called 'small' or 'weak'. I 
want to speak to the Czechs because their plight moved me to the point of 
physical and mental distress, and I felt that it would be cowardice on my part 
not to share with them the thoughts that were welling up within me, It is clear 
that the small nations must either come or be ready to come under the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 77 protection of the dictators or be a constant menace to the peace of Europe. In 
spite of all the goodwill in the world England and France cannot save them. 
Their intervention can only mean bloodshed and destruction such as has never 
been seen before. If I were a Czech, therefore, I would free these two nations 
from the obligation to defend my country. And yet I must live. I would not be a 
vassal to any nation or body. I must have absolute independence or perish. To 
seek to win in a clash of arms would be pure bravado. Not so, if in defying the 
might of one who would deprive me of my independence I refuse to obey his 
will and perish unarmed in the attempt. In so doing, though I lose the body, I 
save my soul, i.e. my honour. 
This inglorious peace should be my opportunity. I must live down the 
humiliation and gain real independence. 
But says a comforter, "Hitler knows no pity. Your spiritual effort will avail 
nothing, before him." 
My answer is: "You may be right. History has no record of a nation having 
adopted non-violent resistance. If Hitler is unaffected by my suffering, it does 
not matter. For I shall have lost nothing worth. My honour is the only thing 
worth preserving. That is independent of Hitler's pity. But as a believer in non-
violence I may not limit its possibilities. Hitherto he and his likes have built 
upon their invariable experience that men yield to force. Unarmed men, 
women and children offering non-violent resistance without any bitterness in 
them will be a novel experience for them. Who can dare say it is not in their 
nature to respond to the higher and finer forces? They have the same soul that I 
have." 
This is how I should, I believe, act if I was a Czech. When I first launched out on 
Satyagraha, I had no companion. We were 13,000 men, women and children 
against a whole nation capable of crushing the existence out of us. I did not 
know who would listen to me. It all came as in a flash. All the 13,000 did not 
fight. Many fell back. 
But the honour of the nation was saved. New history was written by the South 
African Satyagraha. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 78 A more apposite instance, perhaps, is that of Khansaheb Abdul Gaffar Khan, the 
servant of God as he calls himself, the pride of Afghan as the Pathans delight to 
call him. He is sitting in front of me as I pen these lines. He has made several 
thousands of his people throw down their arms. He thinks he has imbibed the 
lesson of non-violence. He is not sure of his people. I have come to the Frontier 
Province, or rather he has brought me, to see with my own eyes what his men 
here are doing. I can say in advance and at once that these men know very 
little of non-violence. All the treasure they have on earth is their faith in their 
leader. I do not cite these soldiers of peace as at all a finished illustration. I 
cite them as an honest attempt being made by a soldier to convert fellow 
soldiers to the ways of peace. I can testify that it is an honest attempt, and 
whether in the end it succeeds or fails, it will have its lessons for Satyagrahis of 
the future. My purpose will be fulfilled, if I succeed in reaching these men's 
hearts and making them see that, if their non-violence does not make them 
feel much braver than the possession of arms and the ability to use them, they 
must give up their non-violence, which is another name for cowardice, and 
resume their arms which there is nothing but their own will to prevent them 
from taking back. 
I present Dr. Benes with a weapon not of the weak but of the brave. There is no 
bravery greater than a resolute refusal to bend the knee to an earthly power, 
no matter how great, and that without bitterness of spirit in the fullness of 
faith that the spirit alone lives, nothing else does. 
Peshawar, 6-10-'38  
Harijan,  15-10-1938 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 79  
27. THE JEWS 
Several letters have been received by me asking me to declare my views about 
the Arab-Jew question in Palestine and the persecution of the Jews in 
Germany. It is not without hesitation that I venture to offer my views on this 
very difficult question. 
My sympathies are all with the Jews. I have known them intimately in South 
Africa. Some of them became lifelong companions. Through these friends I 
came to learn much of their age long persecution. They have been the 
untouchables of Christianity. The parallel between their treatment by 
Christians and the treatment of untouchables by Hindus is very close. Religious 
sanction has been invoked in both cases for the justification of the inhuman 
treatment meted out to them. Apart from the friendships, therefore, there is 
the more common universal reason for my sympathy for the Jews. 
But my sympathy docs not blind me to the requirements of justice. The cry for 
the national home for the Jews does not make much appeal to me. The 
sanction for it is sought in the Bible and the tenacity with which the Jews have 
hankered after return to Palestine. Why should they not, like other peoples of 
the earth, make that country their home where they are born and where they 
earn their livelihood? 
Palestine belongs to the Arabs in the same sense that England belongs to the 
English or France to the French. It is wrong and inhuman to impose the Jews on 
the Arabs. What is going on in Palestine today cannot be justified by any moral 
code of conduct. The mandates have no sanction but that of the last war. 
Surely it would be a crime against humanity to reduce the proud Arabs so that 
Palestine can be restored to the Jews partly or wholly as their national home. 
The nobler course would be to insist on a just treatment of the Jews wherever 
they are born and bred. The born in France arc French in precisely the same 
sense that Christians born in France are French. If the Jews have no home but 
Palestine, will they relish the idea of being forced to leave the other parts of My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 80 the world in which they are settled? Or do they want a double home where they 
can remain at will? This cry for the national home affords a colourable 
justification for the German expulsion of the Jews. 
But the German persecution of the Jews seems to have no parallel in history. 
The tyrants of old never went so mad as Hitler seems to have gone. And he is 
doing it with religious zeal. For, he is propounding a new religion of exclusive 
and militant nationalism in the name of which any inhumanity becomes an act 
of humanity to be rewarded here and hereafter. The crime of an obviously mad 
but intrepid youth is being visited upon his whole race with unbelievable 
ferocity. If there ever could be a justifiable war in the name of and for 
humanity, a war against Germany to prevent the wanton persecution of a whole 
race, would be completely justified. But I do not believe in any war. A 
discussion of the pros and cons of such a war is, therefore, outside my horizon 
or province. 
But if there can be no war against Germany, even for such a crime as is being 
committed against the Jews, surely there can be no alliance with Germany. 
How can there be alliance between a nation which claims to stand for justice 
and democracy and one which is the declared enemy of both? Or is England 
drifting towards armed dictatorship and all it means? 
Germany is showing to the world how efficiently violence can be worked when 
it is not hampered by any hypocrisy or weakness masquerading as 
humanitarianism. 
It is also showing how hideous, terrible and terrifying it looks in its nakedness. 
Can the Jews resist this organized and shameless persecution? Is there a way to 
preserve their self-respect and not to feel helpless, neglected and forlorn? I 
submit there is. 
person who has faith in a living God need feel helpless or forlorn; Jehovah of 
the Jews is a God more personal and the God of the Christians, the Mussalmans 
or the Hindus, though as a matter of fact, in essence, He is common to all and 
one without a second and beyond description. But as the Jews attribute My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 81 personality to God and believe that He rules every action of theirs, they ought 
not to feel helpless. If I were a Jew and were born in Germany and earned my 
livelihood there, I would claim. Germany as my home even as the tallest gentile 
German might, and challenge him to shoot me or cast me in the dungeon; I 
would refuse to be expelled or to submit to discriminating treatment. And for 
doing this I should not wait for the fellow Jews to join me in civil resistance, 
but would have confidence that in the end the rest were bound to follow my 
example. If one Jew or all the Jews were to accept the prescription here 
offered, he or they cannot be worse off than now. And suffering voluntarily 
undergone will bring them an inner strength and joy which no number of 
resolutions of sympathy passed in the world outside Germany can. Indeed, even 
if Britain, France and America were to declare hostilities against Germany, they 
can bring no inner joy, no inner strength. The calculated violence of Hitler may 
even result in a general massacre of the Jews by way of his first answer to the 
declaration of such hostilities. But if the Jewish mind could be prepared for 
voluntary suffering, even the massacre I have imagined could be turned into a 
day of thanksgiving and joy that Jehovah had wrought deliverance of the race 
even at the hands of the tyrant. For to the God fearing, death has no terror. It 
is a joyful sleep to be followed by a waking that would be all the more 
refreshing for the long sleep. 
It is hardly necessary for me to point out that it is easier for the Jews than for 
the Czechs to follow my prescription. And they have in the Indian Satyagraha 
campaign in South Africa an exact parallel. There the Indians occupied 
precisely the same place that the Jews occupy in Germany. The persecution 
had also a religious tinge. President Kruger used to say that the white Christians 
were the chosen of God and Indians were inferior beings created to serve the 
whites. A fundamental clause in the Transvaal constitution was that there 
should be no equality between the whites and coloured races including Asiatics. 
There too the Indians were consigned to ghettos described as locations. The 
other disabilities were almost of the same type as those of the Jews in 
Germany. The Indians, a mere handful, resorted to Satyagraha without any 
backing from the world outside or the Indian Government. Indeed the British My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 82 officials tried to dissuade the Satyagrahis from their contemplated step. World 
opinion and the Indian Government came to their aid after eight years of 
fighting. And that too was by way of diplomatic pressure, not of a threat of 
war. 
But the Jews of Germany can offer Satyagraha under infinitely better auspices 
than the Indians of South Africa. The Jews are a compact, homogeneous 
community in Germany. They are far more gifted than the Indians of South 
Africa. And they have organized world opinion behind them. I am convinced 
that, if someone with courage and vision can arise among them to lead them in 
nonviolent action, the winter of their despair can in the twinkling of an eye be 
turned into the summer of hope. And what has today become a degrading man-
hunt can be turned into a calm and determined stand offered by unarmed men 
and women possessing the strength of suffering given to them by Jehovah. It 
will be then a truly religious resistance offered against the godless fury of 
dehumanized man. The German Jews will score a lasting victory over the 
German gentiles in the sense that they will have converted the latter to an 
appreciation of human dignity. They will have rendered service to fellow-
Germans and proved their title to be the real Germans as against those who are 
today dragging, however unknowingly, the German name into the mire. 
And now a word to the Jews in Palestine. I have no doubt that they are going 
about in the wrong way. The Palestine of the Biblical conception is not a 
geographical tract. It is in their hearts. But if they must look to the Palestine of 
geography as their national home, it is wrong to enter it under the shadow of 
the British gun. A religious act cannot be performed with the aid of the bayonet 
or the bomb. They can settle in Palestine only by the goodwill of the Arabs. 
They should seek to convert the Arab heart. The same God rules the Arab heart 
who rules the Jewish heart. They can offer Satyagraha in front of the Arabs and 
offer themselves to be shot or thrown into the Dead Sea without raising a little 
finger against them. They will find the world opinion in their favour in their 
religious aspiration. There are hundreds of ways of reasoning with the Arabs, if 
they will only discard the help of the British bayonet. As it is, they are co-My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 83 sharers with the British in despoiling a people who have done no wrong to 
them. 
I am not defending the Arab excesses. I wish they had chosen the way of non-
violence in resisting what they rightly regarded as an unwarrantable 
encroachment upon their country. But according to the accepted canons of 
right and wrong, nothing can be said against the Arab resistance in the face of 
overwhelming odds. 
Let the Jews who claim to be the chosen race proves their title by choosing the 
way of non-violence for vindicating their position on earth. Every country is 
their home including Palestine not by aggression but by loving service. A Jewish 
friend has sent me a book called  The Jewish Contribution to Civilization  by 
Cecil Roth. It gives a record of what the Jews have done to enrich the world's 
literature, art, music, drama, science, medicine, agriculture, etc. Given the 
will, the Jew can refuse to be treated -as the outcaste of the West, to be 
despised or patronized. He can command the attention and respect of the 
world by being man, the chosen creation of God, instead of being man who is 
fast sinking to the brute and forsaken by God. They can add to their many 
contributions the surpassing contribution of non-violent action. 
Harijan,  26-11-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 84  
28. SOME QUESTIONS ANSWERED 
Friends have sent me two newspapers cutting criticizing my appeal to the Jews. 
The two critics suggest that in presenting non-violence to the Jews as a remedy 
against the wrong done to them I have suggested nothing new, and that they 
have been practising non-violence for the past two thousand years. Obviously, 
so far as these critics are concerned, I did not make my meaning clear. The 
Jews, so far as I know, have never practised non-violence as an article of faith 
or even as a deliberate policy. Indeed, it is a stigma against them that their 
ancestors crucified Jesus. Are they not supposed to believe in eye for- an eye 
and tooth for a tooth? Have they no violence in their hearts for their 
oppressors? Do they not want the so-called democratic powers to punish 
Germany for her persecution and to deliver them from oppression? If they do, 
there is no non-violence in their hearts. Their non-violence, if it may be so 
called, is of the helpless and the weak. 
What I have pleaded for is renunciation of violence of heart and consequent 
active exercise of the force generated by the great renunciation. One of the 
critics says that favourable public opinion is necessary for the working of non-
violence. The writer is evidently thinking of passive resistance conceived as a 
weapon of the weak. I have drawn a distinction between passive resistance of 
the weak and active non-violent resistance of the strong. The latter can and 
does work in the teeth of the fiercest opposition. But it ends in evoking the 
widest public sympathy. Sufferings of the non-violent have been known to melt 
the stoniest hearts. I make bold to say that, if the Jews can summon to their 
aid the soul power that comes only from nonviolence, Herr Hitler will bow 
before the courage which he has never yet experienced in any large measure in 
his dealings with men, and which, when it is exhibited, he will own, is infinitely 
superior to that shown by his best storm troopers. The exhibition of such 
courage is only possible for those who have a living faith in the God of Truth 
and Non-violence, i.e. Love. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 85 Of course the critics can reasonably argue that the non-violence pictured by me 
is not possible for masses of mankind, it is possible only for the very few highly 
developed persons. I have combated that view and suggested that, given proper 
training and proper generalship, nonviolence can be practised by masses of 
mankind. 
I see, however, that my remarks are being misunderstood to mean that, 
because I advise non-violent resistance by the persecuted Jews, by inference I 
expect or would advise non-interference by the democratic powers on behalf of 
the Jews. I hardly need to answer this fear. Surely there is no danger of the 
great powers refraining from action because of anything I have said. They will, 
they are bound to, do all they can to free the Jews from the inhuman 
persecution. My appeal has force in the face of the fact that the great powers 
feel unable to help the Jews in an effective manner. Therefore it is that I have 
offered the prescription which I know to be infallible when taken in the right 
manner. 
The most relevant criticism, however, which I have received is this: How do I 
expect the Jews to accept my prescription when I know that India, where I am 
myself working, where I call myself the self-appointed general, has not 
accepted it  in toto  ? My answer is, 'Blessed are they that expect nothing.' I 
belong to the category of the blessed, in this case at least. Having got the 
prescription and being sure of its efficacy, I felt that I would be wrong if I did 
not draw attention to it when I saw cases where it could be effectively applied. 
Sevagram, 9-12-'38  
Harijan,  17-12-1938 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 86  
29. NON-VIOLENCE AND WORLD CRISIS 
The Question, of Motive 
Going to the very rock-bottom, one of the questioners asked Gandhiji what his 
motive in life was, “the thing that leads us to do what we do ", whether it was 
religious, or social or political. 
“Purely religious," replied Gandhiji. "This was the question asked me by the late 
Mr. Montagu when I accompanied a deputation which was purely political. How 
have you, a social reformer, ' he exclaimed, ' found your way into this crowd?' 
My reply was that it was only an extension of my social activity. I could not be 
leading a religious life unless I identified myself with the whole of mankind, 
and that I could not do unless I took part in politics. The whole gamut of man's 
activities today constitutes an indivisible whole. You cannot divide social, eco-
nomic, political and purely religious work into watertight compartments. I do 
not know any religion apart from human activity. It provides a moral basis to all 
other activities which they would otherwise lack, reducing life to a maze of 
'sound and fury signifying nothing'." 
'Seeing the influence you wield over the people,' he was next asked, 'may we 
inquire whether it is the love of the cause or the love of the people that moves 
you?’ 
“Love of the people, " was Gandhiji's unhesitating reply. ''Cause without the 
people is a dead thing. Love of the people brought the problem of 
untouchability early into my life. My mother said, 'You must not touch this boy> 
he is an untouchable.' 'Why not?' I questioned back, and from that day my revolt 
began." 
 
No Exclusion of Politics 
“You would expect us Christians to copy your example, Should we allow our 
religious motive to plunge us into Politics?" " Those who come from different My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 87 parts of the world into this country cannot say," replied Gandhiji, "'we shall 
have nothing to do with the politics of the country They would not be true to 
their faith, if they bargained with the government in order to supersede their 
fellow- feeling with the people. Supposing the government does a grievous 
wrong to the people of the soil and the missionaries are told that they must not 
lift a finger to prevent it, surely, the least they can do is to leave the country 
by way of signifying their displeasure at the perpetration of the wrong. If a 
missionary puts himself out for service, opportunities will come — today it may 
be in the economic sphere, tomorrow in the social, next time it may be in the 
political field. You cannot then say, ' I shall confine myself to this or that work 
and do nothing else.' When I went to South Africa I knew nothing about that 
country. I was bound to my client only. Yet, within seven days of my reaching 
there, I found that I had to deal with a situation too terrible for words." 
 
Non-violence the Supreme Law 
Gandhiji was next asked in what relation his nonviolence stood to the pacifist 
attitude, 'which we Westerners are trying to adopt without much success.' 
"In my opinion," replied Gandhiji, "non-violence is not passivity in any shape or 
form. Non-violence, as I understand it, is the activest force in the world. 
Therefore, whether it is materialism or anything else, if non-violence does not 
provide an effective antidote, it is not the active force of my conception. Or, 
to put it conversely, if you bring me some conundrums that I cannot answer, I 
would say my non-violence is still defective. Non-violence is the supreme law. 
During my half a century of experience I have not yet come across a situation 
when I had to say that I was helpless, that I had no remedy in terms of non-
violence. 
 
China's Ordeal 
"What about China, you will ask. The Chinese have no designs upon other 
people. They have no desire for territory. True, perhaps, China is not ready for 
such aggression; perhaps, what looks like her pacifism is only indolence. In any My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 88 case China's is not active non-violence. Her putting up a valiant defence against 
Japan is proof enough that China was never intentionally non-violent. That she 
is on the defensive is no answer in terms of non-violence. Therefore, when the 
time for testing her active non-violence came, she failed in the test. This is no 
criticism of China. I wish the Chinese success. According to the accepted 
standards her behaviour is strictly correct. But when the position is examined in 
terms of non-violence I must say it is unbecoming for a nation of 400 millions, a 
nation as cultured as Japan, to repel Japanese aggression by resorting to 
Japan's own methods. If the Chinese had nonviolence of my conception, there 
would be no use left for the latest machinery for destruction which Japan 
possesses. The Chinese would say to Japan, 'Bring all your machinery, we 
present half of our population to you. But the remaining two hundred millions 
won't bend their knee to you.' If the Chinese did that, Japan would become 
China's slave." And in support of his argument he referred to Shelley's 
celebrated lines from  The Mask of Anarchy, “Ye are many, they are few”: 
Stand ye calm and resolute, like a forest close and mute, with folded arms and 
looks which are Weapons of unvanquished war. 
And if then the tyrants dare, let them ride among you there, Slash, and stab, 
and maim and hew,— what they like, that let them do. 
With folded arms and steady eyes, And little fear, and less surprise, Look upon 
them as they slay Till their rage has died away. 
Then they will return with shame to the place from which they came, And the 
blood thus shed will speak in hot blushes on their cheek. 
Rise like Lions after slumber In unvanquishable number— Shake your chains to 
earth like dew Which in sleep had fallen on you— Ye are many — they are few. 
 
Mechanical Warfare and Non-violence 
"It has been objected, however," said Gandhiji, M that non-violence is all right 
in the case of the Jews because there is personal contact between the 
individual and his persecutors, but in China Japan comes with its long-range My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 89 guns and aeroplanes. The person who rains death from above has never any 
chance of even knowing who and how many he has killed. How can non-violence 
combat aerial warfare, seeing that there are no personal contacts? The reply to 
this is that behind the death- dealing bomb there is the human hand that 
releases it, and behind that still is the human heart that sets the hand in 
motion. And at the back of the policy of terrorism is the assumption that 
terrorism, if applied in a sufficient measure, will produce the desired result, 
namely, bend the adversary to the tyrant's will. But supposing a people make 
up their mind that they will never do the tyrant's will, nor retaliate with the 
tyrant's own methods, the tyrant will not find it worth his while to go on with 
his terrorism. If sufficient food is given to the tyrant, a time will come when he 
will have had more than surfeit. If all the mice in the world held conference 
together and resolved that they would no more fear the cat but all run into her 
mouth, the mice would live. I have actually seen a cat play with a mouse. She 
did not kill it outright but held it between her jaws, then released it, and again 
pounced upon it as soon as it made an effort to escape. In the end the mouse 
died out of sheer fright. The cat would have derived no sport, if the mouse had 
not tried to run away. I learnt the lesson of non-violence from my wife, when I 
tried to bend her to my will. Her determined resistance to my will on the one 
hand, and her quiet submission to the suffering my stupidity involved on the 
other, ultimately made me ashamed of myself, and cured me of my stupidity in 
thinking that I was born to rule over her, and in the end she became my 
teacher in non-violence. And what I did in South Africa was but an extension of 
the rule of Satyagraha which she unwillingly practised in her own person.'
 
What about Dictatorships? 
But one of the visitors objected: "You do not know Hitler and Mussolini. They 
are incapable of any kind of moral response. They have no conscience, and they 
have made themselves impervious to world opinion. Would it not be playing 
into the hands of these dictators if, for instance, the Czechs, following your 
advice, confronted them with non-violence? Seeing that dictatorships are My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 90 unmoral by definition, would the law of moral conversion hold good in their 
case?" 
"Your argument," replied Gandhiji "presupposes that the dictators like Mussolini 
or Hitler -are beyond redemption. But belief in non-violence is based on the 
assumption that human nature in its essence is one and therefore unfailingly 
responds to the advances of love. It should be remembered that they have up 
to now always found ready response to the violence that they have used. Within 
their experience, they have not come across organized non-violent resistance 
on an appreciable scale, if at all. Therefore it is not only highly likely, but I 
hold it to be inevitable, that they would recognize the superiority of non-
violent resistance over any display of violence that they may be capable of 
putting forth. Moreover the nonviolent technique that I have presented to the 
Czechs does not depend for its success on the goodwill of the dictators, for, a 
non-violent resister depends upon the unfailing assistance of God which sustains 
him throughout difficulties which would otherwise be considered 
insurmountable. His faith makes him indomitable." 
The visitor retorted that these dictators wisely refrain from using force, but 
simply take possession of what they want. In the circumstances what can non-
violent resisters do? 
"Suppose," replied Gandhiji, "they come and occupy mines, factories and all 
sources of natural wealth belonging to the Czechs, then the following results 
can take place: (1) The Czechs may be annihilated for disobedience to orders. 
That would be a glorious victory for the Czechs and the beginning of the fall of 
Germany. (2) The Czechs might become demoralized in the presence of over-
whelming force. This is a result common in all struggles. But if demoralization 
does take place, it would not be on account of non-violence, but it would be 
due to absence or inadequacy of non-violence. (3) The third thing that can take 
place is that Germany might use her new possessions for occupation by her 
surplus population. This, again, could not be avoided by offering violent 
resistance, for we have assumed that violent resistance is out of the question. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 91 Thus non-violent resistance is the best method under all conceivable 
circumstances. 
"I do not think that Hitler and Mussolini are after all so very indifferent to the 
appeal of world opinion. But today these dictators feel satisfaction in defying 
world opinion because none of the so-called Great Powers can come to them 
with clean hands, and they have a rankling sense of injustice done to their 
people by the Great Powers in the past. Only the other day an esteemed 
English friend owned to me that Nazi Germany was England's sin, and that it 
was the treaty of Versailles that made Hitler. " 
Visitor: "What can I as a Christian do to contribute to international peace? How 
can international anarchy be broken down and non-violence made effective for 
establishing peace? Subject nations apart, how can nations at the top be made 
to disarm themselves?" 
Gandhiji: "You as a Christian can make an effective contribution by non-violent 
action even though it may cost you your all. Peace will never come until the 
Great Powers courageously decide to disarm themselves. It seems to me that 
recent events must force that belief on the Great Powers, I have an implicit 
faith — a faith that today burns brighter than ever, after half a century's 
experience of unbroken practice of non-violence — that mankind can only be 
saved through non-violence, which is the central teaching of the Bible as I have 
understood the Bible." 
Sevagram, 12-12-'38      P YARELAL  
Harijan,  24-12-1938 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 92  
30. IS NON-VIOLENCE INEFFECTIVE? 
In dealing with my answer to the criticism that the Jews had been non-violent 
for 2,000 years,  The Statesman says in the course of an editorial: 
“The whole world has heard of Pastor Niemoeller and the sufferings of the 
Lutheran Church; here many pastors and individual Christians bore themselves 
bravely before People's Courts, violence and threats; without retaliation they 
bore noble witness to the truth. And what change of heart is there in Germany? 
Buried in prisons and concentration camps are today, and have been for five 
years, members of the Bible Searchers' League who rejected Nazi militarism as 
conflicting with Christ's Gospel of peace. And how many Germans know of them 
or, if they know, do anything about it? 
"Non-violence, whether of the weak or of the strong, seems, except in very 
special conditions, rather a personal than a Social gospel. A man's salvation may 
be left to himself; politicians are concerned with causes, creeds and minorities. 
It is suggested by Mr. Gandhi that Herr Hitler would bow before courage ' 
infinitely superior to that shown by his own Storm Troopers'. If that were so, 
one would have supposed that he would have paid tribute to such men as Herr 
Von Ossietzky. Courage to a Nazi, however, seems a virtue only when displayed 
by his own supporters: elsewhere it becomes ' the impudent provocation of 
Jewish-Marxist  canaille  '. Mr. Gandhi has produced his prescription in view of 
the inability of the Great Powers effectively to move La the matter, an inability 
we all deplore and would see remedied. His sympathy may do much for the 
comfort of the Jews, but seems likely to do less for their enlargement. Christ is 
the supreme example of non-violence, and the indignities heaped upon Him at 
His tortured death proved once and for all that in a worldly and temporal sense 
it can fail hopelessly." 
I do not think that the sufferings of Pastor Niemoeller and others have been in 
vain. They have preserved their self-respect intact. They have proved that their 
faith was equal to any suffering. That they have not proved sufficient for 
melting Herr Hitler's heart merely shows that it is made of harder material than My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 93 stone. But the hardest metal yields to sufficient heat. Even so must the hardest 
heart melt before sufficiency of the heat of non-violence? And there is no limit 
to the capacity of non-violence to generate heat. 
Every action is a resultant of a multitude of forces even of a contrary nature. 
There is no waste of energy. So we learn in the books on mechanics. This is 
equally true of human actions. The difference is that in the one case we 
generally know the forces at work, and when we do, we can mathematically 
foretell the resultant. In the case of human actions, they result from a 
concurrence of forces, of most of which we have no knowledge. But our 
ignorance must not be made to serve the cause of disbelief in the power of 
these forces. Rather is our ignorance a cause for greater faith. And non-
violence being the mightiest force in the world and also the most elusive in its 
working, it demands the greatest exercise of faith. Even as we believe in God in 
faith, so have we to believe in non-violence in faith. 
Herr Hitler is but one man enjoying no more than the average span of life. He 
would be a spent force, if he had not the backing of his people. I do not despair 
of his responding to human suffering even though caused by him. But I must 
refuse to believe that the Germans as a nation have no heart or markedly less 
than the other nations of the earth. They will some day or other rebel against 
their own adored hero, if he does not wake up be-times. And when he or they 
do, we shall find that the sufferings of the Pastor and his fellow-workers had 
not a little to do with the awakening. 
An armed conflict may bring disaster to German arms; it cannot change the 
German heart even as the last defeat did not. It produced a Hitler vowed to 
wreak vengeance on the victors. And what a vengeance it is! My answer, 
therefore, must be the answer that Stephenson gave to his fellow-workers who 
had despaired of ever filling the deep pit that made the first railway possible. 
He asked his coworkers of little faith to have more faith and go on filling the 
pit. It was not bottomless, it must be filled. Even so I do not despair because 
Herr Hitler's or the German heart has not yet melted. On the contrary I plead 
for more suffering and still more till the melting has become visible to the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 94 naked eye. And even as the Pastor has covered himself with glory, a single Jew 
bravely standing up and refusing to bow to Hitler's decree will cover himself 
with glory and lead the way to the deliverance of the fellow-Jews. 
I hold that non-violence is not merely a personal virtue. It is also social virtue 
to be cultivated like the other virtues. Surely society is largely regulated by the 
expression of non-violence in its mutual dealings. What I ask for is an extension 
of it on a larger, national and international scale. 
I was unprepared to find the view expressed by  The Statesman  writer that the 
example of Christ proved once and for all that in a worldly and temporal sense 
it can fail hopelessly!! Though I cannot claim to be a Christian in the sectarian 
sense, the example of Jesus's suffering is a factor in the composition of my 
undying faith in non-violence which rules all my actions wordly and temporal. 
And I know that there are hundreds of Christians who believe likewise. Jesus 
lived and died in vain, if he did not teach us to regulate the whole of life by the 
eternal Law of Love.  
- On the train to Bardoli, 2-1-'39 
Harijan,  7-1-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 95  
31. CHINA AND JAPAN 
Gandhiji went straight to the question on which he wanted to hear first hand 
from Dr. Kagawa. “What is the feeling of people in Japan about the war?" 
“I am rather a heretic in Japan," said Dr. Kagawa. “Rather than I express my 
views, I would like to learn from you what you would do if you were in my 
position." 
“It would be presumptuous for me to express my views." 
"No, I would like very much to know what you would do." 
“I would declare my heresies and be shot. I would put the co-operatives and all 
your work in one scale, and put the honour of your nation in the other, and if 
you found that the honour was being sold, I should ask to declare your views 
against Japan and in so doing make Japan live through your death. But, for this, 
inner conviction is necessary. I do not know that I should be able to do all that I 
have said if I was in your position, but I must give you my opinion since you 
have asked for it." 
“The conviction is there. But friends have been asking me to desist." 
"Well, don't listen to friends when the Friend inside you says, 'Do this.' And 
friends, however good, can sometimes well deceive us. They cannot argue 
otherwise. They would ask you to  live and do your work. The same appeal was 
made to me when I took the decision to go to jail. But I did not listen to 
friends, with the result that I found the glow of freedom when I was confined 
within the four solid walls of prison. I was inside a dark cell, but I felt that I 
could see everything from within those walls, and nothing from outside." 
Harijan,  21-1-1939     M. D. 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 96  
32. A WORLD IN AGONY - I 
Cultural Destruction? 
(Rev. Lew, the distinguished visitor from China, said :) “We are not afraid of 
material destruction, distressing though it is, but of cultural destruction. The 
first bomb in Shanghai hit a library. Colleges have been wiped out. Professors 
have been killed. New education has been disorganized and forced to migrate 
into the interior.'"* 
“Even worse is the moral injury they have done us," he continued. And he gave 
a lurid description of how a systematic attempt is being made to force the drug 
evil upon China which they had been, for the last twenty years, trying to fight 
tooth and nail. “When they occupied Peking they opened 50 new brothels 
there, filling them with Korean girls. The army of occupation rapes women 
everywhere, the figure for Peking alone being anything between 8,000 to 
20,000 according to various estimates. In Shanghai the revenue in one month 
from gambling and drug shops that have been opened under Japanese authority 
amounted to 250 thousand dollars, The morale of the whole nation is being 
sapped. There is no hope once you are enslaved by the drug habit on a nation-
wide scale. Supposing we win the war after 10 or 15 years, we may restore 
material devastation, but how shall we redeem our young generation? 
“We want your message. We have translated your Autobiography  into Chinese. 
We look to you for spiritual guidance." 
 
Culture is Bomb-proof 
Gandhiji replied: "I was once asked by a Chinese friend from Shantiniketan to 
give a message to the Chinese people. I had to ask him to excuse me. I gave 
him my reasons. If I merely said I sympathized with the Chinese in their 
struggle, it would be not of much value as coming from me. I should love to be 
able to say to the Chinese definitely that their salvation lay only through non-
violent technique. But then it is not for a person like me, who is outside the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 97 fight, to say to a people who are engaged in a life and death struggle, 'Not this 
way, but that.' They would not be ready to take up the new method, and they 
would be unsettled in the old. My interference would only shake them and 
confuse their minds. 
“But whilst I have no 'message' to send to the Chinese people who are engaged 
in fighting, I have no hesitation in presenting my viewpoint to you. I was almost 
going to ask you as to what you meant by being culturally ruined. I should be 
sorry to learn that Chinese culture resided in brick and mortar or in huge tomes 
which the moth can cat. A nation's culture resides in the hearts and in the soul 
of its people. Chinese culture is Chinese only to the extent that it has become 
part and parcel of Chinese life. Your saying, therefore, that your culture and 
your morals are in danger of being destroyed, leads one to think that the re-
form movement in your country was only skin-deep. Gambling had not 
disappeared from the people's hearts. It was kept down not by the tone set by 
society, but by the penalty of the law. The heart continued to gamble. Japan is 
of course to blame and must be blamed for what it has done or is doing. But 
then Japan is just now like the wolf whose business it is to make short work of 
the sheep. Blaming the wolf would not help the sheep much. The sheep must 
learn not to fall into the clutches of the wolf. 
"If even a few of you took to non-violence, they would stand forth as living 
monuments of Chinese culture and morals. And then, even if China were 
overwhelmed on the battlefield, it would be well with China in the end, 
because it would at the same time be receiving a message which contains a 
promise of hope and deliverance. Japan cannot force drugs down unwilling 
throats at the point of the bayonet. It can only set up temptations. You cannot 
teach people to resist these temptations by replying to Japanese force by 
force. Whatever else force may or may not be able to achieve, it cannot 
safeguard Chinese morals or save Chinese culture. 
“If you feel the truth of my remarks, you will become a living message to 
China. You will then tell the Chinese people, 'No matter what material 
destruction Japan inflicts, it cannot bring about China's cultural destruction. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 98 Our people must be sufficiently educated and warned to resist all the 
temptations that Japan may devise. Monuments and cities may be razed to the 
ground. They are but a passing show, that is going one day to be claimed by 
time as its own. If they are destroyed by the Japanese, it will only be a morsel 
taken out of time's mouth. The Japanese cannot corrupt our soul. If the soul of 
China is injured, it will not be by Japan.' "
 
Non-violent Technique 
One of the companions asked, "Is it not necessary that individuals should 
practise non-violence first in their own person, in their relations with other 
individuals?" And by way of illustration he described how, even after he came to 
have the conviction that non-violence was the law of life, for years he refused 
to preach its use in outer affairs to others. "I said I would first try myself to live 
it and perfect myself in its practice. I began by making a resolve not to answer 
back or refute criticism directed against me. After seven years I gave a report 
of my experience to my students. I cannot say that in practice my method has 
always answered. So I say to myself, 'Patience, I must try again.' " 
“It would be a delusion to think otherwise," replied Gandhiji. “If one does not 
practise non-violence in one's personal relations with others and hopes to use it 
in bigger affairs, one is vastly mistaken. Non-violence like charity must begin at 
home. But if it is necessary for the individual to be trained in non-violence, it is 
even more necessary for the nation to be trained likewise. One cannot be non-
violent in one's own circle and violent outside it. Or else, one is not truly non-
violent even in one's own circle; often the non-violence is only in appearance. 
It is only when you meet with resistance, as for instance, when a thief or a 
murderer appears, that your non-violence is put on its trial. You either try or 
should try to oppose the thief with his own weapons, or you try to disarm him 
by love. Living among decent people, your conduct may not be described as 
non-violent. Mutual forbearance is not non-violence. Immediately, therefore, 
you get the conviction that nonviolence is the law of life, you have to practise 
it towards those who act violently towards you; and the law must apply to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 99 nations as to individuals. Training is no doubt necessary. And beginnings are 
always small. But if the conviction is there, the rest will follow." 
Another question was: "In the practice of non-violence, is there no danger of 
developing a 'martyrdom complex' or pride creeping in?" 
Gandhiji: "If one has that pride and egoism, there is no non-violence. Non-
violence is impossible without humility. My own experience is that whenever I 
have acted non-violently I have been led to it and sustained in it by the higher 
promptings of an unseen power. Through my own will I should have miserably 
failed. When I first went to jail, I quailed at the prospect. I had heard terrible 
things about jail life. But I had faith in God's protection. Our experience was 
that those who went to jail in a prayerful spirit came out victorious, those who 
had gone in their own strength failed. There is no room for self-pitying in it 
either, when you say God is giving you the strength. Self-pity comes when you 
do a thing for which you expect recognition from others. But here there is no 
question of recognition." 
 
To Fight or not to Fight 
Another friend thus placed his dilemma: "I am a firm believer in non-violence. 
Eight years ago I read your Experiments with Truth  and immediately became 
converted to the way of life you have their advocated. Shortly after that I 
translated the book into Chinese. And then came the Japanese invasion. My 
faith in non-violence was put to a severe test and I was caught in a dilemma. 
On the one hand I felt I could not preach non-violence to my people who were 
never militaristic but who now believed that resistance with force was the only 
way out. It was the best thing they knew, and I believe with you that 'I would 
rather risk the use of force a thousand times than let my people lose their 
manhood.' But on the other hand, when I try to take a sympathetic attitude and 
try to do something helpful in such a situation, I find I am giving moral and 
material support directly and indirectly to something which is against the 
highest that I know. There seems to be no way out of this dilemma because I 
cannot live in a vacuum and anything I do will work one way or the other. While My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 100  I can believe without reserve .in non-violence in personal relationships, even 
though I fail far short of it, I cannot feel in the same way when I am faced with 
a national situation in which the greats majority of the people have not even 
heard of the way of non-violence." 
 
The Non-violent Equivalent 
“Yours is a difficult situation," replied Gandhiji. “Such difficulties have 
confronted me more than once. I took part on the British side in the Boer War 
by forming an ambulance corps. I did likewise at the time of what has been 
described as the Zulu Revolt. The third time was during the Great War. I 
believed in non-violence then. My motive was wholly non-violent. That 
seemingly inconsistent conduct gave me strength. My example cannot be used 
as a precedent for others to follow. Looking back upon my conduct on those 
three occasions, I have no sense of remorse. I know this too that my non-violent 
strength did not suffer diminution because of those experiences. The actual 
work I was called upon to do was purely humanitarian, especially during the 
Zulu Revolt. I and my companions were privileged to nurse the wounded Zulus 
back to life. It is reasonable to suggest that but for our services some of them 
would have died. I cite this experience not to justify my participation, however 
indirect it was. I cite it to show that I came through that experience with 
greater non-violence and with richer love for the great Zulu race. And I had an 
insight into what war by white men against coloured races meant. 
“The lesson to be learnt from it by you is that, placed as you are in a position 
of hopeless minority, you may not ask your people to lay down their arms unless 
their hearts are changed and by laying down their arms they feel the more 
courageous and brave. But whilst you may not try to wean people from war, 
you will in your person live non-violence in all its completeness and refuse all 
participation in war. You will develop love for the Japanese in your hearts. You 
will examine yourself whether you can really love them, whether you have not 
some ill-will towards them for all the harm they are doing. It is not enough to 
love them by remembering their virtues. You must be able to love them in spite My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 101  of all their misdeeds. If you have that love for the Japanese in your hearts, you 
will proceed to exhibit in your conduct that higher form of courage which is the 
hall-mark of true non-violence and which your Chinese friends will not fail to 
detect and recognize as such. You will not wish success to Japanese arms 
because you ' love ' the Japanese. At the same time you will not pray for the 
success of Chinese arms. It is very difficult to judge, when both sides are 
employing weapons of violence, which side 'deserves' to succeed. You will, 
therefore pray only that the right should prevail. Whilst you will keep yourself 
aloof from all violence, you will not shirk danger. You will serve friend and foe 
alike with a reckless disregard for your life. You will rush forth if there is an 
outbreak of an epidemic or a fire to be combated, and distinguish yourself by 
your surpassing courage and non-violent heroism. But you will refuse to call the 
curses of heaven upon the Japanese. If by chance some Japanese soldiers or 
airmen fall into the hands of the Chinese and are in danger of being lynched by 
an infuriated Chinese mob or otherwise ill- treated, you will plead for them 
with your own people and, if necessary, even protect them with your life. You 
know the story of Emily Hobhouse. Though an Englishwoman, she courageously 
went to the Boer concentration camps. She exhorted the Boers never to lose 
heart, and it is said that, if she had not steeled the hearts of the Boer women 
as she did, the war might have taken a different turn. She was full of wrath 
against her own people for whom she had not a good word to say. You would 
not copy her unmeasured wrath which somewhat vitiated her non-violence, but 
you will copy her love for the 'enemy' that made her denounce the misdeeds of 
her own countrymen. Your example will affect the Chinese, and might even 
shame some Japanese who will become bearers of your message among the 
Japanese. 
"A very slow process, you will perhaps say. Yes, possibly, under the existing 
adverse circumstances to begin with. But it will gather momentum and speed in 
an incalculable manner as you proceed. I am an irrepressible optimist. My 
optimism rests on my belief in the infinite possibilities of the individual to 
develop non-violence. The more you develop it in your own being, the more My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 102  infectious it becomes till it overwhelms your surroundings and by and by might 
over sweep the world." 
"I, a believer in non-violence, often find that I am actuated by mixed motives. 
So does a war general have mixed motives. Is it not possible to fight, with love 
for the enemy in one's heart? May we not shoot out of love?" 
Gandhiji: "We do often have mixed motives. But that would not be non-
violence. There can be degrees in violence, not in non-violence. The constant 
effort of the votary of non-violence is to purge himself of hatred towards the 
so- called enemy. There is no such thing as shooting out of love in the way you 
suggest." 
 
Can Non-violence Be Organized? 
The last to place before Gandhiji his problem was Mr. P- G. Hsu. "Our difficulty 
is this," he commented, "while sincerely believing in non-violence, we have not 
found a way of making it effective." 
"Should that present a difficulty?" exclaimed Gandhiji. "A person who realizes a 
particular evil of his time and finds that it overwhelms him, dives deep in his 
own heart for inspiration, and when he gets it, he presents it to others. 
Meetings and group organizations are all right. They are of some help, but very 
little. They are like the scaffolding that an architect erects — a temporary and 
makeshift expedient. The thing that really matters is an invincible faith that 
cannot be quenched. 
"Faith can be developed. Only, the way it can be developed and in which it 
works differs from that in the case of violence. You cannot develop violence 
through prayer. Faith, on the other hand, cannot be developed except through 
prayer. 
"Non-violence succeeds only when we have a living faith in God. Buddha, Jesus, 
Mahomed — they were all warriors of peace in their own style. We have to 
enrich the heritage left by these world teachers. God has His own wonderful 
way of executing His plans and choosing His instrument. The Prophet and Abu My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 103  Bakr trapped in a cave were saved from their persecutors by a spider which had 
woven its web across the mouth of that cave. All the world teachers you should 
know, began with a zero!!"  
Bardoli,  15-1-'39     P YARELAL  
Harijan,  28-1-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 104   
33. A WORLD IN AGONY — II  
A Programme for Africa 
The success of the non-violence programme of the Congress has brought to 
some of their (the Negro race in the Union of South Africa—Ed.) leaders a fresh 
glimmer of hope, and Rev. Tema was anxious to learn the secret of that 
success. "How can my people make their Congress as successful as the Indian 
National Congress?" he asked Gandhiji. 
"The Congress," replied Gandhiji, "became successful for the simple reason that 
it was inaugurated by the most selfless and cultured people that could be found 
in that age. They made themselves the representatives of the people, and 
captured their imagination by reason of service and self-sacrifice. They were 
from the people and of the people." After describing in some detail the services 
and the evolution of the Congress as a democratic organization, Gandhiji 
proceeded: "You have not, as far as I am aware, a band of Africans who would 
be content to work and live in impecuniosity. Among those who are educated 
there is not that absolute selflessness. Again, while most of your leaders are 
Christians, the vast mass of the Bantus and Zulus are not Christians. You have 
adopted European dress and manners, and have as a result become strangers in 
the midst of your own people. Politically, that is a disadvantage. It makes it 
difficult for you to reach the heart of the masses. "You must not be afraid of 
being 'Bantuized' or feel ashamed of carrying an assagai 01 of going about with 
only a tiny clout round your loins. A Zulu or a Bantu is a well-built man and 
need not be ashamed of showing his body. He need not dress like you. You must 
become Africans once more." 
 
A Non-white United Front? 
Of late there has been some talk of forming an Indo- African united Non-white 
Front in South Africa. "W7hat do you think about it," asked Rev. Tema. "It will 
be a mistake," replied Gandhiji. "You will be pooling together not strength but My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 105  weakness. You will best help one another by each standing on his own legs. The 
two cases are different. The Indians are a microscopic minority. They can never 
be a 'menace' to the white population. You, on the other hand, are the sons of 
the soil who are being robbed of your inheritance. You are bound to resist that. 
Yours is a far bigger issue. It ought not to be mixed up with that of the Indians. 
This does not preclude the establishment of the friendliest relations between 
the two races. The Indians can co-operate with you in a number of ways. They 
can help you by always acting on the square towards you. They may not put 
themselves in opposition to your legitimate aspirations, or run you down as 
'savages' while exalting themselves as 'cultured' people, in order to secure 
concessions for themselves at your expense." 
Rev. Tema: "What sort of relations would you favour between these two races?" 
Gandhiji: "The closest possible. But while I have abolished all distinction 
between an African and an Indian, that does not mean that I do not recognize 
the difference between them. The different races of mankind are like different 
branches of a tree — once we recognize the common parent stock from which 
we are sprung, we realize the basic unity of the human family, and there is no 
room left for enmities and unhealthy competition." 
Rev. Tema: "Should we adopt violence or non-violence as a means for our 
deliverance?" 
Gandhiji: "Certainly, non-violence under all circumstances. But you must have a 
living faith in it. Even when there is impenetrable darkness surrounding you, 
you must not abandon hope. A person who believes in non-violence believes in 
a living God. He cannot accept defeat. Therefore, my advice is non-violence all 
the time, but non-violence of the brave, not of the coward." 
"Your example," continued Rev. Tema, "has shed so much influence upon us 
that we are thinking whether it would not be possible for one or two of our 
young men, who, we are hoping, will become leaders, to come to you for 
training." 
"It is quite a good and sound idea," replied Gandhiji. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 106  Rev. Tema: "Do you think Christianity can bring salvation to Africa?" 
Gandhiji: "Christianity, as it is known and practised today, cannot bring 
salvation to your people. It is my conviction that those who today call 
themselves Christians do not know the true message of Jesus. I witnessed some 
of the horrors that were perpetrated on the Zulus during the Zulu Rebellion. 
Because one man, Bambatta, their chief, had refused to pay his tax, the whole 
race was made to suffer. I was in charge of an ambulance corps. I shall never 
forget the lacerated backs of Zulus who had received stripes and were brought 
to us for nursing because no white nurse was prepared to look after them. And 
yet those who perpetrated all those cruelties called themselves Christians. 
They were 'educated', better dressed than the Zulus, but not their moral 
superiors." 
Rev. Tema had one more question to ask. "Whenever a leader comes up in our 
midst, he flops down after a while. He either becomes ambitious after money 
or succumbs to the drink habit or some other vice and is lost to us. How shall 
we remedy this?" 
"The problem is not peculiar to you," replied Gandhiji. "Your leadership has 
proved ineffectual because it was not sprung from the common people. If you 
belong to the common people, live like them and think like them, they will 
make common cause with you. If I were in your place, I would not ask a single 
African to alter his costume and make himself peculiar. It does not add a single 
inch to his moral stature." 
Bardoli, 6-2-'39      P YARELAL  
Harijan , 18-2-1939 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 107   
34. A POLISH SISTER'S AGONY 
"In spite of all I am going to try to reach Poland—sailing tonight — to Basra in 
Iraq, then through Turkey and Rumania. The inner call is irresistible. It may 
seem madness from the ordinary human point of view. Now I am not going for 
my mother's sake or for my dearest friends who are now on the battlefields — 
ready to die at any moment — it is for Poland itself. I believe countries have 
also souls. Souls of nations are a reality, not a theory, for me. If I reach the 
soul of Poland, I will feel satisfied, even if I do not find those whom I love. It is 
the soul (and body) of the nation itself that is in its supreme hour of 
martyrdom. I believe Poland bleeds and struggles not only for her own rights 
but for the Right, the Just, the True; for the freedom of all nations, India 
including. I feel Hindu to the bottom of my heart; Indian as much as Pole, both 
motherlands are to be in my soul to the last day of my life. But I could not live 
if I would not do what is humanly possible to reach the feet of the Mother who 
is now bleeding in agony of pain. I shall write from the way, but not when I 
reach the war zone; I shall only think often about you and send mental 
messages as well as I can. Bapuji, do pray in all fervour of your great loving 
heart for those thousands of innocent people who suffer incredible pain and 
misery in Poland. It is these that need most sympathy and blessings and tender 
thoughts." 
This is the letter a Polish sister wrote from Bombay harbour. I have known her 
for some years. She is herself a believer through and through in non-violence. 
But her very non-violence made her restless. Her whole soul has rebelled 
against the wrong, as she thinks, that is being perpetrated against her 
motherland. So she has gone to find the Poland of her imagination fighting to 
the last ditch, not for merely preserving her own freedom but for the freedom 
of all those nations who have lost it. And in this slhe naturally includes her 
second love, India. May her dream prove true. If Poland has that measure of 
uttermost bravery and an equal measure of selflessness, history will forget that My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 108  she defended herself with violence. Her violence will be counted almost as non-
violence.  
Sevagram, 18-9-'39  
Harijan,  23-9-1939 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 109   
35. CONUNDRUMS 
Thus asks a well-known Congressman: 
"I. What is your personal attitude towards this war consistent with non-
violence? 
1. Is it the same as, or different from your attitude during the last war? 
2. How could you with your non-violence actively associate with and help the 
Congress whose policy is based on violence in the present crisis? 
3. What is you concrete plan based on non-violence to oppose or prevent this 
war?" 
These questions conclude a long friendly complaint about my seeming 
inconsistencies or my inscrutability. Both are old complaints, perfectly justified 
from the standpoint of the complainants, wholly unjustified from my own. 
Therefore my complainants and I must agree to differ. Only this let me say. At 
the time of writing I never think of what I have said before. My aim is not to be 
consistent with my previous statements on a given question, but to be 
consistent with truth as it may present itself to me at a given moment. The 
result has been that I have grown from truth to truth; I have saved my memory 
an undue strain; and what is more, whenever I have been obliged to compare 
my writing even of fifty years ago with the latest, I have discovered no 
inconsistency between the two. But friends who observe inconsistency will do 
well to take this meaning that my latest writing may yield unless, of course, 
they prefer the old. But before making the choice they should try to see if 
there is not an underlying and abiding consistency between the two seeming 
inconsistencies. 
So far as my inscrutability is concerned, friends should take my assurance that 
there is never any attempt on my part to suppress my thought when it is 
relevant. Sometimes it arises from my desire to be brief. And sometimes it 
must be due to my own ignorance of the subject on which I may be called upon 
to give an opinion. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 110  To give a typical instance, a friend, between whom and me there never is any 
mental reservation, thus writes in anguish rather than anger: 
“In the not-improbable event of India being a theatre of war, is Gandhiji 
prepared to advise his countrymen to bare their breasts to the enemy's sword? 
A little while ago I would have pledged my word he would do so, but I am not 
confident anymore." 
I can only assure him that, notwithstanding my recent writings, he can retain 
his confidence that I would give the same advice as he expects I would have 
given before, or as I gave to the Czechs or the Abyssinians. My nonviolence is 
made of stern stuff. It is firmer than the firmest metal known to the scientists. 
Yet, alas, I am painfully conscious of the fact that it has still not attained its 
native firmness. If it had, God would have shown me the way to deal with the 
many local cases of violence that I helplessly witness daily. This is said not in 
arrogance but in the certain knowledge of the power of perfect non-violence. I 
will not have the power of non-violence to be underestimated in order to cover 
my limitations or weaknesses. 
Now for a few lines in answer to the foregoing questions. 
1. My personal reaction towards this war is one of greater horror than ever 
before. I was not so disconsolate before as I am today. But the greater 
horror would prevent me today from becoming the self-appointed recruit-
ing sergeant that I had become during the last war. And yet, strange as it 
may appear, my sympathies are wholly with the Allies. Willynilly this war 
is resolving itself into one between such democracy as the West has 
evolved and totalitarianism as it is typified in Herr Hitler. Though the part 
that Russia is playing is painful, let us hope that the unnatural combination 
will result in a happy though unintended fusion whose shape no one can 
foretell. Unless the Allies suffer demoralization, of which there is not the 
slightest indication, this war may be used to end all wars, at any rate of 
the virulent type that we see today. I have the hope that India, distraught 
though it is with internal dissensions, will play an effective part in ensuring 
the desired end and the spread of cleaner democracy than hitherto. This My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 111  will undoubtedly depend upon how the Working Committee will ultimately 
act in the real tragedy that is being played on the world stage. We are 
both actors in and spectators of the drama. My line is cast. Whether I act 
as a humble guide of the Working Committee or, if I may use the same 
expression without offence, of the Government, my guidance will be for 
the deliberate purpose of taking either or both along the path of non-
violence, be the step ever so imperceptible. It is plain that I cannot force 
the pace either way. I can only use such power as God may endow my head 
or heart with for the moment. 
2. I think I have covered the second question in answering the first. 
3. There are degrees of violence as of non-violence. The Working Committee 
has not willfully departed from the policy of non-violence. It could not 
honestly accept the real implications of non-violence. It felt that the vast 
mass of Congressmen had never clearly understood that in the event of 
danger from without they were to defend the country by non-violent 
means. All that they had learnt truly was that they could put up a 
successful fight, on the whole non-violent, against the British Government. 
Congressmen have had no training in the use of non-violence in other 
fields. Thus, for example, they had not yet discovered a sure method of 
dealing successfully in a nonviolent manner with communal riots or 
goondaism. The argument is final inasmuch as it is based on actual 
experience. I would not serve the cause of non-violence, if I deserted my 
best co-workers because they could not follow me in an extended 
application of non-violence. I therefore remain with them in the faith that 
their departure from the nonviolent method will be confined to the 
narrowest field and will be temporary. 
4. I have no ready-made concrete plan. For me too this is a new field. Only I 
have no choice as to the means. It must always be purely non-violent, 
whether I am closeted with the members of the Working Committee or 
with the Viceroy. Therefore what I am doing is itself part of the concrete 
plan. More will be revealed to me from day to day, as all my plans always My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 112  have been. The famous non-co-operation resolution came to me within less 
than 24 hours of the meeting of the A.I.C.C. at which it was moved in 
Calcutta in 1920; and so did practically the Dandi March. The foundation of 
the first civil resistance under the then knovyn name of passive resistance 
was laid by accident at a meeting of Indians in Johannesburg in 1906 
convened for the purpose of finding the means of combating the anti-
Asiatic measure of those days. I had gone to the meeting with no 
preconceived resolution. It was born at the meeting. The creation is still 
expanding. But assuming that God had endowed me with full powers 
(which He never does), I would at once ask the English to lay down arms, 
free all their vassals, take pride in being called "little Englanders", and 
defy all the totalitarians of the world to do their worst. Englishmen will 
then die unresistingly and go down to history as heroes of nonviolence I 
would further invite Indians to co-operate with Englishmen in this godly 
martyrdom. It will be an indissoluble partnership drawn up in letters of the 
blood of their own bodies, not of their so-called enemies. But I have no 
such general power. Non-violence is a plant of slow growth. It grows 
imperceptibly but surely. And even at the risk of being misunderstood, I 
must act in obedience to " the still small voice".  
On the train to Simla, 25-9-'39 
Harijan,  30-9-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 113   
36. INDIA'S ATTITUDE 
I agree with Kamaladevi's analysis of the motives of the parties to the war.  
Both are fighting for their existence and for the furtherance of their policies. 
There is, however, this great difference between the two: however incomplete 
or equivocal the declarations of the Allies are, the world has interpreted them 
to mean that they are fighting for saving democracy. Herr Hitler is fighting for 
the extension of the German boundaries, although he was told that he should 
allow his claims to be submitted to an impartial tribunal for examination.  
He contemptuously rejected the way of peace or persuasion and chose that of 
the sword. Hence my sympathy for the cause of the Allies. But my sympathies 
must not be interpreted to mean endorsement, in any shape or form, of the 
doctrine of the sword for the defence even of proved right. Proved right should 
be capable of being vindicated by right means as against the rule, i.e. 
sanguinary, means. Man may and should shed his own blood for establishing 
what he considers to be his 'right'. He may not shed the blood of his opponent 
who disputes his 'right'. India as represented by the Congress has been  
fighting in order to prove her 'right', not by the sword but by the non-violent 
method. And she has carved out for herself a unique place and prestige in the 
world, although she is yet far — let us hope, not very far — from the 
independence of her dream. Her novel method has evidently struck the 
imagination of the world. It has the right to expect India to play a decisive part 
in this war, which no people of the world have wanted, by insisting that the 
peace this time is not to be a mockery, designed to share among the victors the 
spoils of war and to humiliate the vanquished. Jawaharlal Nehru, who has a 
right to speak for the Congress, has said in stately language that the peace 
must mean freedom for those who are held in bondage by the imperialist 
powers of the world. I have every hope that the Congress will also be able to 
show the world that the power that armaments give to defend right is nothing 
compared to the power that nonviolence gives to do the same thing and that My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 114  too with better show of reason. Armaments can show no reason, they can make 
only a pretence of it. 
Sevagram, 9-10-'39 
Harijan,  14-10-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 115   
37. ON TRIAL 
In the course of the conversation with the members of the Working Committee, 
I discovered that their nonviolence had never gone beyond fighting the British 
Government with that weapon. I had hugged the belief that Congressmen had 
appreciated the logical result of the practice of non-violence for the past 
twenty years in fighting the biggest imperialist power in the world. But in great 
experiments like that of non-violence, hypothetical questions have hardly any 
play. I myself used to say in answer to questions that when we had actually 
acquired independence we would know whether we could defend ourselves 
non-violently or not. But today the question is no longer hypothetical. Whether 
there is on the part of the British Government a favourable declaration or not, 
the Congress has to decide upon the course it would adopt in the event of an 
invasion of India. For though there may be no settlement with the Government, 
the Congress has to declare its policy and say whether it would fight the 
invading host violently or non-violently. 
So far as I can read the Working Committee's mind after a fairly full discussion, 
the members think that Congressmen are unprepared for non-violent defence 
against armed invasion. 
This is tragic. Surely the means adopted for driving an enemy from one's house 
must, more or less, coincide with those to be adopted for keeping him out of 
the house. If anything, the latter process must be easier. The fact, however, is 
that our fight has not been one of non-violent resistance of the strong. It has 
been one of passive resistance of the weak. Therefore there is no spontaneous 
response in our hearts, at this supreme moment, to an undying faith in the 
efficacy of non-violence. The Working Committee, therefore, wisely said that 
they were not ready for the logical step. The tragedy of the situation is that, if 
the Congress is to throw in its lot with those who believe in the necessity of 
armed defence of India, the past twenty years will have been years of gross 
neglect of the primary duty of Congressmen to learn the science of armed 
warfare. And I fear that history will help me, as the general of the fight, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 116  responsible for the tragedy. The future historian will say that I should have 
perceived that the nation was learning not non-violence of the strong but 
merely passivity of the weak, and that I should have, therefore, provided for 
Congressmen's military training. 
Being obsessed with the idea that somehow or other India will learn true non-
violence, it would not occur to me to invite my co-workers to train themselves 
for armed defence. On the contrary, I used to discountenance all sword- play 
and the display of stout lathis. Nor am I even now repentant for the past. I have 
the unquenchable faith that, of all the countries in the world, India is the one 
country which can learn the art of non-violence, that if the test were applied 
even now, there would be found, perhaps, thousands of men and women who 
would be willing to die without harbouring malice against their persecutors. I 
have harangued crowds and told them repeatedly that they might have to 
suffer much including death by shooting. Did not thousands of men and women 
brave hardships during the salt campaign equal to any that soldiers are called 
upon to bear? No different capacity is required from what has been already 
evinced, if India has to contend against an invader. Only it will have to be on 
vaster scale. 
One thing ought not to be forgotten. India unarmed would not require to be 
destroyed through poison gas or bombardment. It is the Maginot line that has 
made the Siegfried line necessary. And  vice versa.  Defence of India by the 
present methods has been necessary because –she is an appendage of Britain. 
Free India can have no enemy. And if her people have learnt the art of saying 
resolutely 'no' and acting up to it, I dare say, no one would want to invade her. 
Our economy would be so modelled as to prove no temptation for the exploiter. 
But some Congressmen will say: "Apart from the British, India has so many 
martial races within her border that they will want to put up a fight for the 
country which is as much theirs as ours." This is perfectly true. I am therefore 
talking, for the moment, only of Congressmen. How would they act in the event 
of an invasion? We shall never convert the whole of India to our creed unless we 
are prepared to die for it. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 117  My position is, therefore, confined to myself alone. I have to find out whether I 
have any fellow-traveller along the lonely path. If I am in the minority of one I 
must try to make converts. Whether one or many, I must declare my faith that 
it is better for India to discard violence altogether even for defending her 
borders. For India to enter into the race for armaments is to court suicide. With 
the loss of India to non-violence the last hope of the world will be gone. I must 
live up to the creed I have professed for the last half a century, and hope to 
the last breath that India will make non-violence her creed, preserve man's 
dignity, and prevent him from reverting to the type from which he is supposed 
to have raised himself. 
Sevagram, 10-10-'39 
Harijan,  14-10-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 118   
38. A POSER 
A Britisher has written to Deenabandhu Andrews a letter on the war expounding 
his own views. He is an ardent pacifist. Deenabandhu has shared the letter with 
me. In it occur the following paragraphs: 
"For India too I think that this is a very critical time. The danger I see is that 
Britain may promise full Dominion Status or something of the kind, and as a 
result India will raise an army and become one more military-minded nation. 
Her witness for the way of non-violence and soul-force would then be largely 
discounted. 
“How can Gandhiji as a believer in non-violence ask for clarification of war 
aims with a view to getting India's support for Britain in this way of war? The 
only thing that he can do and that we should all be doing is to build up an army 
of men and women who are committed to the way of love and forgiveness and 
to receive, but never to return, violence. We have to work this out to see how 
it will alter our daily life as well as all our thinking and acting towards other 
communities and nations. We have to be disciplined in this and also to learn to 
act together as one man. Along this line I see tremendous possibilities. 
"Of course, we should also use all the influence we can to urge Britain to 
acknowledge and put into practice full democracy in India, as it is a high 
principle quite apart from whether India helps Britain in the war or not." 
The danger that the writer senses is real. I dealt with it last week. The writer 
cavils at my sympathy with the Allies. I have shown it as an out-and-out 
believer in nonviolence, even because of my belief. Whilst all violence is bad 
and must be condemned in the abstract, it is permissible for, it is even the duty 
of, a believer in Ahimsa to distinguish between the aggressor and the defender. 
Having done so, he will side with the defender in a non-violent manner, i. e. 
give his life in saving him. His intervention is likely to bring a speedier end to 
the duel, and may even result in bringing about peace between the 
combatants. Applying the argument to the present war, if the Congress actively My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 119  sides with the Allies in a non-violent way, the Congress assistance will lift the 
Allied cause to a high moral plane, and the Congress influence will be 
effectively used in the cause of peace. What is more it will be the special 
business of the Congress to see that, if the war is fought to a finish, no 
humiliation is heaped upon the vanquished. That is the role I have conceived 
for the Congress. The declaration of independence has become a necessity. The 
question having been raised, the Congress cannot help Britain, if Britain is 
secretly fighting for imperialism while it declares to the world that the fight is 
for saving democracies. For Britain to be in the right, a clear declaration of her 
war aim is a necessity, irrespective of the Congress policy. 
Sevagram, 16-10-'39 
Harijan,  21-10-1939 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 120   
39. THE HOUR OF TRIAL 
(With the members of the Gandhi Seva Sangh) 
“Non-violence is not a cloistered virtue, confined only to the Rishi and the 
cave-dweller. It is capable of being practised by the millions, not with full 
knowledge of its implications, but because it is the law of our species. It 
distinguishes man from the brute. But man has not shed the brute in him. He 
has to strive to do so. This striving applies to the practice of non-violence, not 
to the belief in it. I cannot strive to believe in a principle: I either believe in it 
or I do not. And if I believe in it, I must bravely strive to practise it. Ahimsa is 
an attribute of the brave. Cowardice and Ahimsa do not go together any more 
than water and fire. It is that Ahimsa that every member of the Gandhi Seva 
Sangh has to make a conscious effort to develop in himself. 
“We have often thought about this question, but the hour of our trial has 
arrived today, as much with reference to war as with the struggle for Swaraj 
and equally with reference to Hindu-Muslim unity. Remember also that your 
non-violence cannot operate effectively unless you have faith in the spinning 
wheel. I would ask you to read Hind Swaraj with my eyes and see therein the 
chapter on how to make India non-violent. You cannot build non-violence on a 
factory civilization, but it can be built on self-contained villages. Even if Hitler 
was so minded, he could not devastate seven hundred thousand non-violent 
villages. He would himself become non-violent in the process. Rural economy, 
as I have conceived it, eschews exploitation altogether, and exploitation is the 
essence of violence. You have, therefore, to be rural-minded before you can be 
nonviolent, and to be rural-minded you have to have faith in the spinning 
wheel." 
 
Posers 
The members slept over this discourse and met Gandhiji again the next day. 
Numerous questions were troubling them, as they should everyone who is a My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 121  votary of Ahimsa. But out of regard for Gandhiji's time they limited themselves 
to a few. 
"How can a believer in the non-violence of your conception be a minister?" 
"I fear he cannot in the present state of things," said Gandhiji. "We have seen 
that our ministers have had to resort to violence even as the British 
Government in the pre-autonomy days. It was inevitable perhaps. Had Con-
gressmen been truly non-violent, there would have been no resort to force. But 
the Congress majorities were not based on unadulterated non-violence. A 
minister said the other day that, although he had not given up an iota of non-
violence, he could not do without resorting to the minimum of firing. He had 
resorted to it only to the extent that it was unavoidable. He may have said it 
then; he may not say it again if I can help it. For, if he goes in again, he will 
have made his position clear, and he will represent a House that is 
predominantly non-violent. In other words, he will take office, if he is sure that 
the people would let him carry on the government on a non-violent basis." 
"But may it not be that whereas a non-violent minister will confine violence to 
the lowest minimum, one who does not believe in non-violence would observe 
no such restraint?" 
"That belief is a delusion. All those who are using violence today make the same 
claim. Hitler too would say the same thing. General Dyer was acclaimed as the 
hero of the hour by the House of Lords because his object was said to be to 
prevent the spread of mob violence. Soviet Russia believes its violence is a 
transitional stage to the establishment of an order without violence. 
Non-violence is impossible without self-purification. Let us, therefore, be 
members of a self-purification association, but no association is necessary for 
that purpose. Therefore let us try, each in our own way, to face difficulties and 
problems as they come and see how far we can go. In Hudli, two years ago, I 
asked you to help in the elections and in sending the best possible men to the 
legislature. I gave advice in the atmosphere as it existed then. I cannot give 
you that advice today. In fact the time may have come when it becomes My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 122  necessary for such of you as believe in the non-violence of the brave to retire 
from the Congress as I did in 1934." 
"How do you think that the masses can practise nonviolence, when we know 
that they are all prone to anger, hate, ill-will? They are known to fight for the 
most trivial things." 
"They are, and yet I think they can practise nonviolence for the common good. 
Do you think the thousands of women that collected contraband salt had ill-will 
against anyone? They knew that the Congress or Gandhi had asked them to do 
certain things, and they did those things in faith and hope. To my mind the 
most perfect demonstration of non-violence was in Champaran. Did the 
thousands of ryots who rose up in revolt against the agrarian evils harbour the 
least ill-will against the Government or the planters? Their belief in non-
violence was unintelligent, even as the belief in the earth being round with 
many is unintelligent. But their belief in their leaders was genuine, and that 
was enough. With those who lead it is another matter. Their belief has got to 
be intelligent, and they have to live up to all the implications of the belief." 
"But then are not the masses the world over like that?" 
"They are not, for others have not that background of non-violence." 
"But if there was non-violence ingrained in our masses, how should they have 
come to this state of slavery?" 
"There indeed is what I flatter myself is going to be my contribution. I want 
that non-violence of the weak to become non-violence of the brave. It may be 
a dream, but I have to strive for its realization."  
Sevagram, 29-10-'39 
Harijan,  4-11-1939 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 123   
40. MY ADVICE TO NOAKHALI HINDUS 
Their case is more or less like the Sukkur case. There is a great difference in 
degree. But I feel sure that no popularly elected government can successfully 
cope with widespread goondaism as it is alleged to be in Noakhali.  
It is essentially a case of self-defence. Self-respect and honour cannot be 
protected by others. They are for each individual himself or herself to guard. 
Governments can at best punish offenders after the offence has been 
committed. They cannot assure prevention except in so far as punishment acts 
as a deterrent. Self-defence can be violent or non-violent. I have always 
advised and insisted on nonviolent defence. But I recognize that it has to be 
learnt like violent defence. It requires a different training from that which is 
required for violent defence. Therefore, if the capacity for non-violent  
self-defence is lacking, there need be no hesitation in using violent means. 
But Manoranjan Babu, being an old Congressman, said, "You say I cannot 
retaliate even in self-defence?" "That is certainly my view," I replied. "There 
was, however, a resolution passed by the Gaya Congress that the use of force in 
self-defence was permissible to Congressmen. I have never justified the 
resolution. Non-violence becomes meaningless, if violence is permitted for self-
defence. What is it but self-defence in national resistance against an aggressor 
nation? I would, therefore, advise secession from the Congress, if you 
contemplate the use of force in defending yourselves in the circumstances 
described by you." 
"But," said Manoranjan Babu, "Supposing I adopt the Gaya resolution,  
would I be accused of communalism, if I defended the aggrieved Hindus?" 
"Certainly not," I replied. "In the first place, you do not cease to be Hindu 
because you are a Congressman. You will, however, be guilty of communalism, 
if you sided with Hindus right or wrong. In the case in point you will  
defend Hindus, not because they are Hindus but because they are 
afflicted.  My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 124  I would expect you to defend Muslims if you found them molested by Hindus.  
A Congressman recognizes or should recognize no communal distinction."  
Calcutta, 
26-2-'40 Harijan , 2-3-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 125   
41. WHEN THE BRITISH WITHDRAW 
“Unless you adopt an all-party form of government, you are paving the way 
towards sowing Hindu-Muslim conflict after the British protection is withdrawn. It 
was not non-violence but your tremendous magnetism plus the backing of British 
bayonet that kept the Congress in power. Try non-violence without the latter for 
two or three months, and the truth of the above will be realized." 
Thus writes an esteemed correspondent. I have no difficulty in endorsing the 
remark that it was the British bayonet that kept the Congress ministries in 
power. My 'magnetism' may have had something to do with the victory at the 
polls. But it proved utterly useless to keep ministries in power. The sustaining 
force was the British bayonet. This only shows that the people at large have not 
yet imbibed the lesson of non-violence. 
The remedy is not an all-party government. Such will be no government of the 
people for the people. It will be the government - of a caucus for its own ends. 
The caucus will have no smoother sailing than the Congress ministries had. It 
will also have to rely upon the British bayonet. There can be no manly peace in 
the land unless the British bayonet is withdrawn. The risk of riots has to be run. 
Non-violence will be born out of such risks, if at all it is to be part of national 
life. It is daily becoming crystal clear that real unity will not come so long as 
the British bayonet crushes the free spirit of the people. The peace it imposes 
is the peace of the grave. I feel that riots will be a welcome relief, if that is 
the price we have to pay for freedom. For out of them I can conceive the po-
ssibility of peace coming, not out of the present unreality. The way out of riots 
on the one hand and British bayonets on the other is frank acceptance of non-
violence. To this my life is dedicated, and my faith in its possibility and efficacy 
will survive the dissolution of my body.  
On the train to Wardha, 3-3-'40  
Harijan,  9-3-1940 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 126   
42. TWO QUESTIONS FROM AMERICA 
A friend writing from America propounds the following two questions: 
"1. Granted that Satyagraha is capable of winning India's independence, what are 
the chances of its being accepted as a principle of State policy in a free India ? In 
other words, would a strong and independent India rely on Satyagraha as a method 
of self-preservation, or would it lapse back to seeking refuge in the age-old 
institution of war, however defensive its character? To restate the question on the 
basis of a purely theoretic problem: Is Satyagraha likely to be accepted only in an 
uphill battle, when the phenomenon of martyrdom is fully effective, or is it also to 
be the instrument of a sovereign authority which has neither the need nor the 
scope of behaving on the principle of martyrdom? 
2. Suppose a free India adopts Satyagraha as an instrument of State policy, how 
would she defend herself against probable aggression by another sovereign State? 
To restate the question on the basis of a purely theoretic problem: What would be 
the Satyagrahic action-patterns to meet the invading army at the frontier? What 
kind of resistance can be offered the opponent before a common area of action, 
such as the one now existing in India between the Indian nationalists and the 
British government, is established? Or should the Satyagrahis withhold their action 
until after the opponent has taken over the country?" 
The questions are admittedly theoretical. They are also premature for the 
reason that I have not mastered the whole technique of non-violence. The 
experiment is still in the making. It is not even in its advanced stage. The 
nature of the experiment requires one to be satisfied with one step at a time. 
The distant scene is not for him to see. Therefore my answers can only be 
speculative. 
In truth, as I have said before, now we are not having unadulterated non-
violence even in our struggle to win independence. 
As to the first question, I fear that the chances of nonviolence being accepted 
as a principle of State policy are very slight, so far as I can see at present. If 
India does not accept non-violence as her policy after winning independence, 
the second question becomes superfluous. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 127  But I may state my own individual view of the potency of non-violence. I 
believe that a State can be administered on a non-violent basis, if the vast 
majority of the people are non-violent. So far as I know, India is the only 
country which has a possibility of being such a State. I am conducting my 
experiment in that faith. Supposing, therefore, that India attained 
independence through pure non-violence, India could retain it too by the same 
means. A nonviolent man or society does not anticipate or provide for attacks 
from without. On the contrary, such a person or society firmly believes that 
nobody is going to disturb them. If the worst happens, there are two ways open 
to non-violence. To yield possession, but non-co-operate with the aggressor. 
Thus supposing that a modern edition of Nero descended upon India, the 
representatives of the State will let him in, but tell him that he will get no 
assistance from the people. They will prefer death to submission. The second 
way would be non-violent resistance by the people who have been trained in 
the non-violent way. They would offer themselves unarmed as fodder for the 
aggressor's cannons. The underlying belief in either case is that even a Nero is 
not devoid of a heart. The unexpected spectacle of endless rows upon rows of 
men and women simply dying rather than surrender to the will of an aggressor 
must ultimately melt him and his soldiery. Practically speaking, there will be 
probably no greater loss in men than if forcible resistance was offered; there 
will be no expenditure in armaments and fortifications. The non-violent training 
received by the people will add inconceivably to their height. Such men and 
women will have shown personal bravery of a type far superior to that shown in 
armed warfare. In each case the bravery consists in dying, not in killing. Lastly, 
there is no such thing as defeat in non-violent resistance. That such a thing has 
not happened before is no answer to my speculation. I have drawn no 
impossible picture. History is replete with instances of individual non-violence 
of the type I have mentioned. There is no warrant for saying or thinking that a 
group of men and women cannot by sufficient training act non-violently as a 
group or nation. Indeed the sum total of the experience of mankind is that men 
somehow or other live on, from which fact I infer that it is the law of love that 
rules mankind. Had violence, i.e. hate, ruled us, we should have become My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 128  extinct long ago. And yet the tragedy of it is that the so-called civilized men 
and nations conduct themselves as if the basis of society was violence. It gives 
me ineffable joy to make experiments proving that love is the supreme and 
only law of life. Much evidence to the contrary cannot shake my faith. Even the 
mixed non-violence of India has supported it. But if it is not enough to convince 
an unbeliever, it is enough to incline a friendly critic to view it with favour. 
Sevagram, 8-4-'40 
Harijan,  13-4-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 129   
43. DEMOCRACY AND NON-VIOLENCE 
Q. Why do you say, "Democracy can only be saved through non-violence”? (The 
questioner is an American friend.) 
A. Because democracy, so long as it is sustained by violence, cannot provide for 
or protect the weak. My notion of democracy is that under it the weakest 
should have the same opportunity as the strongest. That can never happen 
except through non-violence. No country in the world today shows any but 
patronizing regard for the weak. The weakest, you say, go to the wall. Take 
your own case. Your land is owned by a few capitalist owners. The same is true 
of South Africa. These large holdings cannot be sustained except by violence, 
veiled if not open. Western democracy, as it functions today, is diluted Na- zim 
or Fascism. At best it is merely a cloak to hide the Nazi and the Fascist 
tendencies of imperialism. Why is there the war today, if it is not for the 
satisfaction of the desire to share the spoils? It was not through democratic 
methods that Britain bagged India. What is the meaning of South African 
democracy? It’s very constitution has been drawn to protect the white man 
against the coloured man, the natural occupant. Your own history is perhaps 
blacker still, in spite of what the Northern States did for the abolition of 
slavery. The way you have treated the Negro presents a discreditable record. 
And it is to save such democracies that the war is being fought. There is 
something very hypocritical about it. I am thinking just now in terms of non-
violence and trying to expose violence in its nakedness. 
India is trying to evolve true democracy, i.e. without violence. Our weapons are 
those of Satyagraha expressed through the Charkha, the village industries, 
primary education through handicrafts, removal of untouchabilitv, communal 
harmony, prohibition, and non-violent organization of labour as in Ahmedabad. 
These mean mass effort and mass education. We have big agencies for con-
ducting these activities. They are purely voluntary, and their only sanction is 
service of the lowliest. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 130  This is the permanent part of the non-violent effort. From this effort is created 
the capacity to offer non-violent resistance called non-co-operation and civil 
disobedience which may culminate in mass refusal to pay rent and taxes. As you 
know, we have tried non-co-operation and civil disobedience on a fairly large 
scale and fairly successfully. The experiment has in it promise of a brilliant 
future. As yet our resistance has been that of the weak. The aim is to develop 
the resistance of the strong. Your wars will never ensure safety for democracy, 
India's experiment can and will, if the people come up to the mark or, to put it 
another way, if God gives me the necessary wisdom and strength to bring the 
experiment to fruition.  
Sevagram, 13-5-'40 
Harijan,  18-5-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 131   
44. HOW TO COMBAT HITLERISM 
Whatever Hitler may ultimately prove to be, we know what Hitlerism has come 
to mean. It means naked ruthless force reduced to an exact science and worked 
with scientific precision. In its effect it becomes almost irresistible. 
In the early days of Satyagraha when it was still known as passive resistance,  
The Star  of Johannesburg, stirred by the sight of a handful of Indians, wholly 
unarmed and incapable of organized violence even if they wished it, pitting 
themselves against an overwhelmingly armed government, had a cartoon in 
which the latter was depicted as a steam-roller representing irresistible force, 
and passive resistance was depicted as an elephant unmoved and comfortably 
planting himself in his seat. This was marked immovable force. The cartoonist 
had a true insight into the duel between the irresistible and the immovable 
forces. It was then a stalemate. The sequel we know. What was depicted and 
appeared to be irresistible was successfully resisted by the immovable force of 
Satyagraha — call it suffering without retaliation. 
What became true then can be equally true now. Hitlerism will never be 
defeated by counter-Hitlerism. It can only breed superior Hitlerism raised to  
nth. degree. What is going on before our eyes is a demonstration of the futility 
of violence as also of Hitlerism. 
Let me explain what I mean by failure of Hitlerism. It has robbed the small 
nations of their liberty. It has compelled France to sue for peace. Probably by 
the time this is in print Britain will have decided upon her course. The fall of 
France is enough for my argument. I think French statesmen have shown rare 
courage in bowing to the inevitable and refusing to be party to senseless 
mutual slaughter. There can be no sense in France coming out victorious if the 
stake is in truth lost. The cause of liberty becomes a mockery, if the price to be 
paid is wholesale destruction of those who are to enjoy liberty. It then becomes 
an inglorious satiation of ambition. The bravery of the French soldier is world-
known. But let the world know also the greater bravery of the French 
statesmen in suing for peace. I have assumed that the French statesmen have My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 132  taken the step in a perfectly honourable manner as behaves true soldiers. Let 
me hope that Herr Hitler will impose no humiliating terms but show that, 
though he can fight without mercy, he can at least conclude peace not without 
mercy. 
But to resume the thread of the argument. What will Hitler do with his victory? 
Can he digest so much power? Personally he will go as empty-handed as his not 
very remote predecessor Alexander. For the Germans he will have left not the 
pleasure of owning a mighty empire but the burden of sustaining its crushing 
weight. For they will not be able to hold all the conquered nations in perpetual 
subjection. And I doubt if the Germans of future generations will entertain 
unadulterated pride in the deeds for which Hitlerism will be deemed 
responsible. They will honour Herr Hitler as a genius, as a brave man, a match-
less organizer, and much more. But I should hope that the Germans of the 
future will have learnt the art of discrimination even about their heroes. 
Anyway I think it will be allowed that all the blood that has been spilled by 
Hitler has added not a millionth part of an inch to the world's moral stature. 
As against this imagine the state of Europe today if the Czechs, the Poles, the 
Norwegians, the French and the English had all said to Hitler: "You need not 
make your scientific preparation for destruction. We will meet your violence 
with non-violence. You will, therefore, be able to destroy our non-violent army 
without tanks, battleships and airships." It may be retorted that the only 
difference would be that Hitler would have got without fighting what he has 
gained after a bloody fight. Exactly. The history of Europe would then have 
been written differently. Possession might (but only might) have been then 
taken under non-violent resistance, as it has been taken now after perpetration 
of untold barbarities. Under non-violence only those would have been killed 
who had trained themselves to be killed, if need be, but without killing anyone 
and without bearing malice towards anybody. I dare say that in that case 
Europe would have added several inches to its moral stature. And in the end I 
expect it is the moral worth that will count. All else is dross. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 133  I have written these lines for the European Powers. But they are meant for 
ourselves. If my argument has gone home, is it not time for us to declare our 
changeless faith in non-violence of the strong and say we do not seek to defend 
our liberty with the force of arms, but we will defend it with the force of non-
violence? 
Sevagram, 18-6-'40 
Harijan,  22-6-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 134   
45. BOTH HAPPY AND UNHAPPY 
It was on the 18th instant that I expressed the following hope in  Harijan:  
"If my argument has gone home, is it not time for us to declare our changeless 
faith in non-violence of the strong and say we do not seek to defend our liberty 
with the force of arms, but we will defend it with the force of non-violence?" 
On the 21st the Working Committee felt unable to enforce such faith in action 
when the time for it came. For the Committee never before had an occasion to 
test their faith. At the last meeting they had to lay down a course of action for 
meeting impending anarchy within and danger of aggression from without. 
I pleaded hard with the Committee: “If you have faith in non-violence of the 
strong, now is the time to act up to it. It does not matter that many parties do 
not believe in non-violence whether of the strong or of the weak. Probably that 
is all the greater reason for Congressmen to meet the emergency by non-violent 
action. For if all were non-violent, there could be no anarchy and there would 
be no question of anybody arming for meeting aggression from without. It is 
because Congressmen represent a party of non-violence, in the midst of parties 
who do not believe m it, that it becomes imperative for Congressmen to show 
that they are well able to act up to their faith. 
But the members of the Working Committee felt that Congressmen would not 
be able to act up to it. It would be a new experience for them. They were 
never before called upon to deal with such a crisis. The attempt made by me to 
form peace brigades to deal with communal riots and the. like had wholly 
failed. Therefore they could not hope for the action contemplated. 
My position was different. With the Congress nonviolence was always a policy. 
It was open to it to reject if it failed. If it could not bring political and 
economic independence, it was of no use. For me non-violence is a creed. I 
must act up to it whether I am alone or have companions. Since propagation of 
non-violence is the mission of my life, I must pursue it in all weathers. I felt 
that now was the time for me to prove my faith before God and man. And so I My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 135  asked for absolution from the Committee. Hitherto I have been responsible for 
guiding the general policy of the Congress. I could no longer do so when funda-
mental differences were discovered between them and me. They readily 
recognized the correctness of my attitude. And they gave me the absolution. 
Once more they have justified the trust imposed in them. They have been true 
to themselves. They had not the confidence in themselves or those whom they 
represented, that they could express in their actions the required measure of 
non-violence. And so they made the only choice they could honestly make. It 
was a tremendous sacrifice they made — the sacrifice of the prestige that the 
Congress had gained in the world for unadulterated non-violence, and the 
dissolution of the unwritten and unspoken bond between them and me. But 
though it is a break in the common practice of a common ideal or policy, there 
is no break in the friendship of over twenty years' standing. 
I am both happy and unhappy over the result. Happy because I have been able 
to bear the strain of the break and have been given the strength to stand alone. 
Unhappy because my word seemed to lose the power to carry with me those 
whom it was my proud privilege to carry all these many years which seem like 
yesterday. But I know that, if God shows me the way to demonstrate the 
efficacy of non-violence of the strong, the break will prove to have been 
temporary. If there is no way, they will have justified their wisdom in bearing 
the wrench of letting me go my way alone. If that tragic discovery of my 
impotence is in store for me, I hope still to retain the faith that has sustained 
me all these years and to have humility enough to realize that I was not fit 
enough instrument to carry the torch of non-violence any further. 
But this argument and doubt are based upon the assumption that the members 
of the Working Committee represent the feeling of the vast majority of 
Congressmen. They would wish, and I hope, that the vast majority of Congress-
men had in them the non-violence of the strong. No one would be more glad 
than they to discover that they had underrated Congressmen's strength. The 
probability, however, is that there is no majority but only a good minority 
which represents the non-violence of the strong. It should be remembered that My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 136  the matter does not lend itself to argument. The members of the Working 
Committee had all the argument before them. But non-violence, which is a 
quality of the heart, cannot come by an appeal to the brain. Therefore what is 
required is a quiet but resolute demonstration of non-violent strength. The 
opportunity comes to everyone almost daily. There are communal clashes, 
there are dacoities, there are wordy duels. In all these things those who are 
truly non-violent can and will demonstrate it. If it is shown in an adequate 
measure, it will not fail to infect their surroundings. I am quite clear that there 
is not a single Congressman who disbelieves in the efficacy of nonviolence out 
of sheer cussedness. Let the Congressmen who believe that the Congress should 
adhere to non-violence in dealing with internal disorders or external 
aggression, express it in their daily conduct. Non-violence of the strong cannot 
be a mere policy. It must be a creed, or a passion, if £ creed ' is objected to. A 
man with a passion expresses it in every little act of his. Therefore he who is 
possessed by non-violence will express it in the family circle, in his dealings 
with neighbours, in his business, in Congress meetings, in public meetings, and 
in his dealings with opponents. It is because it has not expressed itself in this 
way among Congressmen that the members of the Working Committee rightly 
concluded that Congressmen were not ready for non-violent treatment of 
internal disorders or external aggression. Embarrassment caused by non-violent 
action would move established authority to yield to popular will. But such 
action has obviously no play in the face of disorders. We have to court death 
without retaliation and with no malice or anger towards those who bring about 
disorder, it is easy enough to see that non-violence required here is of a wholly 
different type from what the Congress has known hitherto. But it is the only 
non-violence that is true and that can save the world from self-destruction. 
This is a certainty sooner or later, sooner rather than later, if India cannot 
deliver the message of true non-violence to a world which wants to be saved 
from the curse of wars and does not know how to find the deliverance. 
Sevagram, 24-6-'40  
Harijan,  29-6-1940 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 137   
46. TO EVERY BRITON 
I appeal to every Briton, wherever he may be now, to accept the method of 
non-violence instead of that of war, for the adjustment of relations between 
nations and other matters. Your statesmen have declared that this is a war on 
behalf of democracy. There are many other reasons given in justification. You 
know them all by heart. I suggest that, at the end of the war, whichever way it 
ends, there will be no democracy left to represent democracy. This war has 
descended upon mankind as a curse and a warning. It is a curse inasmuch as it 
is brutalizing man on a scale hitherto unknown. All distinctions between comba-
tants and non-combatants have been abolished. No one and nothing is to be 
spared. Lying has been reduced to an art. Britain was to defend small 
nationalities. One by one they have vanished, at least for the time being. It is 
also a warning. It is a warning that, if nobody reads the writing on the wall, 
man will be reduced to the state of the beast, whom he is shaming by his 
manners. I read the writing when the hostilities broke out. But I had not the 
courage to say the word. God has given me the courage to say it before it is too 
late. 
I appeal for cessation of hostilities, not because you are too exhausted to fight, 
but because war is bad in essence. You want to kill Nazism. You will never kill 
it by its indifferent adoption. Your soldiers are doing the same work of 
destruction as the Germans. The only difference is that perhaps yours arc not 
as thorough as the Germans. If that be so, yours will soon acquire the same 
thoroughness as theirs, if not much greater. On no other condition can you win 
the war. In other 'words, you will have to be more ruthless than the Nazis. No 
cause, however just, can warrant the indiscriminate slaughter that is going on 
minute by minute. I suggest that a cause that demands the inhumanities that 
are being perpetrated today cannot be called just. 
I do not want Britain to be defeated, nor do I want her to be victorious in a trial 
of brute strength, whether expressed through the muscle or the brain. Your 
muscular bravery is an established fact. Need you demonstrate that your brain My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 138  is also as unrivalled in destructive power as your muscle? I hope you do not wish 
to enter into such an undignified competition with the Nazis. I venture to 
present you with a nobler and a braver way, worthy of the bravest soldier. I 
want you to fight Nazism without arms, or, if I am to retain the military 
terminology, with nonviolent arms. I would like you to lay down the arms you 
have as being useless for saving you or humanity. You will invite Herr Hitler and 
Signor Mussolini to take what they want of the countries you call your 
possessions. Let them take possession of your beautiful island, with your many 
beautiful buildings. You will give all these but neither your souls, nor your 
minds. If these gentlemen choose to occupy your homes, you will vacate them. 
If they do not give you free passage out, you will allow yourself man, woman 
and child, to be slaughtered, but you will refuse to owe allegiance to them. 
This is no appeal made by a man who does not know his business. I have been 
practising with scientific precision non-violence and its possibilities for an 
unbroken period of over fifty years. I have applied it in every walk of life, 
domestic, institutional, economic and political. I know of no single case in 
which it has failed. Where it has seemed sometimes to have failed, I have 
ascribed it to my imperfections. I claim no perfection for myself. But I do claim 
to be a passionate seeker after Truth, which is but another name for God. In 
the course of that search the discovery of non-violence came to me. Its spread 
is my life mission. I have no interest in living except for the prosecution of that 
mission.  
I claim to have been a lifelong and wholly disinterested friend of the British 
people. At one time I used to be also a lover of your empire. I thought that it 
was doing good to India. When I saw that in the nature of things it could do no 
good, I used, and am still using, the non-violent method to fight imperialism. 
Whatever the ultimate fate of my country, my love for you remains, and will 
remain, undiminished. My non-violence demands universal love, and you are not 
a small part of it. It is that love which has prompted my appeal to you. 
May God give power to every word of mine. In His name I began to write this, 
and in His name I close it. May your statesmen have the wisdom and courage to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 139  respond to my appeal. I am telling His Excellency the Viceroy that my services 
are at the disposal of His Majesty's Government, should they consider them of 
any practical use in advancing the object of my appeal. 
New Delhi, 2-7-'40 
Harijan , 6-7-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 140   
47. BEFORE THE GANDHI SEVA SANGH 
The Test of Genuineness 
“You will examine every action of yours in the light of the creed. That does not 
mean that you will be morbid or pernickety. Your conduct will have to be 
natural. When I began observing silence it meant an effort on my part. Now it 
has become part of my nature, and to break my silence means an effort. In the 
same way acting non-violently must be part of your nature. It is likely that your 
relating everything to non-violence may be logically wrong, but it is not wrong 
for you. I may be wrong, in the eyes of others, in my belief that with every 
thread that I draw I am bringing Swaraj nearer, but for me the belief is as true 
as the fact that I exist. That saves me from losing my sanity. This spinning 
wheel is a symbol of non-violence for me. The wheel as such is lifeless, but 
when I invest it with symbolism it becomes a living thing for me. Its sound, if it 
is musical, is in tune with non-violence. If it is unmusical, it is not in tune with 
it, for it indicates carelessness on my part. The steel spindle one can use as a 
deadly weapon, but we have put it there for the best possible use. So we have 
to be meticulously careful about every part of the wheel. Then and then only 
will it produce fine music and spinning will be a true sacrificial act. 
"But this kind of  sadhana , you will say, may take thousands of years. It may 
take some a thousand years, and it may take some others only one year. Don't 
think that, if in spite of my fifty years' practice of it I am still imperfect, it 
must take you many more years. No, there is no rule of three here. You may 
succeed quicker than I. I meant what I said to Prithwisingh: 'You had at any rate 
the violence of the brave. I had nothing of it. Now if you believe in cultivating 
non-violence of the brave, you will do so much more quickly than I, and you 
will leave me behind.' This applies to every one of you. In South Africa I was the 
first to learn shoemaking, and so I taught it to others. But those others soon 
left me behind. It was because I was a true teacher. Now if I am a true teacher 
of Ahimsa, I am sure you will soon leave behind your teacher. If that does not My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 141  happen, it will only mean that I was an unfit teacher. But if my teaching 
fructifies, there will be teachers of Ahimsa in every home. 
"I want to know how many of you are with me. If none goes with me, I am ready 
to tread my path alone. For I know that I can never be  alone  as God is there 
with me. You are all companion  sadhaks (seekers) with me. I am old, but you 
have many years before you. And yet let me tell you that I do not feel the 
weight of my years. I do not think my power of growth or capacity for research 
has come to an end. 
"So you have to go forth and find out how many actual believers in Ahimsa 
there are among Congressmen. The Working Committee members are your 
representatives. If they were mistaken in assessing the faith of their electors, 
you have to correct their judgment. My position was different from theirs. I 
consider myself a confirmed representative of Ahimsa and so I severed my 
connection with the Congress in 1934. I could not help doing it. If I had not 
done so, I should have been untrue to my creed. 
"No one knows my imperfections better than I, but what little power I possess is 
derived from my Ahimsa. What is it but my Ahimsa that draws thousands of 
women to me in fearless confidence? But neither you nor I can trade on cur 
capital. We have to be up and doing every moment of our lives, and go forward 
in our sadhana . We have to live and move and have our being in Ahimsa even as 
Hitler does in Himsa. It is the faith and perseverance and single- mindedness 
with which he has perfected his weapons of destruction that commands my 
admiration. That he uses them as a monster is immaterial for oar purpose. We 
have to bring to bear the same singlc-mindedness and perseverance in evolving 
our Ahimsa. Hitler is awake all the twenty-four hours of the day in perfecting 
his sadhana. He wins because he pays the price. His inventions surprise his 
enemies. But it is his single-minded devotion to hi* purpose that should be the 
object of our admiration and emulation. Although he works all his waking 
hours, his intellect is unclouded and unerring. Are our intellects unclouded and 
unerring? A mere belief in Ahimsa or the Charkha will not do. It should be 
intelligent and creative. If intellect plays a large part in the field of violence, I My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 142  hold that it plays a larger part in the field of non-violence." 
 
Why an Imperfect Man Chosen? 
To those who have been saying that, if Gandhiji has failed in perfecting his 
Ahimsa failure is certain in their case, he had already given the answer. But in 
the concluding part of the speech he presented another aspect of his 
imperfection. He said: "In placing civil disobedience before constructive work I 
was wrong, and I did not profit by the Himalayan blunder that I had committed. 
I feared that I should estrange my co-workers, and so carried on with imperfect 
Ahimsa. But I am not sorry for my blunders. My imperfections and failures are 
as much a blessing from God as my successes and my talents, and I lay them 
both at His feet. Why should He have chosen me, an imperfect instrument, for 
such a mighty experiment? I think He deliberately did so. He had to serve the 
poor dumb ignorant millions. A perfect man might have been their despair. 
When they found that one with their failings was marching on towards Ahimsa, 
they too had confidence in their own capacity. We should not have recognized 
a perfect man if he had come as our leader, and we might have driven him to a 
cave. May be who follows me will be more perfect and you will be able to 
receive his message. May be some one of you may be that perfect teacher who 
is to come." 
 
An Impossible Ideal? 
But are we not being driven to philosophical anarchism? Is that not an 
impossible ideal? These questions were asked by a philosophic friend some 
months ago, and Gandhiji gave him replies which, I think, will be useful today. 
"Does anyone know true non-violence?" he asked. 
Gandhiji immediately replied: "Nobody knows it, for nobody can practise 
perfect non-violence." 
"Then how can it be used in politics?" My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 143  "It can be used in politics precisely as it can be used in the domestic sphere. We 
may not be perfect in our use of it, but we definitely discard the use of 
violence, and grow from failure to success." 
"You would govern non-violently. But all legislation is violence." 
"No, not all legislation. Legislation imposed by people upon themselves is non-
violence to the extent it is possible in society. A society organized and run on 
the basis of complete non-violence would be the purest anarchy." 
"Do you think it is a realizable ideal?" 
"Yes. It is realizable to the extent non-violence is realizable. That State is 
perfect and non-violent where the people are governed the least. The nearest 
approach to purest anarchy would be a democracy based on nonviolence. The 
European democracies are to my mind a negation of democracy." 
"Do you think that non-violence of the democracy which you visualize was ever 
realized in the olden times?" 
"I do not know. But if it was not, it only means that we had never made the 
attempt to realize the highest in us. I have no doubt in my mind that at some 
stage we were wiser, and that we have to grow wiser than we are today in 
order to find what beauties are hidden in human nature. Perfect non-violence is 
impossible so long as we exist physically, for we would want some space at 
least to occupy. Perfect non-violence whilst you are inhabiting the body is only 
a theory like Euclid's point or straight line, but we have to endeavour every 
moment of our lives." 
Sevagram, 15-7-'40         M. D. 
Harijan,  21-7-1940 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 144   
48. UNREPENTANT 
"Two English friends, who admire you, say your appeal to every Briton cannot 
have any effect  just now.  It is impossible to expect the man in the street to do 
a complete  vole face  with any degree of understanding — indeed it is 
impossible for the understanding to do, as you say, without a  heart- belief in 
non-violence. The time to mould a new world on your lines will be  after the 
war. They realize your way is the right one, but they say it needs endless 
preparation and instruction and  big leadership — none of which they possess. 
Regarding India they say the attitude of the present authority is deplorable. 
Long ago India should have been declared as independent as Canada, and her 
people should be allowed to work out their own constitution. But what they are 
extremely perplexed about now is that you want absolute independence 
straightaway, and the next step you will take is 'no further help to Britain in the 
prosecution of war, surrender to Germany, and opposition to her by non-violent 
means'. You must explain what you mean in more detail so as to remove this 
misunderstanding. This is an honest reaction." 
The appeal was intended, to produce the effect now. It could not come out of a 
mathematical calculation. If the conviction could have come, action was an 
easy matter. The mass mind responds under pressure. That the appeal has not 
produced the intended result shows that either my word has no power or that 
God has a purpose of which we have no knowledge. The appeal has come from 
an anguished heart. I could not suppress it. It was not written for the moment. I 
am quite sure that it enunciates a truth of eternal value. 
If the ground is not prepared from now, there may be no time left after a 
dismal termination of the war for evolving a new order. Whatever the order, it 
will be in response to a conscious or unconscious effort from now. Indeed the 
effort began before my appeal. I hope that it has stimulated it, perhaps given it 
a definite direction. I suggest to the non-official leaders and moulders of British 
opinion, if they are convinced of the truth of my position, to work for its 
adoption. Compared to the big issue raised in my appeal, the question of Indian My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 145  independence pales into insignificance. But I hold with the two Englishmen that 
the British government's attitude is deplorable. The two friends are wholly 
wrong in the deduction they have drawn from the assumed recognition of 
India's independence. They forget that I am out of the picture. Those who are 
responsible for the Working Committee's last resolution have meant free India's 
co-operation with Britain. With them, there is no question of surrender to 
Germany or non-violent opposition. 
But I must not here tarry on Indian independence and its implications, tempting 
though the subject is. 
The cuttings and correspondence before me say that the Congress rejection of 
my advice to abstain from preparation for military defence of India precludes 
me from making the appeal to Britain or from expecting a favourable response. 
The argument is plausible, but only plausible. The critics say that, if I have 
failed with my people, I have no right to expect Britain whilst she is in the 
midst of a life and death struggle to listen to me. I am a man with a mission. 
India's millions have never tasted the bitters of war as the British have. Britain, 
if she is to fulfill her declared purpose, needs a radical change in her policy. I 
feel that I know the change that is needed. My inability to persuade the 
Working Committee is irrelevant to the theme under discussion. There is no 
analogy between India's case and Britain's. I am, therefore, wholly unrepentant. 
I maintain that in issuing my appeal I have acted wholly as a lifelong friend of 
Britain. 
A writer, however, retorts: "Address your appeal to Hitler." In the first place, I 
did write to Herr Hitler. My letter was published in the press some time after I 
addressed it. In the second place, there can be no meaning in my appeal to 
Herr Hitler to adopt non-violence. He is marching from victory to victory. I can 
only appeal to him to desist. That I have done. But to Britain, which is just now 
on the defensive, I can present the really effective weapon of non-violent non-
co-operation. Let my method be rejected on merits, not by bringing inapt 
analogies or untenable argument. The issue raised by me, I venture to think, is 
of universal importance. The usefulness of the non-violent method seems to be My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 146  granted by all the critics. They gratuitously assume the impossibility of human 
nature, as it is constituted, responding to the strain involved in non-violent 
preparation. But that is begging the question. I say, “You have never tried the 
method on any scale. In so far as it has been tried, it has shown promising 
results."  
Sevagram, 17-7-'40 
Harijan,  21-7-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 147   
49. KHANSAHEB'S AHIMSA 
In the storm that shook most of the members of the Working Committee, 
Khansaheb Abdul Gaffar Khan stood firm as a rock. He had never any doubt 
about his position, and his statement, which I reproduce below, should serve as 
a beacon light to all of us: 
"Some recent resolutions of the Congress Working Committee indicate that they 
are restricting the use of non-violence to the fight for India's freedom against 
constituted authority. How far and in what manner this will have to be applied 
in the future I cannot say. The near future will perhaps throw light on this. 
Meanwhile it is difficult for me to continue in the Congress Working Committee, 
and I am resigning from it. 
I should like to make it clear that the non-violence I have believed in and 
preached to my brethren of the Khudai Khidmatgars is much wider. It affects all 
our life, and only this has permanent value. Unless we learn this lesson of non-
violence fully, we shall never do away with the deadly feuds which have been 
the curse of the people of the Frontier. Since we took to nonviolence and the 
Khudai Khidmatgars pledged themselves to it, we have largely succeeded in 
ending these feuds. Non-violence has added greatly to the courage of the 
Pathans. Because they were previously addicted to violence far more than 
others, they have profited by non-violence much more. We shall never really 
and effectively defend ourselves except through non-violence. Khudai 
Khidmatgars must, therefore, be what our name implies — pure servants of God 
and humanity — by laying down our own lives and never taking any life." 
It is worthy of the Khansaheb and all that he has stood for during the past 
twenty years. He is a Pathan, and a Pathan may be said to be born with a rifle 
or sword in his hand. But the Khansaheb deliberately asked his Khudai 
Khidmatgars to shed all weapons when he asked them to join the Satyagraha 
against the Rowlatt Act. He saw that this deliberate giving up of the weapons of 
violence had a magical effect. It was the only remedy for the blood-feuds which 
were handed down from sire to son and which had become part of the normal My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 148  life of a Pathan. They had decimated numerous families, and non-violence 
seemed to the Khansaheb to have come as a longed-for salvation. The violent 
blood-feuds would otherwise have no end and would spell the end of the 
Pathans. He saw as clear as daylight that, if he could persuade his people not 
to retaliate, the suicidal feuds would cease and the Pathans would be able to 
give a better account of their bravery. They took up his message, and put into 
practice what with them became non-violence of the brave. 
Being so clear about his own faith and that of the Khudai Khidmatgars, there 
was for him no escape from resignation of his membership of the Congress 
Working Committee. His continuing on it would have been anomalous and might 
have meant an end of his life's work. He could not ask his people to join as 
recruits in the army and at the same time forget the law of tribal retaliation. 
The simple Pathan would have argued with him — and the argument would have 
been irresistible — that the present war was a war of retaliation and revenge, 
and that there was no difference between it and their blood-feuds. 
I do not know how far the Khansaheb has succeeded in carrying his message to 
his people. This I know that with him non-violence is a matter not of 
intellectual conviction but of intuitive faith. Nothing can, therefore, shake it. 
About his followers he cannot say how far they will adhere to it. But that does 
not worry him. He has to do his duty which he owes to them. The result he 
leaves to God. He derives his Ahimsa from the Holy Quran. He is a devout 
Musalman. During his stay with me for over a year I never saw him miss his 
Namaz (prayers) or his Ramzan fast except when he was ill. But his devotion to 
Islam does not mean disrespect for other faiths. He has read the Gita. His 
reading is slight but selective, and he immediately assimilates what appeals to 
him. He loathes long argument and does not take long to make up his mind. If 
he succeeds in his mission, it would mean the solution of many another 
problem. But the result no one can predict. “The lot is cast into the lap, but 
the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord." 
Sevagram, 16-7-'40 
Harijan,  21-7-1940 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 149   
50. HOW TO CULTIVATE AHIMSA? 
Let us confine ourselves to Ahimsa. We have all along regarded the spinning 
wheel, village crafts, etc. as the pillars of Ahimsa, and so indeed they are. 
They must stand. But we have now to go a step further. A votary of Ahimsa will 
of course base upon non-violence, if he has not already done so, all his 
relations with his parents, his children, his wife, his servants, his dependants, 
etc. But the real test will come at the time of political or communal 
disturbances or under the menace of thieves and dacoits. Mere resolve to lay 
down one's life under the circumstances is not enough. There must be the 
necessary qualification for making the sacrifice. If I am a Hindu, I must 
fraternize with the Musalmans and the rest. In my dealing with them I may not 
make any distinction between my coreligionists and those who might belong to 
a different faith. I would seek opportunities to serve them without any feeling 
of fear or unnaturalness. The word ' fear' can have no place in the dictionary of 
Ahimsa. Having thus qualified himself by his selfless service, a votary of pure 
Ahimsa will be in a position to make a fit offering of himself in a communal 
conflagration. Similarly, to meet the menace of thieves and dacoits, he will 
need to go among, and cultivate friendly relations with the communities from 
which thieves and dacoits generally come. 
A brilliant example of this kind of work is provided by Ravishankar Maharaj. His 
work among the criminal tribes in Gujarat has evoked praise even of the Baroda 
State authorities. There is an almost unlimited field for this kind of work, and it 
does not call for any other talent in one besides pure love. Ravishankar Maharaj 
is an utter stranger to English. Even his knowledge of Gujarati is barely 
sufficient for everyday use. But God has blessed him with unlimited neighbourly 
love. His simplicity easily wins all hearts, and is the envy of everybody. Let his 
example provide a cue and inspiration to all those who may be similarly 
engaged in other fields of Satyagraha.  
Sevagram, 16-7-'40  
Harijan,  21-7-1940 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 150   
51. WHAT OF THE 'WEAK MAJORITY'? 
Prof. Timur of Islamia College, Peshawar, writes: "The world is indebted to you 
for revealing to it in these hard times the hidden values of non-violence. The 
experiment which you want to make of defending India against foreign aggre-
ssion without the use of arms would be the boldest moral experiment of all 
times. There are two possible results of such a course. Either the conscience of 
the invaders may be awakened by the love of the invaded and they may repent 
of their sin. Or the proud invaders may take non-violence as a sign of physical 
weakness and degeneration, and may think it right to subjugate, rule over, and 
exploit, a weak people. This is the doctrine of Nietzsche which is followed in 
practice by Hitler. A great loss is involved in such conquest of the physically 
weak by the physically strong. A few strong-willed members of the conquered 
nation may refuse to own allegiance to the conquerors, but the large majority 
always submits and adopts servile manners to preserve its existence. Among 
them may be found great scientists, philosophers and artists. Genius and moral 
strength are not always combined in the same man. The strong man does not 
need armies to defend his liberty. He sacrifices his body to preserve his soul. 
Such men are, however, few and far between. It is the weak majority which 
needs protection. The question is how to protect it by non-violent methods. 
This is the real difficulty which every patriot feels when he thinks of adopting 
non-violence for the defence of his country." The weak majority no doubt needs 
protection. If all were soldiers either of Ahimsa or Himsa, no such questions as 
call for discussion in these columns would arise. There is always a weak 
majority that would want protection against man's mischief. The orthodox 
method we know. Nazism is its logical outcome. It is an answer to a definite 
want. A terrible wrong wantonly perpetrated against a whole nation cried out 
for redress. And Hitler arose to avenge it. Whatever the ultimate fortune of the 
war, Germany will not be humiliated again. Humanity will not stand a second 
outrage. But in seeking to avenge the wrong by the wrong method of violence 
brought to very near perfection, Hitler has brutalized not only Germans but a My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 151  large part of humanity. The end of it we have not yet reached. For Britain, so 
long as she holds to the orthodox method, has to copy the Nazi methods, if she 
is to put up a successful defence. Thus the logical outcome of the violent 
method seems to be increasingly to brutalize man including “the weak 
majority". For it has to give its defenders the required measure of co-
operation. 
Now imagine the same majority defended after the method of non-violence. As 
it admits of no grossness, no fraud, no malice, it must raise the moral tone of 
the defenders. Hence there will be a corresponding rise in the moral tone of 
the “weak majority" to be defended. No 'doubt there will be difference in 
degree, but not in kind. 
But the snag comes in when we consider the ways and means of working the 
non-violent method. In working the other, there is no difficulty in getting the 
human material. Therefore that way seems easy. In getting non-violent 
defenders, we have to pick and choose. Money cannot buy them. The non-
violent process is wholly different from the one commonly known. I can only 
say that my own experience in organizing non-violent action for half a century 
fills me with hope for the future. It has succeeded in a marked measure in 
protecting the “weak majority ". But half a century is nothing in discovering the 
hidden possibilities of this force and working them out. Those, therefore, like 
the correspondents who are attracted to non-violence should, according to 
their ability and opportunity, join the experiment. It has entered upon a most 
interesting; though at the same time a most difficult, stage. I am myself sailing 
on uncharted waters. I have to take soundings every half-hour. The difficulty 
only braces me for the struggle. 
Sevagram, 6-8-'40 
Harijan,  11-8-1940 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 152   
52. IS NON-VIOLENCE IMPOSSIBLE? 
"One may admit that in theory non-violence is an infallible weapon, and that no 
power on earth can be a match for the man who has achieved non-violence to 
the fullest extent. But is this possible? There may be a rare  yogi who can tame 
wild beasts like lions and tigers and render them meek as lambs, but the 
average man must resort to a rifle or similar weapon to protect himself against 
such beasts. You with your wonderful power may convert others by the sheer 
force of your thought, but the average man has to have recourse to worldly 
remedies like a law court, pleaders and so on. Even in the dim and distant past 
we rarely hear of men who practised Ahimsa in daily affairs. Lord Buddha tried 
for a time to lead people along the path of Ahimsa, but what happened after 
him? Society went back to its old ways, forgetting Buddha's teaching. The past, 
therefore, offers little promise, for the future, of society going along the lines 
of Ahimsa any more than it has done before, and our sages, therefore, must 
have wisely left the world and resorted to the forest for practising truth and 
nonviolence. You may inspire a few persons to study Ahimsa but society as a 
whole is not likely to take to it. The same argument applies to India as a 
nation. She must needs seek means other than those of Ahimsa in order to win 
her liberty. It is idle to expect an infant learning his primer to understand a 
book like Tilak's Gita. Even so is it idle to expect people steeped in worldly 
pleasures to understand the infallibility of Ahimsa. Besides Ahimsa is the final 
goal, attainment of which requires much greater preparation than is required in 
order to obtain a degree in medicine or engineering. We shall have to have 
numerous colleges and universities for the teaching of the science and art of 
truth and non-violence. Today society directs its energies to creating new 
wants and satisfying them. How do you expect it to turn those energies in the 
direction of researches in Ahimsa?" The doubt and difficulties raised by this 
correspondent occur to others also, and I have on various occasions tried to 
solve them too. But when the Working Committee of the Congress has been My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 153  instrumental in making of Ahimsa a live issue, it seems necessary to deal with 
these doubts and difficulties at some length. 
The correspondent doubts in substance the universal application of Ahimsa, and 
asserts that society has made little progress towards it. Teachers like Buddha 
arose and made some effort with some little success perhaps in their lifetime, 
but society is just where it was in spite of them. 
The last statement is incorrect inasmuch as the Congress has adhered to non-
violence as the means for the attainment of Swaraj. It has indeed gone a step 
further. The question having been raised as to whether non-violence continues 
to be the weapon against all internal disturbances, the A. I. C. C. clearly gave 
the answer in the affirmative. And then even on this matter there was a 
considerable body of the members of the A. I. C. C. who voted against the 
resolution. This dissent has got to be reckoned with when the question voted 
upon is one of principle. The Congress policy must always be decided by a 
majority vote, but it does not cancel the minority vote. It stands. When there is 
no principle involved and there is a programme to be carried out, the minority 
has got to follow the majority. But where there is a principle involved, the 
dissent stands, and it is bound to express itself in practice when the occasion 
arises. 
Now for the argument that I am but a rare individual, and that what little 
society has done in the matter of Ahimsa is due to my influence, and that it is 
sure to disappear with me. This is not right. The Congress has a number of 
leaders who can think for themselves. The Maulana is a great thinker of keen 
intellect and vast reading. Few can equal him in his Arabic and Persian 
scholarship. Experience has taught him that Ahimsa alone can make India free. 
It was he who insisted on the resolution accepting Ahimsa as a weapon against 
internal disturbances. Pandit Jawaharlal is not a man to stand in awe of 
anyone. His study of history and contemporary events is second to none. It is 
after mature thought that he has accepted Ahimsa as a means for the 
attainment of Swaraj. It is true that he has said that he would not hesitate to 
accept Swaraj if non-violence failed and it could be won by means of violence. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 154  But that is not relevant to the present issue. There are not a few other big 
names in the Congress who believe in Ahimsa as the only weapon at least for 
the attainment of Swaraj. To think that all of them will give up the way of 
Ahimsa as soon as I am gone, is to insult them and to insult human nature. We 
must believe that everyone can think for himself. Mutual respect to that extent 
is essential for progress. By crediting our companions with independent 
judgment we strengthen them and make it easy for them to be independent-
minded even if they are proved to be weak. 
If we turn our eyes to the time of which history has any record down to our own 
time, we shall find that man has been steadily progressing towards Ahimsa. Our 
remote ancestors were cannibals. Then came a time when they were fed up 
with cannibalism and they began to live on chase. Next came a stage when man 
was ashamed of leading the life of a wandering hunter. He therefore took to 
agriculture and depended principally on mother earth for his food. Thus from 
being a nomad he settled down to civilized stable life, founded villages and 
towns, and from member of a family he became member of a community and a 
nation. All these are signs of progressive Ahimsa and diminishing Himsa. Had it 
been otherwise, the human species should have been extinct by now, even as 
many of the lower species have disappeared. 
Prophets and  avatars  have also taught the lesson of Ahimsa more or less. Not 
one of them has professed to teach Himsa. And how should it be otherwise? 
Himsa does not need to be taught. Man as animal is violent, but as Spirit is non-
violent. The moment he awakes to the Spirit within he cannot remain violent. 
Either he progresses towards Ahimsa or rushes to his doom. That is why the 
prophets and  avatars  have taught the lessons of truth, harmony, brotherhood, 
justice, etc. — all attributes of Ahimsa. 
And yet violence seems to persist, even to the extent of thinking people like 
the correspondent regarding it as the final weapon. But, as I have shown, 
history and experience are against him. If we believe that mankind has steadily 
progressed towards Ahimsa, it follows that it has to progress towards it still 
further. Nothing in this world is static, everything is kinetic. If there is no My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 155  progression, then there is inevitable retrogression. No one can remain without 
the eternal cycle, unless it be God Himself. 
The present war is the saturation point in violence. It spells to my mind also its 
doom. Daily I have testimony of the fact that Ahimsa was never before 
appreciated by mankind as it is today. All the testimony from the West that I 
continue to receive points in the same direction. The Congress has pledged 
itself to Ahimsa however limited. I invite the correspondent and doubters like 
him to shed their doubts and plunge confidently into the sacred sacrificial fire 
of Ahimsa. Then I have little doubt that the Congress will retrace its step. "It is 
always willing Well has Pritam, our poet, sung: 
Happiest are those that plunge in the fire, the lookers-on are all but scorched 
by flames. 
Sevagram, 5-8-'40  
Harijan,  11-0-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 156   
53. MORAL SUPPORT 
A friend writes as follows: 
"On the declaration of war you had advised giving moral support to Britain. Many 
persons never understood the implications of such support. You have never 
explained them either, so far as I know. I am a regular reader of  Harijan-bandhu,  
but I have not seen a clear explanation there. Everyone puts his own interpretation 
on the words. At the last sitting of the Gujarat Provincial Congress Committee the 
leaders said: 'Bapu was ready to give moral support to Britain. What else has the 
Congress done in its latest resolution? As a matter of fact, the Congress asks for 
more than it promises to give. Bapu was willing to give all for nothing.' If war is 
itself a wrong act, how can it deserve moral support or blessings? In the 
Mahabharata, was the help that Lord Krishna gave to Arjuna moral, or was it more 
destructive than the deadliest weapons of war?" 
I did explain in  Harijan  what I meant by moral support. It is possible that the 
explanation did not appear in  Harijan-bandhu. In my English writings things are 
often left to be understood. The ellipses need, however, to be brought out in 
translations. 
Broadly speaking Britain could have had moral support from the Congress, if 
only she had acted justly towards India. There was no spirit of bargaining in my 
proposal because the help was not offered in exchange for anything. 
Suppose my friend possesses moral strength which he has acquired through  
tapasya.  And suppose I am in need of this strength. I shall not get it from him 
for the asking. He may always be ready to give it to me, but if I have not the 
capacity within me to take it from him, how shall I ever obtain it? Moral support 
cannot really be given in the sense of giving. It automatically comes to him who 
is qualified to take it. And such a one can take it in abundance. 
The Congress has this moral reservoir. The acceptance of the creed of truth and 
non-violence has been its  tapasya. It has acquired world prestige through the 
acceptance of truth and non-violence for the attainment of its goal. If the 
Congress could have given its blessings to Britain, the world would have My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 157  adjudged Britain's cause to be just. The masses over whom the Congress holds 
sway would also have acknowledged justice to be on Britain's side. But in all 
this the Congress would have had nothing material to give. The British 
government would, by its own action, have acquired moral prestige or strength. 
Though the "Congress would not give one man or one pice as material aid, its 
moral support and blessings would definitely have turned the scales in favour of 
Britain. This is my belief. That my belief may be groundless and that the 
Congress never had any moral prestige is quite possible. The determination of 
this question is unnecessary for my argument. 
But the opportunity for rendering moral support now seems almost to have 
gone. The Congress felt itself unable to adopt my course. It cannot be taken 
mechanically. It presupposes a living faith in truth and non-violence. The 
greatest quality in the Congress is this that it has never claimed to have what it 
really does not possess. And therefore its resolutions are dignified and carry 
force with them. 
The help that the Congress in its latest resolution promises to give is material 
and for a consideration, eminently just, no doubt, but it is not and cannot be 
unconditional. I do not suggest that this position is either untenable or morally 
wrong. The resolution has dignity because it is the considered opinion of the 
majority. But by passing it the Congress has, in my opinion, surrendered the 
prestige it had or was supposed to have. Many Congressmen say that, while 
they firmly believed that they could attain Swaraj through non-violence, they 
had never meant it to be understood that they could retain it also through non-
violence. The entire outside world, however, believed that the Congress was 
showing the golden way to the abolition of war. No one outside India ever 
dreamed that, if the Congress could wrest independence from a mighty power 
like Britain purely through non-violence, it would not be able to defend it also -
by the same means. 
In my opinion Lord Krishna's help to Arjuna cannot be said to be moral, because 
he himself had an army and was an expert in the art of war. Duryodhana acted 
foolishly in that he asked for Krishna's army, while Arjuna got what he wanted My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 158  in the person of the expert in the science of war. Therefore, if we interpret the 
Mahabharata literally, Lord Krishna's strength was certainly more destructive 
than that of his army. Because of his scientific skill Krishna was able, with an 
army of seven divisions, to destroy Duryodhana's army of eleven. But it is well- 
known that I have never looked upon the Mahabharata as a mere record of 
earthly warfare. In the garb of an epic the poet has described the eternal 
warfare within the individual as well as in society, between Truth and Untruth, 
Violence and Non-violence, Right and Wrong. Looking at the epic even 
superficially one can understand how the great Vyasa has demonstrated that in 
this war the victor was no better off than the vanquished. Out of that vast 
concourse of warriors only seven remained to tell the tale. And the poet gives a 
true picture of the woeful state of mind also of these seven. The author has 
shown clearly too that in armed warfare the contending parties are certain to 
stoop to meanness and trickery. When occasion arose even the great 
Yudhishthira had to resort to untruth to save the battle. 
One more question of the writer remains to be answered. If war is itself a 
wrong act, how can it be worthy of moral support or blessings? I believe all war 
to be wholly wrong. But if we scrutinize the motives of two warring parties, we 
may find one to be in the right and the other in the wrong. For instance, if A 
wishes to seize B's country, B is obviously the wronged one. Both fight with 
arms. I do not believe in violent warfare, but all the same, B, whose cause is 
just, deserves my moral help and blessings.  
Sevagram, 12-8-'40 
Harijan,  18-8-1940 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 159   
54. WHAT SHOULD A BRITON DO AND NOT DO? 
Q. In your appeal to 'Every Briton' you say: "You will invite Herr Hitler and 
Signor Mussolini to take what they want.... You will give all your 'earthly 
possessions' but never your souls or your minds.... You will refuse to own 
allegiance to them." Please explain clearly what a Briton should or should not 
do. I ask the question because your answer will have a bearing on the duty of 
every Satyagrahi. 
A. Not to yield your soul to the conqueror means that you will refuse to do that 
which your conscience forbids you to do. Suppose the 'enemy' were to ask you 
to rub your nose on the ground or to pull your ears or to go through such 
humiliating performances, you will not submit to any of these humiliations. But 
if he robs you of your possessions, you will yield them because as a votary of 
Ahimsa you have from the beginning decided that earthly possessions have 
nothing to do with your soul. That which you look upon as your own you may 
keep only so long as the world allows you to own it. 
Not to yield your mind means that you will not give way to any temptation. Man 
is oftentimes weak-minded enough to be caught in the snare of greed and 
honeyed words. We see this happening daily in our social life. A weak-minded 
man can never be a Satyagrahi. The latter's 'no' is invariably a 'no', and his 'yes' 
an eternal 'yes'. Such a man alone has the strength to be a devotee of truth and 
Ahimsa. But here one must know the difference between steadfastness and 
obstinacy. If after having said 'yes' or 'no' one finds out that the decision was 
wrong and in spite of that knowledge clings to it, that is obstinacy and folly. It 
is necessary to think things out carefully and thoroughly before coming to any 
decision. 
The meaning of refusal to own allegiance is clear. You will not bow to the 
supremacy of the victor, you will not help him to attain his object. Herr Hitler 
has never dreamt of possessing Britain. He wants the British to admit defeat. 
The victor can then demand anything he likes from the vanquished, and the 
latter has perforce to yield. But if defeat is not admitted, the enemy will fight My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 160  until he has killed his opponent. A Satyagrahi, however, is dead to his body 
even before the enemy attempts to kill him, i.e. he is free from attachment to 
his body and only lives in the victory of the soul. Therefore, when he is already 
thus dead, why should he yearn to kill anyone? To die in the act of killing is in 
essence to die defeated. Because, if the enemy is unable to get what he wants 
from you alive, he will decide to get it after killing you. If, on the other hand, 
he realizes that you have not the remotest thought in your mind of raising your 
hand against him even for the sake of your life, he will lack the zest to kill you. 
Every hunter has had this experience. No one has ever heard of anyone hunting 
cows. 
You may find that I have not answered the questions that you had in your mind. 
I have made a humble effort and dealt with your general question by giving you 
a few-homely examples. I hope that from them you will be able to deduce 
answers to the questions left unanswered. 
Dignity of the soul and self-respect are interpreted differently by different 
persons. I am aware that self-respect is often misinterpreted. The over-
sensitive man may see disrespect or hurt in 'almost everything. Such a man does 
not really understand what self-respect is. That has been my experience in 
many cases. But no harm accrues even if a non-violent man holds mistaken 
notions of self-respect. He can die cheerfully for the sake of what he believes 
to be his dignity and self-respect. Only he has no right to injure or kill the 
supposed-wrong-doer. 
Sevagram, 13-8-'40 
Harijan,  18-8-1940 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 161   
55. AN INTERESTING DISCOURSE — I 
The Scope of Ahimsa 
The first question was about the limits and implications of Ahimsa and the 
extent of its applications. Should one stop with the human species or extend it 
to all creation? 
Gandhiji said: "I was not prepared for this question. For the Congress Ahimsa is 
naturally confined to the political field and therefore only to the human 
species. Hence out-and-out non-violence means for our purpose every variety of 
non-violence on the political field. In concrete terms it covers family relations, 
relations with constituted authority, internal disorders and external aggression. 
Put in another way it covers all human relations." 
"Then what about meat-eating and egg-eating? Do they consist with non-
violence?" 
"They do. Otherwise we should have to exclude Musalmans and Christians and a 
vast number of Hindus as possible co-workers in Ahimsa. I have known many 
meat-eaters to be far more non-violent than vegetarians." 
"But what if we had to give them up for the sake of a principle?" 
"Oh, yes, we would, if we had to compromise our principle. Our principle is 
defined as I have shown already." 
 
A Wrong Analogy 
"If, as you have said, Polish resistance to the German invasion was almost non-
violent, and you would thus seem to reconcile yourself with it, why do you 
object to the Wardha resolution of the Working Committee?" "Surely," said 
Gandhiji, "there is no analogy between the two cases. Ii" a man fights with his 
sword single-handed against a horde of dacoits armed to the teeth, I should say 
he is fighting almost non-violently. Haven't I said to our women that, if in 
defence of their honour they used their nails and teeth and even a dagger, 1 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 162  should regard their conduct non-violent? She does not know the distinction 
between Himsa and Ahimsa. She acts spontaneously. Supposing a mouse in 
fighting a cat tried to resist the cat with his sharp beak, would you call that 
mouse violent? In the same way, for the Poles to stand valiantly against the 
German hordes vastly superior in numbers, military equipment and strength, 
was almost non-violence. I should not mind repeating that statement over and 
over again. You must give its full value to the word 'almost'. But we are 400 
millions here. If we were to organize a big army and prepare ourselves to fight 
foreign aggression, how could we by any stretch of imagination call ourselves 
almost non-violent, let alone non-violent? The Poles were unprepared for the 
way in which the enemy swooped down upon them. When we talk of armed 
preparation, we contemplate preparation to meet any violent combination with 
our superior violence. If India ever prepared herself that way, she would 
constitute the greatest menace to world peace. For, if we take that path, we 
will also have to choose the path of exploitation like the European nations. 
That is why I still regret the moment when my words lacked the power of 
convincing the Sardar and Rajaji. By having passed that resolution we 
proclaimed to the world that the Ahimsa we had subscribed to all these years 
was not really Ahimsa but a form of Himsa." 
 
Administering Non-violently 
Q, "How will you run your administration non- violently?" 
A. "If you assume that we would have won independence by non-violent means, 
it means that the bulk of the country had been organized non-violently. 
Without the vast majority of people having become non-violent, we could not 
attain non-violent Swaraj. If, therefore, we attain Swaraj by purely non-violent 
means, it should not be difficult for us to carry on the administration without 
the military. The goondas too will then have come under our control. If, for 
instance, in Sevagram we have five or seven goondas in a population of seven 
hundred who are non-violently organized, the five or seven will either live 
under the discipline of the rest or leave the village. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 163  "But you will see that I am answering the question with the utmost caution, and 
my truth makes me admit that we might have to maintain a police force. But 
the police will be after our pattern, and not the British pattern. As we shall 
have adult suffrage, the voice of even the youngest of us will count. That is 
why I have said that the ideally non-violent State will be an ordered anarchy. 
That State will be the best governed which is governed the least. The pity is 
that no one trusts me with the reins of government! Otherwise I would show 
how to govern non-violently. If I maintain a police force, it will be a body of 
reformers." 
"But," someone retorted, "You had the power in the Congress?" 
"That was a paper-boat," said Gandhiji. "And then you must not forget that I 
never spared the Congress ministries. Munshi and Pantji came in for a lot of 
strictures from me. As I have said in another connection even the dirty water 
from the gutter, when it mixes with the water of the Ganges, becomes as pure 
as the Ganges water; even so I had expected even the goondas would work 
under Congress discipline. But evidently our ministers had not attained the 
purifying potency of the fabled Ganges." 
"But," said Shri Kher, intervening at this stage, "the Congress ministers had no 
non-violent power with them. Even if 500 goondas had run amok and had been 
allowed to go unchecked, they would have dealt untold havoc. I do not know 
how even you would have dealt with them." 
"Surely, surely," said Gandhiji, "I had rehearsed such situations. The ministers 
could on such occasions have gone out and allowed themselves to be done to 
death by the goondas. But let us face the fact that we had not the requisite 
Ahimsa. We went in with our half-baked Ahimsa. I do not mind it, inasmuch as 
we gave up power the moment we felt we should give it up. I am sure that, if 
we had adhered to strictest non-violence during these two or three years, the 
Congress would have made a tremendous advance in the direction of Ahimsa 
and also independence." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 164  "But," said Balasaheb, "four or five years ago when there was a riot, and I 
appealed to the leaders to go and throw themselves into the conflagration, no 
one was ready." 
"So you are supporting my argument. You agree that our loyalty to Ahimsa was 
lip-loyalty and not heart- loyalty. And if even the half-baked Ahimsa carried us 
a long way, does it not follow that thorough Ahimsa would have carried us very 
far indeed, even if it had not already brought us to the goal?" 
 
Non-violent Army 
"But we cannot visualize how you will stand non-violently against a foreign 
invasion." 
"I cannot draw the whole picture to you because we have no past experience to 
fall back upon and there is no reality facing us today. We have got the 
government army manned by the Sikhs, Pathans and Gurkhas. What I can 
conceive is this that with my non-violent army of, say, two thousand people I 
should put myself between the two contending armies. But this, I know, is no 
answer. I can only say that we shall be able to reduce the invader's violence to 
a minimum. The general of a non-violent army has got to have greater presence 
of mind than that of a violent army, and God would bless him with the 
necessary resourcefulness to meet situations as they arise." 
Shri Kher now raised a philosophical question. "The world," he said, "is made up 
of pairs of opposites. Where there is fear, there is courage too. When we walk 
on the edge of a precipice we walk warily, for we have fear. Fear is not a thing 
to despise. Will your non-violent army is above these pairs of opposites?" 
"No," said Gandhiji, replying in the same philosophical terminology. "No, for the 
simple reason that my army will represent one of the pair — Ahimsa — out of 
the pair of Himsa and Ahimsa. Neither I nor my army is above the pair of 
opposites. The state of  gunatita , in the language of the Gita, rises above Himsa 
and Ahimsa both. Fear has its use, but cowardice has none. I may not put my 
finger into the jaws of a snake, but the very sight of the snake need not strike My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 165  terror into me. The trouble is that we often die many times before death 
overtakes us. 
"But let me explain what my army will be like. They need not and will not have 
the resourcefulness or understanding of the general, but they will have a 
perfect sense of discipline to carry out faithfully his orders. The general should 
have the quality which commands the unquestioning- obedience of his army, 
and he will expect of them nothing more than this obedience. The Dandi March 
was entirely my conception. Pandit Motilalji first laughed at it; he thought it to 
be a quixotic adventure, and Jamnalalji suggested instead a march on the 
Viceroy's House! But I could not think of anything but the salt march as I had to 
think in terms of millions of our countrymen. It was a conception that God gave 
me. Pandit Motilalji argued for some time, and then he said he must not argue, 
as after all I was the general and he must have faith in me. Later when he saw 
me in Jarnbusar he was completely converted, for he saw with his own eyes the 
awakening that had come over the masses. And it was an almost magical 
awakening. Where in history shall we find parallels of the cool courage that our 
women displayed in such large numbers? 
"And yet none of the thousands who took part in the movement were above the 
average. They were erring, sinning mortals. God has a way of making use of the 
most fragile instruments and remaining Himself untouched by everything. Only 
He is gunatita.  
 
The Real Equipment 
"And then what after all is the army that wins? You know Rama's reply to 
Vibhishana when the latter wondered how Rama would be able to conquer a foe 
like Ravana, when he had no chariot, no armour, nor any shoes to his feet? 
Rama says: 
"The chariot, my dear Vibhishana, that wins the victory for Rama is of a 
different sort from the usual one. Manliness and courage are its wheels; 
unflinching truth and character its banners and standards; strength, 
discrimination, self-restraint and benevolence its horses, with forgiveness, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 166  mercy, equanimity their reins; prayer to God is that conqueror's unerring 
charioteer, dispassion his shield, contentment his sword, charity his axe, 
intellect his spear, arid perfect science his stout bow. His pure and unwavering 
mind stands for a quiver, his mental quietude and his practice of  yama  and 
niyama  stand for the sheaf of arrows, and the homage he pays to Brahmanas 
and his guru is his impenetrable armour. There is no other equipment for 
victory comparable to this; and, my dear friend, there is no enemy who can 
conquer the man who takes his stand on the chariot of Dharma. He who has a 
powerful chariot like this is a warrior who can conquer even that great and 
invincible enemy — the world. Hearken unto me and fear not." 
"That is the equipment," added Gandhiji, "that can lead us to victory. I have not 
retired from the world, nor do I mean to. I am no recluse. I am content to do 
what little work I can in Sevagram and give what guidance I can to those that 
come to me. What we need is faith. And what is there to be lost in following 
the right path? The worst that can happen to us is that we shall be crushed. 
Better to be crushed than to be vanquished. 
"But if we had to equip ourselves violently, I should be at my wit's end. I cannot 
even think out an armament plan, much less work it. On the other hand my 
non-violent plan is incredibly simpler and easier, and with God as our 
Commander and Infallible Guide where is there cause for any fear?" 
Sevagram, 21 -8-'40        M. D. 
Harijan,  25-8-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 167   
56. AN INTERESTING DISCOURSE — II 
A Sister's Questions 
Q. "May a non-violent man possess wealth, and if he may, how can he keep it 
non-violently?" 
A. “He  may not own any wealth, though he may possess millions. Let him hold 
it in trust. If he lives among dacoits and thieves, he may possess very little, 
indeed little beyond a loin-cloth. And if he does this, he will convert them. 
"But you must not generalize. In a non-violent State there will be very few 
dacoits. For the individual the golden rule is that he will  own nothing. If I 
decided to settle and work among the so-called criminal tribes, I should go to 
them without any belongings and depend on them for my food and shelter. The 
moment they feel that I am in their midst in order to serve them, they will be 
my friends. In that attitude is true Ahimsa." 
Q. "How is one to protect the honour of women?" 
A. "I am afraid you do not read  Harijan  regularly. I discussed this question years 
ago, and have discussed it often since. The question may be discussed under 
two heads: (1) how is a woman to protect her own honour? and (2) how are her 
male relatives to protect it? 
"As regards the first question, where there is a nonviolent atmosphere, where 
there is the constant teaching of Ahimsa, woman will not regard herself as 
dependent, weak or helpless. She is not really helpless when she is really pure. 
Her purity makes her conscious of her strength. I have always held that it is 
physically impossible to violate a woman against her will. The outrage takes 
place only when she gives way to fear or does not realize her moral strength. If 
she cannot meet the assailant's physical might, her purity will give her the 
strength to die before he succeeds in violating her. Take the case of Sita. 
Physically she was a weakling before Ravana, but her purity was more than a 
match even for his giant might. He tried to win her with all kinds of 
allurements but could not carnally touch her without her consent. On the other My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 168  hand, if a woman depends on her own physical strength or upon a weapon she 
possesses, she is sure to be discomfited whenever her strength is exhausted. 
“The second question is easily answered. The brother or father or friend will 
stand between his protegee and her assailant. He will then either dissuade the 
assailant from his wicked purpose or allow himself to be killed by him in 
preventing him. In so laying down his life he will not only have done his duty, 
but given a new accession of strength to his protegee who will now know how 
to protect her honour." 
"But," said one of the sisters from Poona, "there lies the rub. How is a woman to 
lay down her life? Is it possible for her to do so?" 
“Oh!” said Gandhiji, "any day more possible for her than for man. I know that 
women are capable of throwing away their lives for a much lesser purpose. 
Only a few days ago a young girl of twenty burnt herself to death as she felt she 
was being persecuted for refusing to go in for ordinary studies. And she 
perished with such cool courage and determination! She ignited her sadi with 
an ordinary oil-light and did not so much as raise a cry, so that the people in 
the neighbouring room were unaware of the happening until all was over. I do 
not give these details to commend her example, hut to show how easily woman 
can throw away her life. I, at any rate, am incapable of this courage. But I 
agree that it is not the external light but the inner light that is needed. " 
The same sister wondered how one was to avoid anger and violence altogether 
in dealing with children. "You know our old adage," said Gandhiji laughing 
heartily, "Play with him till he is five, hammer him for ten years, treat him as 
your friend when he is sixteen." "But," he added, “don’t you worry. If you have 
to be angry with your child on occasions, I shall call that anger non-violent 
anger. I am speaking of wise mothers, not the ignorant ones who do not deserve 
to be mothers." 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 169  Central Teaching of the Gita 
The discussion again took a serious turn with a challenging question on the 
philosophy of the Gita: “Is the central teaching of the Gita selfless action or 
non-violence?" 
"I have no doubt that it is  anasakti  — selfless action. Indeed I have called my 
little translation of the Gita  Anasa- ktiyoga. And  anasakti  transcends Ahimsa. 
He who would be anasakta  (selfless) has necessarily to practise non-violence in 
order to attain the State of self-lessness. Ahimsa is, therefore, a necessary 
preliminary, it is included in  anasakti, it does not go beyond it." 
"Then does the Gita teach Himsa and Ahimsa both?" 
"I do not read that meaning in the Gita. It is quite likely that the author did not 
write it to inculcate Ahimsa, but as a commentator draws innumerable 
interpretations from a poetic text, even so I interpret the Gita to mean that, if 
its central theme is  anasakti, it also teaches Ahimsa. Whilst we are in the flesh 
and tread the solid earth, we have to practise Ahimsa. In the life beyond there 
is no Himsa or Ahimsa." 
"But," said Balasaheb Kher, "Lord Krishna actually counters the doctrine of 
Ahimsa. For Arjuna utters this pacifist resolve: 
‘Better I deem it, if my kinsmen strike, to face them weaponless, and bare my 
breast to shaft and spear, than answer blow with blow. ' 
And Lord Krishna teaches him to answer blow with blow." 
 
What to Do? 
"There I join issue with you," said Gandhiji. "Those words of Arjuna were words 
of pretentious wisdom. 'Until yesterday,' says Krishna to him-, 'You fought your 
kinsmen with deadly weapons without the slightest compunction. Even today 
you would strike if the enemy was a stranger and not your own kith and kin!' 
The question before him was not of non-violence, but whether he should slay 
his nearest and dearest." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 170  Again the questioners came down to solid earth, and began to put questions 
about the Congress and the attitude f those who believed in complete non-
violence. Gandhiji explained that they should refrain till he gave the word. He 
wanted still to plead with the leaders who had passed the Poona resolution. He 
expected to show them that the Congress would lose all its prestige if they 
adhered to the new policy. But the question had to be dealt with patiently. On 
the other hand it did not matter even if the Congress resolution received no 
response. The resolution was as good as enforced, when it was deliberately 
passed, and their duty did not alter with refusal of the government to respond. 
"Besides," he added, "there is an inherent flaw in the Poona resolution. It 
should be obvious to the meanest understanding that, if you think that you 
cannot do without arms in meeting foreign aggression, they would  a fortiori be 
needed in dealing with daily disturbances — internecine feuds, dacoities and 
riots. For organized unarmed resistance against an organized invasion is any day 
easier than deliberate Ahimsa in face of a dacoit who breaks into your house at 
night. That calls for Ahimsa of the highest type." 
Sevagram, 26-8-'40         M. D. 
Harijan , 1-9-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 171   
57. HOW TO QUENCH IT? 
Elsewhere in these columns the reader will see "A Seeker's" letter* in which he 
has asked a question which must have occurred to everyone. The beauty lies in 
the way in which he has introduced the question. He has depicted the present 
conflagration in such lurid colours that violence cannot but stink in our nostrils. 
The reader is sure instinctively to exclaim: "Even if it were possible to win the 
kingdom of the world by means of such violence, I would not have it." 
But this exclamation will be of no avail to quench the conflagration. No doubt it 
will someday quench itself but it means mutual fratricidal slaughter like that of 
the Yadavas of old who destroyed themselves and relieved the earth of so much 
burden. And such a consummation would any day be preferable to a perpetual 
conflagration. But no one would wish for this. What one would devoutly wish 
for is some brave step to stop the conflagration before there is total 
destruction. This can only be a non-violent step. How and when it can be taken 
has to be discovered. The "Seeker" will be satisfied when the discovery is made. 
In my opinion the discovery has already been made. If India can win Swaraj 
non-violently even while this conflagration is going on, the latter is bound to be 
extinguished by that one event. 
We read in our religious books that whenever, in the days of old, all ordinary 
means failed to secure release from an ordeal or a calamity, people resorted to  
tapasya  (penance), i. e., actually burnt themselves. I do not regard these 
stories as legendary.  Tapasya  is of various kinds. Misguided men can resort to 
it, as we find them doing today. The wise also can do it. It is worth while 
understanding the implication of  tapasya. It was by dint of  tapasya  that 
Western scientists made their discoveries.  Tapasya  does not simply consist of 
betaking oneself to the forest and sitting down there surrounded by blazing 
fires. That  tapasya  may even be the height of folly. We have, therefore, to 
discriminate. 
The question asked by "A Seeker" does not arise out of despair. It is intended to 
quicken the conscience of those who believe in Ahimsa. I have already shown My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 172  the way. It is the fulfillment of the thirteenfold constructive programme* 
described in a recent article. Those who will carry it out in faith, in full 
knowledge, and without the slightest fuss, will have done their share in the  
tapasya  to quench the conflagration. They will achieve two ends at the same 
time. They will make India free, and will also quench the conflagration. It is 
likely that the number of such people is limited, so limited that it can have no 
effect. I have maintained that, even if there is one individual who is almost 
completely non-violent, he can put out the conflagration. But I have suggested 
a tapasya  which can easily be performed by the average individual. In this age 
of democracy it is essential that desired results are achieved by the collective 
effort of the people. It will no doubt be good to achieve an objective through 
the effort of a supremely powerful individual, but it can never make the 
community conscious of its corporate strength. An individual's success will be 
like a millionaire doling free food to millions of starving people. We should, 
therefore, bend our energies to a fulfillment of the thirteenfold constructive 
programme1. It may or may not bring Swaraj, but we shall surely have the 
satisfaction of having done our best. 
There is a warning in the "Seeker's" letter to which I should like to draw the 
reader's attention. He says papers and broadcasts describe with devilish 
pleasure the amount of injury each is able to inflict upon the other, and 
suggests that such news should sicken people instead of providing pleasure, if 
they arc to take part in the propagation of peace. I agree. Such people will not 
be able to carry out even the constructive programme, for they will have no 
faith in it. 
However that may be, it is as clear as daylight that, if this conflagration is to 
be put out through non-violent effort, it will be done only by India.  
Sevagram, 2-9-'40 
Harijan , 8-9-1940 
 
1 Constructive Programme,  reprint of second revised, enlarged edition. Navajivan Publishing House, 
Ahmedabad-14. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 173   
*"A Seeker's" Question  
The Editor,  Harijan 
Sir, 
You must be reading in the papers how the war between Germany and England is 
being waged. Aeroplanes filled with thousands of incendiary bombs do untold 
havoc, and newspapers and broadcasts- describe with pleasure the amount of 
injury each side is able to inflict on the other. The general public is consoled by 
being told that the damage done in the enemy country is greater than what the 
enemy has done in theirs. It is said that military objectives are the sole targets of 
the raiders: but it is impossible to believe that, flying at great heights and often 
through smoke screens, the bombers can really take proper aim. And then we hear 
from both sides of the 'successful* blockades, the object of which is to spread 
famine; and famine must necessarily, more than even bombs, hurt the civilian 
population. 
Is it impossible for these belligerents to think in terms of humanity and stop this 
carnage? How can any good ever come out of war? And must we not, therefore, 
declare ourselves unreservedly against war for or against anybody or any ideology? 
There must be many godly people in the warring countries who think in this way 
but have not the strength to raise their voice in protest. May we not help them to 
do so and at the same time rouse the sleeping conscience of all thinking people? 
Yours,  
A Seeker 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 174   
58. NOT MECHANICAL 
Unlimited Ahimsa will take time to be universalized. We will have ample cause 
to congratulate ourselves, if we learn to substitute the law of love in society 
for that of the jungle, and if, instead of harbouring ill-will and enmity in our 
bosoms against those whom we regard as our enemies, we learn to love them as 
actual and potential friends. It should be remembered too that mere  jivadaya  
(kindness to animals) does not enable us to overcome the 'Six deadly enemies' 
within us, namely lust, anger, greed, infatuation, pride and falsehood. Give me 
the man who has completely conquered self and is full of goodwill and love 
towards all, and is ruled by the law of love in all his actions, and I for one will 
offer him my respectful homage even though he be a meat-eater. On the other 
hand the  jivadaya  of a person who is steeped in anger and lust but daily feeds 
the ants and insects and refrains from killing has hardly anything in it to 
recommend itself. It is a mechanical performance without any spiritual value. It 
may even be worse — a hypocritical screen for hiding the corruption within. 
Sevagram, 9-9-'40 
Harijan,  15-9-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 175   
59. SOME CRITICISM ANSWERED 
I must say why I think that the warring nations do not know what they are 
fighting for. I had used the expression Warring nations', not 'peoples of Europe'. 
This is not a distinction without a difference. I have distinguished between the 
nations and their leaders. The leaders of course know what they are fighting 
for. I make no admission that they are right. But neither the English nor the 
Germans nor the Italians know what they are fighting for except that they trust 
their leaders and therefore follow them. I submit that this is not enough when 
the stake is so bloody and staggering as during the present war. It is perhaps 
common cause that Germans and Italians do not know why English children 
should be slaughtered in cold blood and beautiful English homes should be 
destroyed. When I asked the British soldiers in South Africa during the Boer War 
they could not tell me what they were fighting for. Theirs 'was surely' not to 
reason why '. They did not even know where they were being marched to. The 
British people would not be able to give me a more satisfying answer, if I 
happened to be in London and asked them why their soldiers were working 
havoc in Berlin. If the press accounts are to be relied upon, British skill and 
valour have wrought more havoc in Berlin than have the Germans in London. 
What wrong have the German people done to the British people? Their leaders 
have. Hang them by all means, but why destroy German homes and German 
civilian life? What difference does it make to the dead, the orphans and the 
homeless, whether the mad destruction is wrought under the name of 
totalitarianism or the holy name of liberty or democracy? I assert in all 
humility, but with all the strength at my command, that liberty and democracy 
become unholy when their hands are dyed red with innocent blood. I hear the 
living Christ saying: "These so-called children of mine know not what they are 
doing. They take my Father's name in vain, for they disobey the central 
command of my Father'" If my ears do not deceive, I have erred in good 
company, if I have erred at all. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 176  And why have I uttered the truth? Because I am confident that God has made 
me the instrument of showing the better way. If Britain seeks justice, she must 
appear before the imperial court of God with clean hands. She will not defend 
liberty and democracy by following totalitarian methods so far as war is 
concerned. She will not be able to retrace her steps after out-Hitlering Hitler in 
war. The last war is a resounding lesson. Her victory, if attained, will be a 
snare and a delusion. I know mine is a voice in the wilderness. But it will 
someday ring true. If liberty and democracy are to be truly saved, they will 
only be by non-violent resistance no less brave, no less glorious, than violent 
resistance. And it will be infinitely braver and more glorious because it will give 
life without taking any.  
On the way to Simla, 25-9-'40  
Harijan,  29-9-1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 177   
60. TO ADOLF HITLER 
[The letter reproduced below was written by Gandhiji in the Christmas week of 1941, but 
the Government of India would not allow it to be transmitted to the Nazi dictator.] 
Dear Friend, 
That I address you as a friend is no formality. I own ho foes. My business in life 
has been for the past thirty-three years to enlist the friendship of the whole 
humanity by befriending mankind, irrespective of race, colour or creed. 
I hope you will have the time and desire to know how a good portion of 
humanity who have been living under the influence of that doctrine of universal 
friendship view your actions. We have no doubt about your bravery or devotion 
to your fatherland, nor do we believe that you are the monster described by 
your opponents. But your own writings and pronouncements and those of your 
friends and admirers leave no room for doubt that many of your acts are 
monstrous and unbecoming of human dignity, especially in the estimation of 
men like me who believe in universal friendliness. Such are your humiliation of 
Czechoslovakia, the rape of Poland and the swallowing of Denmark. I am aware 
that your view of life regards such spoliations as virtuous acts. But we have 
been taught from childhood to regard them as acts degrading humanity. Hence 
we cannot possibly wish success to your arms. But ours is a unique position. We 
resist British Imperialism no less than Nazism. If there is a difference, it is in 
degree. One-fifth of the human race has been brought under the British heel by 
means that will not bear scrutiny. Our resistance to it does not mean harm to 
the British people. We will convert them, not defeat them on the battlefield. 
Ours is an unarmed revolt against the British rule. But whether we convert 
them or not we are determined to make their rule impossible by non-violent 
non-co-operation. It is a method in its nature undefeatable. It is based on the 
knowledge that no spoliator can compass his end without a certain degree of 
co-operation, willing or compulsory, of the victim. Our rulers can have our land 
and bodies, but not our souls. They can have the former only by destruction of 
every Indian, man, woman, and child. That all may not rise to that degree of My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 178  heroism and that a fair amount of frightfulness can bend the back of the revolt 
is true, but the argument would be beside the point. For, if a fair number of 
men and women can be found in India who would be prepared without any ill-
will against the spoliators to lay down their lives rather than bend the knee to 
them, they would have shown the way to freedom from the tyranny of 
violence. I ask you to believe me when I say that you will find an unexpected 
number of such men and women in India. They have been having that training 
for the past twenty years. 
We have been tidying for the past half a century to throw off the British rule. 
The movement of independence has been never so strong as now. The most 
powerful political organization, I mean the Indian National Congress, is trying to 
achieve this end. We have attained a very fair measure of success through non-
violent effort. We are groping for the right means to combat the most 
organized violence in the world, which the British power represents. You have 
challenged it. It remains to be seen which is the better organized, the German 
or the British. 
We know what the British heel means for us and the non-European races of the 
world. But we would never wish to end British rule with German aid. We have 
found in non-violence a force which, if organized, can without doubt match 
itself against a combination of all the most violent forces in the world. In non-
violent technique, as I have said, there is no such thing as defeat. It is all "do or 
die” without killing or hurting. It can be used practically without money and 
obviously without the aid of the science of destruction, which you have brought 
to such perfection. 
It is a marvel to me that you do not see it is nobody's monopoly. If not the 
British, some other power will certainly improve upon your method and beat 
you with your own weapon. You are leaving no legacy to your people of which 
they would feel proud. They cannot take pride in a recital of cruel deeds, 
however skillfully planned. 
I, therefore, appeal to you in the name of humanity to stop the war. You will 
lose nothing by referring all the matters of dispute between you and Great My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 179  Britain to an International Tribunal of your joint choice. If you attain success in 
the war, it will not prove that you were in the right. It will only prove that your 
power of destruction was greater, whereas an award, by an impartial tribunal, 
will show as far as it is humanly possible, which party was in the right. 
You know that not long ago I made an appeal to every Briton to accept my 
method of non-violent resistance. I did it because the British know me as a 
friend, though a rebel. I am a stranger to you and your people. I have not the 
courage to make to you the appeal I made to every Briton. Not that it would 
not apply to you with the same force as to the British. But my present proposal 
is much simpler because it is much more practical and familiar. During this 
season when the hearts of the peoples of Europe yearn for peace, we have 
suspended even our peaceful struggle. Is it too much to ask you to make an 
effort for peace during a time which may mean nothing to you personally, but 
must mean much to the millions of Europeans, whose dumb cry for peace I 
hear, for my ears are attuned to hearing the dumb millions? I had the privilege 
of meeting Signor Mussolini when I was in Rome during my visit to England as a 
delegate to the Round Table Conference. I hope he will take this as addressed 
to him also with the necessary changes. 
I am,  
Yours sincere friend, 
M. K. GANDHI 
This Was Bapu,  (Ed. 1959), pp. 155-58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 180   
61. A DEPLORABLE INCIDENT 
As Sardar Vallabhbhai was leaving Sevagram the other day he told me of a 
dacoity in a home in Kheda District. Armed dacoits entered the house, 
belaboured the inmates, and escaped with the loot. The story was heart-
rending. What should I do under similar circumstances, I thought to myself. 
What should Congressmen do in the circumstances was the next thought; and 
since then the train of thought arising from the dacoity has taken possession of 
me. The Congress has been working continuously since 1920 under the policy of 
non-violence. The province of Gujarat has also had the advantage of a leader of 
the Sardar's calibre. And yet daring dacoities can take place. How far then can 
Congress influence be said to have penetrated? People imagine that, if the 
British Government were to cease to function today, it would be the non-
violent Congressmen who would automatically take over. But it is not so. I have 
been working to this end for the last twenty years, but my dream has not 
materialized. For the Congress has not had a living faith in the very means 
which it adopted in 1920. Therefore the non-violence of the Congress has really 
been non-violence of the weak. But governments can only be run by the strong. 
And a non-violent government can only be run by those who believe that non-
violence is the mightiest force on earth. If we had this strength, there would be 
no Hindu-Muslim riots, there would be no robbers or dacoits. Some might say 
that for such strength you need either a Jesus or a Buddha. But this is not so. 
Neither Jesus nor Buddha tried non-violence in the political sphere, or it would 
be truer to say that the present- day type of politics did not exist in their day. 
The Congress experiment is, therefore, a new one. The tragedy is that 
Congressmen have not tried it with full faith, full understanding and sincerity. 
If they had had these three essential qualities, the Congress would today have 
been far taller than it is. But I may not cry over spilt milk. I refer to the past 
only in order to guide us in. the present. Even if we wake up now, the game is 
ours; if we do not, we shall surely lose. Power invariably elects to go into the 
hands of the strong. That strength may be physical or of the heart, or, if we do My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 181  not fight shy of the word, of the spirit. Strength of the heart connotes soul 
force. If today we decide that we should try to get power by force of arms, we 
shall have to undo all the work of twenty years among the masses. We shall 
have to spend a considerable time in giving people a contrary training. We 
cannot afford to give the required time at this critical juncture. It is certain 
that today whoever has any strength of any kind will use it for seizing power. It 
is my firm conviction that, if Congressmen are to get power, it should only be 
through non-violence or soul force. 
We have neither time nor material to do new work even in this line. When we 
have so far employed non-violence as a weapon of the weak, how can we all of 
a sudden expect to convert it into a weapon of the strong? But in spite of this I 
feel that at the present moment this experiment alone is feasible and proper 
for us. There is no risk involved in it. Even failure in it takes the form of success 
because, even if the people are not able to go the whole length in the 
experiment, they cannot possibly be led into a ditch. By following the way of 
physical force they may not only be proved cowards, but in attempting to 
follow an untrodden path thousands may also be destroyed. 
It is then the duty of Congressmen to seek out dacoits and robbers. They should 
try to understand and convert them. Such workers cannot be had for the 
asking; but Congressmen should know that this work is just as important as it is 
fraught with risk, and a certain number of them have to devote themselves to 
it. 
The second thing requisite is that we should prepare such workers as would, 
under difficult circumstances, stand up to dacoits and, whilst trying to check or 
convert them from their evil ways, be prepared to suffer hurt or even death. 
Perhaps few workers will be forthcoming for this task too, but peace brigades 
throughout the country are a definite necessity. Or else in times of chaos 
Congressmen will lose all the reputation they have so far gained. 
Thirdly, the rich should ponder well as to what is their duty today. They who 
employ mercenaries to guard their wealth may find those very guardians 
turning on them. The moneyed classes have got to learn how to fight either My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 182  with arms or with the weapon of non-violence. For those who wish to follow the 
latter way the best and most effective  mantram  is: तेन /glyph216य/glyph201तेन भ ुंजीथाः। (Enjoy 
thy wealth by renouncing it). Expanded it means: "Earn your crores by all 
means. But understand that your wealth is not yours; it belongs to the people. 
Take what you require for your legitimate needs, and use the remainder for 
society." This truth has hitherto not been acted upon; but, if the moneyed 
classes do not even act on it in these times of stress, they will remain the 
slaves of their riches and passions and consequently of those who overpower 
them. 
But I have visions that the end of this war will mean also the end of the rule of 
capital. I see coming the day of the rule of the poor, whether that rule be 
through force of arms or of non-violence. Let it be remembered that physial 
force is transitory even as the body is transitory. But the power of the spirit is 
permanent, even as the spirit is everlasting.  
Sevagram, 25-1-'42  
Harijan , 1-2-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 183   
62. CRIMINAL ASSAULTS 
The whole world is on trial today. No one can escape from the war. Whilst the 
Ramayana and the Mahabharata are products of poets' imagination, their 
authors were not mere rhymesters. They were seers. What they depicted is 
happening before our very eyes today. Ravanas are warring with each other. 
They are showing matchless strength. They throw their deadly weapons from 
the air. No deed of bravery in the battlefield is beyond their capacity or 
imagination. 
Man would not fight in this manner, certainly not the gods. Only brutes can. 
Soldiers drunk with the pride of physical strength loot shops and are not even 
ashamed to take liberties with women. The administration is powerless in war 
time to prevent such happenings. The army fulfils their primary need, and they 
wink the eye at their misdeeds. Where a whole nation is militarized the way of 
military life becomes part and parcel of its civilization. Therefore a soldier's 
taking such liberties is not a matter for condemnation. But it would take 
generations for India to become so. 
Hence arise questions like the following which a sister sends me: 
1. "If a soldier commits an assault on a woman, can she be said to have lost her virtue? 
2. Is such a woman to be condemned and ostracized by society? 
3. What should women and the public do under such circumstances?" 
Whilst the woman lias in point of fact lost her virtue, the loss cannot in any way 
render her liable to be condemned or treated as an outcast. She is entitled to 
our sympathy for she has been cruelly injured, and we should tend her wounds 
as we would those of any injured person. 
A woman is worthy of condemnation only when she is a willing party to her 
dishonour. In no case are adultery and criminal assault synonymous terms. If we 
were to view the matter in this light, we would not hide such instances as has 
thus far been our wont. Public opinion against such conduct on the part of men 
towards women would then be created and freely exercised. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 184  If the press carried on a sustained agitation, soldiers white or brown would 
probably cease to behave in this manner. Their officers would be compelled to 
prevent such misbehaviour. 
My advice to women is that they should leave the cities and migrate to the 
villages where a wide field of service awaits them. There is comparatively little 
risk of their being assaulted in villages. They must, however, live simple lives 
and make themselves one with the poor. If they will display their wealth by 
dressing in silks and satins and wearing jewellery, they will, in running away 
from one danger, expose themselves to a double. Naturally the advice cannot 
refer to those whom duty compels to live in cities. 
The main thing, however, is for women to know how to be fearless. It is my 
firm conviction that a fearless woman who knows that her purity is her best 
shield can never be dishonoured. However beastly the man, he will bow in 
shame before the flame of her dazzling purity. There are examples even in 
modern times of women who have thus defended themselves. I can, as I write, 
recall two such instances. I therefore recommend women who read this article 
to try to cultivate this courage. They will become wholly fearless, if they can 
and cease to tremble as they do today at the mere thought of assaults. It is 
not, however, necessary for a woman to go through a bitter experience for the 
sake of passing of test of courage. These experiences mercifully do not come in 
the way of lakhs or even thousands. Every soldier is not a beast. It is a minority 
that loses all sense of decency. Only twenty per cent of snakes are poisonous, 
and out of these a few only bite. They do not attack unless trodden on. But this 
knowledge does not help those who are full of fear and tremble at the sight of 
a snake. Parents and husbands should, therefore, instruct women in the art of 
becoming fearless. It can best be learnt from a living faith in God. Though He is 
invisible, He is one's unfailing protector. He who has this faith is the most 
fearless of all. 
But such faith or courage cannot be acquired in a day. Meantime we must try to 
explore other means. When a woman is assaulted she may not stop to think in 
terms of Himsa or Ahimsa. Her primary duty is self-protection. She is at liberty My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 185  to employ every method or means that come to her mind in order to defend her 
honour. God has given her nails and teeth. She must use them with all her 
strength and, if need be, die in the effort. The man or woman who has shed all 
fear of death will be able not only to protect himself or herself but others also 
through laying down his life. In truth we fear death most, and hence we 
ultimately submit to superior physical force. Some will bend the knee to the 
invader, some will resort to bribery, some will crawl on their bellies or submit 
to other forms of humiliation, and some women will even give their bodies 
rather than die. I have not written this in a carping spirit. I am only illustrating 
human nature. Whether we crawl on our bellies or whether a woman yields to 
the lust of man is symbolic of that same love of life which makes us stoop to 
anything. Therefore only he who loses his life shall save it; तेन /glyph216य/glyph201तेन भ ुंजीथाः। 
Every reader should commit this matchless  shloka  to memory. But mere lip 
loyalty to it will be of no avail. It must penetrate deep down to the innermost 
recesses of his heart. To enjoy life one should give up the lure of life. That 
should be part of our nature. 
So much for what a woman should do. But what about a man who is witness to 
such crimes? The answer is implied in the foregoing. He must not be a passive 
onlooker. He must protect the woman. He must not run for police help; he 
must not rest satisfied by pulling the alarm chain in the train. If he is able to 
practise non-violence, he will die in doing so and thus save the woman in jeo-
pardy. If he does not believe in non-violence or cannot practise it, he must try 
to save her by using all the force he may have. In either way there must be 
readiness on his part to lay down his life. 
If old, decrepit and toothless, as I am, I were to plead non-violence and be a 
helpless witness of assault on the honour of a sister, my so-called Mahatmaship 
would be ridiculed, dishonoured and lost. If I or those like me were to 
intervene and lay down our lives whether violently or non-violently, we would 
surely save the prey and at any rate we would not remain living witnesses to 
her dishonour. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 186  So much about the witnesses. But if the courageous spirit pervades the entire 
atmosphere of our country and it is known that no Indian will stand women 
being assaulted, I venture to say that no soldier will dare to touch them. That 
such a spirit does not exist is a matter of shame for us. But it will be 
something, if persons ready to wipe out this blot are forthcoming. 
Those who have influence with the Government will try to get the authorities 
to take the necessary action. But self-help is best help. In the present 
circumstances we may rely only on our strength and God's help.  
On the train to Wardha, 19-2-'42 
Harijan , 1-3-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 187   
63. ON ITS TRIAL 
"I am a pacifist still in one sense; that is to say, I realize that Christians should be 
able to meet material force with spiritual power. It is horrifying to reflect that 
after nineteen hundred years, we are still unable to do it except in individual cases 
and on a small scale. But to me it seems merely 'wishful thinking' to act as though 
we had a power which in fact we have not and for which we have neither trained 
nor disciplined ourselves in the past. Such power does not come to those who have 
not disciplined themselves, at the last moment, in the hour of need. It has not 
come to us. I would rather, therefore, do what I can in defence of principles which 
I believe to be both right in themselves and of enormous importance to the future 
of the human race, than stand aside and do nothing. It is doing nothing that is the 
worst expedient of all. 
When, therefore, my pacifist friends ask me whether I can imagine Jesus Christ 
dropping a bomb or firing a gun I am entitled to reply: 'No, I cannot; but neither 
can I imagine him standing aside and doing nothing at all.' 
I am compelled to echo the words of a very dear relative of mine who, loathing 
war as much as any pacifist that ever breathed, said to me at the beginning of the 
last war, (in which he lost his life) 'If you can stop war with spiritual power, do it. 
If you can't, let me do what I can; and if you are right in thinking that war is so 
damnable that anyone who takes part in it is damned, then I would rather be 
damned than let these things go on without doing all I can to stop them, even at 
the cost of my own life.' 
Is this not very close to the meaning of our Lord when he said: 'He that loseth his 
life shall save it'?" 
The foregoing is the concluding portion of a touchingly sorrowful article 
contributed to  The Survey Graphic of December 1941 by the celebrated Dr. 
Maude Royden of the Guildhouse, London. She is one of the foremost pacifists 
of the West. Like many she has felt compelled to revise her position and is now 
most reluctantly but fully ranged on the side of the defenders of the British 
Isles. 
The article demands a considered reply. I have been in constant touch with the 
Western pacifists. In my opinion Dr. Royden has surrendered her position in the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 188  portion I have quoted. If individuals have lived up to the Christian teaching 
(i.e., on non-violence) and that on a small scale, one would think practice 
should make such a life possible for many people and on a large scale. It is un-
doubtedly wrong and foolish "to act as though one had the power which in fact 
one has not". "But," says the worthy writer, "such power does not come to those 
who have not disciplined themselves, at the last moment, in the hour of need." 
I suggest that with the knowledge of the defect no time should be lost in 
seeking to remove it. That by itself is doing not only something but the right 
thing. To deny one's faith by contrary practice is surely the worst thing one can 
do. 
And I am not sure that "doing nothing is the worst expedient of all". In septic 
treatment, for instance, doing nothing is not only expedient, it is obligatory. 
There is no cause whatsoever for despondency, much less for denial of one's 
faith at the crucial moment. Why should not British pacifists stand aside and 
remodel their life in its entirety? They might be unable to bring about peace 
outright, but they would lay a solid foundation for it and give the surest test of 
their faith. When, in the face of an upheaval such as we are witnessing, there 
are only a few individuals of immovable faith, they have to live up to their faith 
even though they may produce no visible effect on the course of events. They 
should believe that their action will produce tangible results in due course. 
Their staunchness is bound to attract sceptics. I would also suggest that 
individuals like Dr. Maude Royden are not mere camp followers. They are 
leaders. Therefore, they have to live their lives in strict accord with the 
Sermon on the Mount, and they will find immediately that there is much to give 
up and much to remodel. The greatest thing that they have to deny themselves 
is the fruit of imperialism. The present complicated life of the Londoner and his 
high living is possible only because of the hoards brought from Asia, Africa and 
other parts of the world. In spite of the fierce criticism which has been levelled 
against my letter 'To Every Briton', I adhere to every word of it, and I am 
convinced that posterity will adopt the remedy suggested therein against 
violence however organized and fierce. And now that the enemy is at the gates My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 189  of India, I am advising my countrymen the same course of action I advised the 
British people. My advice may or may not be accepted by my countrymen. I 
would remain unmoved. Their non-acceptance will be no test of failure of non-
violence. I would subscribe to the charge of my imperfection. But a Satyagrahi 
does not wait for perfection before he invites others to experiment with him, 
provided always that his faith is immovable like a mountain. The advice that 
Dr. Royden's relative gave her and which she quotes approvingly is altogether 
wrong. If the war is damnable, how can he stop the things that go on by taking 
part in it, even though it may be on the defensive side and at the cost of his 
own life ? For the defence has to resort to all the damnable things that the 
enemy does, and that with greater vigour if it has to succeed. Such a giving of 
life is not only not saving it but a mere waste. 
I have attended the Doctor's services in her Church where a living belief in the 
efficacy of prayer is much in vogue. When the impenetrable gloom surrounded 
her, why did she not find strength and consolation and real action in heart-
prayer? It is never too late to mend. She and her fellow-pacifists, many of 
whom I have the privilege of knowing should take heart and, like Peter, repent 
of the momentary loss of faith and return to the old faith in non-violence with 
renewed vigour. Their return will mean no material loss to the war effort but 
will mean a great deal to the anti-war effort which is bound to succeed sooner 
rather than later, if man is to live as man and not become a two-footed brute. 
Sevagram, 8-3-'42 
Harijan , 15-3-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 190   
64. 'SCORCHED EARTH' 
The Russian technique of scorched earth has staggered humanity, but humanity 
has been powerless to do anything except applaud the amazing sacrifice and 
bravery that counted no cost too great to circumvent the enemy. I have shared 
the amazement with the admirers but not their admiration. 
We like to imitate what we admire. Now that the prospect faces us, are we 
able to contemplate with equanimity, or feel the glow of bravery and sacrifice 
at, the prospect of India's earth being scorched and everything destroyed in 
order that the enemy march may be hampered ? 
As a war resister my answer can only be one. I see neither bravery nor sacrifice 
in destroying life or property for offence or defence. I would far rather leave, if 
I must, my crops and homestead for the enemy to use than destroy them for 
the sake of preventing their use by him. There is reason, sacrifice and even 
bravery in so leaving my homestead and crops, if I do so not out of fear but 
because I refuse to regard anyone as my enemy—that is, out of a humanitarian 
motive. 
But in India's case there is, too, a practical consideration. Unlike Russia's, 
India's masses have no national instinct developed in the sense that Russia's 
have. India is not fighting. Her conquerors are. Supposing that the conquerors 
are worsted and the Japanese come, the inarticulate masses will not even 
notice the change for the time being or for a long time. The intelligentsia' are 
divided on the issue of the war. The motive here is irrelevant. India's soldiers 
are in no sense a national army. They are soldiers because it is their profession. 
They will as soon fight under the Japanese or any other provided they are paid 
for fighting. In these circumstances the policy of scorched earth would be a 
wholly indefensible act. 
(The reader should not miss) the conditional expression "if I must". I have 
imagined a state of things in which I am not prepared just now to die and 
therefore I want to retreat in an orderly manner in the hope of resisting under My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 191  other and better auspices. The thing to consider here is not resistance but non-
destruction of food crops and the like. Resistance, violent or non-violent, has to 
be well thought out. Thoughtless resistance will be regarded as bravado in 
military parlance, and violence or folly in the language of non-violence. Retreat 
itself is often a plan of resistance and may be a precursor of great bravery and 
sacrifice. Every retreat is not cowardice which implies fear to die. Of course a 
brave man would more often die in violently or non-violently resisting the 
aggressor in the latter's attempt to oust him from his property, but he will be 
no less brave if wisdom dictates present retreat.  
Sevagram, 16-3-'42 and 7-4-'42 
Harijan . 22-3-1942 and 12-4-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 192   
65. INHUMAN IF TRUE 
The Honorary Secretary of the Social Service Department of the Marwadi Relief 
Society writes: 
"I have to place before you a very brief review of the activities of the Marwadi 
Relief Society, Calcutta, in connection with rendering relief to evacuees from 
Burma and Malaya, absolutely irrespective of caste, creed and colour, and also to 
humbly seek your invaluable advice on a very grave matter. The Society has 
undertaken to provide food, medical aid, and facilities for repatriation to 
thousands of helpless refugees who are arriving in Calcutta daily by rail, road and 
sea. Several emergent cases of delivery have also been attended to. The Society is 
also trying to secure suitable jobs for unemployed evacuees with the kind co-
operation of respectable local firms. 
In this connection I beg to report a certain very regrettable incident to you, and 
shall be grateful if you kindly advise me as to my duties in the matter. 
On the night of the 14th March, shortly after the arrival of the Chittagong Mail, as 
I, in company with a number of volunteers, was attending to the wants of the 
evacuees, a British tommy got hold of a small child belonging to one of the poor 
evacuees and threw it under the train. Although I am a humble follower of your 
noble creed of non-violence, it was with the greatest difficulty that I restrained 
myself and my volunteers from punishing the soldier bodily for his brutal act. I 
reported the matter to the station military authorities, but their attitude was 
anything but sympathetic. I later approached Mr. K. C. Sen I.C.S. over the matter, 
and though he promised to duly enquire into the matter, nothing has been done as 
yet to rectify it. There are still large numbers of soldiers loitering about the 
platforms every night, and a violent clash between these soldiers and relief 
volunteers and the public is a possibility which has to be tackled in no time. I have 
already placed the matter before the Bengal Congress Civil Protection Committee. 
I should be thankful, if you kindly advised me on the following points: 
1. Should I start an agitation in the press over the matter? 
2. Supposing a soldier behaves indecently towards a helpless female evacuee, are 
we to put up with it silently, or should the soldier be forcibly dealt with? My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 193  It would help us very greatly, if you kindly issue a statement in Harijan in this 
connection. I am prepared to accept all responsibility regarding the truthfulness of 
the above incident."  
I have suppressed many letters giving me authentic details about the 
misbehaviour of soldiers. I have published them when it would have been 
wrong, if not cowardly, to suppress them. The letter in question demands, in 
my opinion, the widest publicity, not merely for the safety of the public but 
also for the sake of the soldiers and the Government. The Marwadi Relief 
Society is a big philanthropic institution of twenty-five years' standing having an 
all-India reputation. It has funds and seasoned workers. Its prestige should have 
been enough security for the good behaviour of the soldiers in the presence of 
its workers. The soldier must have run amuck or been under the influence of 
drink to have behaved as he is reported to have done. I trust that the Marwadi 
Relief Society will not leave the matter till it is thoroughly thrashed out; and I 
trust too that the authorities will not wish to hush up the matter but will make 
ample amends, if the case is proved as reported by my correspondent. 
So much for the case itself. The correspondent desires my guidance about 
similar cases in future. The action of Himsa or Ahimsa would have been 
identical. The volunteers should have, if they could, bodily prevented the 
soldier from touching the child or snatched the child from him, even if the 
soldier had been hurt in the act of preventing or snatching. The proceedings 
after the delivery of the child or the failure of the attempt would vary 
according as the deliverers were actuated violently or non-violently. Non-
violent behaviour would dictate generous and gentle behaviour towards the 
culprit. But generosity and gentleness would have to be thoughtful and 
reasoned. It is difficult to lay down in advance the rule of conduct applicable in 
all cases. I can say this much that a truly generous act demands sincere 
recognition on the part of the culprit. I have known instances of Africans in 
South Africa insulted at railway stations saying to the rude white men, "My 
brother, God will forgive you for your rudeness", and the white men giggling, if 
not adding injury to insult. In similar circumstances I have myself remained 
silent and suffered the insult. I am quite clear that the Africans' so-called My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 194  generosity was a mere mechanical act justly evoking derision. Mine was 
timidity. I did not wish to evoke further insult. I certainly did not want to take 
legal proceedings. I was trying then to shape my non-violent conduct. 
I have interpolated an examination of so-called nonviolent conduct in cases of 
personal insult or injury. What about the child injured or the injury imagined by 
my correspondent? I think non-violent conduct would not, should not, be 
different. The distinction that is often drawn between personal injury and 
injury done to wards is unjustified, if not wrong. A man is not expected to do 
more for his wards than he would for himself. He would no doubt sacrifice 
himself for his ward's honour, but he would be expected to do likewise for his 
own. If he did otherwise, he would be voted a coward and is not likely to 
protect his ward's honour, if he is not able to protect his own. But I own that 
correct non-violent conduct does not come through mere reasoning. Reason is a 
necessary preliminary. But correctness of conduct will come only through 
repeated practice, may be even repeated failures. 
What violent conduct should be surely needs no examination.  
Sevagram, 23-3-'42 
Harijan,  29-3-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 195   
66. NON-VIOLENT RESISTANCE 
Japan is knocking at our gates. What are we to do in a non-violent way? If we 
were a free country, things could be done non-violently to prevent the 
Japanese from entering the country. As it is, non-violent resistance could 
commence the moment they effected a landing. Thus non-violent resisters 
would refuse them any help, even water. For it is no part of their duty to help 
anyone to steal their country. But if a Japanese had missed his way and was 
dying of thirst and sought help as a human being, a non-violent resister, who 
may not regard anyone as his enemy, would give water to the thirsty one. 
Suppose the Japanese compel resisters to give them water, the resisters must 
die in the act of resistance. It is conceivable that they will exterminate all 
resisters. The underlying belief in such non-violent resistance is that the 
aggressor will, in time, be mentally and even physically tired of killing non-
violent resisters. He will begin to search what this new (for him) force is which 
refuses co-operation without seeking to hurt, and will probably desist from 
further slaughter. But the resisters may find that the Japanese are utterly 
heartless and that they do not care how many they kill. The non-violent 
resisters will have won the day inasmuch as they will have preferred 
extermination to submission. 
But things will not happen quite so simply as I have put them. There are at 
least four parties in the country. First, the British and the army they have 
brought into being. The Japanese declare that they have no designs upon India. 
Their quarrel is only with the British. In this they are assisted by some Indians 
who are in Japan. It is difficult to guess how many, but there must be a fairly 
large number who believe in the declaration of the Japanese and think that 
they will deliver the country from the British yoke and retire. Even if the worst 
happens, their fatigue of the British yoke is so great that they would even 
welcome the Japanese yoke for a change. This is the second party. The third 
are the neutrals, who though not non-violent will help neither the British nor 
the Japanese. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 196  The fourth and last are non-violent resisters. If they are only a few, their 
resistance will be ineffective except as an example for the future. Such 
resisters will calmly die wherever they are but will not bend the knee before 
the aggressor. They will not be deceived by promises. They do not seek 
deliverance from the British yoke through the help of a third party. They 
believe implicitly in their own way of fighting and no other. Their fight is on 
behalf of the dumb millions who do not perhaps know that there is such a thing 
as deliverance. They have neither hatred for the British nor love for the 
Japanese. They wish well to both as to all others. They would like both to do 
what is right. They believe that non-violence alone will lead men to do right 
under all circumstances. Therefore, if for want of enough companions non-
violent resisters cannot reach the goal, they will not give up their way but 
pursue it to death. 
The task before the votaries of non-violence is very difficult. But no difficulty 
can baffle men who have faith in their mission. 
This is going to be a long drawn out agony. Let nonviolent resisters not make 
impossible attempts. Their powers are limited. A resister in Kerala is not 
physically responsible for the defence of Assam which is just now in imminent 
danger. If Assam is non-violently inclined, it is well able to take care of itself. If 
it is not, no party of nonviolent resisters from Kerala can help it or any other 
province. Kerala can help Assam etc. by demonstrating its non-violence in 
Kerala itself. The Japanese army, if it gets a foothold in India, will not stop at 
Assam. In order to defeat the British, it has to overrun the whole country. The 
British will fight every inch of the ground. Loss of India will probably be 
admission of complete defeat for them. But whether it is so or not, it is quite 
clear that Japan will not rest till India is wholly in her hands. Hence non-
violent, resisters must remain at their posts wherever they are. 
One thing has to be made clear. Where the British army is actually engaging the 
'enemy', it would be perhaps improper for direct resistance to function. It will 
not be non-violent resistance when it is mixed with, or allies itself to, violence. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 197  Let me therefore reiterate what I have said so often. The best preparation for, 
and even the expression of, nonviolence lies in the determined pursuit of the 
constructive programme. Anyone who believes that without the backing of the 
constructive programme he will show non-violent strength when the testing 
time comes will fail miserably. It will be, like the attempt of a starving 
unarmed man to match his physical strength against a fully fed and panoplied 
soldier, foredoomed to failure. He who has no belief in the constructive 
programme has, in my opinion, no concrete feeling for the starved millions. He 
who is devoid of that feeling cannot fight non-violently. In actual practice the 
expansion of my non-violence has kept exact pace with that of my 
identification with starved humanity. I am still far from the non-violence of my 
conception, for am I not still far away from the identification of my conception 
with dumb humanity?  
On the train to Wardha, 5-4-'42  
Harijan,  12-4-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 198   
67. TO EVERY JAPANESE 
I must confess at the outset that, though I have no ill-will against you, I 
intensely dislike your attack upon China. From your lofty height you have 
descended to imperial ambition. You will fail to realize that ambition and may 
become the authors of the dismemberment of Asia, thus unwittingly preventing 
world federation and brotherhood without which there can be no hope for 
humanity. 
Ever since I was a lad of eighteen studying in London over fifty years ago, I 
learnt, through the writings of the late Sir Edwin Arnold, to prize the many 
excellent qualities of your nation. I was thrilled when in South Africa I learnt of 
your brilliant victory over Russian arms. After my return to India from South 
Africa in 1915, I came in close touch with Japanese monks who lived as 
members of our Ashram from time to time. One of them became a valuable 
member of the Ashram in Sevagram, and his application to duty, his dignified 
bearing, his unfailing devotion to daily worship, affability, unruffledness under 
varying circumstances, and his natural smile which was positive evidence of his 
inner peace had endeared him to all of us. And now that owing to your 
declaration of war against Great Britain he has been taken away from us, we 
miss him as a dear co-worker. He has left behind him as a memory his daily 
prayer and his little drum, to the accompaniment of which we open our 
morning and evening prayers. 
In the background of these pleasant recollections I grieve deeply as I 
contemplate what appears to me to be your unprovoked attack against China 
and, if reports are to be believed, your merciless devastation of the great and 
ancient land. 
It was a worthy ambition of yours to take equal rank with the Great Powers of 
the world. Your aggression against China and your alliance with the Axis Powers 
was surely an unwarranted excess of that ambition. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 199  I should have thought that you would be proud of the fact that that great and 
ancient people, whose old classical literature you have adopted as your own, 
are your neighbours. Your understanding of one another's history, tradition, 
literature should bind you as friends rather than make you the enemies you are 
today. 
If I was a free man, and if you allowed me to come to your country, frail though 
I am, I would not mind risking my health, may be my life, to come to your 
country to plead with you to desist from the wrong you are doing to China and 
the world and therefore to yourself. 
But I enjoy no such freedom. And we are in the unique position of having to 
resist an imperialism that we detest no less than yours and Nazism. Our 
resistance to it does not mean harm to the British people. We seek to convert 
them. Ours is an unarmed revolt against British rule. An important part in the 
country is engaged in a deadly but friendly quarrel with the foreign rulers. 
But in this they need no aid from foreign Powers. You have been gravely 
misinformed, as I know you are, that we have chosen this particular moment to 
embarrass the Allies when your attack against India is imminent. If we wanted 
to turn Britain's difficulty into our opportunity we should have done it as soon 
as the war broke out nearly three years ago. 
Our movement demanding the withdrawal of the British power from India 
should in no way be misunderstood. In fact, if we are to believe your reported 
anxiety for the independence of India, a recognition of that independence by 
Britain should leave you no excuse for any attack on India. Moreover the 
reported profession sorts ill with your ruthless aggression against China. 
I would ask you to make no mistake about the fact that you will be sadly 
disillusioned if you believe that you will receive a willing welcome from India. 
The end and aim of the movement for British withdrawl is to prepare India, by 
making her free for resisting all militarist and imperialist ambition, whether it 
is called British Imperialism, German Nazism, or your pattern. If we do not, we 
shall have been ignoble spectators of the militarization of the world in spite of 
our belief that in non-violence we have the only solvent of the militarist spirit My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 200  and ambition. Personally I fear that without declaring the independence of 
India the Allied Powers will not be able to beat the Axis combination which has 
raised violence to the dignity of a religion. The Allies cannot beat you and your 
partners unless they beat you in your ruthless and skilled warfare. If they copy 
it, their declaration that they will save the world for democracy and individual 
freedom must come to naught. I feel that they can only gain strength to avoid 
copying your ruthlessness by declaring and recognizing  now the freedom of 
India, and turning sullen India's forced cooperation into freed India's voluntary 
co-operation. 
To Britain and the Allies we have appealed in the name of justice, in proof of 
their professions, and in their own self-interest. To you I appeal in the name of 
humanity. It is a marvel to me that you do not see that ruthless warfare is 
nobody's monopoly. If not the Allies some other Power will certainly improve 
upon your method and beat you with your own weapon. Even if you win you will 
leave no legacy to your people of which they would feel proud. They cannot 
take pride in a recital of cruel deeds however skillfully achieved. 
Even if you win it will not prove that you were in the right, it will only prove 
that your power of destruction was greater. This applies obviously to the Allies 
too, unless they perform now the just and righteous act of freeing India as an 
earnest and promise of similarly freeing all other subject peoples in Asia and 
Africa. 
Our appeal to Britain is coupled with the offer of Free India's willingness to let 
the Allies retain their troops in India. The offer is made in order to prove that 
we do not in any way mean to harm the Allied cause, and in order to prevent 
you from being misled into feeling that you have but to step into the country 
that Britain has vacated. Needless to repeat that if you cherish any such idea 
and will carry it out, we will not fail in resisting you with all the might that our 
country can muster. I address this appeal to you in the hope that our movement 
may even influence you and your partners in the right direction and deflect you 
and them from the course which is bound to end in your moral ruin and the 
reduction of human beings to robots. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 201  The hope of your response to my appeal is much fainter than that of response 
from Britain. I know that the British are not devoid of a sense of justice and 
they know me. I do not know you enough to be able to judge. All I have read 
tells me that you listen to no appeal but to the sword. How I wish that you are 
cruelly misrepresented and that I shall touch the right chord in your heart! Any 
way I have an undying faith in the responsiveness of human nature. On the 
strength of that faith I have conceived the impending movement in India, and it 
is that faith which has prompted this appeal to you. 
I am, 
Your friend and well-wisher, 
M. K.  GANDHI 
 
Sevagram, 18-7-'42  
Harijan,  26-7-1942 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 202   
68. FASTING IN NON-VIOLENT ACTION 
If the struggle which we are seeking to avoid with all our might has to come, 
and if it is to remain non-violent as it must in order to succeed, fasting is likely 
to play an important part in it. It has its place in the tussle with authority and 
with our own people in the event of wanton acts of violence and obstinate riots 
for instance. 
There is a natural prejudice against it as part of a political struggle. It has a 
recognized place in religious practice. But it is considered a vulgar 
interpolation in politics by the ordinary politician though it has always been 
resorted to by prisoners in a haphazard way with more or less success. By 
fasting, however, they have always succeeded in drawing public attention and 
disturbing the peace of jail authorities. 
My own fasts have always, as I hold, been strictly according to the law of 
Satyagraha. Fellow Satyagrahis too in South Africa fasted partially or wholly. My 
fasts have been varied. There was the Hindu-Muslim unity fast of 21 days in 
1924 started under the late Maulana Mahomed Ali's roof in Delhi. The 
indeterminate fast against the MacDonald Award was taken in the Yeravda 
Prison in 1932. The 21 days' purificatory fast was begun in the Yeravda Prison 
and was finished at Lady Thakersey's, as the Government would not take the 
burden of my being in the prison in that condition. Then followed another fast 
in the Yeravda Prison in 1933 against the Government refusal to let me carry on 
anti-untouchability work through Harijan  (issued from prison) on the same basis 
as facilities had been allowed me four months before. They would not yield, 
but they discharged me when their medical advisers thought I could not live 
many days if the fast was not given up. Then followed the ill-fated Rajkot fast 
in 1939. A false step taken by me thoughtlessly during that fast thwarted the 
brilliant result that would otherwise certainly have been achieved. In spite of 
all these fasts, fasting has not been accepted as a recognized part of 
Satyagraha. It has only been tolerated by the politicians. I have however been 
driven to the conclusion that fasting unto death is an integral part of My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 203  Satyagraha programme, and it is the greatest and most effective weapon in its 
armoury under given circumstances. Not everyone is qualified for undertaking it 
without a proper course of training. 
I may not burden this note with an examination of the circumstances under 
which fasting may be resorted to and the training required for it. Non-violence 
in its positive aspect as benevolence ( I do not use the word love as it has fallen 
into disrepute) is the greatest force because of the limitless scope it affords for 
self-suffering without causing or intending any physical or material injury to the 
wrongdoer. The object always is to evoke the best in him. Self- suffering is an 
appeal to his better nature, as retaliation is to his baser. Fasting under proper 
circumstances is such an appeal  par excellence. If the politician does not 
perceive its propriety in political matters, it is because it is a novel use of this 
very fine weapon. 
To practise non-violence in mundane matters is to know its true value. It is to 
bring heaven upon earth. There is no such thing as the other world. All worlds 
are one. There is no * here ' and no ' there As Jeans has demonstrated, the 
whole universe including the most distant stars, invisible even through the most 
powerful telescope in the world, is compressed in an atom. I hold it therefore 
to be wrong to limit the use of non-violence to cave dwellers and for acquiring 
merit for a favoured position in the other world. All virtue ceases to have use if 
it serves no purpose in every walk of life. I would therefore plead with the 
purely political-minded people to study non-violence and fasting as its extreme 
manifestation with sympathy and understanding. 
Sevagram, 20-7-'42 
Harijan,  26-7-1942 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 204   
69. THE 'QUIT INDIA' RESOLUTION 
I 
[Gandhiji addressed the A.I.C.C. at Bombay on 8-8-'42 outlining his plan of action, in 
Hindustani as follows:] 
"Before you discuss the resolution, let me place before you one or two things. I 
want you to understand two things very clearly and to consider them from the 
same point of view from which I am placing them before you. I ask you to 
consider it from my point of view, because if you approve of it, you will be 
enjoined to carry out all I say. It will be a great responsibility. There are people 
who ask me whether I am the same man that I was in 1920, or whether there 
has been any change in me. You are right in asking that question. 
"Let me, however, hasten to assure you that I am the same Gandhi as I was in 
1920. I have not changed in any fundamental respect. I attach the same 
importance to non-violence that I did then. If at all, my emphasis on it has 
grown stronger. There is no real contradiction between the present resolution 
and my previous writings and utterances. 
"Occasions like the present do not occur in everybody's and but rarely in 
anybody's life. I want you to know and feel that there is nothing but purest 
Ahimsa in all that I am saying and doing today. The draft resolution of the 
Working Committee is based on Ahimsa, the contemplated struggle similarly has 
its roots in Ahimsa. If, therefore, there is any among you who has lost faith in 
Ahimsa or is wearied of it, let him not vote for this resolution. 
"Let me explain my position clearly. God has vouchsafed to me a priceless gift 
in the weapon of Ahimsa. I and my Ahimsa are on our trial today. If in the 
present crisis, when the earth is being scorched by the flames of Himsa and 
crying for deliverance, I failed to make use of the God given talent, God will 
not forgive me and I shall be judged unworthy of the great gift. I must act now. 
I may not hesitate and merely look on, when Russia and China are threatened. 
"He emphasized: "Ours is not a drive for power, but purely a non-violent fight My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 205  for India's independence. In a violent struggle, a successful general has been 
often known to effect a military coup and to set up a dictatorship. But under 
the Congress scheme of things, essentially non-violent as it is, there can be no 
room for dictatorship. A non-violent soldier of freedom will covet nothing for 
himself, he fights only for the freedom of his country. The Congress is 
unconcerned as to who will rule, when freedom is attained. The power, when it 
comes, will belong to the people of India, and it will be for them to decide to 
whom it should be entrusted. May be that the reins will be placed in the hands 
of the Parsis, for instance — as I would love to see happen — or they may be 
handed to some others whose names are not heard in the Congress today. It will 
not be for you then to object saying, ' This community is microscopic. That 
party did not play its due part in the freedom's struggle; why should it have all 
the power?' Ever since its inception the Congress has kept itself meticulously 
free of the communal taint. It has thought always in terms of the whole nation 
and has acted accordingly .... 
"I know how imperfect our Ahimsa is and how far away we are still from the 
ideal, but in Ahimsa there is no final failure or defeat. I have faith, therefore, 
that if, in spite of our shortcomings, the big thing does happen, it will be 
because God wanted to help us by crowning with success our silent, unremitting  
sadhana  for the last twenty- two years." 
"I believe," he said, "that in the history of the world, there has not been a more 
genuinely democratic struggle for freedom than ours. I read Carlyle's  French 
Revolution while I was in prison, and Pandit Jawaharlal has told me something 
about the Russian revolution. But it is my conviction that inasmuch as these 
struggles were fought with the weapon of violence they failed to realize the 
democratic ideal. In the democracy which I have envisaged, a democracy 
established by non-violence, there will be equal freedom for all. Everybody will 
be his own master. It is to join a struggle for such democracy that I invite you 
today. Once you realize this you will forget the differences between the Hindus 
and Muslims, and think of yourselves as Indians only, engaged in the common 
struggle for independence." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 206  Concluding his speech, Gandhiji said: 
"Then, there is the question of your attitude towards the British. I have noticed 
that there is hatred towards the British among the people. The people say they 
are disgusted with their behaviour. The people make no distinction between 
British imperialism and the British people. To them, the two are one. This 
hatred would even make them welcome the Japanese. It is most dangerous. It 
means that they will exchange one slavery for another. We must get rid of this 
feeling. Our quarrel is not with the British people, we fight their imperialism. 
The proposal for the withdrawal of British power did not come out of anger. It 
came to enable India to play its due part at the present critical juncture. It is 
not a happy position for a big country like India to be merely helping with 
money and material obtained willynilly from her while the United Nations are 
conducting the war. We cannot evoke the true spirit of sacrifice and valour, so 
long as we do not feel that it is our war, so long as we are not free. I know the 
British Government will not be able to withhold freedom from us, when we 
have made enough self-sacrifice. We must, therefore, purge ourselves of 
hatred. Speaking for myself, I can say that I have never felt any hatred. As a 
matter of fact, I feel myself to be a greater friend of the British now than ever 
before. One reason is that they are today in distress. My very friendship, 
therefore, demands that I should try to save them from their mistakes. As I 
view the situation, they are on the brink of an abyss. It, therefore, becomes my 
duty to warn them of their danger even though it may; for the time being, 
anger them to the point of cutting off the friendly hand that is stretched out to 
help them. People may laugh, nevertheless that is my claim. At a time when I 
may have to launch the biggest struggle of my life, I may not harbour hatred 
against anybody. "  
Mahatma, Vol. VI, pp. 188-90 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 207  II 
[Gandhiji's address before the A.I.C.C. at Bombay on 8-8-'42 delivered in Hindustani.] 
"I congratulate you on the resolution that you have just passed. I also 
congratulate the three comrades on the courage they have shown in pressing 
their amendments to a division, even though they knew that there was an 
overwhelming majority in favour of the resolution, and I congratulate the 
thirteen friends who voted against the resolution. In doing so, they had nothing 
to be ashamed of. For the last twenty years we have tried to learn not to lose 
courage even when we are in a hopeless minority and are laughed at. We have 
learned to hold on to our beliefs in the confidence that we are in the right. It 
behoves us to cultivate this courage of conviction, for it ennobles man and 
raises his moral stature. I was, therefore, glad to see that these friends had 
imbibed the principle which I have tried to follow for the last fifty years and 
more. 
"Having congratulated them on their courage, let me say that what they asked 
this committee to accept through their amendments was not the correct 
representation of the situation. These friends ought to have pondered over the 
appeal made to them by the Maulana to withdraw their amendments; they 
should have carefully followed the explanations given by Jawaharlal. Had they 
done so, it would have been clear to them that the right which they now want 
the Congress to concede has already been conceded by the Congress. 
"Time was when every Muslaman claimed the whole of India as his motherland. 
During the years that the Ali brothers were with me, the assumption underlying 
all their talks and discussions was that India belonged as much to the 
Musalmans as to the Hindus. I can testify to the fact that this was their 
innermost conviction and not a mask; I lived with them for years. I spent days 
and nights in their company. And I make bold to say that their utterances were 
the honest expression of their beliefs. I know there are some who say that I 
take things too readily at their face value, that I am gullible. I do not think I am 
such a simpleton, nor am I so gullible as these friends take me to be. But their My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 208  criticism does not hurt me. I should prefer to be considered gullible rather than 
deceitful. 
"What these communist friends proposed through their amendments is nothing 
new. It has been repeated from thousands of platforms. Thousands of 
Musalmans have told me, that if Hindu-Muslim question was to be solved 
satisfactorily, it must be done in my lifetime. I should feel flattered at this; but 
how can I agree to a proposal which does not appeal to my reason? Hindu-
Muslim unity is not a new thing. Millions of Hindus and Musalmans have sought 
after it. I consciously strove for its achievement from my boyhood. While at 
school, I made it a point to cultivate the friendship of Muslim and Parsi co-
students. I believed even at that tender age that the Hindus in India, if they 
wished to live in peace and amity with the other communities, should 
assiduously cultivate the virtue of neighbourliness. It did not matter, I felt, if I 
made no special effort to cultivate the friendship with Hindus, but I must make 
friends with at least a few Musalmans. It was as counsel for a Musalman 
merchant that I went to South Africa. I made friends with other Musalmans 
there, even with the opponents of my client, and gained a reputation for 
integrity and good faith. I had among my friends and co-workers Muslims as well 
as Parsis. I captured their hearts and when I left finally for India, I left them 
sad and shedding tears of grief at the separation. 
"In India too I continued my efforts and left no stone unturned to achieve that 
unity. It was my life-long aspiration for it that made me offer my fullest co-
operation to the Musalmans in the Khilafat movement. Muslims throughout the 
country accepted me as their true friend. 
"How then is it that I have now come to be regarded as so evil and detestable? 
Had I any axe to grind in supporting the Khilafat movement? True, I did in my 
heart of hearts cherish a hope that it might enable me to save the cow. I am a 
worshipper of the cow. I believe the cow and myself to be the creation of the 
same God, and I am prepared to sacrifice my life in order to save the cow. But, 
whatever my philosophy of life and my ultimate hopes, I joined the movement 
in no spirit of bargain. I cooperated in the struggle for the Khilafat solely in My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 209  order to discharge my obligation to my neighbour who, I saw, was in distress. 
The Ali brothers, had they been alive today, would have testified to the truth 
of this assertion. And so would many others bear me out in that it was not a 
bargain on my part for saving the cow. The cow like the Khilafat, stood on her 
own merits. As an honest man, a true neighbour and a faithful friend, it was 
incumbent on me to stand by the Musalmans in the hour of their trial. 
"In those days, I shocked the Hindus by dining with the Musalmans, though with 
the passage of time they have now got used to it. Maulana Bari told me, 
however, that though he would insist on having me as his guest, he would not 
allow me to dine with him, lest some day he should be accused of a sinister 
motive. And so, whenever I had occasion to stay with him, he called a 
Brahmana cook and made special arrangements for separate cooking. Fir- angi 
Mahal, his residence, was an old-styled structure with limited accommodation; 
yet he cheerfully bore all hardships and carried out his resolve from which I 
could not dislodge him. It was the spirit of courtesy, dignity and nobility that 
inspired us in those days. The members of each community vied with one 
another in accommodating members of sister communities. They respected one 
another's religious feelings, and considered it a privilege to do so. Not a trace 
of suspicion lurked in anybody's heart. Where has all that dignity, that nobility 
of spirit, disappeared now? I should ask all Musalmans, including Quaid-i-Azam 
Jinnah, to recall those glorious days and to find out what has brought us to the 
present impasse. Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah himself was at one time a Congressman. 
If today the Congress has incurred his wrath, it is because the canker of 
suspicion has entered his heart. May God bless him with long life, but when I 
am gone, he will realize and admit that I had no designs on Musalmans and that 
I had never betrayed their interests. Where is the escape for me, if I injure 
their cause or betray their interests? My life is entirely at their disposal. They 
are free to put an end to it, whenever they wish to do so. Assaults have been 
made on my life in the past, but God has spared me till now, and the assailants 
have repented for their action. But if someone were to shoot me in the belief 
that he was getting rid of a rascal, he would kill not the real Gandhi, but the 
one that appeared to him a rascal. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 210  "To those who have been indulging in a campaign of abuse and vilification I 
would say, 'Islam enjoins you not to revile even an enemy. The Prophet treated 
even enemies with kindness and tried to win them over by his fairness and 
generosity. Are you followers of that Islam or of any other? If you are followers 
of the true Islam, does it behove you to distrust the words of one who makes a 
public declaration of his faith? You may take it from me that one day you will 
regret the fact that you distrusted and killed one who was a true and devoted 
friend of yours.' It cuts me to the quick to see that the more I appeal and the 
more the Maulana importunes, the more intense does the campaign of 
vilification grow. To me, these abuses are like bullets. They can kill me, even 
as a bullet can put an end to my life. You may kill me. That will not hurt me. 
But what of those who indulge in abusing? They bring discredit to Islam. For the 
fair name of Islam, I appeal to you to resist this unceasing campaign of abuse 
and vilification. 
"Maulana Saheb is being made a target for the filthiest abuse. Why? Because he 
refuses to exert on me the pressure of his friendship. He realizes that it is a 
misuse of friendship to seek to compel a friend to accept as truth what he 
knows is an untruth. 
"To the Quaid-i-Azam I would say: 'Whatever is true and valid in the claim for 
Pakistan is already in your hands. What is wrong and untenable is in nobody's 
gift, so that it can be made over to you. Even if someone were to succeed in 
imposing an untruth on others, he would not be able to enjoy for long the fruits 
of such a coercion. God dislikes pride and keeps away from it. God would not 
tolerate a forcible imposition of an untruth.' 
"The Quaid-i-Azam says that he is compelled to say bitter things but that he 
cannot help giving expression to his thoughts and his feelings. Similarly I would 
say: I consider myself a friend of Musalmans. Why should I then not give 
expression to the things nearest to my heart, even at the cost of displeasing 
them? How can I conceal my innermost thoughts from them? I should 
congratulate the Quaid-i-Azam on his frankness in giving expression to his 
thoughts and feelings, even if they sound bitter to his hearers. But even so why My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 211  should the Musalmans sitting here be reviled, if they do not see eye to eye with 
him? If millions of Musalmans are with you can you not afford to ignore the 
handful of Musalmans who may appear to you to be misguided ? Why should one 
with the following of several millions be afraid of a majority community, or of 
the minority being swamped by the majority? How did the Prophet work among 
the Arabs and the Musalmans? How did he propagate Islam? Did he say he would 
propagate Islam only when he commanded a majority? I appeal to you for the 
sake of Islam to ponder over what I say. There is neither fair play nor justice in 
saying that the Congress must accept a thing, even if it does not believe in it 
and even if it goes counter to principles it holds dear. 
"Rajaji said: I do not believe in Pakistan. But Musalmans ask for it, Mr. Jinnah 
asks for it, and it has become an obsession with them. Why not then say "yes" to 
them just now? The same Mr. Jinnah will later on realize the disadvantages of 
Pakistan and will forgo the demand.' I said: It is not fair to accept as true a 
thing which I hold to be untrue, and ask others to do so in the belief that the 
demand will not be pressed when the time comes for settling it finally. If I hold 
the demand to be just, I should concede it this very day. I should not agree to it 
merely in order to placate Jinnah Saheb. Many friends have come and asked me 
to agree to it for the time being to placate Mr. Jinnah, disarm his suspicions 
and to see how he reacts to it. But I cannot be party to a course of action with 
a false promise. At any rate, it is not my method.' 
"The Congress has no sanction but the moral one for enforcing its decisions. It 
believes that true democracy can only be the outcome of non-violence. The 
structure of a world federation can be raised only on a foundation of non-
violence, and violence will have to be totally abjured from world affairs. If this 
is true, the solution of Hindu- Muslim question, too, cannot be achieved by a 
resort to violence. If the Hindus tyrannize over the Musalmans, with what face 
will they talk of a world federation? It is for the same reason that I do not 
believe in the possibility of establishing < world peace through violence as the 
English and American statesmen propose to do. The Congress has agreed to 
submitting all the differences to an impartial international tribunal and to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 212  abide by its decisions. If even this fairest of proposals is unacceptable, the only 
course that remains open is that of the sword, of violence. How can I persuade 
myself to agree to an impossibility? To demand the vivisection of a living 
organism is to ask for its very life. It is a call to war. The Congress cannot be 
party to such a fratricidal war. Those Hindus who, like Dr. Moonje and Shri 
Savarkar, believe in the doctrine of the sword may seek to keep the Musalmans 
under Hindu domination. I do not represent that section. I represent the 
Congress. You want to kill the Congress which is the goose that lays golden 
eggs. If you distrust the Congress, you may rest assured that there is to be 
perpetual war between the Hindus and the Musalmans, and the country will be 
doomed to continue warfare and bloodshed. If such warfare is to be our lot, I 
shall not live to witness it. 
"It is for that reason that I say to Jinnah Saheb, 'You may take it from me that 
whatever in your demand for Pakistan accords with considerations of justice 
and equity is lying in your pocket; whatever in the demand is contrary to 
justice and equity you can take only by the sword and in no other manner.' 
"There is much in my heart that I would like to pour out before this assembly. 
One thing which was uppermost in my heart I have already dealt with. You may 
take it from me that it is with me a matter of life and death. If we Hindus and 
Musalmans mean to achieve a heart unity, without the slightest mental 
reservation on the part of either, we must first unite in the effort to be free 
from the shackles of this empire. If Pakistan after all is to be a portion of India, 
what objection can there be for Musalmans against joining this struggle for 
India's freedom? The Hindus and Musalmans must, therefore, unite in the first 
instance on the issue of fighting for freedom. Jinnah Saheb thinks the war will 
last long. I do not agree with him. If the war goes on for six months more, how 
shall we be able to save China? 
"I, therefore, want freedom immediately, this very night, before dawn, if it can 
be had. Freedom cannot now wait for the realization of communal unity. If that 
unity is not achieved, sacrifices necessary for it will have to be much greater 
than would have otherwise sufficed. But the Congress must win freedom or be My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 213  wiped out in the effort. And forget not that the freedom which the Congress is 
struggling to achieve will not be for the Congressmen alone but for all the forty 
crores of the Indian people. Congressmen must for ever remain humble servants 
of the people. 
"The Quaid-i-Azam has said that the Muslim League is prepared to take over the 
rule from the Britishers if they are prepared to hand it over to the Muslim 
League, for the British took over the empire from the hands of the Muslims. 
This, however, will be Muslim Raj. The offer made by Maulana Saheb and by me 
does not imply establishment of Muslim Raj or Muslim domination. The Congress 
does not believe in the domination of any group or any community. It believes 
in democracy which includes in its orbit Muslims, Hindus, Christians, Parsis, 
Jews—every one of the communities inhabiting this vast country. If Muslim Raj 
is inevitable, then let it be; but how can we give it the stamp of our assent? 
How can we agree to the domination of one community over the others? 
"Millions of Musalmans in this country come from Hindu stock. How can their 
homeland be any other than India? My eldest son embraced Islam some years 
back. What would his homeland be—Porbandar or the Punjab? I ask the 
Musalmans: 'If India is not your homeland, what other country do you belong to? 
In what separate homeland would you put my son who embraced Islam?’ 
His mother wrote him a letter after his conversion, asking him if he had on 
embracing Islam given up drinking which Islam forbids to its followers. To those 
who gloated over the conversion, she wrote to say: I do not mind his becoming 
a Musalman, so much as his drinking. Will you, as pious Musalmans, tolerate his 
drinking even after his conversion? He has reduced himself to the state of a 
rake by drinking. If you are going to make a man of him again, his conversion 
will have been turned to good account. You will, therefore, please see that he 
as a Musalman abjures wine and woman. If that change does not come about, 
his conversion goes in vain and our non-co-operation with him will have to 
continue.' 
"India is without doubt the homeland of all the Musalmans inhabiting this 
country. Every Musalman should therefore co-operate in the fight, for India's My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 214  freedom. The Congress does not belong to any one class or community; it 
belongs to the whole nation. It is open to Musalmans to take possession of the 
Congress. They can, if they like, swamp the Congress by their numbers, and can 
steer it along the course which appeals to them. The Congress is fighting not on 
behalf of the Hindus but on behalf of the whole nation, including the 
minorities. It would hurt me to hear of a single instance of a Musalman being 
killed by a Congressman. In the coming revolution, Congressmen will sacrifice 
their lives in order to protect the Musalman against a Hindu's attack and  vice 
versa. It is a part of their creed, and is one of the essentials of non-violence. 
You will be expected on occasions like these not to lose your heads. Every 
Congressman, whether a Hindu or a Musalman, owes this duty to the 
organization to which he belongs. The Musalman who will act in this manner 
will render a service to Islam. Mutual trust is essential for success in the final 
nation-wide struggle that is to come. 
"I have said that much greater sacrifices will have to be made this time in the 
wake of our struggle because of the opposition from the Muslim League and 
from Englishmen. You have seen the secret circular issued by Sir Frederick 
Puckle. It is a suicidal course that he has taken. It contains an open incitement 
to organizations which corp up like mushrooms to combine to fight the 
Congress. We have thus to deal with an empire whose ways are crooked. Ours is 
a straight path which we can tread even with our eyes closed. That is the 
beauty of Satyagraha. 
"In Satyagraha, there is no place for fraud or falsehood, or any kind of untruth. 
Fraud and untruth today are stalking the world. I cannot be a helpless witness 
to such a situation. I have travelled all over India as perhaps nobody in the 
present age has. The voiceless millions of the land saw in me their friend and 
representative, and I identified myself with them to an extent it was possible 
for a human being to do. I saw trust in their eyes, which I now want to turn to 
good account in fighting this empire upheld on untruth and violence. However 
gigantic the preparations that the empire has made, we must get out of its 
clutches. How can I remain silent at this supreme hour and hide my light under My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 215  the bushel ? Shall I ask the Japanese to tarry awhile? If today I sit quiet and 
inactive, God will take me to task for not using up the treasure He had given 
me, in the midst of the conflagration that is enveloping the whole world. Had 
the condition been different, I should have asked you to wait yet awhile. But 
the situation now has become intolerable, and the Congress has no other course 
left for it. 
"Nevertheless, the actual struggle does not commence this moment. You have 
only placed all your powers in my hands. I will now wait upon the Viceroy and 
plead with him for the, acceptance of the Congress demand. That process is 
likely to take two or three weeks. What, ^would you do in the meanwhile? What 
is the programme, for the interval, in which all can participate? As you know, 
the spinning wheel is the first thing that occurs to me. I made the same answer 
to the Maulana. He would have none of it, though he understood its import 
later. The fourteenfold constructive programme is, of course, there for you to 
carry out. What more should you do? I will tell you. Every one of you should, 
from this moment onwards, consider yourself a free man or woman, and act as 
if you are free and are no longer under the heel of this imperialism. 
"It is not a make-believe that I am suggesting to you. It is the very essence of 
freedom. The bond of the slave is snapped the moment he considers himself to 
be a free being. He will plainly tell the master: 'I was your bondslave till this 
moment, but I am a slave no longer. You may kill me if you like, but if you keep 
me alive, I wish to tell you that if you release me from the bondage, of your 
own accord, I will ask for nothing more from you. You used to feed and clothe 
me, though I could have provided food and clothing for myself by my labour. I 
hitherto depended on you instead of on God, for food and raiment. But God has 
now inspired me with an urge for freedom and I am today a free man, and will 
no longer depend on you.' 
"You may take it from me that I am not going to strike a bargain with the 
Viceroy for ministries and the like. I am not going to be satisfied with anything 
short of complete freedom. May be, he will propose the abolition of salt tax, 
the drink evil, etc. But I will say 'Nothing less than freedom'. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 216  "Here is a  mantra , a short one, that I give you. You may imprint it on your 
hearts and let every breath of yours give expression to it. The  mantra  is: 'Do or 
Die'. We shall either free India or die in the attempt; we shall not live to see 
the perpetuation of our slavery. Every true Congressman or woman will join the 
struggle with an inflexible determination not to remain alive to see the country 
in bondage and slavery. Let that be your pledge. Keep jails out of your 
consideration. If the Government keep me free, I will spare you the trouble of 
filling the jails. I will not put on the Government the strain of maintaining a 
large number of prisoners at a time, when it is in trouble. Let every man and 
woman live every moment of his or her life hereafter in the consciousness that 
he or she eats or lives for achieving freedom and will die, if need be, to attain 
that goal. Take a pledge, with God and your own conscience as witness, that 
you will no longer rest till freedom is achieved and will be prepared to lay 
down your lives in the attempt to achieve it. He who loses his life will gain it; 
he who will seek to save it shall lose it. Freedom is not for the coward or the 
faint-hearted. 
"A word to the journalists. I congratulate you on the support you have hitherto 
given to the national demand. I know the restrictions and handicaps under 
which you have to labour. But I would now ask you to snap the chains that bind 
you. It should be the proud privilege of the newspapers to lead and set an 
example in laying down one's life for freedom. You have the pen which the 
Government can't suppress. I know you have large properties in the form of 
printing-presses, etc., and you would be afraid lest the Government should 
attach them. I do not ask you to invite an attachment of the printing-press 
voluntarily. For myself, I would not suppress my pen, even if the press was to 
be attached. As you know my press was attached in the past and returned later 
on. But I do not ask from you that final sacrifice. I suggest a middle way. You 
should now wind up your standing committee, and-you may declare that you 
will give up writing under the present restrictions and take up the pen only 
when India has won her freedom. You may tell Sir Frederick Puckle that he 
can't expect from you a command performance, that his press notes are full of 
untruth, and that you will refuse to publish them. You will openly declare that My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 217  you are whole-heartedly with the Congress. If you do this, you will have 
changed the atmosphere before the fight actually begins. 
"From the princes I ask with all respect due to them a very small thing. I am a 
well-wisher of the princes. I was born in a State. My grandfather refused to 
salute with his right hand any prince other than his own. But he did not say to 
the prince, as I feel he ought to have said, that even his own master could not 
compel him, his minister, to act against his conscience. I have eaten the 
princes' salt and I would not be false to it. As a faithful servant, it is my duty to 
warn the princes that if they will act while I am still alive, the princes may 
come to occupy an honourable place in free India. In Jawaharlal's scheme of 
free India, no privileges or the privileged classes have a place. Jawaharlal 
considers all property to be State-owned. He wants planned economy. He wants 
to reconstruct India according to plan. He likes to fly; I do not. I have kept a 
place for the princes and the zamindars in India that I envisage. I would ask the 
princes in all humility to enjoy through renunciation. The princes may renounce 
ownership over their properties and become their trustees in the true sense of 
the term. I visualize God in the assemblage of people. The princes may say to 
their people: 'You are the owners and masters of the State and we are your ser-
vants.' I would ask the princes to become servants of the people and render to 
them an account of their own services. The empire too bestows power on the 
princes, but they should prefer to derive power from their own people; and if 
they want to indulge in some innocent pleasures, they may seek to do so as 
servants of the people. I do not want the princes to live as paupers. But I would 
ask them: 'Do you want to remain slaves for all time? Why should you, instead 
of paying homage to a foreign power, not accept the sovereignty of your own 
people?' You may write to the Political Department: 'The people are now 
awake. How are we to withstand an avalanche before which even the large 
empires are crumbling? We therefore, shall belong to the people from today 
onwards. We shall sink or swim with them.' Believe me, there is nothing un-
constitutional in the course I am suggesting. There are, so far as I know, no 
treaties enabling the empire to coerce the princes. The people of the States 
will also declare that though they are the princes' subjects, they are part of the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 218  Indian nation and that they will accept the leadership of the princes, if the 
latter cast their lot with the people, but not otherwise. If this declaration 
enrages the princes and they choose to kill the people, the latter will meet 
death bravely and unflinchingly, but will not go back on their word. 
"Nothing, however, should be done secretly. This is an open rebellion. In this 
struggle secrecy is a sin. A free man would not engage in a secret movement. It 
is likely that when you gain freedom you will have- a G.I.D. of your own, in 
spite of my advice to the contrary. But in the present struggle, we have to work 
openly and to receive bullets on our chest, without taking to heels. 
"I have a word to say to Government servants also. They may not, if they like, 
resign their posts yet. The late Justice Ranade did not resign his post, but he 
openly declared that he belonged to the Congress. He said to the Government 
that though he was a judge, he was a Congressman and would openly attend 
the sessions of the Congress, but that at the same time he would net let his 
political views warp his impartiality on the bench. He held Social Reform 
Conference in the very pandal of the Congress. I would ask all the Government 
servants to follow in the footsteps of Ranade and to declare their allegiance to 
the Congress as an answer to the secret circular issued by Sir Frederick Puckle. 
"This is all that I ask of you just now. I will now write to the Viceroy. You will 
be able to read the correspondence not just now but when I publish it with the 
Viceroy's consent. But you are free to aver that you support the demand to be 
put forth in my letter. A judge came to me and said: 'We get secret circulars 
from high quarters. What are we to do?' I replied, 'If I were in your place, I 
would ignore the circulars. You may openly say to the Government: "I have 
received your secret circular. I am, however, with the Congress. Though I serve 
the Government for my livelihood, I am not going to obey these secret circulars 
or to employ underhand methods." ' 
"Soldiers too are covered by the present programme. I do not ask them just now 
to resign their posts and to leave the army. The soldiers come to me, 
Jawaharlal and the Maulana and say: 'We are wholly with you. We are tired of 
the Governmental tyranny.' To these soldiers I would say: 'You may say to the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 219  Government, "Our hearts are with the Congress. We are not going to leave our 
posts. We will serve you so long as we receive your salaries. We will obey your 
just orders, but will refuse to fire on our own people." ' 
"To those who lack the courage to do this much I have nothing to say. They will 
go their own way. But if you can do this much, you may take it from me that 
the whole atmosphere will be electrified. Let the Government then shower 
bombs, if they like. But no power on earth will then be able to keep you in 
bondage any longer. 
"If the students want to join the struggle only to go back to their studies after a 
while, I would not invite them to it. For the present, however, till the time 
that I frame a programme for the struggle, I would ask the students to say to 
their professors: 'We belong to the Congress. Do you belong to the Congress or 
to the Government? if you belong to the Congress, you need not vacate your 
posts. You will remain at your posts but teach us and lead us unto freedom.' In 
all fights for freedom, the world over, the students have made very large 
contributions. 
"If in the interval that is left to us before the actual fight begins, you do even 
the little I have suggested to you, you will have changed the atmosphere and 
will have prepared the ground for the next step. 
"There is much I should yet like to say. But my heart is heavy. I have already 
taken up much of your time. I have yet to say a few words in English also. I 
thank you for the patience and attention with which you have listened to me 
even at this late hour. It is just what true soldiers would do. For the last 
twenty-two years, I have controlled my speech and pen and have stored up my 
energy. He is a true Brahmachari who does not fritter away his energy. He will, 
therefore, always control his speech. That has been my conscious effort all 
these years. But today the occasion has come when I had to unburden my heart 
before you. I have done so, even though it meant putting a strain on your 
patience; and I do not regret having done it. I have given you my message and 
through you I have delivered it to the whole of India." 
Mahatma, Vol. VI, pp. 191-203 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 220   
III 
[The following is the concluding portion of Gandhiji's speech before the A.I.C.C. at 
Bombay on 8-8-'42 which was delivered in English:] 
I have taken such an inordinately long time over pouring out, what was 
agitating my soul, to those whom I had just now the privilege of serving. I have 
been called their leader or, in the military language, their commander. But I do 
not look at my position in that light. I have no weapon but love to wield my 
authority over any one. I do sport a stick which you can break into bits without 
the slightest exertion. It is simply my staff with the help of which I walk. Such a 
cripple is not elated, when he has been called upon to bear the greatest 
burden. You can share that burden only when I appear before you not as your 
commander but as a humble servant. And he who serves best is the chief among 
equals. 
Therefore, I was bound to share with you such thoughts as were welling up in 
my breast and tell you, in as summary a manner as I can, what I expect you to 
do as the first step. 
Let me tell you at the outset that the real struggle does not commence today. I 
have yet to go through much ceremonial as I always do. The burden, I confess, 
would be almost unbearable. I have to continue to reason in those circles with 
whom I have lost my credit and who have no trust left in me. I know that in the 
course of the last few weeks I have forfeited my credit with a large number of 
friends, so much so, that they have begun to doubt not only my wisdom but 
even my honesty. Now I hold my wisdom is not such a treasure which I cannot 
afford to lose; but my honesty is a precious treasure to me and I can ill-afford 
to lose it. I seem however to have lost it for the time being. 
 
Friend of the Empire 
Such occasions arise in the life of the man who is a pure seeker after truth and 
who would seek to serve the humanity and his country to the best of his lights My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 221  without fear or hypocrisy. For the last fifty years I have known no other way. I 
have been a humble servant of humanity and have rendered on more than one 
occasion such service as I could to the Empire, and here let me say without fear 
of challenge that throughout my career never have I asked for any personal 
favour. I have enjoyed the privilege of friendship as I enjoy it today with Lord 
Linlithgow. It is a friendship which has outgrown official relationship. Whether 
Lord Linlithgow will bear me out, I do not know, but there is a personal bond 
between him and myself. He once introduced me to his daughter. His son-in-
law, the A.D.C. was drawn towards me. He fell in love with Mahadev more than 
with me and Lady Anna and he came to me. She is an obedient and favourite 
daughter. I take interest in their welfare. I take the liberty to give out these 
personal and sacred tit-bits only to give you an earnest of the personal bond 
which exists between us; and yet let me declare here that that personal bond 
will never interfere with the stubborn struggle on which, if it falls to my lot, I 
may have to launch against Lord Linlithgow, as the representative of the 
Empire. I will have to resist the might of that Empire with the might of the 
dumb millions with no limit but of non-violence as policy confined to this strug-
gle. It is a terrible job to have to offer resistance to a Viceroy with whom I 
enjoy such relations. He has more than once trusted my word, often about my 
people. I would love to repeat that experiment, as it stands to his credit. I 
mention this with great pride and pleasure. I mention it as an earnest of my 
desire to be true to the Empire when that Empire forfeited my trust and the 
Englishman who was its Viceroy came to know it. 
 
Charlie Andrews 
Then there is the sacred memory of Charlie Andrews which wells up within me. 
At this moment the spirit of Andrews hovers about me. For me he sums up the 
brightest traditions of English culture. I enjoyed closer relations with him than 
with most Indians. I enjoyed his confidence. There were no secrets between us. 
We exchanged our hearts every day. Whatever was in his heart, he would blurt 
out without the slightest hesitation or reservation. It is true he was a friend of My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 222  Gurudev, but he looked upon Gurudev with awe. He had that peculiar humility. 
But with me he became the closest friend. Years ago he came to me with a 
note of introduction from Gokhale. Pearson and he were the first-rank 
specimens of Englishmen. I know that his spirit is listening to me. 
Then I have got a warm letter of congratulations from the Metropolitan of 
Calcutta. I hold him to be a man of God. Today he is opposed to me. 
 
Voice of Conscience 
With all this background, I want to declare to the world, although I may have 
forfeited the regard of many friends in the West and I must bow my head low; 
but even for their friendship or love I must not suppress the voice of conscience 
— the promptings of my inner basic nature today. There is something within me 
impelling me to cry out my agony. I have known humanity. I have studied 
something of psychology. Such a man knows exactly what it is. I do not mind 
how you describe it. That voice within tells me, "You have to stand against the 
whole world although you may have to stand alone. You have to stare in the 
face the whole world although the world may look at you with bloodshot eyes. 
Do not fear. Trust the little voice residing within your heart." It says: "Forsake 
friends, wife and all; but testify to that for which you have lived and for which 
you have to die." Believe me, friends I am not anxious to die. I want to live my 
full span of life. And for me I put my span of life at 120 years. By that time 
India will be free, the world will be free. 
 
Real Freedom 
Let me tell you too that I do not regard England or for that matter America as 
free countries. They are free after their own fashion, free to hold in bondage 
coloured races of the earth. Are England and America fighting for the liberty of 
these races today? If not, do not ask me to wait until after the war. You shall 
not limit my concept of freedom. The English and American teachers, their 
history, their magnificent poetry have not said that you shall not broaden the 
interpretation of freedom. And according to my interpretation of that freedom My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 223  I am constrained to say they are strangers to that freedom which their teachers 
and poets have described. If they will know the real freedom they should come 
to India. They have to come not with pride or arrogance but in the spirit of real 
earnest seekers of truth. It is a fundamental truth which India has been 
experimenting with for 22 years. 
 
Congress and Non-violence 
Unconsciously from its very foundations long ago the Congress has been building 
on non-violence known as constitutional methods. Dadabhai and Pherozeshah 
who have held the Congress India in the palm of their hands became rebels. 
They were lovers of the Congress. They were its masters. But above all they 
were real servants. They never countenanced murder, secrecy and the like. I 
confess there are many black sheep amongst us Congressmen. But I trust the 
whole of India today to launch upon a non-violent struggle. I trust because of 
my nature to rely upon the innate goodness of human nature which perceives 
the truth and prevails during the crisis as if by instinct. But even if I am 
deceived in this I shall not swerve. I shall not flinch. From its very inception the 
Congress based its policy on peaceful methods, included Swaraj and the 
subsequent generations added non-violence. When Dadabhai entered the British 
Parliament, Salisbury dubbed him as a black man; but the English people 
defeated Salisbury and Dadabhai went to the Parliament by their vote. India 
was delirious with joy. These things however India has outgrown. 
 
I will Go Ahead 
It is, however, with all these things as the background that I want Englishmen, 
Europeans and all the United Nations to examine in their hearts what crime had 
India committed in demanding Independence. I ask, is it right for you to distrust 
such an organization with all its background, tradition and record of over half a 
century and misrepresent its endeavours before all the world by every means at 
your command? Is it right that by hook or by crook, aided by the foreign press, 
aided by the President of the U.S.A., or even by the Generalissimo of China My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 224  who has yet to win his laurels, you should present India's struggle in shocking 
caricature? I have met the Generalissimo. I have known him through Madame 
Shek who was my interpreter; and though he seemed inscrutable to me, not so 
Madame Shek; and he allowed me to read his mind through her. There is a 
chorus of disapproval and righteous protest all over the world against us. They 
say we are erring, the move is inopportune. I had great regard for British dip-
lomacy which has enabled them to hold the Empire so long. Now it stinks in my 
nostrils, and others have studied that diplomacy and are putting it into 
practice. They may succeed in getting, through these methods, world opinion 
on their side for a time; but India will speak against that world opinion. She will 
raise her voice against all the organized propaganda. I will speak against it. 
Even if all the United Nations opposed me, even if the whole of India forsakes 
me, I will say, "You are wrong. India will wrench with non-violence her liberty 
from unwilling hands." I will go ahead not for India's sake alone, but for the 
sake of the world. Even if my eyes close before there is freedom, non-violence 
will not end. They will be dealing a mortal blow to China and to Russia if they 
oppose the freedom of non-violent India which is pleading with bended knees 
for the fulfillment of debt long overdue. Does a creditor ever go to the debtor 
like that? And even when, India is met with such angry opposition, she says, 
"We won't hit below the belt, we have learnt sufficient gentleman- liness. We 
are pledged to non-violence." I have been the author of non-embarrassment 
policy of the Congress and yet today you find me talking this strong language. I 
say it is consistent with our honour. If a man holds me by the neck and wants to 
drown me, may I not struggle to free myself directly? There is no inconsistency 
in our position today. 
 
Appeal to United Nations 
There are representatives of the foreign press assembled here today. Through 
them I wish to say to the world that the United Powers who somehow or other 
say that they have need for India, have the opportunity now to declare. India 
free and prove their  bona fides.  If they miss it, they will be missing the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 225  opportunity of their lifetime, and history will record that they did not discharge 
their obligations to India in time, and lost the battle. I want the blessings of the 
whole world so that I may succeed with them. I do not want the United Powers 
to go beyond their obvious limitations. I do not want them to accept non-
violence and disarm today. There is a fundamental difference between fascism 
and this imperialism which I am fighting. Do the British get from India all they 
want? What they get today is from India which they hold in bondage. Think 
what difference it would make if India was to participate as a free ally. That 
freedom, if it is to come, must come today. It will have no taste left in it if 
today you who have the power to help cannot exercise it. If you can exercise it, 
under the glow of freedom what seems impossible, today, will become possible 
tomorrow. If India feels that freedom, she will command that freedom for 
China. The road for running to Russia's help will be open. The Englishmen did 
not die in Malaya or on Burma soil. What shall enable us to retrieve the 
situation? Where shall I go, and where shall I take the forty crores of India? How 
is this vast mass of humanity to be aglow in the cause of world deliverance, 
unless and until it has touched and felt freedom. Today they have no touch of 
life left. It has been crushed out of them. If lustre is to be put into their eyes, 
freedom has to come not tomorrow, but today. 
 
Do or Die 
Concluding Gandhiji said, "I have pledged the Congress and the Congress will do 
or die." 
From a galley-proof traced from our records 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 226   
70. SABOTAGE AND SECRECY 
"How is the cutting of telegraphic wires contrary to the principle of Ahimsa?" a 
friend asked Gandhiji some time back. 
The question is typical of many that have been put to Gandhiji since his 
release. Another friend who saw him some time after he left the Agakhan 
Palace posed to him the problem thus: "There are two schools of thought 
amongst our youth today. One school holds and openly says that as a 
programme of action Ahimsa is played out. It has done its work which was to 
waken the masses and has set the stage for the final struggle for independence. 
In this struggle force of arms cannot be excluded. The other school while 
professing belief in Ahimsa says that there is room for modification and further 
elaboration in its technique. They aver that the next phase of our struggle 
would be characterized by organized sabotage on an extensive scale." Gandhiji 
questioned the statement that sabotage could be part of the non-violent 
programme or that it was derivable from the principle of Ahimsa as he 
understood it. The friend however persisted that sabotage had come to stay 
whether one liked it or not. "Irresponsible prophesying leads to nowhere," cut 
short Gandhiji. "The real question is where we stand, what our attitude towards 
it is going to be." 
The friend put before Gandhiji some of his doubts. Was destruction of 
Government property violence? "You say that nobody has a right to destroy any 
property not his own. If so, is not Government property mine? I hold it is mine 
and I may destroy it." 
"There is a double fallacy involved in your argument," replied Gandhiji. "In the 
first place, conceding that Government property is national property — which 
today it is not — I may not destroy it because I am dissatisfied with the 
Government. But even a national Government will be unable to carry on for a 
day if everybody claimed the right .to destroy bridges, communications, roads, 
etc., because he disapproved of some of its activities. Moreover, the evil 
resides not in bridges, roads, etc. which are inanimate objects but in men. It is My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 227  the latter who need to be tackled. The destruction of bridges, etc., by means 
of explosives does not touch this evil but only provokes a worse evil in the place 
of the one it seeks to end." "I agree," rejoined the friend, "that the evil is within 
ourselves, not in the bridge which can be used for a good purpose as well as an 
evil one. I also agree that it’s blowing up provokes counter violence of a worse 
type. But it may be necessary from a strategic point of view for the success of 
the movement and in order to prevent demoralization." 
"It is an old argument," replied Gandhiji. "One used to hear it in the old days in 
defence of terrorism. Sabotage is a form of violence. People have realized the 
futility of physical violence but some people apparently think that it may be 
successfully practised in its modified form as sabotage. It is my conviction that 
the whole mass of people would not have risen to the height of courage and 
fearlessness that they have but for the working of full non-violence. How it 
works we do not yet fully know. But the fact remains that under non-violence 
we have progressed from strength to strength even through our apparent 
failures and setbacks. On the other hand terrorism resulted in demoralization. 
Haste leads to waste." 
"We have found," rejoined the friend, "that a person who has had a schooling in 
violent activity comes nearer to true non-violence than one who has had no 
such experience." 
"That can be true only in the sense that having tried violence again and again 
he has realized its futility. That is all. Would you maintain also that a person 
who has had a taste of vice is nearer to virtue than the one who had none? For, 
that is what your argument amounts to." 
The discussion then turned upon secrecy. The friend in question argued that 
whilst individual secrecy created a fear complex and was therefore an evil, 
organized secrecy might be useful. "It is no secrecy if the person concerned is 
boldly prepared to face the consequences of his action. He resorts to secrecy in 
order to achieve his object. He can refuse to take any part in subsequent 
interrogations during his trial. He need not make a false statement." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 228  But Gandhiji was adamant. "No secret organization, however big, could do any 
good. Secrecy aims at building a wall of protection round you. Ahimsa disdains 
all such protection. It functions in the open and in the face of odds, the 
heaviest conceivable. We have to organize for action vast people that have 
been crushed under the heel of unspeakable tyranny for centuries. They cannot 
be organized by any other than open truthful means; I have grown up from 
youth to 76 years in abhorrence of secrecy. There must be no watering down of 
the ideal. Unless we cling to the formula in its fullness, we shall not make any 
headway. 
"I know we have not always lived up to our ideal. There have been grave lapses. 
Had our instruments been less imperfect, we would have been nearer our goal. 
But in spite of our temporizing with our ideal, non-violence has worked like a 
silent leaven among the dumb millions. That does not mean that we can afford 
to go on like this for ever. We cannot remain static. We must move forward or 
we shall slide back." 
"Are you of opinion," asked the friend, "that the August revolution caused a 
setback in the struggle for independence; that all the heroism and courage 
which our people showed in the course of it was useless?" 
"No," replied Gandhiji. "I do not say that. In the historical process, the country 
will be found to have advanced towards freedom through every form of 
struggle, even through the August upheaval. All that I have said is that the 
progress would have been much greater if we had shown the non-violent 
bravery of my conception. In this sense the sabotage activity has retarded the 
country's freedom. I have the highest admiration for the courage, patriotism 
and spirit of self-sacrifice of people, say, Tike Jaiprakash Narain. But 
Jaiprakash cannot be my ideal. If I had to give a medal for heroism, it would go 
not to him but to his wife who, though simple and unlearned in politics, typifies 
in her person the power of Satyagraha in its purest form before which even 
Jaiprakash has to bow. What I have said about the August upheaval is not by 
way of judgment upon the past — I have consistently refused to condemn it — 
but as a guidance for the future." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 229  "Our people," said the friend finally, "have faith in non-violence but they do not 
know how to make it dynamic. What is the reason for this failure?" 
"By hammering away at it through painful years," replied Gandhiji, "people have 
begun to see that there is a potency in non-violence, but they have not seen it 
in all its fullness and beauty. If they had responded to all the steps that had to 
be taken for the effective organization of non-violence and carried out in their 
fullness the various items of the eighteen-fold constructive programme, our 
movement would have taken us to our goal. But today our minds are confused 
because our faith in constructive work is so weak. I know, one must push forth 
undaunted by difficulties." 
On the train to Madura, 2-2-'46 
Harijan,  10-2-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 230   
71. NON-VIOLENCE AND MOLESTATION OF WOMEN 
On the night of 29th December 1945, Gandhiji met about 200 men and women 
of Mahishadal and the near- about villages. They included local workers and 
victims of police and military atrocities during the 1942 upheaval. Gandhiji 
invited questions. The first question was whether they were expected to 
remain non-violent even in the face of their women being dishonoured. They 
believed in suffering for Swaraj. They believed that any departure from non-
violence would delay the coming of Swaraj. Then, what could they do in cases 
of molestation of their womenfolk? 
Gandhiji replied that he had been asked the same question in 1920 and 1921 
and he could only repeat the reply which he gave then. The question betrayed 
ignorance of non-violence and also of Swaraj of his conception. He did not want 
Swaraj at the cost of women's honour. If what passed as non-violence did not 
enable them to protect the honour of women or if it did not enable the women 
to protect their own honour, it was not non-violence. "Believe, it is something 
quite different," and he described what he had written in  Hind Swaraj in 1909. 
The reader should read the argument on pages 44 to 51* of the Navajivan Press 
edition. Gandhiji observed that experience had added force to the argument. 
"After all who protected Sita from Ravan? The Poet tells us that her purity was 
such that Ravan dared not compass his end without her consent." 
He warned them in the end that if anybody came to him with the plea that, 
they could not protect the honour of their womenfolk because they had taken 
the vow of non-violence, he would give them no quarter. Nonviolence should 
never be used as a shield for cowardice. It was a weapon of the brave. He 
would rather they died fighting violently than became helpless witnesses to 
such atrocities. A truly non-violent man would never live to tell the tale of such 
atrocities. He would have laid down his life on the spot in non-violent 
resistance. 
In this connection I am reminded of Gandhiji's Frontier tour where the Khudai 
Khidmatgars had asked him the same question. "What if the miscreant does not My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 231  kill you but ties you up instead and gags you so that you are forced to be a 
silent witness of his misdeed," they had asked after hearing his reply which was 
practically the same as he gave to the people at Mahishadal. "I will struggle," he 
had replied, "so that I will either break the bonds or break myself in the effort. 
In no case will I remain a helpless witness. When that intensity of feeling is 
there, God will come to your aid and somehow or other spare you the agony of 
being a living witness to such a deed." 
Mahishadal, 29-12-'45 
Harijan , 10-2-1946 
 
* Pages 77 to 86 in the 1958 edition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 232   
72. NON-VIOLENT TECHNIQUE AND PARALLEL GOVERNMENT 
Perhaps no part of India has passed through such fire of suffering as Midnapore 
during the August upheaval in 1942, when man's brutality completed the work 
of nature's wrath. Their suffering had chastened them but did not subdue their 
spirit. The chastening effect was visible in the perfect discipline and pin-drop 
silence that marked Gandhiji's prayer gatherings which were sometimes 
attended 'by over a lakh of people. 
The question of non-violence and  Jatiya Sarkar  naturally constituted the core 
of the discussions which the Congress workers of Midnapore had with Gandhiji 
during his visit to Mahishadal.  Jatiya Sarkar  was set up in the  thanas of 
Sutahata, Nandigram, Mahishadal and Tamluk in Midnapore district on 17-12-'42 
and 16-1-'43 and was formally dissolved on August 8, 1944, as a result of the 
publication of Gandhiji's statement on secrecy and underground work after his 
release from detention. By September 1944, about 150 workers connected with 
it had come out into the open and surrendered themselves to the authorities. In 
a comprehensive report which the workers of Midnapore submitted to Gandhiji 
during his visit to Mahishadal, they described in graphic detail how during the 
August upheaval the people had captured  thanas,  burnt down kutcheris,  
paralyzed communications, and organized a parallel police service, intelligence 
branch and law courts where delinquents and those engaged in anti-social acti-
vities were brought to book and dealt with "according to law". They had 
scrupulously avoided taking of life, they claimed, and had therefore acted non-
violently. 
Later on they discussed the whole question of parallel government and 
sabotage with Gandhiji. "I cannot say," remarked Gandhiji "that all that has 
been done has been well done or ought to have been done. On the contrary, 
much of it ought not to have been done. That the people did not remain inert is 
a matter of satisfaction, but the fact that after all these years they should not 
have known what the Congress stood for is a matter for sorrow. What they did 
was thoughtless. By its very nature it could not be sustained. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 233  "You have graphically put in your reports how you blew up a railway track, put 
a road out of use, burnt a kutchery,  seized a  thana , set up a parallel 
government and so on. This is not the technique of non-violent action. People 
committed the mistake of thinking that all that did not involve killing was non-
violence. Sometimes killing is the cleanest part of violence. If you kill the 
mischief-maker outright, there is an end to it as far as he is concerned, but 
harassment is worse. It did not pat out mischief. On the contrary, it brought 
the mischief on our own heads. The authorities became vindictive. Perhaps you 
will say that they would have been vindictive anyhow, but that is not what we 
should desire or aim at. It does not pay us to let them go into a panic. 
"In August 1942, the authorities became panicky. We gave them that excuse. 
But they are a people who do not know what defeat is; their cowardice is not 
fundamental. So, they let such things as  thanas, kuttheris, panchayat courts 
etc., remain in your hands for a short while as toys, but as soon as they had 
completed their dispositions they turned the full blast- of their machinery of 
retaliation against us. It is not in this way that India will attain her 
independence. We cannot afford to repeat it. 
"Today you have to reckon not with Britain alone but the Big Three. You cannot 
successfully fight them with their own weapons. After all you cannot go beyond 
the atom bomb. Unless we can have a new way of fighting imperialism of all 
brands in the place of the outworn one of a violent rising, there is no hope for 
the oppressed races of the earth. 
"Let nobody be misled by the Russian parallel," he continued. "Our tradition is 
wholly different from Russia's. The historical setting too is different. In Russia 
the whole population was under arms; Indian masses won't take to arms even if 
they could be given the necessary training. But it is useless to think that our 
rulers will let us give them that training when they have at a stroke disarmed a 
first-rate military State like Japan. Today Japan lies prostrate at the 
conqueror's feet. But non-violence knows no defeat. It must however be true 
non-violence, not a make-believe. I would not shed a single tear if I alone were 
left to represent such non-violence." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 234  "After all that we have done and suffered," observed the friends, "we have 
begun to doubt whether our energies have flown in the right channel, whether 
the mass awakening was not misdirected. But, is not non-violent rebellion, a 
programme of seizure of power?" they asked. 
"Therein lies the fallacy," replied Gandhiji. "A nonviolent revolution is not a 
programme of 'seizure of power'. It is a programme of transformation of 
relationships ending in a peaceful transfer of power. If the people had fully 
carried out the five steps outlined by me in my 8th of August speech in the 
A.I.C.C. in Bombay, and had there been a perfect atmosphere of non-violence, 
the Government's power of repression would have been sterilized and, it would 
have been compelled to yield to the national demand. 
"If under the impact of foreign invasion or some such cause the ruling power 
abdicates and a vacuum is created, the people's organization will naturally take 
over its functions; but such  Jatiya Sarkar  would have no other sanction except 
that of non-violence and service of the people to enforce its fiats. It will never 
use coercion. Even those who might hold contrary views will receive a full 
measure of security under it." 
As an instance of the infinitely greater efficacy of the non-violent technique as 
compared to the technique of coercion, he mentioned the case of Bardoli. In 
Midnapore whilst they succeeded in capturing a few symbols of power in the 
initial stages, they could not retain the fruits of their success. But in Bardoli 
the Satyagrahis were able fully to retain the gains of their struggle. "Moreover, 
you have seen," resumed Gandhiji, "that all your bravery could not prevent the 
violation of women. Now that is intolerable. No one should be able to cast an 
evil eye upon them. This requires inculcation of a higher form of bravery, i.e. 
that of non-violence which can hurl defiance at death and against which the 
power of the aggressor cannot prevail. This is what I am trying to do. It may 
take time. It takes a long time to infuse this kind of higher courage among the 
millions. Whether this kind of non-violence will ever come into play or not I do 
not know. But you, who have had training in non-violence for all these years, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 235  ought to realize that in your hands non-violence should show all the brilliance 
that is inherent in it." 
They next wanted to know as to how they could start on the right lines. 
Gandhiji in reply prescribed to them the spinning wheel as "the symbol and 
central sun of the 18- fold constructive programme". It was the best way of 
achieving social solidarity and non-violent organisation. The technique of non-
violent action consisted in isolating and sterilizing the instruments of evil.  
Jatiya Sarkar  based on non-violence would not put Government servants under 
duress, but would effectively isolate them so that they would either have to 
align themselves with the people or be reduced to the necessity of carrying out 
the foreign Government's writ through undiluted barbarism of which they would 
soon sicken and tire. Even their relations and dear ones would desert them. 
"This presupposes that no section among the people is labouring under a sense 
of injustice and wrong at the hands of the others. Untouchability, exploitation 
and communal rancour can have no place under a  Jatiya Sarkar , or it will be 
like a house divided against itself which must fall." 
Sevagram, 9-2'46 
Harijan,  17-2-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 236   
73. AFRICA AND INDIA 
There was a group of Negro soldiers from West Africa. West African Negroes are 
perhaps the most awakened of the Africans. The experiment of modern 
university education has been tried among them and has produced some 
brilliant though queer results. 
They quoted Gandhiji's observation that to remain in slavery is beneath the 
dignity of man; a slave who is conscious of his state and yet does not strive to 
break his chains is lower than the beast. "How can a continent like Africa fight 
down the fetters of slavery when it is so hopelessly divided?" they asked. 
"I know your difficulty," replied Gandhiji. "If you think of the vast size of Africa, 
the distance and natural obstacles separating its various parts, the scattered 
condition of its people and the terrible divisions among them, the task might 
well appear to be hopeless. But there is a charm which can overcome all these 
handicaps. The moment the slave resolves that he will no longer be a slave, his 
fetters fall. He frees himself and shows the way to others. Freedom and slavery 
are mental states. Therefore, the first thing is to say to yourself: T shall no 
longer accept the role of a slave. I shall not obey orders as such but shall 
disobey them when they are in conflict with my conscience.' The so-called 
master may lash you and try to force you to serve him. You will say: 'No, I will 
not serve you for your money or under a threat.' This may mean suffering. Your 
readiness to suffer will light the torch of freedom which can never be put out." 
"Africa and India both drink of the cup of slavery. What necessary steps can be 
taken to unite the two nations so as to present a common front?" 
"You are right," replied Gandhiji. "India is not yet free and yet Indians have 
begun to realize that their freedom is coming, not because the white man says 
so but because they have developed the power within. Inasmuch as India's 
struggle is non-violent, it is a struggle for the emancipation of all the oppressed 
races against superior might. I do not propose mechanical joint action between 
them. 'Each one has to find his own salvation' is true of this as well as of the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 237  other world. It is enough that there is a real moral bond between Asiatics and 
Africans. It will grow as time passes." 
They wanted to know what India could give them and how they could achieve 
'co-operative industrialization in order to be saved from the terrible 
exploitation under which they were suffering. 
"The commerce between India and Africa," replied Gandhiji, "will be of ideas 
and services, not of manufactured goods against raw materials after the fashion 
of Western exploiters. Then, India can offer you the spinning wheel. If I had 
discovered it when I was in South Africa, I would have introduced it among the 
Africans who were my neighbours in Phoenix. You can grow cotton, you have 
ample leisure and plenty of manual skill. You should study and adopt the lesson 
of the village crafts we are trying to revive. Therein lies the key to your 
salvation." 
Sevagram, 8-2-'46  
Harijan,  24-2-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 238   
74. WHITE MAN'S BURDEN! 
Passive resistance is aimed at removal in a most approved manner of bad laws, 
customs or other evils and is designed to be a complete and effective substitute 
for forcible methods including hooliganism and lynch law. It is an appeal to the 
heart of man. Often reason fails. It is dwarfed by self. The theory is that an 
adequate appeal to the heart never fails. Seeding failure is not of the law of 
Satyagraha but of incompetence* of the Satyagrahi by whatever cause induced. 
It may not be possible to give a complete historical instance. The name of Jesus 
at once comes to the lips. It is an instance of brilliant failure. And he has been 
acclaimed in the West as the Prince of passive resisters. I showed years ago in 
South Africa that the adjective 'passive' was a misnomer, at least as applied to 
Jesus. He was the most active resister known perhaps to history. His was non-
violence par excellence. But I must no longer stray from my main subject. It is 
the resistance of the Jesus type that the White hooligans are seeking to thwart. 
Let us hope that our countrymen's heroic resistance will not only shame the 
hooligans into silence but prove the precursor of the repeal of the law that 
disfigures the statute book of South Africa. In concrete form, what pure 
suffering, wholly onesided, does is to stir public opinion against a wrong. Legis-
lators are, after all, representatives of the public. In obedience to it they have 
enacted a wrong. They have to reverse the process when the same public, 
awakened to the wrong, demands its removal. 
The real 'White man's burden' is not insolently to dominate coloured or black 
people under the guise of protection, it is to desist from the hypocrisy which is 
eating into them. It is time White men learnt to treat every human being as 
their equal. There is no mystery about whiteness of the skin. It has repeatedly 
been proved that given equal opportunity a man, be he of any colour or 
country, is fully equal to any other. 
Therefore, White men throughout the world and especially of India should act 
upon their fellow-men in South Africa and call upon them not to molest Indian 
resisters who are bravely struggling to preserve the self- respect of Indians in My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 239  the Union and the honour of their motherland. "Do unto others as you would 
that they should do unto you." Or, do they take in vain the name of him who 
said this? Have they banished from their hearts the great coloured Asiatic who 
gave to the world the above message? Do they forget that the greatest of the 
teachers of mankind were all Asiatics and did not possess a white face? These, 
if they descended on earth and went to South Africa, will all have to live in the 
segregated areas and be classed as Asiatics and coloured people unfit by law to 
be equals of Whites. 
Is a civilization worth the name which requires for its existence the very 
doubtful prop of racial legislation and lynch law? The silver lining to the cloud 
that hangs over the devoted heads of our countrymen lies in the plucky action 
of Rev. Scott, a White clergyman, and his equally White fellow workers, who 
have undertaken to share the sufferings of the Indian resisters.  
New Delhi, 26-6-'46 
Harijan,  30-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 240   
75. HOW TO CANALIZE HATRED 
Hatred is in the air and impatient lovers of the country will gladly take 
advantage of it, if they can, through violence, to further the cause of 
independence. I suggest that it is wrong at any time and everywhere. But it is 
more wrong and unbecoming in a country where fighters for freedom have 
declared to the world that their policy is truth and non-violence. Hatred, they 
argue, cannot be turned into love. Those who believed in violence will naturally 
use it by saying, 'kill your enemy, injure him and his property wherever you 
can, whether openly or secretly as necessity requires'. The result will be deeper 
hatred and counter hatred, and vengeance let loose on both sides. The recent 
war, whose members have yet hardly died, loudly proclaims the bankruptcy of 
this use of hatred. And it remains to be seen whether the so-called victors have 
really won or whether they have not depressed themselves in seeking and trying 
to depress their enemies. It is a bad game at its best. Some philosophers of 
action in this country improve upon the model and say, 'We shall never kill our 
enemy but we shall destroy his property.' Perhaps I do them an injustice when I 
call it 'his property', for the remarkable thing is that the so-called enemy has 
brought no property of his own and what little he has brought he makes us pay 
for. Therefore, what we destroy is really our own. The bulk of it, whether in 
men or things, he produces here. So what he really has is the custody of it. For 
the destruction too we have to pay through the nose and it is the innocent who 
are made to pay. That is the implication of punitive tax and all it carries with 
it. Nonviolence in the sense of mere non-killing does not appear to me, 
therefore, to be any improvement on the technique of violence. It means slow 
torture and when slowness becomes ineffective we shall immediately revert to 
killing and to the atom bomb, which is the last word in violence today. 
Therefore, I suggested in 1920 the use of nonviolence and its inevitable twin 
companion truth, for canalizing hatred into the proper channel. The hater 
hates not for the sake of hatred but because he wants to drive away from his 
country the hated being or beings. He will, therefore, as readily achieve his end My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 241  by non-violent as by violent means. For the past 25 years, willingly or unwill-
ingly, the Congress has spoken to the masses in favour of non-violence as 
against violence for regaining our lost liberty. We have also discovered through 
our progress that in the application of non-violence we have been able to reach 
the mass mind far more quickly and far more extensively than ever before. And 
yet, if truth is told as it must be, our non-violent action has been half-hearted. 
Many have preached non-violence through the lips while harbouring violence in 
the breast. But the unsophisticated mass mind has read the secret meaning 
hidden in our breast and the unconscious reaction has not been altogether as it 
might have been. Hypocrisy has acted as an ode to virtue, but it could never 
take its place. And so I plead for non-violence and yet more non-violence. I do 
so not without knowledge but with sixty years' experience behind me. This is 
the critical moment, for the dumb masses are today starving. There are many 
ways that will suggest themselves to the wise reader as to how to apply the 
canons of non-violence to the present needs of the country. The hypnotism of 
the I.N.A.* has cast its spell upon us. Netaji's name is one to conjure with. His 
patriotism is second to none. (I use the present tense intentionally). His bravery 
shines through all his actions. He aimed high but failed. Who has not failed? 
Ours is to aim high and to aim well. It is not given to everyone to command 
success. My praise and admiration can go no further. For I knew that his action 
was doomed to failure, and that I would have said so even if he had brought his 
I.N.A. victorious to India, because the masses would not have come into their 
own in this manner. The lesson that Netaji and his army bring to us is one of 
self-sacrifice, unity irrespective of class and community, and discipline. If our 
adoration will be wise and discriminating, we will rigidly copy this trinity of 
virtues, but we will as rigidly abjure violence. I would not have the I.N.A. man 
think or say that he and his can ever deliver the masses of India from bondage 
by force of arms. But if he is true to Netaji and still more so to the country, he 
will spend himself in teaching the masses, men, women and children, to be 
brave, self-sacrificing and united. Then we will be able to stand erect before 
the world. But if he will merely act the armed soldiers, he will only lord it over 
the masses and the fact that he will be a volunteer will not count for much. I, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 242  therefore, welcome the declaration made by Capt. Shah Nawaz that to be 
worthy of Netaji, on having come to Indian soil, he will act as a humble soldier 
of non-violence in Congress ranks. 
Sevagram, 15-2-'46 
Harijan,  24-2-1946
 
*1 The Indian National Army (I.N.A.) was formed in Singapore in 1941-42. It hoped under 
the leadership of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose to free India from British rule. When the 
British regained Singapore and Burma, -the I.N.A. men were taken prisoners by the British 
and tried in India. —Ed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 243   
76. THE MESSAGE OF THE I.N.A. 
India has accorded to the released I.N.A. men a right royal welcome. They have 
been acclaimed as national heroes. Everybody seems to have been swept off his 
feet before the rising tide of popular sentiment. I must, however, frankly 
confess to you that I do not share this indiscriminate hero-worship. I admire the 
ability, sacrifice and patriotism of the I.N.A. and Netaji Bose. But I cannot 
subscribe to the method which they adopted and which is incompatible with 
the one followed by the Congress for the last twenty-five years for the 
attainment of independence. Yesterday I spoke to you of a  sthitaprajna , i.e. 
"the man of steady wisdom", i.e., a Satyagrahi. If we accept that ideal we 
would not regard anybody as our enemy; we must shed all enmity and ill-will. 
That ideal is not meant for the select few — the saint or the seer only; it is 
meant for all. I have described myself as a scavenger having become one, not 
only in nam' but in fact, while I was in Phoenix. It was there that I took up the 
bucket and the broom, impelled by the inner urge to identify myself with the 
lowest of the low. As a humble fellow toiler, then, let me bear witness that 
anyone, even a simple-minded villager who wants to and tries, can attain the 
state of mental equipoise described in the Gita verses which are recited at the 
prayer. We all lose our sanity at times, though we may not care to admit it or 
be even aware of it. A man with a steady mind will never lose patience, even 
with a child, or indulge in anger or abuse. Religion as taught in the Gita is a 
thing to be practised in this life. It is not a means for attaining merit in the 
next irrespective of what you may do here. That would be a negation of 
religion. 
"For me the visit to the I.N.A. men in detention was a matter of pure duty. It 
gave me supreme satisfaction to be able to meet them, and they on their part 
received me with a warmth of affection which I shall always treasure. 
I have interpreted their welcome as a token of their recognition in me of a 
devoted servant of the country. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 244  "Netaji was like a son to me. I came to know him as a lieutenant full of promise 
under the late Deshabandnu Das. His last message to the I.N.A. was that, whilst 
on foreign soil they had fought with arms, on their return to India they would 
have to serve the country as soldiers of nonviolence under the guidance and 
leadership of the Congress. The message which the I.N.A. has for India is not 
adoption of the method of appeal to arms for settling disputes (it has been 
tried and found wanting), but of cultivating nonviolence, unity, cohesion and 
organization. 
"Though the I.N.A. failed in their immediate objective they have a lot to their 
credit of which they might well be proud. Greatest among these was to gather 
together under one banner men from all religions and races of India and to 
infuse into them the spirit of solidarity and oneness to the utter exclusion of all 
communal or parochial sentiment. It is an example which we should all 
emulate. If they did this under the glamour and romance of fighting, it was not 
much. It must persist in peace. It is a higher and more difficult work. We have 
to die performing our duty and without killing. For that we shall need to 
cultivate the attributes of a  sthitaprajna  as set forth in the Gita. 
"Far more potent than the strength of the sword is the strength of Satyagraha. I 
said so to the I.N.A. men and they were happy to tell me, as I was to hear, that 
they had realized this and would hereafter strive to serve India as true soldiers 
of non-violence under the Congress flag."  
New Delhi, 8-4-'46 
Harijan,  14-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 245   
77. A MESSAGE FOR THE I.N.A. 
The other day I was talking to the I.N.A. men in the Red Fort. We were 
discussing as to what they should do on their release. They assumed me that 
they would on their release serve India as true soldiers of non-violence under 
the Congress flag. I told them that today a true soldier of India is he who spins 
to clothe the naked and tills the soil to grow more food to meet the 
threatening food crisis. The Congress has declared that it would carry on the 
struggle for India's independence through the method of non-violence. But it 
has not yet decided whether it would adhere to that method for the protection 
of that freedom against possible foreign aggression. To me it is a self-evident 
truth that if freedom is to be shared equally by all — even physically the 
weakest, the lame and the halt — they must be able to contribute an equal 
share in its defence. How that can be possible when reliance is placed on 
armaments, my plebeian mind fails to understand. I therefore, swear and shall 
continue to swear by non-violence, i.e. by Satyagraha or soul force. In it 
physical incapacity is no handicap and even a frail woman or a child can pit 
herself or himself on equal terms against a giant, armed with the most 
powerful weapons. 
The eighteen-fold constructive programme with the spinning wheel as its centre 
is the concrete expression of that spirit in organized society. Let us realize that 
spirit by devoting ourselves prayerfully to the carrying out of the constructive 
programme during the National Week. 
For the I.N.A. men there were two alternatives. They could serve free India as 
soldiers-in-arms or they could convert themselves into soldiers of non-violence 
if they were convinced that non-violence was the higher and the more 
efficacious way. They should make use of their training and discipline to 
introduce non-violent organization among the masses, learn spinning and 
become veteran constructive workers. If they did that they would set a glorious 
example to the whole world. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 246  "The I.N.A. men," observed Gandhiji, "have shown great strength, heroism and 
resourcefulness. But I must confess that their achievements have not dazzled 
my eyes. To die without killing requires more heroism. There is nothing very 
wonderful in killing and being killed in the process. But the man who offers his 
neck to the enemy for execution but refuses to bend to his will shows courage 
of a far higher type. 
"Troublous times lie ahead of us. Our non-violence has brought us to the gate of 
independence. Shall we renounce it after we have entered that gate? I for one 
am firmly convinced that non-violence of the brave, such as I have envisaged, 
provides the surest and most efficacious means to face foreign aggression and 
internal disorder just as it has done for winning independence." The British 
were going to quit. What place would India have in the comity of nations? 
Would she be satisfied with being a fifth-rate power like China? China was 
independent only in name. India would have long to wait before she could 
become a first-class military power. "And for that she would have to go under 
the tutelage of some Western power. A truly non-violent India will have nothing 
to fear from any foreign power nor will she look to British navy and air force for 
her defence. I know that we have not as yet the non-violence of the brave."  
New Delhi, 16-4-'46 
Harijan,  21-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 247   
78. I. N. A. MEN'S DILEMMA 
Between 50 to 60 senior officers of the I.N.A. met Gandhiji in the Sweepers' 
Colony the other day during his stay in Delhi. They first sang in a chorus the 
I.N.A. Hindustani adaptation of Gurudev's song " Janaganamana adhinayaka jay a 
he Bharata bhagyavidhata " just as they had sung during Gandhiji's visit to them 
behind the barbed wire fence in the Kabul Lines when their fate still hung in 
the balance. Gandhiji then addressed them a few words in Hindustani. 
"Other friends have placed before me," he began, "the dilemma which, I am 
told, faces many of you too. The Congress creed is, of course, that of winning 
Swaraj through non-violence and peaceful means but there are many men 
outside, and even within the Congress, who have begun to doubt whether that 
policy of the Congress has not exhausted its purpose and now become effete for 
the task that lies ahead, specially in view of the changed and changing times. 
"You, who have served under Subhas Babu as veteran fighters, have proved your 
mettle on the battlefield. Success and failure are, however, not in our hands, 
but in God's hands alone. Netaji told you when bidding good-bye to you that, on 
your return to India, you must put yourselves under the Congress discipline and 
act according to its policy. Your object, as I have been told, was only to free 
India, never to help the Japanese. You failed in your direct objective, i.e. to 
defeat the British. But you have the satisfaction that the whole country has 
been roused and even the regular forces have been stirred into a new political 
consciousness and have begun to think in terms of independence. You have 
achieved a complete unity among the Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Christians, 
Anglo-Indians and Sikhs in your ranks. That is no mean achievement. What, 
however, you realized under conditions of freedom outside India, you have now 
to sustain and keep alive under Indian conditions. That will be your real test. 
"If you have imbibed the spirit of non-violence, you will remain free men at 
heart even here. For instance, no government on earth can make men, who 
have realized freedom in their hearts, salute against their will. If they threaten 
to kill them they will offer their necks to them, but refuse to submit. The odds My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 248  are that a soldier's spirit will revolt against such cold-blooded murder. Thus, 
whether they live or die it will be as free men. They will never be slaves. If you 
all become free men at heart, the whole of India will be free. They might 
imprison you. You will welcome it or you can tell them that you will be a corpse 
before they can put you into prison. Both alternatives are open to a non-violent 
soldier and both call for bravery of the highest order. Our task is no less than to 
reinfuse life into the 400 millions of India. We have to dispel fear from their 
hearts. On the day they shed all fear, India's fetters shall fall and she will be 
free. 
"Years ago I said at Nankanasahib: 'Sikhs have given proof of their martial 
valour. But the consummation of Guru Govind Singh's ideal will be reached only 
when they will substitute for their  kirpans  the sword of the spirit of non-
violence.' So long as one wants to retain one's sword, one has not attained 
complete fearlessness. No power on earth can subjugate you when you are 
armed with the sword of Ahimsa. It ennobles both the victor and the 
vanquished. Netaji has fired you with a new spirit. That spirit can now be kept 
alive only through non-violence." 
Having thus explained to them the significance of Ahimsa in terms of martial 
courage, Gandhiji proceeded to place before them the higher type of courage 
that is required of a Satyagrahi soldier to become an ideal, self- respecting 
citizen. "Above all, you must never beg or throw yourselves on anybody's 
charity. Because you have risked your lives for India's sake and fought for her on 
the Imphal plain, you must not expect to be pampered in return. If you do that, 
you will lose all worth like the salt that has lost its savour. You should prefer to 
earn your bread by the sweat of your brow, but refuse to beg or accept charity. 
In short, you have to show the same degree of bravery and courage of the non-
violent type as you have done in the use of arms hitherto. 
"If you want land you will have it. You will clear it and turn it into model farms. 
You have to overcome the inertia of ages which weighs down our masses. That 
you will be able to do only by setting an example of industry and hard work. 
You must be able to wield the bucket and the broom with skill and diligence My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 249  and not consider the cleaning of latrines as dirty or beneath your dignity. 
Graduation in this work is more heoric than winning the Victoria Cross." 
Then followed questions and answers: 
Q. How can one who has spent his whole life in fighting- take to Ahimsa with 
success? Are not the two incompatible? 
A. I do not agree. Badshah Khan is a Pathan. But today he has become a soldier 
of non-violence. Tolstoy too served in the army. Yet he became the high priest 
of non-violence in Europe. We have not yet realized fully the power that is in 
non-violence. If the Government had not arrested me in 1942, I would have 
shown how to fight Japan by non-violence. 
Q. Surely, it is no breach of Ahimsa to use the sword in self-defence? 
A. Even Wavell, Auchinleck or Hitler does not use the sword without necessity. 
But that does not make it Ahimsa. It is Himsa, whatever its justification. 
Q. You cannot take the world along with you if you adopt Ahimsa. You have to 
choose the one or the other. 
A. There again I disagree. A reformer has to sail not with the current, very 
often he has to go against it, even though it may cost him his life. You must not 
be carried off your feet by unthinking, popular applause. The essential part of 
your message to the country is not how to wield the sword but to cease to be 
afraid of it. 
Q. What would you have done if Subhas Babu had returned to you victorious? 
A. I would have asked him to make you put away your weapons and stack them 
before me. 
Mussoorie, 30-5-'46 
Harijan,  9-6-1946 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 250   
79. NOT LONELY 
Mutual trust and mutual love are no trust and no love. The real love is to love 
them that hate you, to love your neighbour even though you distrust him. I 
have sound reasons for distrusting the English official world. If my love is 
sincere, I must love the Englishman in spite of my distrust. Of what avail is my 
love, if it be only so long as I trust my friend? Even thieves do that. They 
become enemies immediately the trust is gone. 
I am unable to think that the incendiarism, the looting, the insults heaped upon 
Englishmen are or were acts of hooligans. Who are hooligans? Will there be 
none when English rule is no more? The fashion of blaming the hooligan ought 
to be given up. We are the makers of the brand. They respond to the air about 
them. 
Imagine the senselessness of looting grain shops. The looters did not help 
themselves. Even if they did, they were not starving. The grain was meant for 
the starving. If it was being misused, looting could not prevent that misuse. 
Usurpers will always replace the looted grain while there is any to usurp. 
Between the two sets of looters the starving will be more starved than before. 
They who incited the mutineers did not know what they were doing. The latter 
were bound to submit ultimately. Or, was it meant as a lesson in violence? That 
is not the way to understand history. 
I ask myself, and perhaps others are asking, why I am not repeating what I did 
after Chauri Chaura. I have no call in that direction. When or if it comes, 
nothing in the world will prevent me, ill or well. Let me re-affirm the truth 
that I love the Englishman as well as the Indian. Both are humans. Yet I want 
the rule of and for the masses of India. Lokamanya has taught us that Home 
Rule or Swaraj is their birth right. That Swaraj is not to be obtained by what is 
going on now in Bombay, Calcutta and Karachi. Let every Congressman, 
whether four-anna member or not, think for himself where Congress should 
stand. Let us not deceive ourselves and the world. 
Poona, 24-2-'46 
Harijan,  3-3-1946 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 251   
80. STATEMENT ON GENERAL AVARI’S FAST 
Letters and wires continue to come to me seeking my aid in saving General 
Avari's life which seems now to be sinking. I know Gen. Avari. He is a lovable 
worker. But I know too that he is often improperly obstinate. The present 
occasion is a case in point. If a man however popular and great he may be, 
takes up an improper cause and fasts in defence of the impropriety, it is the 
duty of his friends (among whom I count myself), fellow workers and relatives 
to let him die rather than that an improper cause should triumph so that he 
may live. Fairest means cease to be fair when the end sought is unfair. Let me 
say once more where Gen. Avari's end is improper and unfair. He may be wholly 
right in his statement that a great wrong has been perpetrated by the Central 
Parliamentary Board of the Congress. But who can right the wrong? Not Sardar 
Vallabhbhai Patel as Gen. Avari tells me he can. He is but an individual, Sardar 
though he is. He has pronounced the decision of the Board. A judge cannot 
review his own judgment. The Sardar is out of the picture. The Central Board 
cannot, must not, review its own judgment. It has no authority. No institution 
can act capriciously in a well managed democracy. Gen. Avari and his friends 
have the right of appeal or review by the Working Committee, then the A. I. C. 
C., finally the Congress. This procedure may appear to him too long. It is not, 
unless he is fighting for an individual or individuals and not for a principle as he 
assures me he is doing. Time always runs in favour of the defence of a 
principle. If the general session of the Congress which is the highest tribunal for 
vindicating justice decides against Gen. Avari, he has to submit to its verdict. 
The Congress is the Panchayat. Like the king it can do no wrong. This is merely 
a necessary and legitimate conception for guidance in the observance of an 
infallible duty. In truth, however, decisions of human organizations in all climes 
have been sometimes found to be wrong. So it may be in the case under 
discussion. Then, but not till then, will Gen. Avari have in theory the right, if 
he chooses to exercise it, to stir public conscience into action by a fast to the 
finish. In practice, it will be ludicrous. For the principle behind such action can My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 252  only euphemistically be so called. In democracy even pure men may 
unconsciously give wrong decisions. The remedy is more and purer education, 
greater awakening of the public and in such quickened atmosphere the rise of a 
number of public workers whose sole duty will be to speak, write and act so as 
to serve as bright examples for the public. 
Now I hope the friends of Gen. Avari will understand me when I say that those 
who wrongly support him and his fast and thus encourage him will hasten Gen. 
Avari's death, not those who will not swerve from well-recognized canons of 
justice even for the sake of saving the life of an erring friend. Let justice 
triumph though the heavens weep.  
Poona, 7-3-'46  
Harijan,  17-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 253   
81. FASTING IN THE AIR 
"Fasting has become a veritable epidemic. The blame lies at your door." So writes a 
correspondent and adds: "One can understand the efficacy of a fast for purposes of 
inward purification as also for the outward. But fasts are undertaken nowadays for 
an increment in one's own pay or in that of one's group, for being selected as a 
candidate for the Assembly or for various other causes. You encourage one man for 
fasting for the removal of untouchability and yet you are willing to let another die 
who is doing the same for a different cause. Is this not injustice? Should you not lay 
down rules as to when too fast and when not to, what should be its duration, 
should fruit juices be taken or only water? You talk of the inner voice where you 
are concerned. Would it not really be best if you were to stop undertaking fasts 
yourself and stop others too?" 
There is force in the above argument. It is, however, impossible to lay down 
rules. Experience alone can suggest rules. In particular cases it is open to a 
person to frame his own law or he can refer to me, if he believes me to be an 
authority. 
One general principle, however, I would like to enunciate. A Satyagrahi should 
fast only as a last resort when all other avenues of redress have been explored 
and have failed. There is no room for imitation in fasts. He who has no inner 
strength should not dream of it, and never with attachment to success. But if a 
Satyagrahi once undertakes a fast from conviction, he must stick to his resolve 
whether there is a chance of his action bearing fruit or not. This does not mean 
that fasting cannot or can bear fruit. He who fasts in the expectation of fruit 
generally fails. And even if he does not seemingly fail, he loses all the inner joy 
which a true fast holds. 
Whether one should take fruit juices or not depends on one's physical powers of 
endurance. But no more fruit juice than is absolutely necessary for the body 
should be taken. He probably has the greatest inner strength who takes only 
water. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 254  It is wrong to fast for selfish ends, e.g. for increase in one's own salary. Under 
certain circumstances it is permissible to fast for an increase in wages on 
behalf of one's group. 
Ridiculous fasts spread like plague and are harmful. But when fasting becomes 
a duty it cannot be given up. Therefore I do fast when I consider it to be 
necessary and cannot abstain from it on any score. What I do myself I cannot 
prevent others from doing under similar circumstances. It is common knowledge 
that the best of good things are often abused. We see this happening everyday.  
New Delhi, 13-4-'46 
Harijan,  21-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 255   
82. PRESS STATEMENTS 
I 
I have followed the events now happening in India with painful interest. This 
mutiny in the Navy and what is following is not, in any sense of the term, non-
violent, action. Inasmuch as a single person is compelled to shout Jai Hind  or 
any popular slogan, a nail is driven into the coffin of Swaraj in terms of the 
dumb millions of India. Destruction of churches and the like is not the way to 
Swaraj as defined by the Congress. Burning of tramcars and other property, 
insulting and injuring Europeans, is not non-violence of the Congress type, 
much less mine, if and in so far as it may be different from the Congress. Let 
the known and unknown leaders of this thoughtless orgy of violence know what 
they are doing and then follow their bent. Let it not be said that India of the 
Congress spoke to the world of winning Swaraj through non-violent action and 
belied her word in action and that too at the critical period in her life. I have 
deliberately used the adjective "thoughtless". For, there is such a thing as 
thoughtful violent action. What I see happening now is not thoughtful. If the 
Indian member of the Navy know and appreciate non-violence, the way of non-
violent resistance can be dignified, manly and wholly effective, if it is 
corporate. For the individual it always is. Why should they continue to serve if 
service is humiliating for them or India? Action like this I have called non-
violent non-co-operation. As it is, they are setting a bad and unbecoming 
example for India. 
A combination between Hindus and Muslims and others for the purpose of 
violent action is unholy and will lead to and probably is a preparation for 
mutual violence— bad for India and the world. 
The rulers have declared their intention to 'quit' in favour of Indian rule. Let 
the action be not delayed by a moment because of the exhibition of distressful 
unrest which has been lying hidden in the breast. Their might is unquestioned. 
Its use beyond the bare requirement will be unworthy and even wicked if it is My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 256  made to suppress the people or a portion of them. The people have been far 
too long under the foreign heel.  
Poona, 23-2-'46 
Harijan,  3-3-1946 
 
II 
I congratulate Shrimati Aruna Asaf Ali on her courageous refutation of my 
statement on the happenings in Bombay. Except for the fact that she 
represents not only herself but also a fairly large body of underground workers, 
I would not have noticed her refutation, if only because she is a daughter of 
mine — not less so because not born to me or because she is a rebel. I had the 
pleasure of meeting her on several occasions while she was underground. I 
admired her bravery, resourcefulness and burning love of the country. But my 
admiration stopped there. I did not like her being underground. I do not 
appreciate any underground activity. I know that millions cannot go 
underground. Millions need not. A select few may fancy that they will bring 
Swaraj to the millions by secretly directing their activity. Will this not be 
spoon-feeding? Only open challenge and open activity is for all to follow. Real 
Swaraj  must  be felt by all — man, woman and child. To labour for that 
consummation is true revolution. India has become a pattern for all exploited 
races of the earth, because India's has been an open, unarmed effort which 
demands sacrifice from all without inflicting injury on the usurper. The millions 
in India would not have been awakened but for the open, unarmed struggle. 
Every deviation from the straight path has meant a temporary arrest of the 
evolutionary revolution. 
I do not read the 1942 events as does the brave lady. It was good that the 
people rose spontaneously. It was bad that some or many resorted to violence. 
It makes no difference that Shri Kishorlal Mashruwala, Kakasaheb and other 
workers, in their impatient zeal for the moment, misinterpreted non-violence. 
That they did so, only shows how delicate an instrument non-violence is. My My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 257  analogy is not meant to cast any reflection on any person. Everyone acted as he 
or she thought best. Supineness in the face of overwhelming organized violence 
would have meant cowardice. I would be weak and wrong if I failed to give my 
estimate of the doings of 1942. 
Aruna would "rather unite Hindus and Muslims at the barricade than on the 
constitution front." Even in terms of violence, this is a misleading proposition. If 
the union at the barricade is honest, there must be union at the constitutional 
front. Fighters do not always live at the barricade. They are too wise to commit 
suicide. The barricade life has always to be followed by the constitutional. That 
front is not taboo forever. 
It is a matter of great relief that the ratings have listened to Sardar Patel's 
advice to surrender. They have not surrendered their honour. So far as I can 
see, in resorting to mutiny they were badly advised. If it was for grievance, 
fancied or real, they should have waited for the guidance and intervention of 
political leaders of their choice. If they mutinied for the freedom of India they 
were doubly wrong. They could not do so without a call from a prepared 
revolutionary party. They were thoughtless and ignorant if they believed that 
by their might, they would deliver India from foreign domination. 
Aruna is right when she says that the fighters this time showed grit as never 
before. But grit becomes fool- hardiness when it is untimely and suicidal as this 
was. 
She is entitled to say that the people "are not interested in the ethics of 
violence or non-violence", but the people are very much interested in knowing 
the way which will bring freedom to the masses — violence or non-violence. 
The people have, however imperfectly, hitherto gone the way of non-violence. 
Aruna and her comrades have to ask themselves every time whether the non-
violent way has or has not raised India from her slumber of ages and created in 
them a yearning, very vague perhaps, for Swaraj. There is, in my opinion, only 
one answer.  
Poona, 26-2-'46 
Harijan,  3-3-1946 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 258   
83. FRUITS OF VIOLENCE 
"Look at Italy," said Gandhiji the other day to a friend who would have 
independence at all costs. "Garibaldi was a great man. He brought deliverance 
to Italy. And Mussolini did make her look great. But where is she today? Look at 
Japan, look at Germany. The very violence which brought them to the pinnacle 
of power has razed them to the ground. And has not the atom bomb proved the 
futility of all violence? And yet we are crazy enough to think that we can win 
Swaraj by breaking a few skulls and destroying property which, after all is said 
and done, is our own." Needless to say that all these happenings have filled him 
with unspeakable -anguish. But he is an irrepressible optimist. "I am sure, out 
of this orgy of violence the people will learn the lesson of non-violence," he 
remarked. The sense of oppression and misery that he feels at what is 
happening is so great that only his unquenchable faith in the God of Truth and 
Non-violence could sustain him.  
Poona, 3-3-'46  
Harijan,  10-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 259   
84. FOR SHAME ! 
No Moral Alibis 
"It has become the fashion these days to ascribe all such ugly manifestations to 
the activities of hooligans. It hardly becomes us to take refuge in that moral 
alibi. Who are the hooligans after all? They are our own countrymen and so long 
as any countryman of ours indulges in such acts we cannot disown responsibility 
for them consistently with our claim that we are one people. It matters little 
whether those who were responsible for the happenings are denounced as  
goondas  or praised as patriots — praise and blame must equally belong to us all. 
The only manly and becoming course for those who are aspiring to be free is to 
accept either whilst doing our duty. 
 
"The Way of the Lord" 
"In eating, sleeping and in the performance of other physical functions, man is 
not different from the brute. What distinguishes him from the brute is his 
ceaseless striving to rise above the brute on the moral plane. Mankind is at the 
cross roads. It has to make its choice between the law of the jungle and the 
law of humanity. We in India deliberately adopted the latter twenty-five years 
back, but I am afraid that whilst we profess to follow the higher way, our 
practice has not always conformed to our profession. We have always 
proclaimed from the housetops that non-violence is the way of the brave but 
there are some amongst us who have brought Ahimsa into disrepute by using it 
as a weapon of the weak. In my opinion, to remain a passive spectator of the 
kind of crimes that Bombay has witnessed of late is cowardice. Let me say in all 
humility that Ahimsa belongs to the brave. Pritam has sung: 'The way of the 
Lord is for the brave, not for the coward.' By the way of the Lord is here meant 
the way of non-violence and truth. I have said before that I do not envisage God 
other than truth and non-violence. If you have accepted the doctrine of Ahimsa 
without a full realization of its implications you are at liberty to repudiate it. I My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 260  believe in confessing one's mistakes and correcting them. Such confession 
strengthens one and purifies the soul. Ahimsa calls for the strength and courage 
to suffer without retaliation, to receive blows without returning any. But that 
does not exhaust its meaning. Silence becomes cowardice when occasion 
demands speaking out the whole truth and acting accordingly. We have to 
cultivate that courage, if we are to win India's independence through truth and 
non-violence as proclaimed by the Congress. It is an ideal worth living for and 
dying for. Every one of you who has accepted that ideal should feel that 
inasmuch as a single English woman or child is assaulted it is a challenge to 
your creed of non-violence and you should protect the threatened victim even 
at the cost of your life. Then alone you will have the right to sing 'The way of 
the Lord is for the brave, not for the coward.' To attack defenceless English 
women and children because one has a grievance against the present 
Government hardly becomes a human being." 
Harijan,  7-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 261   
85. THE NON-VIOLENT SANCTION 
What is the place of Satyagraha in making the rich realize their duty towards 
the poor? 
A. The same as against the foreign power. Satyagraha is a law of universal 
application. Beginning with the family its use can be extended to every other 
circle. Suppose a landowner exploits his tenants, and mulcts them of the fruit 
of their toil by appropriating it to his own use. When they expostulate with him 
he does not listen and raises objections that he requires so much for his wife, 
so much for his children and so on. The tenants or those who have espoused 
their cause and have influence will make an appeal to his wife to expostulate 
with her husband. She would probably say that for herself she does not need his 
exploited money. The children will say likewise that they would earn for 
themselves what they need. 
Supposing further that he listens to nobody or that his wife and children 
combine against the tenants, they will not submit. They will quit if asked to do 
so but they will make it clear that the land belongs to him who tills it. The 
owner cannot till all the land himself and he will have to give in to their just 
demands. It may, however, be that the tenants are replaced by others. 
Agitation short of violence will then continue till the replacing tenants see their 
error and make common cause with the evicted tenants. Thus Satyagraha is a 
process of educating public opinion, such that it covers all the elements of 
society and in the end makes itself irresistible. Violence interrupts the process 
and prolongs the real revolution of the whole social structure. 
The conditions necessary for the success of Satyagraha are: (1) The Satyagrahi 
should not have any hatred in his heart against the opponent. (2) The issue 
must be true and substantial. (3) The Satyagrahi must be prepared to suffer till 
the end. 
Poona, 4-3-'46 
Harijan,  31-3-1946 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 262   
86. SATYAGRAHA— THE ART OF LIVING AND DYING 
"The root of Satyagraha is in prayer. A Satyagrahi relies upon God for protection 
against the tyranny of brute force. Why should you then be always afraid of the 
British or anybody playing you false? If someone deceives you, he will be the 
loser. The fight of Satyagraha is for the strong in spirit, not the doubter or the 
timid. Satyagraha teaches us the art of living as well as dying. Birth and death 
are inevitable among mortals. What distinguishes the man from the brute is his 
conscious striving to realize the spirit within. The last eighteen verses of the 
second chapter of the Gita which are recited at the prayer give in a nutshell 
the secret of the art of living. It is given there in the form of a description of a  
sthitaprajna  or the man of steady wisdom, i.e. a Satyagrahi, in reply to Arjun's 
query to Lord Krishna. 
"The art of dying follows as a corollary from the art of living. Death must come 
to all. A man may die of a lightning stroke or as a result of heart failure or 
failure of respiration. But that is not the death that a Satyagrahi can wish for or 
pray for himself. The art of dying for a Satyagrahi consists in facing death 
cheerfully in the performance of one's duty. That is an art which the people of 
Bombay apparently have not yet learnt. It is not enough not to want to hurt or 
take the life of your enemy. You are no Satyagrahi if you remain silent or 
passive spectators while your enemy is being done to death. You must protect 
him even at the cost of your life. If thousands in India learnt that art, the face 
of India would be changed and no one would be able to point his finger of scorn 
at her nonviolence as being a cloak for weakness. We would not then try to 
shift blame for ugly happenings on the hooligan elements. We would convert 
and control the hooligan elements too."  
Uruli, 24-3-'46 
Harijan,  7-4-1946 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 263   
87. IS EATING FISH VIOLENCE? 
Q. You say that those who eat fish should be provided with it. Does not this 
entail violence both for him who eats and him who provides the fish? 
A. Both commit violence. So do those who eat vegetables. This kind of violence 
is inherent in all embodied life, therefore, in man too. It is in this condition and 
in spite of it that we have to practise non-violence as a duty. I have often 
indicated how we may do so. The man who coerces another not to eat fish 
commits more violence than he who eats it. Fishermen, fish vendors and fish 
eaters are probably unaware of any violence in their action. Even if they were 
they might look upon it as unavoidable. But the man who uses coercion is guilty 
of deliberate violence. Coercion is inhuman. Those who quarrel among 
themselves, those who will stoop to anything in order to amass wealth, those 
who exploit or indulge in forced human labour, those who overload or goad or 
otherwise torture animals, all these knowingly commit such violence as can 
easily be stopped. I do not consider it violence to permit the fish eater to eat 
fish. It is my duty to suffer it. Ahimsa is the highest duty. Even if* we cannot 
practise it in full, we must try to understand its spirit and refrain as far as is 
humanly possible from violence. 
Bombay, 11-3-'46 
Harijan , 24-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 264   
88. RELIGION  V. NO RELIGION 
A correspondent writes: 
"In the Harijanbandhu  of the 5th May you have written that your non-violence 
contemplates destruction of animals dangerous to mankind, such as leopards, 
wolves, snakes, scorpions etc. 
"You do not believe in giving food to dogs etc. Several other people besides the 
Gujaratis look upon the feeding of dogs as a meritorious act. Such a belief may not 
be justifiable in times of food shortage like the present. Yet we must remember 
that these animals can be very useful to man. One can feed them and take work 
out of them. 
"You had put 27 questions to Shri Raichandbhai from Durban. One of these 
questions was: 'What should a seeker do when a snake attacks him?' His answer 
was: 'He should not kill the snake and, if it bites, he should let it do so.' How is it 
'that you speak differently now?" 
I have written a lot on this subject in the past. At that time the topic was the 
killing of rabid dogs. There was much discussion on the subject but all that 
seems to have been forgotten. 
My non-violence is not merely kindness to all living creatures. The emphasis laid 
on the sacredness of sub-human life in Jainism is understandable. But that can 
never mean that one is to be kind to this life in preference to human life. While 
writing about the sacredness of such life, I take it that the sacredness of human 
life has been taken for granted. The former has been over-emphasized. And, 
while putting it into practice, the idea has undergone distortion. For instance, 
there are many who derive complete satisfaction in feeding ants. It would 
appear that the theory has become a wooden, lifeless dogma. Hypocrisy and 
distortion are passing current under the name of religion. 
Ahimsa is the highest ideal. It is meant for the brave, never for the cowardly. 
To benefit by others' killing and delude oneself into the belief that one is being 
very religious and non-violent, is sheer self-deception. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 265  A so-called votary of non-violence will not stay in a village which is visited by a 
leopard every day. He will run away and, when someone has killed the leopard, 
will return to take charge of his hearth and home. This is not non-violence. This 
is a coward's violence. The man who has killed the leopard has at least given 
proof of some bravery. The man who takes advantage of the killing is a coward. 
He can never expect to know true non-violence. 
In life it is impossible to eschew violence completely. The question arises, 
where is one to draw the line? The line cannot be the same for everyone. 
Although essentially the principle is the same, yet everyone applies it in his or 
her own way. What is one man's food can be another's poison. Meat-eating is a 
sin for me. Yet, for another person, who has always lived on meat and never 
seen anything wrong in it, to give it up simply in order to copy me will be a sin. 
If I wish to be an agriculturist and stay in the jungle, I will have to use the 
minimum unavoidable violence in order to protect my fields. I will have to kill 
monkeys, birds and insects which eat up my crops. If I do not wish to do so 
myself, I will have to engage someone to do it for me. There is not much 
difference between the two. To allow crops to be eaten up by animals in the 
name of Ahimsa while there is a famine in the land is certainly a sin. Evil and 
good are relative terms. What is good under certain conditions can become an 
evil or a sin under a different set of conditions. 
Man is not to drown himself in the well of Shastras but he is to dive in their 
broad ocean and bring out pearls. At every step he has to use his discrimination 
as to what is Ahimsa and what is Himsa. In this there is no room for shame or 
cowardice. The poet has said that the road leading up to God is for the brave, 
never for the cowardly. 
Finally, Raichandbhai's advice to me was that if I had courage, if I wanted to 
see God face to face, I should let myself be bitten by a snake instead of killing 
it. I have never killed a snake before or after receiving that letter. That is no 
matter of credit for me. My ideal is to be able to play with snakes and scorpions 
fearlessly. But it is merely a wish so far. Whether and when it will be realized I 
do not know. Everywhere I have let my people kill both. I could have prevented My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 266  them if I had wished. But how could I? I did not have the courage to take them 
up with my own hands and teach my companions a lesson in fearlessness. I am 
ashamed that I could not do so. But my shame could not benefit them or me. 
If Ramanama favours me I might still attain that courage some day. In the 
meantime, I consider it my duty to act as I have stated above. Religion is a 
thing to be lived. It is not mere sophistry. 
Mussoorie, 29-5-'46  
Harijan,  9-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 267   
89. DIFFERENCES WITH THE SOCIALISTS 
Q. What is the difference between your technique and that of the communists 
or socialists for realizing the goal of economic equality? 
A. The socialists and communists say they can do nothing to bring about 
economic equality today. They will just carry on propaganda in its favour and 
to that end they believe in generating and accentuating hatred. They say, when 
they get control over the State they will enforce equality. Under my plan the 
State will be there to carry out the will of the people, not to dictate to them or 
force them to do its will. I shall bring about economic equality through non-
violence, by converting the people to my point of view by harnessing the forces 
of love as against hatred. I will not wait till I have converted the whole society 
to my view but will straightaway make a beginning with myself. It goes without 
saying that I cannot hope to bring about economic equality of my conception, if 
I am the owner of fifty motor cars or even of ten  bighas of land. For that I have 
to reduce myself to the level of the poorest of the poor. That is what I have 
been trying to do for the last fifty years or more, and so I claim to be a 
foremost communist although I make use of cars and other facilities offered to 
me by the rich. They have no hold on me and I can shed them at a moment's 
notice, if the interests of the masses demand it. 
Poona, 4-3-'46 
Harijan,  31-3-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 268   
90. SWEEPERS' STRIKE 
There are certain matters in which strikes would be wrong. Sweepers' 
grievances come in this category. I do not want to go into others here. My 
opinion against sweepers'' strikes dates back to about 1897 when I was in 
Durban. A general strike was mooted there and the question arose as to 
whether scavengers should join in it. My vote was registered against the 
proposal. Just as man cannot live without air, so too he cannot exist for long if 
his home and surroundings are not clean. One or other epidemic is bound to 
break out especially when modern drainage is put out of action. 
An impartial tribunal for settling disputes should always be accepted. Refusal is 
a sign of weakness. A Bhangi may not give up his work even for a day. And there 
are many other ways open to him of securing justice. 
Townspeople should, on the other hand, forget that there is such a thing as 
untouchability and learn the art of cleaning their own and the city's drains, so 
that if a similar occasion arises, they are not nonplussed and can render the 
necessary temporary service. They may not be coerced. I go so far as to say 
that the military who know this work should be used for such emergency. If 
Swaraj is round the bend, we can now look upon the military as ours and need 
have no hesitation in taking all the constructive work we can from them. Up till 
now they have only been employed in indiscriminate firing on us. Today they 
must plough the land, dig wells, clean latrines and do every other constructive 
work that they can, and thus turn the people's hatred of them into love. 
New Delhi, 15-4-'46 
Harijan , 21-4-1946 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 269   
91. PEACEFUL STRIKES 
Q. How should a strike be conducted so that hooliganism and violence are 
avoided? 
A. A strike should be spontaneous and not manipulated. If it is organized 
without any compulsion there would be no chance for goondaism and looting. 
Such a strike would be characterized by perfect co-operation amongst the 
strikers. It should be peaceful and there should be no show of force. The 
strikers should take up some work either singly or in co-operation with each 
other, in order to earn their bread. The nature of such work should have been 
thought out beforehand. It goes without saying that in a peaceful, effective and 
firm strike of this character, there will be no room for rowdyism or looting. I 
have known of such strikes. I have not presented a Utopian picture. 
New Delhi, 26-5-'46 
Harijan,  2-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 270   
92. STRIKES 
Obviously there should be no strike which is not justifiable on merits. No unjust 
strike should succeed. All public sympathy must be withheld from such strikes. 
The public has no means of judging the merits of a strike, unless it is backed by 
impartial persons enjoying public confidence. Interested men cannot judge the 
merits of their own case. Hence, there must be an arbitration accepted by the 
parties or a judicial adjudication. As a rule, the matter does not come before 
the public when there is accepted arbitration or adjudication. Cases have, 
however, happened when haughty employers have ignored awards, or 
misguided employees, conscious of their power to assert themselves, have done 
likewise and have decided upon forcible extortion. 
Strikes for economic betterment should never have a political end as an ulterior 
motive. Such a mixture never advances the political end and generally brings 
trouble upon strikers, even when they do not dislocate public life, as in the 
case of public utility services, such as the postal strike. The Government may 
suffer some inconvenience, but will not come to a standstill. Rich persons will 
put up expensive postal services but the vast mass of the poor people will be 
deprived during such a strike of a convenience of primary importance to which 
they have become used for generations. Such strikes can only take place when 
every other legitimate means has been adopted and failed. 
Sympathetic strikes must be taboo until it is conclusively proved that the 
affected men have exhausted all the legitimate means at their disposal. 
One hears of strikes all over the country to paralyse the Government. This 
paralysis is an extreme political step, open only to a body like the Congress, not 
even to unions, however powerful they may be. If the Congress is the people's 
arm par excellence  for the purpose of winning independence, paralysing action 
should be retained solely in the hands of the Congress. 
It follows from the foregoing that political strikes must be treated on their own 
merits and must never be mixed with or related to economic strikes. Political My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 271  strikes have a definite place in non-violent action. They are never taken up 
haphazard. They must be open, never led by goondaism. They are calculated 
never to lead to violence. 
Uruli-Kanchan, 3-8-'46  
Harijan , 11-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 272   
93. NON-VIOLENT STRIKES 
"Strikes have today become a universal plague," Gandhiji replied. "There are 
strikes everywhere, America and England not excepted. But in India they have a 
special significance. We are living under an unnatural condition. As soon as the 
lid is removed and there is a crevice letting in the fresh air of freedom, there 
will be an increasing number of strikes. The fundamental reason for this 
spreading strike fever is that life here as elsewhere, is today uprooted from its 
basis, the basis of religion, and what an English writer has called 'cash nexus' 
has taken its place. And that is a precarious bond. But even when the religious 
basis is there, there will be strikes, because it is scarcely conceivable that 
religion will have become for all the basis of life. So, there will be attempts at 
exploitation on the one hand, and strikes on the other. But these strikes will 
then be of a purely non-violent character. Such strikes never do harm to 
anyone. It was such a strike perhaps that brought General Smuts to his knees. 'If 
you had hurt an Englishman,' said Jan. Smuts, 'I would have shot you, even 
deported your people. As it is, I have put you in prison and tried to subdue you 
and your people in every way. But how long can I go on like this when you do 
not retaliate?' And so he had to come to terms with a mere coolie on behalf of  
coolies  as all Indians were then called in South Africa." 
New Delhi, 16-9-'46 
Harijan , 22-9-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 273   
94. NON-VIOLENT VOLUNTEER CORPS 
Some time ago an attempt was made, at my instance, to form  shanti dais but 
nothing came of it. This lesson, however, was learnt that the membership, in 
its very nature, of such organizations could not be large. Ordinarily, the 
efficient running of a large volunteer corps based on force implies the 
possibility of the use of force in the event of breach of discipline. In such 
bodies little or no stress is laid on a man's character. Physique is the chief 
factor. The contrary must obtain in non-violent bodies in which character or 
soul force must mean everything and physique must take second place. It is 
difficult to find many such persons. That is why non-violent corps must be 
small, if they are to be efficient. Such brigades may be scattered all over; 
there may be one each for a village or a mohalla.  The members must know one 
another well. Each corps will select its own head. All the members will have 
the same status, but where everyone is doing the same work there must be one 
person under whose discipline all must come, or else the work will suffer. 
Where there are two or more brigades the leaders must consult among them-
selves and decide on a common line of action. In that way alone lies success. 
If non-violent volunteer corps are formed on the above lines, they can easily 
stop trouble. These corps will not require all the physical training given in  
akhadas, but a certain part of it will be necessary. 
One thing, however, should be common to members of all such organizations 
and that is implicit faith in God. He is the only companion and doer. Without 
faith in Him these peace brigades will be lifeless. By whatever name one calls 
God, one must realize that one can only work through His strength. Such a man 
will never take another's life. He will allow himself, if need be, to be killed and 
thereby live through his victory over death. 
The mind of the man in whose life the realization of this law has become a 
living reality will not be bewildered in a crisis. He will instinctively know the 
right way to act. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 274  In spite, however, of what I have said above I would like to give some rules 
culled from my own experience: 
1 A volunteer may not carry any weapons. 
2 The members of a corps must be easily recognizable. 
3 Every volunteer must carry bandages, scissors, needl e and thread, surgical 
knife etc. for rendering first aid. 
4 He should know how to carry and remove the wounded. 
5 He should know how to put out fires, how to enter a fire area without 
getting burnt, how to climb heights for rescue work and descend safely 
with or without his charge. 
6 He should be well acquainted with all the residents of his locality. This is a 
service in itself. 
7 He should recite Ramanama ceaselessly in his heart a nd persuade others 
who believe to do likewise. 
There are many who, whether from mental laziness or from having fallen into a 
bad habit believe that God is and will help us unasked. Why then is it necessary 
to recite His name? It is true that if God is, He is irrespective of our belief. But 
realization of God is infinitely more than mere belief. That can come only by 
constant practice. This is true of all science. How much mere true of the 
science of all sciences? 
Man often repeats the name of God parrot-wise and expects fruit from so 
doing. The true seeker must have that living faith which will not only dispel the 
untruth of parrot- wise repetition from within him but also from the hearts of 
others. 
New Delhi, 26-4-'46 
Harijan,  5-5-1946 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 275   
95. INDEPENDENCE 
Independence of my dream means Ramarajya, i.e. the Kingdom of God on 
earth. I do not know what it will be like in Heaven. I have no desire to know the 
distant scene. If the present is attractive enough, the future cannot be very 
unlike. 
In concrete terms, then, the independence should be political, economic and 
moral. 
'Political' necessarily means the removal of the control of the British army in 
every shape and form. 
'Economic' means entire freedom from British capitalists and capital, as also 
their Indian counterpart. In other words, the humblest must feel equal to the 
tallest. This can take place only by capital or capitalists sharing their skill and 
capital with the lowliest and the least. 
'Moral' means freedom from armed defence forces. My conception of Ramarajya 
excludes replacement of the British army by a national army of occupation. A 
country that is governed by even its national army can never be morally free 
and, therefore, its so-called weakest member can never rise to his full moral 
height. 
India will have to decide whether attempting to become a military power she 
would be content to become, at least for some years, a fifth-rate power in the 
world without a message in answer to the pessimism or whether she will by 
further refining and continuing her non-violent policy prove herself worthy of 
being the first nation in the world using her hard-won freedom for the delivery 
of the earth from the burden which is crushing her in spite of the so-called 
victory. 
New Delhi, 29-4-'46 
Harijan,  5-5-1946 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 276   
96. CERTAIN QUESTIONS 
Q. 1. Is it possible for a modern State (which is essentially based on force) to 
offer non-violent resistance for countering internal as well as external forces of 
disorder? Or is it necessary that people wanting to offer non-violent resistance 
should first of all divest themselves of State- authority and place themselves 
vis-a-vis the opponent entirely in a private capacity? 
A. It is not possible for a modern State based on force, non-violently to resist 
forces of disorder, whether external or internal. A man cannot serve God and 
Mammon, nor be 'temperate and furious' at the same time. It is claimed that a 
State can be based on non-violence, i.e. it can offer non-violent resistance 
against a world combination based on armed force. Such a State was Ashoka's. 
The example can be repeated. But the case does not become weak even if it be 
shown that Ashoka's State was not based on nonviolence. It has to be examined 
on its merits. 
Q. 2. Do you think that it would be possible for a Congress government to deal 
with foreign aggression or internal riots in an entirely non-violent manner? 
A. It is certainly possible for a Congress government to deal with "foreign 
aggression or internal riots" in a nonviolent manner. That the Congress may not 
share my belief is quite possible. If the Congress changes its course, the change 
will prove nothing save that the non-violence hitherto offered was of the weak 
and that the Congress has no faith in State non-violence. 
Q. 3. Does not the knowledge that the opponent is wedded to non-violence 
often encourage the bully? 
A. The bully has his opportunity when he has to face non-violence of the weak. 
Non-violence of the strong is any day stronger than that of the bravest soldier 
fully armed or a whole host. 
Q. 4. What policy would you advocate if a section of the Indian people tries to 
enforce by sword a selfish measure which is not only repugnant to others but 
also basically unjust? While it is possible for an unofficial organization to offer My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 277  non-violent resistance in such a case, is it also possible for the government of 
the day to do so? 
A. The question assumes a case which can never exist. A non-violent State must 
be broad-based on the will of an intelligent people, well able to know its mind 
and act up to it. In such a State the assumed section can only be negligible. It 
can never stand against the deliberate will of the overwhelming majority 
represented by the State. The government of the day is not outside the people. 
It is the will of the overwhelming majority. If it is expressed non-violently, it 
cannot be a majority of one but nearer 99 against 1 in a hundred. 
Q. 5. Is not non-violent resistance by the militarily strong more effective than 
that by the militarily weak? 
A. This is a contradiction in terms. There can be no non-violence offered by the 
militarily strong. Thus, Russia in order to express non-violence has to discard all 
her power of doing violence. What is true is that if those, who were at one time 
strong in armed might, change their mind, they will be better able to 
demonstrate their non-violence to the world and, therefore, also to their 
opponents. Those who are strong in non-violence will not mind whether they 
are opposed by the militarily weak people or the strongest. 
Q. 6. Is it not better under existing circumstances that countries like India and 
England should maintain full military efficiency while resolving to give non-
violent resistance a reasonable trial before taking any military step? 
A. The foregoing answers should make it clear that under no circumstances can 
India and England give nonviolent resistance a reasonable chance whilst they 
are both maintaining full military efficiency. At the same time it is perfectly 
true that all military powers carry on negotiations for peaceful adjustment of 
rival disputes. But here we are not discussing preliminary peace parleys before 
appealing to the arbitrament of war. We are discussing a final substitute for 
armed conflict called war, in naked terms mass murder. 
Simla, 2-5-'46 
Harijan,  12-5-1946 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 278   
97. ATOM BOMB AND AHIMSA 
It has been suggested by American friends that the atom bomb will bring in 
Ahimsa as nothing else can. It will, if it is meant that its destructive power will 
so disgust the world that it will turn it away from violence for the time being. 
This is very like a man glutting himself with dainties to the point of nausea and 
turning away from them only to return with redoubled zeal after the effect of 
nausea is well over. Precisely in the same manner will the world return to 
violence with renewed zeal after the effect of disgust is worn out. 
Often does good come out of evil. But that is God's, not man's plan. Man knows 
that only evil can come out of evil, as good out of good. 
That atomic energy though harnessed by American scientists and army men for 
destructive purposes may be utilized by other scientists for humanitarian 
purposes is undoubtedly within the realm of possibility. But that is not what 
was meant by my American friends. They were not so simple as to put a 
question which connoted an obvious truth. An incendiary uses fire for his 
destructive and nefarious purposes, a housewife makes daily use of it in 
preparing nourishing food for mankind. 
So far as I can see, the atomic bomb has deadened the finest feeling that has 
sustained mankind for ages. There used to be the so-called laws of war which 
made it tolerable. Now we know the naked truth. War knows no law except 
that of might. The atom bomb brought an empty victory to the allied arms but 
it resulted for the time being in destroying the soul of Japan. What has 
happened to the soul of the destroying nation is yet too early to see. Forces of 
nature act in a mysterious manner. We can but solve the mystery by deducing 
the unknown result from the known results of similar event. A slave-holder 
cannot hold a slave without putting himself or his deputy in the cage holding 
the slave. Let no one run away with the idea that I wish to put in a defence of 
Japanese misdeeds in pursuance of Japan's unworthy ambition. The difference 
was only one of degree. I assume that Japan's greed was more unworthy. But My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 279  the greater unworthiness conferred no right on the less unworthy of destroying 
without mercy men, women and children of Japan in a particular area. 
The moral to be legitimately drawn from the supreme tragedy of the bomb is 
that it will not be destroyed by counter-bombs even as violence cannot be by 
counter- violence. Mankind has to get out of violence only through non-
violence. Hatred can be overcome only by love. Counter- hatred only increases 
the surface as well as the depth of hatred. I am aware that I am repeating what 
I have many times stated before and practised to the best of my ability and 
capacity. What I first stated was itself nothing new. It was as old as the hills. 
Only I recited no copy-book maxim but definitely announced what I believed in 
every fibre of my being. Sixty years of practice in various walks of life has only 
enriched the belief which experience of friends has fortified. It is however the 
central truth by which one can stand alone without flinching. I believe in what 
Max Muller said years ago, namely that truth needed to be repeated as long as 
there were men who disbelieved it. 
Poona, 1-7-'46 
Harijan,  7-7-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 280   
98. A FAIR HIT 
A correspondent writes : 
"A report from New Delhi dated 16th April, published in The Times of India  of 
the 18th says that at a prayer meeting held on Tuesday evening you said: 
"1. 'The machinery and even engineers were all foreign. He had no enmity with 
machinery. Mills, he said, could not remove the poverty of India, but on the other 
hand had deprived crores of villagers of their work and practically ruined them. 
Those Indians responsible for ruining the villages had become foreigners and as 
such they should live in foreign countries.' 
"How can you reconcile this statement with the gentlemen who form the Board of 
Trustees of the Kasturba Memorial Fund, the primary aim of which is to improve 
conditions in villages. The majority of these gentlemen are industrialists and 
owners of mills. Can they, who are responsible for ruining the villages, and still 
continue to ruin them by their mills, be ever capable of sincere help in improving 
the condition of villagers? 
"2. You have so often talked and written against the curse of black markets. How 
many of the trustees of the Kasturba Memorial Fund can lay their hands on their 
hearts and say they have not dealt in the black market either as buyers or sellers?" 
This is a fair hit. That mill-owners and such others have joined the Kasturba 
Trust is a compliment to my Ahimsa. Though I express my opinions strongly,, 
there is no sting in them, nothing personal. I have no sense of shame in 
befriending mill-owners whose business, I hold, should be stopped, not forcibly 
but by reason. Education of the public could bring about results which no force 
can. I must say in favour of the capitalist class trustees that they never 
interfered with the decision of non-capitalist trustees. Indeed, they have 
always helped by their knowledge. The combination is good and beneficial to 
the Trust. Their sincerity cannot be questioned; for, they have faith in their 
capacity and the modern trend. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 281  As to black markets, I do not know that any of the trustees have black market 
dealings. But should I discover any, I should think twice before inviting them to 
leave the Trust. They have not imposed themselves on the Trust. 
Delhi, 21-5-'46  
Harijan,  26-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 282   
99. LOUIS FISCHER'S INTERVIEW  
Socialist with a Difference 
That turned the discussion on to socialism. "You are a socialist and so are they," 
interpolated Fischer. 
Gandhiji : "I am, they are not. I was a socialist before many of them were born. 
I carried conviction to a rabid socialist in Johannesburg, but that is neither here 
nor there. My claim will live when their socialism is dead." 
"What do you mean by your socialism?" 
"My socialism means 'even unto this last'. I do not want to rise on the ashes of 
the blind, the deaf and the dumb. In their socialism, probably these have no 
place. Their one aim is material progress. For instance, America aims at having 
a car for every citizen. I do not. I want freedom for full expression of my 
personality. I must be free to build a staircase to Sirius if I want to. That does 
not mean that I want to do any such thing. Under the other socialism, there is 
no individual freedom. You own nothing, not even your body." 
"Yes, but there are variations. My socialism in its modified form means that the 
State does not own everything. It does in Russia. There you certainly do not 
own your body even. You may be arrested at any time, though you may have 
committed no crime. They may send you wherever they like." 
"Does not under your socialism, the State own your children and educate them 
in any way it likes?" 
"All States do that. America does it." 
"Then America is not very different from Russia." 
"You really object to dictatorship." 
"But socialism is dictatorship or else arm-chair philosophy. I call myself a 
communist also." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 283  "O, don't. It is terrible for you to call yourself a communist. I want what you 
want, what Jaiprakash and the socialists want: a free world. But the 
communists don't. They want a system which enslaves the body and the mind." 
"Would you say that of Marx?" 
"The communists have corrupted the Marxist teaching to suit their purpose." 
"What about Lenin?" 
"Lenin started it. Stalin has since completed it. When the communists come to 
you, they want to get into the Congress and control the Congress and use it for 
their own ends." 
"So do the socialists. My communism is not very different from socialism. It is a 
harmonious blending of the two. Communism, as I have understood it, is a 
natural corollary of socialism." 
"Yes, you are right. There was a time when the two could not be distinguished. 
But today socialists are very different from communists." 
"You mean to say, you do not want communism of Stalin's type." 
"But the Indian communists want communism of the Stalin type in India and 
want to use your name for that purpose." 
"They won't succeed." 
 
Ethics of Reciprocity 
"Your young men are too Indo-centric," he said. 
"That is only partly true. I won't say we have become international," replied 
Gandhiji, "but we have taken up forlorn causes, e.g., the cause of the exploited 
nations,, because we are ourselves the chief exploited nation." 
"The growing anti-white feeling here is bad," proceeded Gandhiji's interviewer. 
"In Taj Mahal Hotel they have put up a notice 'South Africans not admitted'. I do 
not like it. Your non-violence should make you more generous." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 284  "That won't be non-violence. Today the white man rules in India. So, if Taj 
Mahal has the gumption to put up that notice, it is a feather in its cap." 
Fischer's liberalism felt hurt. "That is what any nationalist will say. You must 
say something better," he remarked. 
"Then I will be a nationalist for once," replied Gandhiji ^with firmness. "They 
have no right to be here if they do not deal with Indians on terms of equality." 
"No right — yes," rejoined Fischer. "But you must give them more than their 
right. You must invite them." 
"Yes, when I am the Viceroy." 
"You mean the President of the Indian Republic." 
"No. I will be quite content to be the Viceroy, a constitutional Viceroy, for the 
time being," said Gandhiji. "The first thing I will do, will be to vacate the 
Viceregal Lodge and give it to the Harijans. I will then invite the South African 
White visitors to my hut and say to them: 'You have ground my people to 
powder. But we won't copy you. We will give more than you deserve. We won't 
lynch you as you do in South Africa,' and thus shame them into doing the right." 
"There is so much anti-white feeling today," put in Fischer somewhat troubled 
in mind. 
"Of course, I am opposed to that. It can do no good to anybody." 
"The world is so divided. And there might be another war and that may be 
between the coloured and the white races." 
"Europe seems to be heading for another war. It is not sufficiently exhausted." 
"Europe is terribly exhausted. But with the atom bomb human beings don't 
matter so much. A few scientists are enough. The next war will be carried on 
by pressing a few buttons. That is why colour war is so dangerous." 
"Anything is better than cowardice. It is violence double distilled." And to 
illustrate his remark Gandhiji narrated the story of a Negro clergyman with a 
Herculean frame in South Africa saying 'pardon me brother', when insulted by a 
white man, and sneaking into a coloured man's compartment. "That is not non-My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 285  violence. It is a travesty of Jesus' teaching. It would have been more manly to 
retaliate." 
"You are not afraid of what happens to you but what it may mean to others," 
replied Fischer, analysing the illustration adduced by Gandhiji. "It takes a great 
deal of irresponsibility to give vent to your feelings and slap the white man 
under the circumstances described by you. In India the situation is different. 
The white men are not so numerous here." 
"You are mistaken," replied Gandhiji. "Why, one Englishman is killed and a 
whole village is razed to the ground as a reprisal. What vindictiveness!" 
 
A Testament of Faith 
"You are strongly constitutionalist now. Is it for fear of the alternative—
violence?" finally asked Fischer. 
"No. If India is destined, to go through a blood bath, it will do so. The thing I 
would fear is my own cowardice or dishonesty. I have neither. So I say, we must 
go in and work it out. If they are dishonest, they will be found out. The loss will 
not be ours but theirs." 
"I think you are afraid of the spirit of violence. It is widespread. I wonder 
whether it has not captured the mood of the youth and you are aware of it, and 
you fear that mood." 
"It has not captured the imagination of the country. I admit that it has captured 
the imagination of a section of the youth." 
"It is a mood that has got to be combated." 
"Yes. I am doing it in my own way. It is my implicit faith that it is a survival 
which will kill itself in time. It cannot live. It is so contrary to the spirit of 
India. But what -is the use of talking? I believe in an inscrutable Providence 
which presides over our destinies — call it God or by any other name you like. 
All I contend is that it is not the fear of violence that makes me advise the My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 286  country to go to the Constituent Assembly. It is repugnant in a non-violent 
attitude not to accept an honorable substitute for civil revolt."  
Panchgani, 27-7-'46  
Harijan,  4-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 287   
100. JEWS AND PALESTINE 
I do believe that the Jews have been cruelly wronged by the world. "Ghetto" is, 
so far as I am aware, the name given to Jewish locations in many parts of 
Europe. But for their heartless persecution, probably no question of return to 
Palestine would ever have arisen. The world should have been their home, if 
only for the sake of their distinguished contribution to it. 
But, in my opinion, they have erred grievously in seeking to impose themselves 
on Palestine with the aid of America and Britain and now with the aid of naked 
terrorism. Their citizenship of the world should have and would have made 
them honoured guests of any country. Their thrift, their varied talent, their 
great industry should have made them welcome anywhere. It is a blot on the 
Christian world that they have been singled out, owing to a wrong reading of 
the New Testament, for prejudice against them. "If an individual Jew does a 
wrong, the whole Jewish world is to blame for it." If an individual Jew like 
Einstein makes a great discovery or another composes unsurpassable music, the 
merit goes to the authors and not to the community to which they belong. 
No wonder that my sympathy goes out to the Jews in their unenviably sad 
plight. But one would have thought, adversity would teach them lessons of 
peace. Why should they depend upon American money or British arms for 
forcing themselves on an unwelcome land? Why should they resort to terrorism 
to make good their forcible landing in Palestine? If they were to adopt the 
matchless weapon of non-violence whose use their best prophets have taught 
and which Jesus the Jew who gladly wore the crown of thorns bequeathed to a 
groaning world, their case would be the world's, and I have no doubt that 
among the many things that the Jews have given to the world, this would be 
the best and the brightest. It is twice blessed. It will make them happy and rich 
in the true sense of the word and it will be a soothing balm to the aching 
world.  
Panchgani, 14-7-'46 
Harijan,  21-7-1946 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 288   
101. CRIMINALS AND NON-VIOLENCE 
Q. What would be the treatment meted out to criminals in Free India in the 
light of your non-violence? 
A. In independent India of the non-violent type, there will be crime but no 
criminals. They will not be punished. Crime is a disease like any other malady 
and is a product of the prevalent social system. Therefore, all crime including 
murder will be treated as a disease. Whether such an India will ever come into 
being is another question.  
New Delhi, 28-4-'46 
Harijan,  5-5-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 289   
102. THIEVING 
Q. What is the employer to do when an employee of his is addicted to stealing 
and is not amenable to correction whether it is by way of entreaty or the cane? 
A. It may well be that the others too are addicts though they may not be found 
out. Observation would show that we are all thieves, the difference being that 
most of us are tolerant towards ourselves and intolerant towards those that are 
found out and are not of the ordinary run. What is man, if he is not a thief, who 
openly charges as much as he can for the goods he sells? If the reply be that the 
buyer is a willing dupe, it begs the question. In reality the buyer is helpless 
rather than willing. The stealing referred to is one of the symptoms of a deep-
seated disease of society. It is symptomatic of the eternal strife between the 
moneyed few and the many paupers. Therefore, my advice to the employer will 
be to remove all temptations in the way of the thief, to treat him as if he was 
his own brother and, when he refuses to yield to any treatment, however 
humanitarian it may be, to ask him to go his way. Let the employer always ask 
himself whether he would treat his own brother in the same way at the given 
stage. 
Panchgani, 14-7-'46 
Harijan,  21-7-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 290   
103. NATURE CURE FOR CRIMINALS 
Speaking after the evening prayer at Uruli, Gandhiji said that in his opinion, 
nature cure was an essential ingredient in the building of Swaraj of his 
conception. The attaining of true Swaraj presupposed the triple purification of 
body, mind and soul. 
He could have hardly imagined when he uttered those words, that within 
twenty-four hours an occasion would arise to put that precept into practice. On 
the very next day a villager was brought to him with injuries on his body, 
received at the hands of thieves who had taken away ornaments etc. from his 
house. There were three ways, Gandhiji told the villagers of Uruli, of dealing 
with the case. The first was the stereotyped orthodox way of reporting to the 
police. Very often it only provided the police a further opportunity for 
corruption and brought no relief to the victim. The second way, which was 
followed by the general run of the village people, was to passively acquiesce in 
it. This was reprehensible as it was rooted in cowardice- Crime would flourish, 
while cowardice remained. What was more, by such acquiescence we ourselves 
became party to the crime. The third way, which Gandhiji commended,, was 
that of pure Satyagraha. It required that we should regard even thieves and 
criminals as our brothers and sisters, and crime as a disease of which the latter 
were the victims and needed to be cured. Instead of bearing ill-will towards a 
thief or a criminal and trying to get him punished they should try to get under 
his skin, understand the cause that had let him into crime and try to remedy it. 
They should, for instance, teach him a vocation and provide him with the 
means to make an honest living and thereby transform his life. They should 
realize that a thief or a criminal was not a different being from themselves. 
Indeed, if they turned the searchlight inward and closely looked into their own 
souls, they would find that the difference between them was only one of 
degree. The rich, moneyed man who made his riches by exploitation or other 
questionable means, was no less guilty of robbery than the thief who picked a 
pocket or broke into a house and committed theft. Only the former took refuge My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 291  behind the facade of respectability and escaped the penalty of law. Strictly 
speaking, remarked Gandhiji, all amassing or hoarding of wealth, above and 
beyond one's legitimate requirements was theft. There would be no occasion 
for thefts and therefore, no thieves, if there was a wise regulation of riches 
and absolute social justice prevailed. In the Swaraj of his conception, there 
would be no thieves and no criminals, or else it would be Swaraj only in name. 
The criminal was only an indication of the social malady and since nature cure, 
as he envisaged it, included the triple cure for body, mind and soul, they must 
not be satisfied with merely banishing physical illness from Uruli, their work 
must include the healing of the mind and soul too, so that there would be 
perfect social peace in their midst. 
 
The Way of Satyagraha 
If they followed the nature cure way of dealing with the criminal, which, as he 
had already explained, was the way of Satyagraha, they could not sit still in the 
face of crime. Only a perfect being could afford to lose himself within himself 
and withdraw completely from the cares and responsibilities of the world. But 
who could claim that perfection? "On the high sea a sudden calm is always 
regarded by experienced pilots and mariners with concern. Absolute calm is not 
the law of the ocean. It is the same with the ocean of life. More often than not, 
it portends rough weather. A Satyagrahi would therefore neither retaliate nor 
would he submit to the criminal, but seek to cure him by curing himself. He will 
not try to ride two horses at a time, viz. to pretend to follow the law of 
Satyagraha, while at the same time, seeking police aid. He must forswear the 
latter, in order to follow the former. If the criminal himself chooses to hand 
himself over to the police, it would be a different matter. You cannot expect to 
touch his heart and win his confidence, if at the same time you are prepared to 
go to the police and inform against him. That would be gross betrayal of trust. 
A reformer cannot afford to be an informer." And by way of illustration, he 
mentioned several instances of how he had refused to give information to the 
police, about persons who had been guilty of violence and came and confessed My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 292  to him. No police officer could compel a Satyagrahi to give evidence against a 
person who had confessed to him. A Satyagrahi would never be guilty of a 
betrayal of trust. He wanted the people of Uruli to adopt the method of 
Satyagraha, for dealing with crime and criminals. They should contact the 
criminals in their homes, win their confidence and trust by loving and selfless 
service, wean them from evil and unclean habits and help to rehabilitate them 
by teaching them honest ways of living.  
Badlapur, 5-8-'46  
Harijan,  11-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 293   
104. HONEST BUSINESS 
Q. I am a young businessman of 21 years and have 11 dependents. I believe in 
truth and non-violence but find I cannot strictly follow it in business. What 
should I do? Abandoning the business means suffering for my relations. 
A. This begs the question. It is difficult but not impossible to conduct strictly 
honest business. The fact is that the honester a business the more successful it 
is. Hence the proverb coined by businessmen "Honesty is the best policy". What 
the correspondent lacks is application and an accurate knowledge of honest 
business methods. What is true is that honesty is incompatible with the 
amassing of a large fortune. "Verily, verily, it is easier for a camel to go through 
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God." Nor 
therefore should an honest businessman, however capable he may be, support 
idlers whether eleven or more or fewer. The eleven dependents cannot all be 
infants or incapables. Honesty makes no impossible demands upon the 
resources of a businessman. An honest man cannot have dishonest kinsmen. The 
questioner will find on introspection that there is nothing wrong with honest 
business but that there is something wrong with him. Let him find out what it is 
that is wrong with him. 
Panchgani, 18-7-'46  
Harijan,  28-7-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 294   
105. COMPENSATION FOR MURDER 
I have been asked whether the brother or other near relatives of the late Bhai 
Rajabali should demand compensation in money from Government for his 
murder. The deceased himself would not have counted such a death as loss. As 
a matter of fact, it is murders such as this which, if wholly unavenged, will 
ultimately put an end to murder. The moment any compensation or revenge is 
sought, the good of the willing sacrifice is wiped out. And how then could the 
spirit of the deceased rest in peace? 
Murder can never be avenged by either murder or taking compensation. The 
only way to avenge murder is to offer oneself as a willing sacrifice, with no 
desire for retaliation. Those who believe in this premise will never dream of 
demanding or taking any compensation for the loss of their dear ones. The 
principle of taking of life for life will, on the contrary, only lead to an increase 
of murders. This is apparent to all today. Revenge or compensation may furnish 
some satisfaction to the individual, but I am quite definite that it can never 
restore peace to or uplift society. 
The question arises as to what the individual should do in a society where 
revenge is the rule. The answer lies not in precept but in example. And those 
alone can set the examples who have been wronged. Therefore, the final 
decision must rest with Bhai Rajabali's relatives. My duty lay in pointing them 
the way of Ahimsa as I know it.  
Sevagram, 9-8-'46  
Harijan,  18-8-1946 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 295   
106. HEAL THYSELF 
A correspondent has written to me about the butchery that is going on in 
Ahmedabad. I give below the relevant portions from his letter. 
"I wish to write to you about the means to be employed for putting down riots. 
About two months ago you wrote an article on Ahimsak Seva Dal—non-violent 
volunteer corps. But looking at the situation in the country, the suggestion will 
not do. Just as you have taught us how to fight against the British Government 
non-violently, you should go to some place of riot and show us the way of 
quelling riots in a non-violent manner by personal example. Supposing you were 
in Ahmedabad today and went out to quell the riots, any number of volunteers 
will join you. Two of our Congress workers Shri Vasantrao and Shri Rajabali 
went out in such a quest and fell a prey to the goonda's knife. They laid down 
their lives in the pursuit of an ideal and they deserve all praise. But no one else 
had the courage to follow in their footsteps. They have not the same self-
confidence. If they had it, there would be no riots and, even if riots broke out, 
they would never assume the proportion and the form that the present day 
riots do. But the fact remains that such a state is merely an imaginary thing 
today. 
"Your guidance and example can inspire many like me with courage and self-
confidence. Once you have shown the way, the local workers will be able to 
follow it whenever occasion demands it. I feel that unless you set an example 
in action, your writings and utterances will not be of any use to the ordinary 
people, and even Congressmen, in organizing non-violent protection of society." 
I like the suggestion mentioned above. People followed my advice and took to 
non-violent resistance against the British Government, because they wanted to 
offer some sort of resistance. But their non-violence, I must confess, was born 
of their helplessness. Therefore, it was the weapon of the weak. That is why, 
today we worship Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and his Azad Hind Fauj (I.N.A.). 
We forget the Netaji himself had told his soldiers that on going to India, they 
must follow the way of non-violence. This I have from the leaders of the I.N.A. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 296  But we have lost all sense of discrimination. To restore it, the I.N.A. men will 
have to live up to the ideal placed before them by Netaji. The work of those 
who believe in non-violence is very difficult in this atmosphere which is full of 
violence. But the path of true non-violence requires much more courage than 
violence. We have not been able to give proof of such non-violence. We might 
look upon the action of Shri Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi, Shri Vasantrao and Shri 
Rajabali as examples of the non-violence of the brave. But when communal 
feelings run high, we are unable to demonstrate any effect of the sacrifices 
mentioned above. For that, many like Shri Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi will have 
to lay down their lives. The fact that no one else in Ahmedabad has followed 
the example set by Shri Vasantrao and Shri Rajabali shows that we have not yet 
developed the spirit of sacrifice to the extent of laying down our lives in non-
violent action. The correspondent has rightly said that under these 
circumstances, I should act myself whether others join me or not. It will be 
disgraceful on my part to sit at home and tell others to go and lay down their 
lives. Such a thing cannot be an indication of non-violence. I have never had 
the chance to test my non-violence in the face of communal riots. It might be 
argued that it was my cowardice which prevented me from seeking such a 
chance. Be that as it may, God willing, the chance will still come to me, and by 
throwing me in the fire, He will purify me and make the path of non-violence 
clear. No one should take it to mean that sacrifice of my life will arrest all 
violence. Several lives like mine, will have to be given if the terrible violence 
that has spread all over, is to stop and non-violence reign supreme in its place. 
The poet has sung: "The path of Truth is for the brave, never for the coward." 
The path of Truth is the path of non-violence.  
Panchgani, 26-6-'46  
Harijan , 4-8-1946 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 297   
107. CONGRESS MINISTERS AND NON-VIOLENCE  
Shri Shankarrao Dev writes: 
"Many people do not understand why those who call themselves Satyagrahis, resort 
to the use of the military and the police, the moment they become ministers of 
Governments. The people feel that this is a breach of both the creed and the 
policy of Ahimsa. This popular belief seems to be consistent with reason. The in-
consistency between belief and action of the Congress ministers and the 
exploitation of the same by their opponents, both Congress and non-Congress, 
makes it hard for our workers to stand up to the criticism. 
"Generally speaking, Congress Ahimsa has been the Ahimsa of the weak. It was 
bound to be sc in the present development of the country and this fact is well 
known to you. You claim that there is a special fire in the Ahimsa of the strong. At 
the same time you accepted leadership of the weak, in order to make them strong 
through the use of Ahimsa. And, in spite of their weakness, governmental power 
has today come into their hands. It is impossible for them today to put down 
disturbances without the use of the police and the military, and if they tried to do 
so, they would not only not succeed, but they would not get the co-operation of 
the people either. 
"I did once ask you, whether a Satyagrahi should take high office if it came his way 
and if he did, how should he promote non-violence? I hold that the person who has 
made non-violence his creed, should not take office and he will never be happy 
there. But there can be no such difficulty for those who have accepted Ahimsa only 
as a policy. Many Congressmen have accepted office and you have permitted them 
to do so. The question arises as to whether you can expect those who believe in 
Ahimsa, to act up to it, at least in their personal capacity, during disturbances. 
Further, having acquired strength through non-violence, how should it be used, in 
order to bring in a State, where there is need for the least government? If you 
cannot lighten our path towards the desired goal, Satyagraha will not be 
considered a full-fledged weapon." 
From my point of view the answer is easy. I have been saying for some time, 
that the words "truth and nonviolence" should be removed from the Congress 
constitution. But whether they are actually removed or not, let us assume that My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 298  they are and then we shall be able to come to an independent judgment on the 
Tightness or wrongness of any action. I am convinced that so long as we have to 
rely on the use of the military and even the police for preserving internal 
order, we shall continue to remain the slaves of either Britain or some- other 
foreign power. It matters little then, whether the Government is in the hands 
of Congress or non-Congressmen. Let us assume that Congress ministers are not 
pledged to non-violence. Let us further assume that Hindus, Mussalmans and 
others want military and police protection. If they do, they will continue to 
receive it. Those ministers, who are wedded to nonviolence, must resign, since 
they would object to the use of the military and the police. The significance of 
it all is that so long as our people have not the wisdom to come to a mutual 
understanding, so long will  goondaism  continue and we shall not be able to 
generate the true strength of Ahimsa within us. 
Now as to how this non-violent strength can be created. I gave the answer to 
this question in the  Harijan  of August 4th, in replying to a letter from 
Ahmedabad. So long as we have not cultivated the strength to die with courage 
and love in our hearts, we cannot hope to develop the Ahimsa of the strong. 
There remains the question as to whether in an ideal society, there should be 
any or no government. I do not think, we need worry ourselves about this at the 
moment. If we continue to work for such a society, it will slowly come into 
being to an extent, such that the people can benefit by it. Euclid's line is one 
without breadth but no one has so far been able to draw it and never will. All 
the same it is only by keeping the ideal line in mind that we have made 
progress in geometry. What is true here is true of every ideal. 
It must be remembered that nowhere in the world, does a State without 
government exist. If at all it could ever come into being, it would be in India; 
for, ours is the only country where the attempt has, at any rate, been made. 
We have not yet been able to show that bravery to the degree which is 
necessary and for the attainment of which there is only one way. Those who My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 299  have faith in the latter, have to demonstrate it. In order to do so, the fear of 
death has to be completely shed, just as we have shed the fear of prisons. 
New Delhi, 6-9-'46 
Harijan , 15-9-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 300   
108. DO NOT ELIMINATE TRUTH AND NON-VIOLENCE 
A correspondent who sends his name and describes himself as devoted to 
service writes: 
"Recently in your reply to Shri Shankarrao Dev you have said : 'I have been saying 
for some time that the words "truth and non-violence" should be removed from the 
Congress constitution.' 
"If this happens in the existing circumstances, people will lose their faith in 
Congress because they will feel that so long as it was not in power it was thought 
best to adhere to truth and non-violence, but now that power has come, it 
contemplates removing these words from the constitution. They might even infer 
that the removal is being resorted to in order to counter the Muslim League's 
threat of direct action. 
"If these words are eliminated from the constitution, Congress will fall from the 
high pedestal which these means alone have secured for it. It will lose in prestige. 
You have always said that you yourself cannot go forward one step without truth 
and non-violence, and is it not their adherence to these that makes the public 
think of Congressmen as trustworthy, merciful, full of the spirit of service and 
bravery? The tree must perish if its roots are destroyed. You must see to it that the 
roots go deeper and deeper and are not eradicated. 
"Therefore, I feel that you should compel every Congressman to follow these 
principles and if he refuses, he must leave the Congress. 
How can I, the champion of Ahimsa, compel anyone to perform even a good 
act? Has not a well-known Englishman said that to make mistakes as a free man 
is better than being in bondage in order to avoid them? I believe in the truth of 
this. The reason is obvious. The mind of a man who remains good under 
compulsion cannot improve, in fact it worsens. And when compulsion is 
removed all the defects well up to the surface with even greater force. 
Moreover, no one should be a dictator. Even the Congress cannot force its 
members to follow truth and nonviolence. These have to be accepted willingly 
from the heart. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 301  I have been recommending the elimination of these words from the constitution 
for over a year, long before the Muslim League contemplated direct action 
which makes no bones about Himsa or Ahimsa. Thus my recommendation has no 
connection with the League's resolution. But I have no help for those who 
invariably attribute sinister motives to my words. 
I have strong grounds for my recommendation. Congress may not cover untruth 
and violence under the guise of truth and non-violence. Is not this an all-
sufficing reason ? If Congressmen were no hypocrites, nothing could be better 
than that Congress should adhere to these two pillars. 
I could never wish the Congress, the moment it comes into power, to discard 
the very ladder by which it has climbed so high. I believe that if Congressmen, 
while in power, renounce truth and non-violence, the lustre surrounding the 
Congress will grow dim. 
We must all guard against one mistake. There is no rule against following what 
is not -in the constitution. Indeed my hope is that when these words are 
removed, all or a large majority of Congressmen will heartily follow truth and 
non-violence even to the point of death. 
The writer has forgotten to mention one thing which I should like to clarify. The 
words in the constitution are 'peaceful and legitimate'. I have no right to 
interpret them as truthful and non-violent, if they don't bear that meaning. 
Congress has adopted them as a policy, not as a creed. The question of my right 
to retain or eliminate them does not arise. But whilst it lasts, policy is 
tantamount to creed and hence becomes obligatory. Of course, my recommen-
dation has no meaning if 'peaceful' can be interpreted as violent and 'legitimate' 
as untruthful. 
New Delhi, 21-9-'46  
Harijan,  29-9-1946 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 302   
109. EXCESSIVE PRAISE 
Thus writes an army officer to a friend: 
"... And what a pity it is that, in all democratic countries, politicians are so 
ignorant of and uninterested in the army. The army could teach them much. Is it 
not at least worthy of deep thought as to why it is, that the army has held the 
loyalty and affection of the man serving in it to a far greater degree than any 
other Government service? And held it moreover under conditions of danger and 
discomfort and trial far exceeding those of any other service. You have a fine army 
and it will be finer still when your best men come forth in large numbers to officer 
it. Find the right officers and you need have no fears about it. It will be second to 
none. But put in the wrong officers or get it mixed up with politics and you will 
have a heavy bill to pay. India is bound to have many troubled years ahead, but I 
am convinced that the one thing which can pull you through them most quickly and 
with the minimum bloodshed is your present army, provided you find officers for it 
and keep politics and religious differences out of it." 
It is not a matter for pity if it is true that in all democratic countries politicians 
are uninterested in the army. The pity of it is that they are wrongly interested 
in it. The democracies regard army men as their saviours. They bring wealth 
and subjugate other countries and sustain authority in times of civil 
disturbance. What is, therefore, to be wished is that democracy to be true, 
should cease to rely upon the army for anything whatsoever. 
What has the army done for India? It is for that army that the writer pleads. I 
fear that in no sense has it served India’s interests. It has kept millions of 
inoffensive and disarmed people under subjection. It has impoverished them. It 
is an army of which the sooner the British part is sent away and better 
employed, the better for both India and England, and the world. The sooner the 
Indian part is turned away from its destructive purpose and its talent employed 
for constructive purposes, the better it will be for democracy in India. It will be 
a poor democracy that depends for its existence on military assistance. Military 
force interferes with the free growth of the mind. It smothers the soul of man. 
Thanks to years of foreign domination brought about by the "highly efficient" My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 303  army, India, in spite of the efforts of the Mission, might have to pull through a 
long or short civil war which, I shall hope, will bring to an end all infatuation 
for armed forces. They are a brutalizing process after you have isolated 
discipline which should be common for any social order. If Free India has to 
sustain the present military expenditure, it will bring no relief to the famishing 
millions. 
Mussoorie, 30-5-'46 
Harijan,  9-6-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 304   
110. WHY ARMIES? 
Two Indonesian friends, who dropped in to see Gandhiji, asked how it was 
possible for them to resist European aggression except by aggression. Europe 
had always believed in force and the Indonesian friends did not see how any 
country could meet it except by force. 
Gandhiji gently remonstrated by saying that such a question betrayed complete 
ignorance of non-violence. "Let me put you a counter-question," he said. 
"Supposing the armed and combined might of Britain, America and Russia 
wished to enslave you, what amount of violence would you need to counter it? I 
suggest that you would not violently stand up to it unless, perhaps, you had the 
backing of the whole of Asia and even then you might lose if the European 
weapons of war were better. But you would resist them alone with non-
violence. You might be annihilated to a man but no one could conquer you." 
Gandhiji went on to tell them what he has been saying on more than one 
occasion recently that the Indian struggle for independence had been mere 
passive resistance which is a weapon of the weak and often a stepping stone to 
active armed resistance. If the Congress had really adopted nonviolence, the 
present communal strife just could not have come' into being. The bravery of 
the heart was far greater than the bravery of the body. A non-violent Indonesia 
could lead the East; a position Gandhiji would have liked India to hold. But 
today a mighty flood of violence was sweeping over India which they had not, 
to their hurt, learnt how to resist non-violently. "Unless," he ended, "we 
cultivate this strength India will not fulfill the high hopes I have cherished for 
her in my heart all these many many years."  
New Delhi, 10-7-‘47 
Harijan,  20-7-1947 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 305   
111. OUTSIDE HIS FIELD 
Major-General Gariappa is reported to have said as follows: 
"Non-violence is of no use under the present circumstances in India and only a 
strong army can make India one of the greatest nations in the world." 
I fear, like many experts, General Cariappa has gone beyond his depth and has 
been unwittingly betrayed into a serious misconception of Ahimsa, of whose 
working in the nature of things, he can only have very superficial knowledge. By 
reason of lifelong practice of Ahimsa, I claim to be an expert in it, though very 
imperfect. Speaking in absolute terms, the more I practise it the clearer I see 
how far I am from the full expression of Ahimsa in my life. It is his ignorance of 
this, the greatest duty of man in the world, which makes him say that in this 
age non-violence has little scope in the face of violence, whereas I make bold 
to say that in this age of the atom bomb unadulterated nonviolence is the only 
force that can confound all the tricks of violence put together. It would have 
become the General, unaided as he can only now be, by his British teachers of 
military science and practice, not to have gone out of his depth. Generals 
greater than General Cariappa have been wise and humble enough frankly to 
make the admission -that they can have no right to speak of the possibilities of 
the force of Ahimsa. We are witnessing the tragic insolvency of military science 
and practice in its own home. Should a bankrupt, who has been by the gamble 
in the share market, sing the praise of that particular form of gambling ? 
New Delhi, 7-11-'47 
Harijan,  16-11-1947 
 
 
 
  
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 306   
112. WOMEN'S ORDEAL 
"It is not death that matters but how you meet death," Gandhiji remarked on 
one occasion. To die at the hands of one's brother is a privilege, provided you 
die bravely. But what about women who were being abducted and forcibly 
converted? That no one could be 'converted' forcibly was here beside the point. 
"And why should Indian women feel so helpless? Is bravery the monopoly of men 
only? Women of course do not generally carry swords though the Rani of Jhansi 
did and outdid all her contemporaries in the valour of the sword. Still all cannot 
become Ranis of Jhansi. But all women can emulate the example of Sita whom 
even the mighty Ravana dared not touch. Ranis of Jhansi could be subdued." 
"Let no one dismiss the example of Sita as legendary," he proceeded and gave 
the example of Olive Doke who dared to go and live among the unclad primitive 
Negro tribes in the heart of Africa without fear of molestation. It was that 
higher type of valour which he wanted Indian womanhood to cultivate. The 
military and police might protect them from abduction but what about those 
who had already been abducted or who might be abducted in spite of the police 
and the military? They ought to learn to die before a hair of their head could be 
injured. He averred that it was possible for a woman to put an end to herself by 
choking or biting the tongue. 
 
Death before Dishonour 
The next evening he had to revise the technique suggested above. Dr. Sushila 
who had heard him the day before had told him — Dr. B. G. Roy who saw him 
the next morning confirmed her statement — that one could not end one's life 
by choking or biting one's tongue. The only way known to medicine for instant 
self-immolation was a strong, poisonous dose. If this was so, he, the speaker, 
would advise every one running the risk of dishonour to take poison before 
submission to dishonour. He had, however, heard from those given to  yogic  
practices that it was possible by some  yogic practice to end life. He would try 
to inquire. His was not an idle idea. He meant all he had said. The very fact of My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 307  steeling oneself for death before dishonour braced one for the struggle. Woman 
in our country was brought up to think that she was well only with her husband 
or on the funeral pyre. He would far rather see India's women trained to wield 
arms, said the speaker, than that they should feel helpless. The vogue of 
carrying daggers and revolvers by women was on the increase. He knew, 
however, that arms were a poor weapon when it came to the matter of 
defending one's honour against odds. Arms were a symbol of one's helplessness, 
not strength. When one was deprived of them, generally there was nothing left 
but surrender. 
New Delhi, 18-10-'46 
Harijan , 27-10-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 308   
113. A WOMAN'S DILEMMA 
Q. What is a woman to do when attacked by miscreants? To run away, or resist 
with violence? To have boats in readiness to fly or prepare to defend with wea-
pons? 
A. My answer to this question is very simple. For me there can be no 
preparation for violence. All preparation must be for non-violence if courage of 
the highest type is to be developed. Violence can only be tolerated as being 
preferable always to cowardice. Therefore I would have no boats ready for a 
flight in emergency. For a nonviolent person there is no emergency, but quiet 
dignified preparation for death. Hence whether it is a man or a woman, he or 
she will defy death even when he or she is unassisted; for real assistance is 
from God. I can preach no other thing and I am here to practise what I preach. 
Whether such an opportunity will occur to me or be given to me I do not know. 
If there are women who when assailed by miscreants cannot resist themselves 
without arms, they do not need to be advised to carry arms. They will do so. 
There is something wrong in this constant enquiry as to whether to bear arms or 
not. People have to learn to be naturally independent. If they will remember 
the central teaching, namely, that the real effective resistance lies in non-
violence, they will model their conduct accordingly. And that is what the world 
has been doing although unthinkingly. Since it is not the highest courage, 
namely, courage born of non-violence, it arms itself even unto the atom bomb. 
Those who do not see in it the futility of violence will naturally arm themselves 
to the best of their ability. 
In India since my return from South Africa, there has been conscious and 
constant training in non-violence with the result we have seen. 
Q. Can a woman be advised to take her own life rather than surrender? 
A. This question requires a definite answer. I answered it in Delhi just before 
leaving for Noakhali. A woman would most certainly take her own life rather 
than surrender. In other words, surrender has no room in my plan of life. But I My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 309  was asked in what way to take one's own life. I promptly said it was not for me 
to prescribe the means, and behind the approval of suicide under such 
circumstances was and is the belief that one whose mind is prepared for even 
suicide will have requisite courage for such mental resistance and such internal 
purity that her assailant will be disarmed. I could not carry the argument any 
further because it does not admit of further development. It requires positive 
proof which, I own, is lacking. 
Q. If the choice is between taking one's own life or that of the assailant, which 
would you advise? 
A. When it is a question of choice between killing oneself or the assailant, I 
have no doubt in my mind that the first should be the choice. 
Palla, 27-l-'47 
Harijan,  9-2-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 310   
114. THE TRAVAIL 
A friend was discussing with Gandhiji the other day the recent gruesome 
happenings in Calcutta. His sensitive and refined spirit shrank from the very 
idea of narrow communalism. What filled him with anguish was not the loss of 
life so much, deplorable as it was, as the degradation of the human spirit that 
had resulted from the Calcutta happenings. "Even those who never thought in 
terms of communalism are now becoming communal-minded. But that was not 
all. The madness has spread." 
As Gandhiji sat listening to the stories that came from Bengal, his mind was 
made up. "If I leave Delhi," he remarked, "it will not be in order to return to 
Sevagram but only to go to Bengal. Else, I would stay here and stew in my own 
juice." 
He consulted two friends from Bengal that evening about it. "Allow us to go 
there first and report," said they. "Give us a chance to do our bit and then, if 
necessary, you can come." Gandhiji agreed. 
In the course of the talk, one of them asked Gandhiji whether he would 
recommend fasting to check the orgy of communal madness that was spreading 
in Bengal. Gandhiji's reply was in the negative. He narrated how a valuable 
colleague from Ahmedabad had invited him to immolate himself. "We believe in 
the non-violent way but lack the strength. Your example would steady our 
wavering faith and fortify us." The logic was perfect and the temptation great. 
"But I resisted it and said 'no'. There is no inner call. When it comes, nothing 
will keep me back. I have reasoned with myself too about it. But I need not set 
forth my reasons. Let people call me a coward if they please. I have faith that 
when the hour arrives God will give me the strength to face it and I won't be 
found unready." 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 311  The Way of the Gross 
"Fasting cannot be undertaken mechanically," he proceeded. "It is a powerful 
thing but a dangerous thing if handled amateurishly. It requires complete self-
purification, much more than what is required in facing death without 
retaliation even in mind. One such act of perfect sacrifice would suffice for the 
whole world. Such is held to be Jesus' example." 
"The idea is," he continued, "that you appropriate to yourself and assimilate the 
essence of his sacrifice, symbolically represented by the bread and wine of the 
Eucharist. A man who was completely innocent offered himself as a sacrifice 
for the good of others, including his enemies and became the ransom of the 
world. It was a perfect act. "It is finished" were the last words of Jesus, and we 
have the testimony of his four disciples as to its authenticity. 
"But whether the Jesus tradition is historically true or not I do not care. To me 
it is truer than history because I hold it to be possible and it enshrines an 
eternal law—the law of vicarious and innocent suffering taken in its true sense." 
He then proceeded to show how the lesson of Jesus could be applied to the 
present situation. "A Hindu and a Mussalman braved the fury of the maddened 
crowd in Bombay and went down together literally clasped in a fatal embrace 
but refused to desert each other. Rajab Ali and Vasantrao Hegishte similarly fell 
to mob frenzy in the attempt to quell it. "What came out of it?" people might 
ask, "the fire still continues to rage." I do not think for a moment it has gone in 
vain. We may not see the effect today. Our non-violence is as yet a mixed, 
affair. It limps. Nevertheless, it is there and it continues to work like a leaven 
in a silent and invisible way, least understood by most. It is the only way." As a 
further illustration of his remarks he recalled the history of the Champaran 
Satyagraha. There had been several bloody risings within half a century 
preceding it against the infamous compulsory indigo plantation. But each 
attempt had only resulted in fastening the rivets tighter than ever before. Then 
came the Champaran mass Satyagraha, untainted by acts of violence, and a 
century-old evil was overthrown in less than six months. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 312  "Go forth, therefore," he concluded. "I have done. I won't detain you for a day 
longer. You have my blessings. 
And I tell you there will be no tears but only joy, if tomorrow I get the news 
that all the three of you are killed." 
"It will be pure joy to be so killed" they echoed. 
"But mark my words,"he resumed. "Let there be no foolhardiness about it. You 
should go because you feel you must and not because I ask you to." 
"That goes without saying," they answered together as they took leave to go 
forth and face the flames. 
In God's Hands 
Remarked Gandhiji at the evening prayer gathering that day that he had 
received numerous messages from Bengal inviting him to go there and still the 
raging fury. Whilst he did not believe that he had any such capacity, he was 
anxious to go to Bengal. Only he thought it was his duty to wait till Pandit 
Nehru's return and the meeting of the Working Committee. But he was in God's 
hands. If he clearly felt that he should wait for nothing, he would not hesitate 
to anticipate the date. His heart was in Bengal.  
New Delhi, 18-10-'46 
Harijan , 27-10-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 313   
115. THE CALL 
After much travail, deep thought and considerable argument, Gandhiji fixed 
the date of his departure for Bengal for the 28th of October. "I do not know 
what I shall be able to do there," he remarked in the course of an argument 
with a very esteemed friend, who made an eleventh hour effort to dissuade him 
from setting out on such a long journey just then. "All I know is that I won't be 
at peace with myself unless I go there." He then went on to describe the "power 
of thought". "There are two kinds of thought—idle and active. There may be 
myriads of the former swarming in one's brain. They do not count." He likened 
them to unfertilized ova in a spawn. "But one pure, active thought, proceeding 
from the depth and endowed with all the undivided intensity of one's being, 
becomes dynamic and works like a fertilized ovum." He was averse to put a 
curb on the spontaneous urge which he felt within him to go to the people of 
Noakhali. Speaking before the evening prayer gathering on Sunday last at New 
Delhi, Gandhiji said that he was leaving for Calcutta the next morning. He did 
not know when God would bring him again to Delhi. He wanted to go to 
Noakhali from Calcutta. It was a difficult journey and he was in poor health. 
But one had to do one's duty and trust in God to make the way smooth. It was 
not that God necessarily and always removed hardships from one's path, but He 
did always enable one to bear them. 
He did not want anyone to come to the station, he continued. India had given 
him enough affection. It needed no further demonstration. 
He was not going to Bengal to pass judgment on anybody. He was going there as 
a servant of the people and he would meet Hindus and Muslims alike. Some 
Muslims looked upon him as an enemy today. They had not done so always. But 
he did not mind their anger. Were not his own religionists angry with him at 
times? From the age of seventeen he had learnt the lesson that all mankind, be 
they of any nationality, colour or country were his own kith and kin. If they 
were God's servants, they had to become servants of all His creation. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 314  It was in that capacity that he was going to Bengal. He would tell them that 
Hindus and Muslims could never be enemies, one of the other. They were born 
and brought up in India and they had to live and die in India. Change of religion 
could not alter that fundamental fact. If some people liked to believe that 
change of religion changed one's nationality also, even they need not become 
enemies. 
Sufferings of women had always melted his heart. He wanted to go to Bengal 
and wipe their tears and put heart into them, if he could. In Calcutta he would 
try to see the Governor and the Prime Minister Mr. Suhrawardy and then 
proceed to Noakhali. 
To make peace between quarrelling parties, the speaker said, had been his 
vocation from his early youth. Even while he practised as a lawyer, he tried to 
bring the contending parties together. Why could not the two communities be 
brought together? He was an optimist, he said. 
From them he wanted only this help; that they should pray with him that this 
mutual slaughter might stop and the two communities might really become one 
at heart. Whether India was to become divided or remain one whole could not 
be decided by force. It had to be done through mutual understanding. Whether 
they decided to part or stay together, they must do so with goodwill and 
understanding. 
He could never be party to anything which might mean humiliation or loss of 
self-respect for anyone. Therefore any peace to be substantial must be 
honourable, never at the cost of honour. In this he was only echoing the senti-
ment expressed to him by a prominent Muslim who had seen him. This friend 
had said: "We must reach our goal, whatever it might be—Pakistan or undivided 
India— without bloodshed or fighting. I go so far as to say that if it cannot be 
reached except through bloodshed and fighting amongst ourselves, it is not 
worth reaching." 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 315  The Grim Resolve 
"Why do you want to go to Noakhali? You did not go to Bombay, Ahmedabad or 
Chhapra, where things have happened that are infinitely worse than Noakhali. 
Would not your going there only add to the existing tension?" Was it because in 
these places it was the Muslims who had been the sufferers that he did not go 
there and would go to Noakhali because the sufferers there were Hindus? —he 
was asked by a Muslim friend the other day. Gandhi- ji's reply was that he made 
no distinction between Hindu and Muslim. He would certainly have gone 
straight to any of the places mentioned by the friend, if anything approaching 
what had happened at Noakhali had happened there and if he felt that he could 
do nothing without being on the spot. It was the cry of outraged womanhood 
that had peremptorily called him to Noakhali. He felt he would find his bearings 
only on seeing things for himself at Noakhali. His technique of non-violence was 
on trial. It remained to be seen how it would answer in the face of the present 
crisis. If it had no validity it were better that he himself should declare his 
insolvency. He was not going to leave Bengal until the last embers of the 
trouble were stamped out. "I may stay on here for a whole year or more. If 
necessary, I will die here. But I will not acquiesce in failure. If the only effect 
of my presence in the flesh is to make people look up to me in hope and 
expectation which I can do nothing to vindicate, it would be far better that my 
eyes were closed in death." He had mentally prepared himself, he added, for 
abstention from the Congress session, if necessary. He had similarly disengaged 
himself mentally from all his responsibilities in respect of Sevagram and Uruli—
his latest love. 
Sodepur, 1-11-'46 
Harijan,  10-11-1946 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 316   
116. BAD NEWS FROM BIHAR 
Fallen upon evil times as we are, we have to be thankful even for small 
mercies. Everybody heaved a sigh of relief when it was known that the  Bakr Id  
had passed off quietly all over India. But the news from Bihar had set Gandhiji 
at war with himself. It was in Bihar that mass Satyagraha in India was born. It 
was in Bihar that his political career in India had practically commenced. And 
now it was the people of Bihar, for whom he had indefatigably laboured and 
who had showered upon him such love and affection —Bihar of Brijkishore Babu 
and Rajendra Babu—that had gone mad and besmirched the fair name of India. 
He had declared times without number that if the people of India should run 
amok against the English, they might find him dead. How could he be a witness 
to the same in regard to innocent Mussalmans who were after all our 
countrymen, our own kith and kin? "I went on spare, milkless diet, principally 
for reasons of health soon after coming to Calcutta. The happenings in the 
country induced me to prolong it. Now Bihar will send me to complete fast if 
things do not radically mend," he wrote in a letter to Rajkumari Amrit Kaur on 
Sunday the 4th. "There will be no time limit," he added. "Do not agitate 
yourself but be really glad that I feel I have the strength to go through the 
ordeal and live up to my creed." On the following day in a letter to Pandit 
Jawaharlal he wrote : "The news from Bihar has shaken me. My own duty seems 
to me to be clear. A deep bond unites me with Bihar. How can I forget that? If 
even half of what one hears is true, it shows that Bihar has forgotten humanity. 
To blame it all on the goondas would be an untruth. Although I have striven 
hard to avert a fast, I can do so no longer.... My inner voice tells me, 'You may 
not live to be a witness to this senseless slaughter. If people refuse to see what 
is clear as daylight and pay no heed to what you say, does it not mean that your 
day is over?' The logic of the argument is driving me irresistibly towards a fast. 
I, therefore, propose to issue a statement* that unless this orgy of madness 
ceases, I must go on a fast unto death. The fast may have to be delayed for 
some time. When you asked me at Delhi about it, I had replied that I was not My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 317  thinking of it at the time. All that has now changed. You can strive with me, if 
you think differently. Whatever you say will carry weight with me. But knowing 
as you do my temperament, I am sure you will approve of my proposed step. In 
any event you will go on with your work without a moment's thought about my 
possible death and leave me in God's good care. No worry allowed." But neither 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru nor the Sardar to whom he had caused a copy of the 
letter to be sent tried to dissuade him. They understood better the magnitude 
of the stake. It was nothing less than India's independence. 
Chaumuhani, 8-11-'46 
Harijan,  17-11-1946 
 
* The Statement follows immediately in the present volume under the caption 'To Bihar'. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 318   
117. TO BIHAR 
To Bihar, 
Bihar of my dreams seems to have falsified them. I am not relying upon reports 
that might be prejudiced or exaggerated. The continued presence of the 
Central Chief Minister and his colleague furnishes an eloquent tale of the 
tragedy of Bihar. It is easy enough to retort that things under the Muslim 
League Government in Bengal were no better, if not worse, and that Bihar is 
merely a result of the latter. A bad act of one party is no justification for a 
similar act by the opposing party, more especially when it is rightly proud of its 
longest and largest political record. I must confess, too, that although I have 
been in Calcutta for over a week, I do not yet know the magnitude of the 
Bengal tragedy. Though Bihar calls me, I must not interrupt my programme for 
Noakhali. And is counter-communalism any answer to the communalism of 
which Congressmen have accused the Muslim League? Is it nationalism to seek 
barbarously to crush the fourteen per cent of the Muslims in Bihar? 
I do not need to be told that I must not condemn the whole of Bihar for the 
sake of the sins of a few thousand Biharis. Does not Bihar take credit for one 
Brijkishore Prasad or one Rajendra Prasad? I am afraid, if the misconduct in 
Bihar continues, all the Hindus of India will be condemned by the world. That is 
its way, and it is not. a bad way either. The misdeeds of Bihari Hindus may 
justify Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah's taunt that the Congress is a Hindu organization in 
spite of its boast that it has in its ranks a few Sikhs, Muslims, Christians, Parsis 
and others. Bihari Hindus are in honour bound to regard the minority Muslims as 
their brethren requiring protection, equal with the vast majority of Hindus. Let 
not Bihar, which has done so much to raise the prestige of the Congress, be the 
first to dig its grave. 
I am in no way ashamed of my Ahimsa. I have come to Bengal to see how far in 
the nick of time my Ahimsa is able to express itself in me. But I do not want in 
this letter to talk of Ahimsa to you. I do want, however, to tell you that what 
you are reported to have done will never count as an act of bravery. For My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 319  thousands to do to death a few hundred is no bravery. It is worse than 
cowardice. It is unworthy of nationalism, of any religion. If you had given a 
blow against a blow, no one would have dared to point a finger against you. 
What you have done is to degrade yourselves and drag down India. 
You should say to Pandit jawaharlalji, Nishtar Saheb and Dr. Rajendra Prasad to 
take away their military and themselves and attend to the affairs of India. This 
they can only do, if you repent of your inhumanity and assure them that 
Muslims are as much your care as your own brothers and sisters. 
You should not rest till every Muslim refugee has come back to his home which 
you should undertake to rebuild, and ask your Ministers to help you to do so. 
You do not know what critics have said to me about your Ministers. 
I regard myself as a part of you. Your affection has compelled that loyalty in 
me. And since I claim to have better appreciation than you seem to have shown 
of what Bihari Hindus should do, I cannot rest till I have done some measure of 
penance. Predominantly for reasons of health, I had put myself on the lowest 
diet possible soon after my reaching Calcutta. That diet now continues as a 
penance after the knowledge of the Bihar tragedy. The low diet will become a 
fast unto death, if the erring Biharis have not turned over a new leaf. 
There is no danger of Bihar mistaking my act for anything other than pure 
penance as a matter of sacred duty. 
No friend should run to me for assistance or to show sympathy. I am surrounded 
by loving friends. It would be wholly wrong and irrelevant for any other person 
to copy me. No sympathetic fast or semi-fast is called for. Such action can only 
do harm. What my penance should do is to quicken the conscience of those who 
know me and believe in my  bona fides.  Let no one be anxious for me. I am like 
of us in God's keeping. 
Nothing will happen to me so long as He wants service through the present 
tabernacle. 
Your Servant, 
M. K. GANDHI 
Sodepur, 6-11-'46 
Harijan,  10-11-1946 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 320   
118. A CHALLENGE TO FAITH 
Q. What should one do in his day-to-day life—that is, what is the minimum 
programme—so that one can acquire non-violence of the brave? 
A. The minimum that is required of a person wishing to cultivate the Ahimsa of 
the brave is first to clear one's thought of cowardice and in the light of the 
clearance regulate his conduct in every activity, great or small. Thus the votary 
must refuse to be cowed down by his superior, without being angry. He must, 
however, be ready to sacrifice his post, however remunerative it may be. 
Whilst sacrificing his all, if the votary has no sense of irritation against his 
employer, he has Ahimsa of the brave in him. Assume that a fellow passenger 
threatens my son with assault and I reason with the would-be-assailant who 
then turns upon me. If then I take his blow with grace and dignity, without 
harbouring any ill-will against him, I exhibit the Ahimsa of the brave. Such 
instances are of everyday occurrence and can be easily multiplied. If I succeed 
in curbing my temper every time and though able to give blow for blow I 
refrain, I shall develop the Ahimsa of the brave which will never fail me and 
which will compel recognition from the most confirmed adversaries. 
Harijan,  17-11-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 321   
119. A VENTURE IN FAITH 
Early in the morning on Wednesday last Gandhiji announced to his party an 
important decision. He had decided to disperse his party detailing each 
member, including the ladies, to settle down in one affected village and make 
himself or herself hostage of the safety and security of the Hindu minority of 
that village. They must be pledged to protect with their lives, if necessary, the 
Hindu population of that village. 
He was going to bury himself in East Bengal until such time that the Hindus and 
Mussalmans learnt to live together in harmony and peace. He would deprive 
himself of the services of all his companions and fend for himself with whatever 
assistance he could command locally. 
That evening he explained his idea further to the party. A discussion followed 
in which Shri Thakkar Bapa and Shrimati Sucheta Kripalani also took part. His 
Ahimsa would be incomplete, he argued, unless he took that step. Either 
Ahimsa is the law of life or it is not. A friend used to say that the Ahimsa Sutra 
in Patanjali, Ahimsa pratishthayam tatsannidhau vairatyagah  ( अ/glyph466हंसा /glyph293/glyph470त/glyph232ठायां 
त/glyph216संि/glyph220नधौ वैर/glyph216यागः। ) was a mistake and needed to be amended and the say ing 
Ahimsa paramo dharmah  ( अ/glyph466हंसा परमो धम/glyph110ः। ) ought to be read as  Himsa paramo 
dharmah  ( /glyph466हंसा परमो धम/glyph110ः। ) in other words, violence, not non-violence was the  
supreme law. If at the crucial moment he lost faith in the law of non-violence, 
he must accept the deceased friend's amendment which appeared to him to be 
absurd. 
"I know the women of Bengal better than probably the Bengalis do. Today they 
feel crushed and helpless. The sacrifice of myself and my companions would at 
least teach them the art of dying with self-respect. It might open too the eyes 
of the oppressors and melt their hearts. I do not say that the moment my eyes 
are closed theirs will open. But that will be the ultimate result, I have not the 
slightest doubt. If Ahimsa disappears, Hindu Dharma disappears." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 322   
"The issue is not religious but political. It is not a movement against the Hindus, 
but against the Congress," remarked one member of the party. 
"Do you not see that they think that the Congress is a purely Hindu body? And 
do not forget that I have no water-tight compartments such as religious, 
political and others. Let us not lose ourselves in a forest of words. How to solve 
the tangle—violently or non-violently—is the question. In other words, has my 
method efficacy today?" 
Another member asked whether it was right to invite people to return to their 
villages under the prevailing conditions which involved a considerable amount 
of risk. Gandhiji's reply was that there was no harm in asking them to return to 
their villages if the Muslims of that village collectively guaranteed their safety 
and their guarantee was backed by one good Hindu and one good Mussalman, 
who would stay with them in that village and protect them by laying down their 
lives, if necessary. If there was that much guarantee, the refugees ought to 
return to their homes and face whatever risk there might be. If they had not 
the courage to live on these terms, Hinduism was doomed to disappear from 
East Bengal. The question of East Bengal is not one of Bengal alone. The battle 
for India is today being decided in East Bengal. Today Mussalrnans are being 
taught by some that Hindu religion is an abomination and therefore forcible 
conversion of Hindus to Islam a merit. It would save to Islam at least the 
descendants of those who were .forcibly converted. If retaliation is to rule the 
day, the Hindus, in order to win, will have to outstrip the Mussalmans in the 
nefarious deeds that the latter are reported to have done. The United Nations 
set out to fight Hitler with his weapons and ended by out- Hitlering Hitler. 
"How can we reassure the people when the miscreants are still at large in these 
villages?" was the last question asked of him. 
"That is why," replied Gandhiji, "I have insisted upon one good Mussalman 
standing security along with a good Hindu for the safety and security of those 
who might be returning. The former will have to be provided by the Muslim 
Leaguers who form the Bengal Government." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 323  In a letter to a friend he wrote from Dattapara: "The work I am engaged in here 
may be my last act. If I return from here alive and unscathed, it will be like a 
new birth to me. My Ahimsa is being tried here through and through as it was 
never before."  
Khajirkhil, 16-11-'46  
Harijan,  24-11-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 324   
120. THE PURPOSE OF THE TOUR 
[The following address which was written out by Gandhiji in Hindustani for being read to 
the audience at prayer time on 6th January—it being his day of silence—has been rendered 
in English from its Bengali version by Shri Nirmal Kumar Bose. It was published in the 
Bengali edition of the  Harijan  of the 12th instant. 
— Mg. Ed.] 
As my weekly silence will not break before 7 p.m., I have written out my 
address. I pray to God, and request you all to join with me in praying that the 
tour which I commenced yesterday should go on uninterrupted till the end and 
be successful in achieving its purpose. But before praying, you should know that 
purpose. I have only one object in view and it is a clear one: namely, that God 
should purify the hearts of Hindus and Muslims, and the two communities 
should be free from suspicion and fear towards each other. Please join with me 
in this prayer and say that God is the Lord of us both and that He may give us 
success. 
You might well ask me why it is necessary to undertake a tour for this purpose; 
or how can one, who is not pure in heart himself, ask others to become pure; or 
how can one, who himself is subject to fear, give courage to others; one, who 
himself moves under armed escort, call upon others to cast away their arms. All 
these questions are relevant and have been put to me. 
My answer is that during my tour I wish to assure '-he villagers to the best of my 
capacity that I do not bear the least ill-will towards any. I can prove this only 
by living and moving among those who distrust me. I admit that the third 
question is a little difficult for me to answer; for I do happen to be moving 
under armed protection, I am surrounded by armed police and military keenly 
alert to guard me from all danger. I am helpless in the matter as it is arranged 
by the Government which being responsible to the people feels that it is their 
duty to keep me guarded by the police and the military. How can I prevent 
them from doing so? Under the circumstances, I can declare only in words that I 
own no protector but God. I do not know whether you will believe my My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 325  statement. God alone knows the mind of a person; and the duty of a man of 
God is to act as he is directed by his inner voice. I claim that I act accordingly. 
Harijan , 26-1-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 326   
121. THE MODERN BUDDHA? 
A question was put to Gandhiji at Narayanpur on the 15th January: Why cannot 
the apostle of non-violence, the modern Buddha, stop internecine war and 
blood-bath in the country? 
Gandhiji, replying to this question, acquitted himself from the charge of being 
the modern Buddha. He was and claimed to be a simple man having extensive 
experience at his back, but on that account claimed to be no better than any 
member of the audience. He was an equal servant of both the communities or 
all the communities of India. He wished he had the power to stop 'internecine 
war' and consequent 'blood-bath'. Buddha or the prophets that followed him 
had gone the way they went in order to stop wars. The fact that he could not 
do so was proof positive that he had no superior power at his back. It was true 
that he swore by non-violence and so he had come to Noakhali in order to test 
the power of his non-violence. As he had repeatedly said ever since his arrival 
in Bengal, he had no desire to leave Bengal unless both the communities 
showed by their action that they were like blood- brothers living together in 
perfect peace and amity. 
Gandhiji also dealt with a question that was raised by the Muslim friends who 
had seen him before the prayer meeting. They had asked him how he expected 
friendly relations between the two communities when the Hindus agitated for 
the arrest and trial of those who were guilty of murders, arson and loot during 
the disturbances. The speaker confessed that he did not like these complaints. 
But he sympathized with the complainants so long as the wrong-doers avoided 
arrest and trial and so long as Muslim opinion in Noakhali did not insist upon 
guilty parties disclosing themselves. He would be glad to see Muslim opinion 
working actively to bring the offenders not before the courts of justice but 
before the court of public opinion. Let the offenders show contrition and let 
them return the looted property. Let them also show to those against whom 
offences were committed that they need fear no molestation, that the days of 
frenzy were over. Muslim public opinion should be such as to guarantee that My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 327  miscreants would not dare to offend against any individual, and only then 
Hindus Could be asked to return safely to their villages. The speaker was sure 
that such purging before the court of public opinion was infinitely superior to a 
trial before a court of law. What was wanted was not vengeance but 
reformation. 
Harijan , 9-2-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 328   
122. ON TRUSTEESHIP 
Gandhiji answered some questions addressed to. him and arising out of his 
remarks on trusteeship. 
Q. Is it possible to defend by means of non-violence anything which can only be 
gained through violence? 
A. What was gained by violence could not only be defended by non-violence but 
the latter required the abandonment of ill-gotten gains. 
Q. Is the accumulation of capital possible except through violence whether 
open or tacit? 
A. Such accumulation by private persons was impossible except through violent 
means, but accumulation by the State in a non-violent society was not only 
possible, it was desirable and inevitable. 
Q. Whether a man accumulates material or moral wealth he does so only 
through the help or co-operation of other members of society. Has he then the 
moral right to use any of it mainly for personal advantage? 
A. No, he has no moral right. 
Q. How would the successor of a trustee be determined? Will he only have the 
right of proposing a name, the right of finalization being vested in the State? 
A. Choice should be given to the original owner who became the first trustee, 
but the choice must be finalized by the State. Such arrangement puts a check 
on the State as well as the individual. 
Q. When the replacement of private by public property thus takes place 
through the operation of the theory of trusteeship, will the ownership vest in 
the State, which is an instrument of violence, or in associations of a voluntary 
character like village communes and municipalities, which may of course derive 
their final authority from State-made laws? 
A. That question involved some confusion of thought. Legal ownership in the 
transformed condition vested in the trustee, not in the State. It was to avoid My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 329  confiscation that the doctrine of trusteeship came into play retaining for the 
society the ability of the original owner in his own right. Nor is it true that the 
State must always be based on violence. It might be so in theory but the 
practice of the theory demanded a State which would for the most part be 
based on non-violence. 
Satgharia (Noakhali), 2-2-'47 
Harijan,  16-2-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 330   
123. WITH A LANDHOLDER 
"Where shall we stand when India is independent?" asked a friend representing 
the landholders' interests, the other day during his visit to Gandhiji. 
"You will be as free as any scavenger," replied Gandhiji, but whether you will 
be able to retain all the privileges which you are enjoying under the British 
Government is a question you can answer for yourself." 
"The landholders," resumed the friend, "derived their charter of rights and 
privileges from the Permanent Settlement of 1802, which was of the nature of 
a contract between the British and the Zamindars, but they are quite willing to 
negotiate an agreement with the leaders of the country on the future of their 
rights." 
"Being a non-violent man by nature," replied Gandhiji, "I cannot countenance 
the usurpation of anybody's just rights. But some of the extraordinary privileges 
that pass muster under British rule are themselves in the nature of an 
usurpation. The history of British rule is a history of usurpation. Those who 
helped the British Government in this process got certain rights as a reward for 
their services. These cannot be insisted upon." 
"Many ancient Zamindaris existed long before the advent of the British and 
were exercising sovereign power," rejoined the friend, "as a product of the 
indigenous social and economic system of long standing. Don't you think they 
have a title to continue their existence? They are trying their best to discharge 
a philanthropic function in the shape of founding educational and social 
institutions." 
"Anything that is ancient and consistent with moral values has a title to be 
retained," answered Gandhiji. "Per contra  anything that does not conform to 
moral values has to go. Wrong has no prescriptive right to exist merely because 
it is of a long standing. If those who are on your Zamindaris feel one with you My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 331  and you with them, like members of a family, you have nothing to fear from 
anybody."  
New Delhi, 23-4-'46 
Harijan,  28-4-1946 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 332   
124. REDUCTION OF LANDLORD'S SHARE 
Q. There is a movement for reducing the share of the owner from half to one-
third of the agricultural produce. What is your opinion about this? 
Gandhiji welcomed the move for the reduction of the landlord's share from half 
to one-third. He thought the move was substantial. The land belonged to the 
Lord of us all and therefore to the worker on it. But till that ideal state of 
things came about, the movement towards the reduction of the landlord's 
portion was in the right direction. 
But he warned the movers against the use of compulsion or violence. He could 
have no part or share in violence. It was a reform to be brought about only by 
the cultivation of healthy public opinion. The reformers must have patience. He 
believed implicitly in the aphorism: 'As the end so the means.' In his opinion it 
was pernicious to hold that so long as the end was good, any means, however 
violent or unjust, were justified. Many movements had come to grief by 
reliance on doubtful means. 
Harijan,  23-2-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 333   
125. INTELLECTUAL AND MANUAL WORK 
Q. Why should we insist on a Rabindranath or Raman earning his bread by 
manual labour? Is it not sheer wastage? Why should not brain workers be 
considered on a par with manual workers, for both of them perform useful 
social work? 
A. Intellectual work is important and has an undoubted place in the scheme of 
life. But what I insist on is the necessity of physical labour. No man, I claim, 
ought to be free from that obligation. It will serve to improve even the quality 
of his intellectual output. I venture to say that in ancient times Brahmans 
worked with their body as with their mind. But even if they did not, body 
labour was a proved necessity at the present time. In this connection I would 
refer to the life of Tolstoy and how he made famous the theory of bread labour 
first propounded in his country by the Russian peasant Bondaref. 
Dharmapur (Noakhali), 6-2-'47  
Harijan , 23-2-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 334   
126. SOME IMPORTANT QUESTIONS 
Q. It has been our experience that a worker becomes power-loving after some 
time. How are the rest of his coworkers to keep him in check? In other words, 
how are we to preserve the democratic character of the organization? We have 
found that non-co-operation with the party in question does not help. The work 
of the organization itself suffers. 
A. This is not your experience alone but it is almost universal. Love of power is 
usual in man and it often only dies with his death. Therefore, it is difficult for 
co-workers to keep him in check, if only because they are more likely than not 
to have the same human frailty; and so long as we do not know a single 
completely non-violent organization in the world, we cannot claim to know the 
utterly democratic character of an organization because, as can be definitely 
proved, no perfect democracy is possible without perfect non-violence at the 
back of it. The question would be proper if non-co-operation was violent as it 
often, if not invariably, is. Claiming to know somewhat from experience the 
non-violent character of non-co-operation, I suggest that given a good cause, 
non-violent non-co-operation must succeed, and no organization can suffer 
through offering non-violent non-co-operation. The questioner labours under 
the difficulty of having experience of non- co-operation, at best partially non-
violent, at its worst bare-face violence sailing under the name of non-violence. 
The pages of the  Harijan  and Young India  are filled with instances of abortive 
non-co-operation, because of these two vital defects, non-violence being 
partial or totally absent. During my long experience, I also noticed that those 
who complain of others being ambitious of holding power are no less ambitious 
themselves, and when it is a question of distinguishing between half a dozen 
and six, it becomes a thankless task. 
Q. In almost all villages there are parties and factions. When we draft local 
help, whether we wish it or not, we become involved in local power politics. 
How can we steer clear of this difficulty? Should we try to by-pass both parties 
and carry on work with the help of outside workers? Our experience has been My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 335  that such work becomes entirely contingent upon outside aid and crumbles 
down as soon as the latter is withdrawn. What should we do then to develop 
local initiative and foster local co-operation? 
A. Alas for India that parties and factions are to be found in the villages as they 
are to be found in our cities. And when power politics enter our villages with 
less thought of the welfare of the villages and more of using them for 
increasing the parties' own power, this becomes a hindrance to the progress of 
the villagers rather than a help. I would say that whatever be the consequence, 
we must make use as much as possible of local help and if we are free from the 
taint of power politics, we are not likely to go wrong. Let us remember that the 
English-educated men and women from the cities have criminally neglected the 
villages of India which are the backbone of the country. The process of 
remembering our neglect will induce patience. I have never gone to a single 
village which is devoid of an honest worker. We fail to find him when we are 
not humble enough to recognize any merit in our villages. Of course, we are to 
steer clear of local politics, and this we shall learn to do when we accept help 
from all parties and no parties, wherever it is really good. I would regard it as 
fatal for success to by-pass villagers. As I knew this very difficulty, I have tried 
rigidly to observe the rule of one village, one worker, except that where he or 
she does not know Bengali, an interpreter's help has been given. I can only say 
that this system has so far answered the purpose. I must, therefore, discount 
your experience, I would further suggest that we have got into the vicious habit 
of coming to hasty conclusions. Before pronouncing such a sweeping 
condemnation as is implied in the sentence that 'work becomes entirely 
contingent upon outside aid and crumbles down as soon as the latter is with-
drawn', I would go so far as to say that even a few years' experience of 
residence in a single village, trying to work through local workers, should not 
be regarded as conclusive proof that work could not be done through and by 
local workers. The contrary is obviously true. It now becomes unnecessary for 
me to examine the last sentence in detail. I can categorically say to the 
principal worker: If you have any outside help, get rid of it. Work singly, My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 336  courageously, intelligently with all the local help you can get and, if you do not 
succeed, blame only yourself and no one else and nothing else.' 
Harijan,  2-3-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 337   
127. IMPORTANT QUESTIONS 
Q. We agree that intrinsically a movement for reducing the share of the owner 
from half to a third of the crop is justified. But could not the present  Tebhaga  
Movement in Bengal be postponed until such time as when the affected persons 
can be smoothly absorbed in other occupations according to some long-term 
plan sponsored by the State? 
We know you have said that the only way to effect such a radical 
transformation in society is through nonviolence. But interested parties will 
sleep over that portion of your advice and parade your moral support to their 
demand and carry on the Movement in their own violent way. Hence is it not 
wrong for you to lend support to the Movement under the present 
circumstances when there is every chance of the entire middle class of Bengal 
being completely ruined as a result? The common villager will also suffer no 
less because he will also be deprived of the services now being rendered to the 
village economy by them. 
A. In reply, Gandhiji uttered the warning that he only dealt with principles as 
he knew them. He had not studied the local question. Therefore, the 
questioner ran the risk of his ignorance causing injustice. 
He felt that the question betrayed exaggeration on the part of the questioner. 
There was no ruin impending for the landlord. His land was not being 
confiscated. His portion, which he could take even if he was in Timbuctoo, was 
merely to be reduced from 50% to 33%. He could see no ruin in the proposal. He 
was afraid they were too much obsessed by the communal question. They 
should rise above it and examine every problem strictly on merits. Then they 
would never go wrong. Therefore they should accept the moral principle 
underlying the demand for reduction of the owner's share and work for solid 
amendments in which they were likely to succeed. Let them not face 
confiscation rather than moderate reduction. Let them remember that for 
years past India had lived through confiscation. Industry after industry had been My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 338  ruined and both the artisans as well as the farmers of India had been 
progressively reduced to poverty. 
If the desired change were brought about through non-violent means, the world 
would not be deprived of the talents of the classes, but then the latter would 
not exercise them at the expenses of the labourers. In the nonviolent order of 
the future, the land would belong to the State, for had it not been said  ‘sab hi 
bhumi Gopalakv ( सभी भू/glyph871म गोपाल क/glyph566 ।  ) ? Under such dispensation, there 
would be no waste of talents and labour. This would be impossible through 
violent means. It was therefore a truism to say that the utter ruin of the land-
owners brought about through violence would also involve the ruin of the 
labourers in the end. If the land-owners, therefore, acted wisely, no party 
would lose. 
Some women workers who earn part of their living by weaving mats were 
advised -by you the other day to work on co-operative principles. Bengal's 
agriculture has been reduced to an uneconomic proposition through extreme 
fragmentation of holdings. Would you advise farmers also to adopt co-operative 
methods? 
If so, how are they to effect this under the present system of land-ownership ? 
Should the State make the necessary changes in the law? If the State is not 
ready, but the people so desire, how are they to work through their own 
organizations to this end? 
A. Replying to the first part of the question, Gandhiji said that he had no doubt 
that the system of cooperation was far more necessary for the agriculturists 
than for the mat weavers. The land as he maintained belonged to the State; 
therefore, it yielded the largest return when it was worked co-operatively. 
Let it be remembered that co-operation should be based on strict non-violence. 
There was no such thing as success of violent co-operation. Hitler was a forcible 
example of the latter. He also talked vainly of co-operation which was forced 
upon the people and everyone knew where German had been led as a result. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 339  Gandhiji concluded by saying that it would be a sad thing if India also tried to 
build up the new society based on co-operation by means of violence. Good 
brought about through force destroyed individuality. Only when the change was 
effected through the persuasive power of nonviolent non-co-operation, i.e. 
love, could the foundation of individuality be preserved and real, abiding 
progress be assured for the world. 
Harijan,  9-3-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 340   
128. QUESTION  BOX 
Q. Do you support evacuation of the Hindus from the affected areas if the 
League Government or the majority community agrees to give us due 
compensation? 
A. He had supported the proposition from the nonviolent standpoint. It was 
applicable to all provinces whether the majority was Hindu or Muslim. What 
could the Government do if the majority had become so hostile that they would 
not tolerate the presence of the minority community? In his opinion it would be 
improper for them to force the majority into submission, nor could they under-
take to protect the minority at the point of the bayonet. Suppose for instance 
that the majority would not tolerate Ramadhun or the clapping (to keep time 
with the chanting), would not listen to the fact that Rama was not a person but 
the name was synonymous with God, and that the Hindus believed in clapping, 
and that the Muslims would not tolerate it, he had then no hesitation in saying 
that the minority should evacuate if adequate compensation was paid. 
Q. What should a Hindu worker do when he is being deliberately 
misrepresented by interested parties in Noakhali? 
A. The answer in terms of Ahimsa, generally, would be that acts should be 
allowed to speak for themselves. 
Whilst this was good as a general proposition there were occasions when to 
speak and explain was a duty and not to speak would amount to a falsehood. 
Therefore wisdom dictated that there were some occasions when speech must 
accompany action. Of course there was an occasion when mere thought would 
take the place of speech and action. Such was the attribute of the Almighty and 
might be almost possible for one in a billion, but he knew no such instance. 
Q. You have advised evacuation if the majority become irrevocably hostile. But 
you have also maintained that a truly non-violent man should never give up 
hope of converting his opponent by love. Under these circumstances, how can 
non-violent man accept defeat and evacuate? My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 341  A. As to this question, it was perfectly correct that a non-violent man would 
not move out of his place. For such a one there would be no question of 
compensation. He would simply die at his post and prove that his presence was 
not a danger to the State or the community. He knew that the Hindus of 
Noakhali made no such pretension. They were simple folk who loved the world 
and wanted to live in the world in peace and safety. Such persons would 
consult their honour if the Government honourably offered them compensation 
in order to see the majority living in peace. If the mere presence of the Hindus 
irritated the Muslims who were the majority, he would consider it to be the 
duty of the Government to offer compensation as it would be of the 
Government in a Hindu majority province to offer compensation to the Muslims 
if their presence irritated the majority community. 
Q. In case of evacuation, under advice from the Government, should the 
evacuees ask for compensation for: 
a) all their movable and immovable property, 
b) loss of business? 
In other words, what would you consider to be adequate compensation? 
A. Gandhiji said that the Government would be obliged to compensate for both 
immovable and movables when the latter could not or were not carried away 
with him by the evacuee. Loss of business was a ticklish question. He could not 
conceive the possibility of any Government shouldering the burden of such 
compensation. He would understand the proposition that asked for a reasonable 
sum for enabling the person concerned to start business in a new place. 
Whilst he examined and admitted the possibility of evacuation, his experience 
of all India told him that the Hindus and the Muslims knew how to live at peace 
among themselves. He declined to believe that people had said goodbye to 
their senses so as to make it impossible to live at peace with each other as they 
had done for generations. 
For, he believed with the late Poet Iqbal that the Hindus and the Muslims who 
had lived together long under the shadow of the mighty Himalayas and had My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 342  drunk the waters of the Ganga and the Jamuna had a unique message for the 
world. 
Harijan , 16-3-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 343   
129. MILITARY TRAINING 
The thing that pained me was the reference to military education.* I think that 
we have to wait a long time before a nation-wide decision on the point is 
made. Otherwise, we are likely to become a curse rather than a blessing to the 
world. Leaders are not made, they are born. Should the State be in a hurry over 
this matter even before full independence is established? Therefore, I am 
surprised that the Central Advisory Board should be party to such a sweeping 
recommendation as they have made.  
Kazirkhil, 21-2-'47 
Harijan,  23-3-1947 
 
* The recommendation referred to here is given below 
CENTRAL ADVISORY BOARD'S RECOMMENDATIONS 
NEW DELHI, Jan. 27th 
"The Central Advisory Board of Education has endorsed the view of the Working Committee 
of the National War Academy that residential schools, where boys may obtain adequate 
facilities for developing the character and powers of leadership, should be started by Pro-
vinces and States to act as 'feeders' for the National War Academy. 
"The Board is of opinion that the new type of schools contemplated in the Scheme of 
National Post-war Education will provide the necessary training for the leadership, 
character, intelligence, courage and physical fitness required by the military authorities 
for the Army, Navy and Air Force. 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 344   
130. NON-RESISTANCE 
Gandhiji in his post-prayer speech referred to a letter from a correspondent 
which had lately reached him. It was in answer to that letter that he wanted to 
say that if a man abused him, it would never do for him to return the abuse. An 
evil returned by another evil only succeeded in multiplying it, instead of 
leading to its reduction. It was a universal law, he said, that violence could 
never be quenched by superior violence but could only he quenched by non-
violence. But the true meaning of non-resistance had often been misunderstood 
or even distorted. It never implied that a non-violent man should bend before 
the violence of an aggressor. While not returning the latter's violence by 
violence, he should refuse to submit to the latter's illegitimate demand even to 
the point of death. That was the true meaning of non-resistance. 
If, for instance, proceeded the speaker, someone asked him under threat of 
violence to admit a claim, say, like that of Pakistan, he should not immediately 
rush to return the violence thus offered. In all humility he would ask the 
aggressor what was really meant by the demand, and if he was really satisfied 
that it was something worth striving for, then he would have no hesitation in 
proclaiming from the housetop that the demand was just and it had to be 
admitted by everyone concerned. But if the demand was backed by force, then 
the only course open to the nonviolent man was to offer non-resistance against 
it as long as he was not convinced of its justice. He was not to return violence 
but neutralize it by withholding one's hand and, at the same time, refusing to 
submit to the demand. This was the only civilized way of going on in the world. 
Any other course could only lead to a race for armaments interspersed by 
periods of peace which was by necessity and brought about by exhaustion, 
when preparations would be going on for violence of a superior order. Peace 
through superior violence inevitably led to the atom bomb and all that it stood 
for. It was the completest negation of non-violence and of democracy which 
was not possible without the former. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 345  The non-violent resistance described above required courage of a superior 
order to that needed in violent warfare. Forgiveness was the quality of the 
brave, not of the cowardly. Gandhiji here related a story, from the 
Mahabharata, when one of the Pandava brothers was accidentally injured while 
living in disguise in the home of King Virata. The brothers not only hid what had 
happened, but for fear that harm might come to the host if a drop of blood 
touched the ground, they prevented it from doing so by means of a golden 
bowl. It was this type of forbearance and courage which Gandhiji wished every 
Indian to develop whether he was a Hindu, Mussalman, Christian, Parsi or Sikh. 
That alone could rescue them from their present fallen condition. 
The lesson of non-violence was present in every religion but Gandhiji fondly 
believed that perhaps it was here in India that its practice had been reduced to 
a science. Innumerable saints had laid down their lives in  tapash-charya  until 
poets had felt that the Himalayas became purified in their snowy whiteness by 
means of their sacrifice. But all that practice of non-violence was nearly dead 
today. It was necessary to revive the eternal law of answering anger by love 
and violence by non-violence; and where could this be more readily done than 
in this land of King Janaka and Ramachandra? 
Harijan,  30-3-1947 
 
"It directs the attention of provincial authorities to the necessity of developing their 
schools on these lines which will actually serve as the kind of schools which the military 
authorities have in mind." 
— A. P. I. 
Harijan,  23-3-1947 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 346   
131. THE AIM OF LIFE 
Gandhiji's weekly silence having commenced, his written message in Hindustani 
was read out to the congregation after the prayers. It was his earnest prayer 
that those who were present and those others whom his voice could reach 
should understand the aim of life. The aim of life was that they should serve 
the Power that had created them, and on whose mercy or consent depended 
their very breath, by heartily serving its creation. That meant love, not hate 
which one saw everywhere. They had forgotten that aim and were either 
actually fighting each other or preparing for that fight. If they could not escape 
calamity, they should regard India's independence as an impossible dream. If 
they thought that they would get independence by the simple fact of the 
British power quitting the land, they were sadly mistaken. The British were 
leaving India. But if they continued fighting one another, some other power or 
powers would step in. If they thought they could fight the whole world with its 
weapons, it was a folly. 
A friend had written, continued Gandhiji, that a sort of peace seemed to have 
been established in the Punjab through military occupation. That peace was 
the peace of the grave. The people were silently preparing for an open and 
deadlier fight. Weapons were being collected. After that even the military 
would find it impossible to control the people. It was his firm conviction that 
the peace established with the aid of the military or the police would be no 
peace. True peace would only come when at least one side, if not both, 
adopted the true bravery that non-violence gave. 
Bihar had realized, said Gandhiji, that there was no bravery in killing women 
and children. It was sheer cowardice. It would be a grand thing if Bihar could 
manifest the true bravery of silent strength and show thereby the true path of 
life to the whole world. 
Harijan , 6-4-1947 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 347   
132. THE MESSAGE OF ASIA 
Addressing the concluding session of the Inter-Asian Relations Conference on 
Wednesday the 2nd of April, 1947, in the Purana Quila at Delhi, Gandhiji said: 
"You, friends, have not seen the real India and you are not meeting in 
conference in the midst of real India. Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Lahore 
are big cities and are, therefore, influenced by the West. If you really want to 
see India at its best, you have to find it in the humble Bhangi homes of our 
villages. There are 7,00,000 of such villages and 38 crores of people inhabit 
them. 
"If some of you see the villages, you will not be fascinated by the sight. You will 
have to scratch below the dung heap. I do not pretend to say that they were 
ever places of paradise. Today they are really dung heaps. They were not like 
that before. What I speak is not from history but from what I have seen myself. 
I have travelled from one end of India to the other and have seen the miserable 
specimens of humanity with lustreless eyes. They are India. In these humble 
cottages, in the midst of these dung heaps, are to be found the humble Bhangis 
in whom you find the concentrated essence of wisdom." 
Stating that wisdom had come to the West from the East, Gandhiji said: "The 
first of these wise men was Zoroaster. He belonged to the East. He was 
followed by Buddha who belonged to East—India. Who followed Buddha? Jesus, 
who came from the East. Before Jesus was Moses who belonged to Palestine 
though he was born in Egypt. After Jesus came Mohammed. I omit any 
reference to Krishna and Rama, and other lights. I do not call them lesser lights 
but they are less known to the literary world. All the same I do not know a 
single person in the world to match these men of Asia. And then what happen-
ed? Christianity became disfigured when it went to the West. I am sorry to have 
to say that. 
"I have told you the story in order to make you understand that what you see in 
the big cities is not the real India. Certainly, the carnage that is going on My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 348  before our very eyes is a shameful thing. As I said yesterday, do not carry the 
memory of that carnage beyond the confines of India. 
"What I want you to understand is the message of Asia. It is not to be learnt 
through the Western spectacles or by imitating the atom bomb. If you want to 
give a message to the West,, it must be the message of love and the message of 
truth. I do not want merely to appeal to your head. I want to capture your 
heart. 
"In this age of democracy, in this age of awakening of the poorest of the poor, 
you can redeliver this message with the greatest emphasis. You will complete 
the conquest of the West not through vengeance because you have been 
exploited, but with real understanding. I am sanguine if all of you put your 
hearts together— not merely heads— to understand the secret of the message 
these wise men of the East have left to us, and if we really become worthy of 
that great message, the conquest of the West will be completed. This conquest 
will be loved by the West itself. 
"The West is today pining for wisdom. It is despairing of a multiplication of the 
atom bombs, because atom bombs mean utter destruction not merely of the 
West but of the whole world, as if the prophecy of the Bible is going to be 
fulfilled and there is to be a perfect deluge. It is up to you to tell the world of 
its wickedness and sin— that is the heritage your teachers and my teachers 
have taught Asia. 
Harijan,  20-4-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 349   
133. ADVICE TO SIND HINDUS 
Gandhiji's timely clarification of his advice to Sind Hindus has heartened them 
to face the future with courage and fortitude. Asked to clarify his advice that 
Sind Hindus should migrate in the event of partition, Gandhiji told Bhai Pratap 
Dayaldas of Hyderabad who met him at New Delhi: 
"I said that you should suffer bravely, but non-violently unto death. But if you 
cannot do that and must take a disgraceful surrender of all including honour, 
your womenfolk and religion, in that case, the only and safe proper course for 
you to take is migration, not singly, but of all the Hindus and other non-
Muslims." 
Harijan,  25-5-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 350   
134. HOW TO COMBAT HIMSA? 
Q. 1. The leaders and followers of the League do not believe in attaining their 
object through non-violence. In such circumstances, how is it possible to melt 
their hearts or to convince them of the evil of violent action? 
A. 1. Violence, can only be effectively met by nonviolence. This is an old, 
established truth. The questioner does not really understand the working of 
non-violence. If he did, he would have known that the weapon of violence, 
even if it was the atom bomb, became useless when matched against true non-
violence. That very few understand how to wield this mighty weapon is true. It 
requires a lot of understanding and strength of mind. It is unlike what is needed 
in military schools and colleges. The difficulty one experiences in meeting 
Himsa with Ahimsa arises from weakness of mind. 
Q. 2. Today many people are beginning to feel that a clash, possibly of a 
violent character, with the supporters of the League is inevitable. The 
nationalists feel that until the League agrees to the partition of Bengal and the 
Punjab, its demand for Pakistan is unjust. What means should they adopt to 
meet the situation? 
A. 2. If the answer to the first question is held valid, the second question does 
not arise. However, the question may be discussed for a clearer understanding. 
If the majority of the Muslims obey Quaid-i-Azam Jinnah, a violent conflict 
should be out of the question, or if the majority of the Hindus take their stand 
on non-violence, no matter how much violence the Muslims use, it is bound to 
fail. One thing, however, should be perfectly understood. The votaries of (non-
violence cannot harbour violence in thought, let alone the question of doing it. 
If Pakistan is wrong, partition of Bengal and the Punjab will not make it right. 
Two wrongs will not make one right. 
Q. 3. The majority of the socialists claim that if there was a socialist revolution 
the economic question will come to the forefront throwing the communal My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 351  conflict in the background. Do you agree? If such a revolution takes place, will 
it promote the establishment of the Kingdom of God which you call Ramarajya? 
A. 3. The economic conflict you envisage is likely to make the Hindu-Muslim 
tension less acute. Even the end of the Hindu-Muslim conflict will not end all 
our troubles. What is happening is this. With the end of slavery and the dawn of 
independence, all the weaknesses of society are bound to come to the surface. 
I do not see any reason to be unnecessarily upset about it. If we keep our 
balance at such a time, every tangle will be solved. As far as the economic 
question is concerned it has to be solved in any case. Today, there is gross 
economic inequality. The basis of socialism is economic equality. There can be 
no Ramarajya in the present state of iniquitous inequalities in which a few roll 
in riches and the masses do not get even enough to eat. I accepted the theory 
of socialism even while I was in South Africa. My opposition to the socialists and 
others consists in attacking violence as a means of effecting any lasting reform. 
Q. 4. You say that a Raja, a Zamindar or a capitalist should be a trustee for the 
poor. Do you think that any such exists today? Or do you expect them to be so 
transformed ? 
A. 4. I think that some very few exist even today, though not in the full sense 
of the term. They are certainly moving in that direction. It can, however, be 
asked whether the present Rajas and others can be expected to become 
trustees of the poor. If they do not become trustees of their own accord, force 
of circumstances will compel the reform unless they court utter destruction. 
When Panchayat Raj is established, public opinion will do what violence can 
never do. The present power of the Zamindars, the capitalists and the Rajas 
can hold away only so long as the common people do not realize their own 
strength. If the people non-co-operate with the evil of Zamindari or capitalism, 
it must die of inanition. In Panchayat Raj only the Panchayat will be obeyed 
and the Panchayat can only work through the law of their making.  
New Delhi, 25-5-'47 
Harijan , 1-6-1947 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 352   
135. WEAPON OF THE BRAVE 
The talk went about that Gandhiji was staying in Bihar, no doubt, in order to 
help the Muslims but the result would be that the Hindus would be butchered. 
He had said to the Hindus that even if the Muslims went mad, they should not 
lose their reason. He was not ashamed of giving that advice to anyone. The 
Hindus were in a minority in the Punjab, but there were the brave Sikhs, each 
one of whom considered himself equivalent to 11 lakh. Did it mean that one 
Sikh could shed as much blood as lakh? He thought not. It meant that one Sikh 
could stand up to lakh persons against him. In that sense it was a tribute to the 
bravery of the Sikhs. Not one Sikh should stand by and see a wrong perpetrated. 
He should give his life to prevent it. His advice, therefore, to the Sikhs also was 
that whatever might have been the use of the sword in Sikh history, in this age 
of the atom bomb there was no weapon like non-violent resistance. It did not 
make cowards of men. It infused courage even in women. If he recommended 
non-violence, it was because he was convinced that it was the weapon of the 
really brave. 
 
Analogy of the Mad Dog 
Someone asked Gandhiji what should be done with a mad dog? His reply was 
that if the friend meant a mad dog literally, he himself would say that in the 
first place a dog would not go mad amongst really god-fearing men. But 
supposing in the presence of men who considered themselves of God, they 
found a dog running amuck, they would naturally kill it rather than allow many 
of themselves to be bitten by a rabid dog and be sent to Kasauli for treatment 
as they used to before. 
But what if a human being went mad? His own brother had gone mad. He 
(Gandhiji) was a small boy of ten at that time. But his mother and father did 
not have the mad son killed. They sent for Vaidyas and doctors and had him 
treated and cured. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 353  "You are all my blood brothers whether you are Hindus or Muslims. Supposing 
you go mad and I have a battalion at my command, would I have you shot? No. I 
would not like to be shot myself, if I went mad. My friend's son went mad, I had 
to send him to the lock-up but I would not have him killed." 
Harijan , 8-6-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 354   
136. NON-VIOLENCE OF THE BRAVE 
Gandhiji had no doubt that non-violence was as effective a weapon against 
communal strife as it had proved in their struggle against the British. The 
people had followed him then, because they knew they could not face the 
might of British arms in any other way. It was the non-violence of the weak. 
That won't serve the purpose in communal strife. For that was required pure 
nonviolence of the brave. 
Speaking in the prayer meeting Gandhiji said that while he admitted his 
impotency regarding the spread of the Ahimsa of the brave and the strong as 
distinguished from that of the weak, the admission was not meant to imply that 
he did not know how that inestimable virtue was to be cultivated. 
Consciousness of the living presence of God within one was undoubtedly the 
first requisite. Acquisition of this consciousness did not require or mean 
temple-going. The daily recitation, however, carried with it certain well-
defined implications. Assuming that the millions of India daily recited at a given 
time the name of God as Rama, Allah, Khuda, Ahura Mazda and Jehovah but the 
recitation was not free from drunkenness, debauchery, gambling on the market 
or in gambling dens, black- marketing etc., the Ramadhun was a vain and 
inglorious effort. One with a wicked heart could never be conscious of the all-
purifying presence of God. Therefore it was truer (if it was a fact) to say that 
India was not ready for the lesson of Ahimsa of the strong than that no 
programme had been devised for the teaching. It would be perfectly just 10 say 
that the programme just mentioned for the Ahimsa of the strong was not as 
attractive as that devised for the non-violence of the weak had proved to be. 
He hoped that at least his hearers who daily attended the prayer meetings 
would lead the way in expressing in their lives the Ahimsa of the strong.  
New Delhi, 22-6-'47 
Harijan , 29-6-1947 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 355   
137. RIGHTS OR DUTIES? 
"I want to deal with one great evil that is afflicting society today. The capitalist 
and the Zamindar talk of their rights, the labourer on the other hand of his, the 
prince of his divine right to rule, the ryot of his to resist it. If all simply insist 
on rights and no duties, there will be utter confusion and chaos. 
"If instead of insisting on rights everyone does his duty, there will immediately 
be the rule of order established among mankind. There is no such thing as the 
divine right of kings to rule and the humble duty of the ryots to pay respectful 
obedience to their masters. Whilst it is true that these hereditary inequalities 
must go as being injurious to the well-being of society, the unabashed assertion 
of rights of the hitherto down-trodden millions is equally injurious, if not more 
so to the same well-being. The latter behaviour is probably calculated to injure 
the millions rather than the few claimants of divine or other rights. They could 
but die a brave or cowardly death but those few dead would not bring in the 
orderly life of blissful contentment. It is, therefore, necessary to understand 
the correlation of rights and duties. I venture to suggest that rights that do not 
flow directly from duty well performed are not worth having. They will be 
usurpations, sooner discarded the better. A wretched parent who claims 
obedience from his children without first doing his duty by them excites nothing 
but contempt. It is distortion of religious precept for a dissolute husband to 
expect compliance in every respect from his dutiful wife. But the children who 
flout their parent who is ever ready to do his duty towards them would be 
considered ungrateful and would harm themselves more than their parent. The 
same can be said about husband and wife. If you apply this simple and universal 
rule to employers and labourers, landlords and tenants, the princes and their 
subjects, or the Hindus and the Muslims, you will find that the happiest relation 
can be established in all walks of life without creating disturbance in and 
dislocation of life and business which you see in India as in the other parts of 
the world. What I call the law of Satyagraha is to be deduced from an 
appreciation of duties and rights flowing therefrom." 
Harijan,  6-7-1947 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 356   
138. WHO IS A SOCIALIST? 
Socialism is a beautiful word and so far as I am aware, in socialism all the 
members of society are equal—none low, none high. In the individual body the 
head is not high because it is the top of the body, nor are the soles of the feet 
low because they touch the earth. Even as members of the individual body are 
equal, so are the members of society. This is socialism. 
In it the prince and the peasant, the wealthy and the poor, the employer and 
the employee are all on the same level. In terms of religion there is no duality 
in socialism. It is all unity. Looking at society all the world over there is nothing 
but duality or plurality. Unity is conspicuous by its absence. This man is high, 
that one is low, that is a Hindu, that a Muslim, third a Christian, fourth a Parsi, 
fifth a Sikh, sixth a Jew. Even among these there are subdivisions. In the unity 
of my conception there is perfect unity in the plurality of designs. 
In order to reach this state we may not look on things philosophically and say 
that we need not make a move until all are converted to socialism. Without 
changing our life we may go on giving addresses, forming parties and hawk-like 
seize the game when it comes our way. This is no socialism. The more we treat 
it as game to be seized, the farther it must recede from us. 
Socialism begins with the first convert. If there is one such, you can add zeros 
to the one and the first zero will account for ten and every addition will 
account for ten times the previous number. If, however, the beginner is a zero, 
in other words, no one makes the beginning, multiplicity of zeros will also 
produce zero value. Time and paper occupied in writing zeros will be so much 
waste. 
This socialism is as pure as crystal. It, therefore, required crystal-like means to 
achieve it. Impure means result in an impure end. Hence the prince and the 
peasant will not be equalized by cutting off the prince's head, nor can the 
process of cutting off equalize the employer and the employed. One cannot 
reach truth by untruthfulness. Truthful conduct alone can reach truth. Are not My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 357  nonviolence and truth twins? The answer is an emphatic 'no'. Non-violence is 
embedded in truth and  vice versa.  Hence has it been said that they are faces of 
the same coin. Either is inseparable from the other. Read the coin either way. 
The spelling of words will be different. The value is the same. This blessed 
state is unattainable without perfect purity. Harbour impurity of mind or body 
and you have untruth and violence in you. 
Therefore, only truthful, non-violent and pure-hearted socialists will be able to 
establish a socialistic society in India and the world. To my knowledge there is 
no country in the world which is purely socialistic. Without the means described 
above the existence of such a society is impossible.  
New Delhi, 6-7-'47 
Harijan,  13-7-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 358   
139. THE ROOT CAUSE OF PARTITION 
Many people come to Gandhiji and express their dissatisfaction over the 
partition of India. They know that Gandhiji has always been opposed to it. Why 
does he not give tangible form to his opposition? they ask. It is wrong for him to 
say that he is a spent bullet or that the country is not behind him. "Give us the 
lead and you will see for yourself whether the country is behind you or not." 
Gandhiji is sometimes amused by such talk. Against whom is he to give the 
lead? It was not the British who had partitioned the country. It had been done 
with the consent of the Congress howsoever reluctantly. There was only one 
way to avoid the calamity and that was by the non-violence of the brave. But 
how could the people develop it overnight? Talking to some friends on this 
subject he said that the leaders had agreed to the partition as the last resort. 
They did not feel that they had made a mistake. Rather than let the whole 
country go to the dogs, they agreed to the partition, hoping to give the country 
a much needed rest. He felt differently. He had said that he would rather let 
the whole country be reduced to ashes than yield an inch to violence. But non-
violence was his creed. It was not so with the Congress. The Congress had 
accepted non-violence as a policy. Badshah Khan was the only leader who 
believed in non-violence as a creed. Even he had not imbibed the doctrine 
through and through. 
"I have admitted my mistake," he continued. "I thought our struggle was based 
on non-violence. Whereas in reality it was no more than passive resistance 
which essentially is a weapon of the weak. It leads naturally to armed 
resistance whenever possible." In South Africa the English Chairman of his 
meeting, the late Mr. Hosken, had said that he (Gandhiji) was fighting for the 
cause of the weak. Therefore he was resorting to passive resistance. Gandhiji 
had contradicted the statement. He had said that they were not weak in the 
sense the Chairman meant. The struggle in the Transvaal was not passive 
resistance. It was based on non-violence. The source of their strength was soul 
force, not physical force. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 359  Intoxicated with his success in South Africa, he came to India. Here too the 
struggle bore fruit. But he now realized that it was not based on non-violence. 
If he had known so then, he would not have launched the struggle. But God 
wanted to take that work from him. So He blurred his vision. It was because 
their struggle was not non-violent that they today witnessed loot, arson and 
murder. 
A friend interposed that Gandhiji had always maintained that our struggle was 
based on non-violence, though of the weak. 
Gandhiji said that his was a mistaken statement. There was no such thing as 
non-violence of the weak. Nonviolence and weakness was a contradiction in 
terms. He had never experienced the dark despair that was today within him. 
He was a born fighter who did not know failure. But he was groping today. 
"But why should you feel despondent?" persisted the friend. "I see clearly," 
replied Gandhiji, "that if the country cannot be turned to non-violence it will 
be bad for it and the world. It will mean goodbye to freedom. It might even 
mean a military dictatorship. I am day and night thinking how non-violence of 
the brave can be cultivated. 
"I said at the Asiatic Conference that I hoped the fragrance of the non-violence 
of India would permeate the whole world. I often wonder if that hope will ma-
terialize."  
New Delhi, 18-7-'47 
Harijan,  27-7-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 360   
140. THE FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCE 
Gandhiji said in his after-prayer speech: It is said that my speeches nowadays 
are depressing. Some even suggest that I should not speak at all. This multitude 
of advisers reminds me of a painter who had exposed his painting in a shop 
window without glass inviting critics to mark the parts they did not like. The 
result was a daub. The painter had simply tried to show that it was impossible 
to please all parties. He was, therefore, satisfied that he had painted a good 
picture. His business was to produce a work which satisfied his artistic taste. 
Mine is a similar case. I hope I never speak for the sake of speaking. I speak 
because I feel that I have something to say to the people. It is true that I do not 
agree with what many of my closest friends have done or are doing. Whilst I am 
in Delhi and I have an opinion about some current events, I cannot help giving 
that opinion. And what are the differences that matter? If you analyse them 
you would find only one fundamental difference to which all the others could 
be traced. Non-violence is my creed. It never was of the Congress. With the 
Congress it has always been a policy. A policy takes the shape of a creed whilst 
it lasts, no longer. The Congress had every right to change it when it found 
necessary. A creed can never admit of any change. Now though according to 
the Congress constitution the policy abides, the practice has undoubtedly 
altered the policy. Technicians may quarrel with the fact. You and I cannot, 
must not. Why should not the makers of the present Congress change their 
policy in fact? The law will take care of itself. It should also be noted that in 
the constitution the word  peaceful  is used, not non-violent.  
In Bombay when the Congress met in 1934 I tried hard to have the word  
peaceful  replaced by  non-violent  and I failed. Therefore, it is open to give the 
word peaceful a meaning probably less than that of  non-violent.  I see none. But 
my opinion is irrelevant. It is for the  savants to determine the difference, if 
any. All that you and I need to realize is that the Congress practice is not non-
violent today in the accepted sense of the term. If the Congress was pledged to 
the policy of non-violence, there would be no army supported by it. But she My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 361  sports an army which may eat up the civilians and establish military rule in 
India unless the people listen to me. Am I to give up all hope of their ever 
listening to me? I cannot do it whilst there is breath left in me. And if the 
people do not wish to listen to my non-violent dirge, there is no reason for 
critics to dissuade me from speaking to the public. 
New Delhi, 15-7-'47 
Harijan , 27-7-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 362   
141. SECULAR 
Reverend Kellas, Principal of the Scottish Church College, came to see Gandhiji 
yesterday with some members of his staff. The principal question discussed was 
in connection with the relation between education, religion and the State. 
Gandhiji expressed the opinion that the State should undoubtedly be secular. 
Everyone living in it should be entitled to profess his religion without let or 
hindrance, so long as the citizen obeyed the common law of the land. There 
should be no interference with missionary effort, but no mission could enjoy 
the patronage of the State as it did during the foreign regime. 
While discussing these matters with Principal Kellas, Gandhiji incidentally 
remarked that although we had thrown overboard British political supremacy, 
we had not yet been able to throw overboard the cultural one. In his 
characteristic style, he said, "We have discarded foreign power, not the unseen 
foreign influence." What he would like the new India of his dream to do was to 
lay the foundation of a new life in keeping with its natural surroundings. In 
every State in the world today, violence, even if it were for so-called defensive 
purpose only, enjoyed a status which was in conflict with the better elements 
of life. "The organization of the best in society," was the aim to which new 
India should dedicate herself; and this could be done only if we succeeded in 
demolishing the status which had been given to  goondaism  today. 
One of the scientist members of the staff then asked Gandhiji what scientific 
men should do if they were now asked by the free Indian Government to engage 
in researches in furtherance of war and the atom bomb ? Gandhiji promptly 
replied, "Scientists to be worth the name should resist such a State unto death." 
Calcutta, 17-8-'47  
Harijan , 24-8-1947 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 363   
142. NON-VIOLENCE AND FREE INDIA 
There was a small gathering of local students the other day in Gandhiji's camp 
at Beliaghata. Gandhiji first asked them if any of them had taken part in the 
riots, to which they replied in the negative. Whatever they had done was in 
self-defence; hence it was no part of the riot. 
This gave Gandhiji an opportunity of speaking on some of the vital problems 
connected with non-violence. He said that mankind had all along tried to justify 
violence and war in terms of unavoidable self-defence. It was a simple rule that 
the violence of the aggressor could only be defeated by superior violence of the 
defender. All over the world, men had thus been caught in a mad race for 
armaments, and no one yet knew at what point of time the world would be 
really safe enough for turning the sword into the plough. Mankind, he stated, 
had not yet mastered the true art of self-defence. 
But great teachers, who had practised what they preached, had successfully 
shown that true defence lay along the path of non-retaliation. It might sound 
paradoxical; but this is what he meant. Violence always thrived on counter-
violence. The aggressor had always a purpose behind his attack; he wanted 
something to be done, some object to be surrendered by the defender. Now, if 
the defender steeled his heart and was determined not to surrender even one 
inch, and at the same time to resist the temptation of matching the violence of 
the aggressor by violence, the latter could be made to realize in -a short while 
that it would not be paying to punish the other party and his will could not be 
imposed in that way. This-would involve suffering. It was this unalloyed self-
suffering which was the truest form of self-defence-which knew no surrender. 
Someone might ask that if through such non-resistance the defender was likely 
to lose his life, how could it be called self-defence? Jesus lost his life on the 
Cross and the Roman Pilate won. Gandhiji did not agree. Jesus had won, as the 
world's history had abundantly shown. What did it matter if the body was 
dissolved in the process, so long as by the Christ's act of non-resistance, the 
forces of good were released in society? My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 364  This art of true self-defence by means of which man gained his life by losing it, 
had been mastered and exemplified in the history of individuals. The method 
had not been perfected for application by large masses of mankind. India's 
Satyagraha was a very imperfect experiment in that direction. Hence, during 
the Hindu-Muslim quarrel it proved a failure on the whole. 
Two or three days ago, before this meeting with the students, Gandhiji 
unburdened his heart in this respect to Professor Stuart Nelson, who had come 
to see him before he left for his college in America. Professor Nelson asked him 
why it was that Indians, who had more or less successfully gained independence 
through peaceful means, were now unable to check the tide of civil war 
through the same means? Gandhiji replied that it was indeed a searching 
question which he must answer. He confessed that it had become clear to him 
that what he had mistaken for Satyagraha was not Satyagraha but passive 
resistance — a weapon of the weak. Indians harboured ill-will and anger against 
their erstwhile rulers, while they pretended to resist them non-violently. Their 
resistance was, therefore, inspired by violence and not by regard for the man in 
the British, whom they should convert through Satyagraha. 
Now that the British were voluntarily quitting India, apparent non-violence had 
gone to pieces in a moment. The attitude of violence which we had secretly 
harboured, in spite of the restraint imposed by the Indian National Congress, 
now recoiled upon us and made us fly at each other's throats when the question 
of the distribution of power came up. If India could now discover a way of 
sublimating the force of violence which had taken a communal turn, and 
turning it into constructive, peaceful ways, whereby differences of interests 
could be liquidated, it would be a great day indeed. 
Gandhiji then proceeded to say that it was indeed true that many English 
friends had warned him that the so-called, non-violent non-co-operation of 
India was not really non-violent. It was the passivity of the weak and not the 
non-violence of the stout in heart who would never surrender their sense of 
human unity and brotherhood even in the midst of conflict of interests, who 
would ever try to convert and not coerce their adversary. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 365  Gandhiji proceeded to say that this was indeed true. He had all along laboured 
under an illusion. But he was never sorry for it. He realized that if his vision 
were not covered by that illusion, India would never have reached the point 
which it had today. 
India was now free, and the reality was now clearly revealed to him. Now that 
the burden of subjection had been lifted, all the forces of good had to be 
marshalled in one great effort to build a country which forsook the accustomed 
method of violence in order to settle human conflicts whether it was between 
two States or between two sections of the same people. He had yet the faith 
that India would rise to the occasion and prove to the world that the birth of 
two new States would be, not a menace, but a blessing to the rest of mankind. 
It was the duty of Free India to perfect the instrument of non-violence for 
dissolving collective conflicts, if its freedom was going to be really worthwhile. 
Calcutta, 20-8-'47  
Harijan,  31-8-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 366   
143. HOW TO SAVE THE COW? 
Let us at the outset realize that cow worship in the religious sense is largely 
confined to Gujarat, Marwad, the United Provinces and Bihar. Marwadis and 
Gujaratis being enterprising merchants, have succeeded in making the greatest 
noise without at the same time devoting their business talent to the solution of 
the very difficult question of conserving the cattle wealth of India. 
It is obviously wrong legally to enforce one's religious practice on those who do 
not share that religion. 
In so far as the pure economic necessity of cow protection is concerned, it can 
be easily secured if the question was considered on that ground alone. In that 
event all the dry cattle, the cows who give less milk than their keep, and the 
aged and unfit cattle would be slaughtered without a second thought. This 
soulless economy has no place in India, although the inhabitants of this land of 
paradoxes may be, indeed, are guilty of many soulless acts. 
Then how can the cow be saved without having to kill her off when she ceases 
to give the economic quantity of milk or when she becomes otherwise an 
uneconomic burden? The answer to the question can be summed up as follows: 
1. By the Hindus performing their duty towards the cow and her progeny. If 
they did so, our cattle would be the pride of India and the world. The 
contrary is the case today. 
2. By learning the science of cattle breeding. Today- there is perfect anarchy 
in this work. 
3. By replacing the present cruel method of castration by the humane 
method practised in the West. 
4. By thorough reform of the  pinjarapoles  of India which are today, as a rule, 
managed ignorantly and without any plan by men who do not know their 
work. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 367  5. When these primary things are done, it will be found that the Muslims will, 
of their own accord, recognize the necessity, if only for the sake of their 
Hindu brethren, of not slaughtering cattle for beef or otherwise. 
The reader will observe that behind the foregoing requirements lies one thing 
and that is Ahimsa, otherwise known as universal compassion. If that supreme 
thing is realized, everything else becomes easy. Where there is Ahimsa, there is 
infinite patience, inner calm, discrimination, self-sacrifice and true knowledge. 
Cow protection is not an easy thing. Much money is wasted in its name. 
Nevertheless, in the absence of Ahimsa the Hindus have become destroyers 
instead of saviours of the cow. It is even more difficult than the removal of 
foreign rule from India.  
Calcutta, 22-8-'47 
[Note: The average quantity of milk that the cow in India yields is said to be 
roughly 2 lbs. per day, that of New Zealand 14 lbs., of England 15 lbs., of 
Holland 20 lbs. The index figure for health goes up in proportion to the increase 
in the yield of milk. 
23-8-'47      — M. K. G. ] 
Harijan,  31-8-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 368   
144. NON-VIOLENT LABOUR AS MAGNET 
(At a gathering of the workers in Motiaburz) 
Gandhiji wanted to say a few words to the workmen in the working men's 
locality. He hoped that there was no distinction between the Hindus and the 
Muslims in labour. They were all labourers. If the communal canker entered the 
labour ranks, both would weaken labour and therefore, themselves and the 
country. Labour was a great leveller of all distinctions. If they realized that 
truth, he would like them to go a step further. Labour, because it chose to 
remain unintelligent, either became subservient or insolently believed in 
damaging capitalists' goods and machinery or even in killing capitalists. He was 
a labourer by conviction and a Bhangi. As such his interests were bound with 
those of labour. As such he wished to tell them that violence would never save 
them. They would be killing the goose that laid the golden egg. What he had 
been saying for years was that labour was far superior to capital. Without 
labour gold, silver and copper were a useless burden. It was labour which 
extracted precious ore from the bowels of the earth. He could quite conceive 
labour existing without metal. Labour was priceless, not gold. He wanted 
marriage between capital and labour. They could work wonders in co-
operation. But that could happen only when labour was intelligent enough to 
cooperate with itself and then offer co-operation with capital on terms of 
honourable equality. Capital controlled labour because it knew the art of 
combination. Drops in separation could only fade away; drops in co-operation 
made the ocean which carried on its broad bosom ocean greyhounds. Similarly, 
if all the labourers in any part of the world combined together, they could not 
be tempted by higher wages or helplessly allow themselves to be attracted for, 
say, a pittance. A true and non-violent combination of labour would act like a 
magnet attracting to it all the needed capital. Capitalists would then exist only 
as trustees. When that happy day dawned, there would be no difference 
between capital and labour. The labour will have ample food, good and sanitary My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 369  dwellings, and the necessary education for their children, ample leisure for 
self-education and proper medical assistance. 
Calcutta, 28-8-'47 
Harijan,  7-9-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 370   
145. PRESS STATEMENT 
I regret to have to report to you that last night some young men brought to the 
compound a bandaged man. He was reported to have been attacked by some 
Muslims. The Prime Minister had him examined and the report was that he had 
no marks of stabbing, which he was said to have received. The seriousness of 
the injury, however, is not the chief point. What I want to emphasize is that 
these young men tried to become judges and executioners. 
This was about 10 p.m. Calcutta time. They began to shout at the top of their 
voices. My sleep was disturbed but I tried to lie quiet, not knowing what was 
happening. I heard the window panes being smashed. I had lying on either side 
of me two very brave girls. They would not sleep, and without my knowledge, 
for my eyes were closed, they went among the small crowd and tried to pacify 
them. Thank God, the crowd did not do any harm to them. The old Muslim lady 
in the house endearingly called Bi Amma and a young Muslim stood near my 
matting, I suppose, to protect me from harm. 
The noise continued to swell. Some had entered the central hall, and began to 
knock open the many doors. I felt that I must get up and face the angry crowds. 
I stood at the threshold of one of the doors. Friendly faces surrounded me and 
would not let me move forward. My vow of silence admitted of my breaking it 
on such occasions and I broke it and began to appeal to the angry young men to 
be quiet. I asked the Bengali grand-daughter- in-law to translate my few words 
into Bengali. All to no purpose. Their ears were closed against reason. 
I clasped my hands in the Hindu fashion nothing doing. More window panes 
began to crack. The friendly ones in the crowd tried to pacify the crowd. There 
were police officers. Be it said to their credit that they did not try to exercise 
authority. They too clasped their hands in appeal. A lathi blow missed me and 
everybody round me. A brick aimed at me hurt a Muslim friend standing by. The 
two girls would not leave me and held on to me to the last. Meanwhile the 
Police Superintendent and his officers came in. They too did not use force. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 371  They appealed to me to retire. Then there was a chance of their stilling the 
young men. After a time the crowd melted. 
What happened outside the compound gate I do not know except that the 
police had to use tear gas to disperse the crowd. Meanwhile, Dr. P. C. Ghosh, 
Ananda Babu and Dr. Nripen walked in and after some discussion left. Happily, 
Shaheed Saheb had gone home to prepare for tomorrow's proposed departure 
for Noakhali. In view of the above ugly incident, which no one could tell where 
it would lead to, I could not think of leaving Calcutta for Noakhali. 
What is the lesson of the incident? It is clear to me that if India is to retain her 
dearly-won independence all men and women must completely forget lynch 
law. What was attempted was an indifferent imitation of it. If Muslims 
misbehaved, the complainants could, if they would not go to the ministers, 
certainly go to me or my friend, Shaheed Saheb. The same thing applies to 
Muslim complainants. There is no way of keeping the peace in Calcutta or 
elsewhere if the elementary rule of civilized society is not observed. Let them 
not think of the savagery of the Punjab or outside India. The recognition of the 
golden rule of never taking the law into -one's own hands has no exceptions. 
My Secretary, Dev Prakash, in Patna, wires: 'Public agitated Punjab happenings. 
Feel statement necessary impressing duty of public and the Press.' Shri Dev 
Prakash is never unduly agitated. There must be some unguarded word by the 
Press. If that is so, at this time when we are sitting on a powder magazine, the 
Forth Estate has to be extra-wise and reticent. Unscrupulousness will act as a 
lighted match. I hope every editor and reporter will realize his duty to the full. 
One thing I must mention. I have an urgent message calling me to the Punjab. I 
hear all kinds of rumours about recrudescence of trouble in Calcutta. I hope 
they are exaggerated, if not quite baseless. The citizens of Calcutta have to 
reassure me that there would be nothing wrong in Calcutta and that peace, 
once restored, will not be broken. 
From the very first day of peace, that is August 14th last, I have been saying 
that the peace might only be a temporary lull. There was no miracle. Will the 
foreboding prove true and will Calcutta again lapse into the law of the jungle? My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 372  Let us hope not, let us pray to the Almighty that He will touch our hearts and 
ward off the recurrence of insanity. 
Since the foregoing was written, i.e. about 4 o'clock, during silence, I have 
come tc know fairly well the details of what has happened in various parts of 
the city. Some of the places which were safe till yesterday have suddenly 
become unsafe. Several deaths have taken place. I saw two bodies of very poor 
Muslims. I saw also some wretched-looking Muslims being carted away to a 
place of safety. I quite see that last night's incidents so fully described above, 
pale into insignificance before this flare-up. Nothing that I may do in the way of 
going about in the open conflagration could possibly arrest it. 
I have told the friends who saw me in the evening what their duty is. What part 
am I to play in order to stop it? The Sikhs and the Hindus must not forget what 
the East Punjab has done during these few days. Now the Muslims in the West 
Punjab have begun the mad career. It is said that the Sikhs and the Hindus are 
enraged over the Punjab happenings. 
I have adverted above to an urgent call for me to go to the Punjab. But now 
that the Calcutta bubble seems to have burst, with what face can I go to the 
Punjab? The weapon which has hitherto proved infallible for me is fasting. To 
put an appearance before a yelling crowd does not always work. It certainly did 
not last night. What my word in person cannot do, my fast may. It may touch 
the hearts of all the warring elements in the Punjab if it does in Calcutta. I, 
therefore, begin fasting from 8-15 tonight to end only if and when sanity 
returns to Calcutta.  
I shall, as usual permit myself to add salt and soda bicarb to the water I may 
wish to drink during the fast. 
If the people of Calcutta wish me to proceed to the Punjab and help the people 
there, they have to enable me to break the fast as early as may be. 
Calcutta, 1-9-'47  
Harijan , 14-9-1947 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 373   
146. THE FAST 
Gandhiji began his fast for allaying the communal frenzy and restoration of 
sanity in Calcutta at 8-15 p.m. on the 1st of September, 1947, and broke it at 
9-15 p.m. on the 4th instant with a glass of sweet lime juice which Mr. 
Suhrawardy served to him. 
It is necessary to go back into the history of the fast, in order to prepare the 
background of the story as to how and under what conditions it was finally 
broken. 
From the 14th of August till the 31st peace reigned. That evening there was a 
demonstration against Gandhiji's peace mission. On the following morning 
communal frenzy, in a very intense form, once more swept over several parts 
of the city. There were already indications in the morning that Gandhiji might 
fast; but the final decision was taken at eleven in the evening when, according 
to him, friends had failed to show any satisfactory reason why he should not 
take the contemplated step. The last sweet drink was taken at 7 p.m. He made 
the provisional decision at 8-15 p.m. 
Anyway, the fast was taken and perhaps partly on account of it and partly also 
because the common citizen, who had tasted peace after one year's life in the 
trenches, did not want the recrudescence, the riots rapidly cooled down, so 
that on the 4th the Government as well as the public could come and report to 
Gandhiji that not one incident had taken place during the last twenty-four 
hours. Parties after parties came to Gandhiji either with reports or with 
promises, and in spite of his weak state, he insisted on speaking in his feeble 
voice to every batch of interviewers. Dr. Sunil Bose, the celebrated physician 
and brother of Netaji, came to Gandhiji with a request that he must take 
plenty of rest and not talk at all. But Gandhiji told him he could not exclude 
relevant talk. Such necessary loss of energy was inevitable. He was certainly 
desirous of living, but not at the cost of work that duty demanded. "I can't 
interrupt the work," he said to Dr. Bose, "which has made me fast and which 
makes me live. If my life ebbs away in the process, I would feel happy." My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 374  This was at half past eleven in the morning. A few minutes afterwards a batch 
of twenty-seven friends belonging to Central Calcutta came to see him. During 
the communal disturbance of the • last year, resistance groups had grown up 
here and there, and the present party represented such a group in Central 
Calcutta which had become the focus of the recrudescence on Monday. They 
had c0me to Gandhiji with the promise that henceforth there would be no more 
incidents in their part of the city and he should, therefore, break his fast now, 
otherwise all of them were prepared to go on a sympathetic fast with him. 
Gandhiji argued long with them, and what he said in substance was this: The 
present occasion was not one in which there was scope for a sympathetic fast. 
Hindus and Mussalrnans had fought for one whole year, at the end of which the 
major parties had agreed that India should be divided into two States. Both had 
Hindu and Muslim subjects. It was now time for everyone to create the sense of 
common citizenship, to rebuild the land so that men might taste the fruits of 
freedom. To this end all should work. Gandhiji said that if the friends had come 
to him only for the sake of saving his life, it was nothing. 
Referring to the Poona Fast which ended with the desired amendment of the 
Communal Award, it was suggested by some that though the amendment was 
not to their desire, they accepted it for the sake of saving his life. This was a 
wholly wrong approach. Such fasts were intended to stir the conscience and 
remove mental sluggishness. Truth could not be sacrificed even for the sake of 
saving a life, however precious it was. Gandhiji, therefore, warned the present 
company that they should create real Hindu- Muslim unity by educating the 
people in a sense of common citizenship of the State, where every single man 
enjoyed perfect equality of rights which flowed from duty performed. If they 
worked with this aim in view, and succeeded after a few days' effort in making 
the Muslims in Calcutta feel safe where they now did not, it would be time for 
him. to break the fast. Gandhiji was clearly of opinion that although his work 
was now confined to Calcutta, yet his one aim with respect to the Hindu-Muslim 
question was that the solution would be complete only when the minority, 
whether in the Indian Union or in Pakistan, felt perfectly safe even if they were 
in the minority of one. There would be no favoured and no depressed My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 375  community anywhere. All should forget their religious affiliations. He was 
working to this end. He was working in such a manner that the majority 
community in each State should go forward and create the necessary conditions 
of freedom. 
Someone asked him : Was it possible that his fast would have any effect on the 
anti-social elements in society? Today, i.e. during the present recrudescence, it 
was this element which had gained the upper hand. Could their hearts be 
converted by Gandhiji's crucifixion? Gandhiji's answer was very clear and 
emphatic. He said that goondas were there because we had made them so. 
During one year of past anarchy, it was understandable how these elements in 
society had gained respectability. But the war between Pakistanis and those for 
Undivided India had ended. It was time for peace-loving citizens to assert 
themselves and isolate  goondaism . Non-violent non-co-operation was a 
universal remedy. Good was self-existent, evil was not. It was like a parasite 
living on and round good. It would die of itself when the support that good gave 
was withdrawn. The heart of the anti-social elements may or may not be 
changed; it would be enough if they were made to feel that the better 
elements of society were asserting themselves in the interests of peace and in 
the interests of normality. 
To the interviewers from Central Calcutta Gandhiji's advice, therefore, was 
that they should desist from a sympathetic fast, go forth among the oppressed 
in each quarter, assure them that they were safe, and rebuild life so that 
safety would be a permanent feature of the new State of India. He would 
personally have loved to move about from quarter to quarter in Calcutta in 
order to place his views before the various bodies, but his physical condition 
would not permit it. If others worked, how could he rest? Yet he was bound to 
make his contribution. He felt that it should be in the shape of a fast. 
The friends from Central Calcutta were followed by others. There came a 
deputation from the Bar Association of Calcutta with the promise that its 
members would do all that lay within their power to restore peace. Friends 
from Belliaghata, who had a few weeks back looked upon Gandhiji's peace My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 376  mission with suspicion, had been electrified by the fast. They had appreciated 
now the full significance of the mission and had, with all their energy, set 
about the task of rehabilitating the deserted Muslim bustees.  Pressmen who 
had met the evacuees who had returned home testified to the sincerity and 
solicitude with which those who had driven them away a few weeks back, now 
treated them. All this was good news for Gandhiji, but yet he did not reach the 
point when the fast could be broken. 
Towards evening, Sjt. N. C. Ghatterjee, President of the Hindu Mahasabha, 
Debendra Nath Mookerjee, its Secretary, Sardar Niranjan Singh Talib, Editor of 
the Desk Darpan, Dr. G. Jilani of the Muslim League, Dr. Abdur Rashid 
Chowdhury and Mohibur Rahaman of the Pakistan Seamens' Union came 
accompanied by some other friends to report on the quiet and with their 
request to Gandhiji to break his fast. Rajaji, the Governor of West Bengal, 
Acharya Kripalani, Dr. P. C. Ghosh and Mr. H. S. Suhrawardy were also there. 
They had a long discussion with Gandhiji which left him rather worn out. 
Gandhiji heard what they said and did most of the talking. This is what he had 
to say. 
He said that ever since the 14th of August although he had relished the 
fraternization between the Hindus and the Mussalrnans, yet he looked on the 
ebullition of emotion with caution and reserve. If the feeling was due entirely 
to friendship newly found, to the sense of brotherhood through common 
citizenship newly attained, there would be more signs of it e.g., in intensified 
efforts for rehabilitation. That sign was lacking. The recrudescence had then 
come. Therefore, Gandhiji felt he must fast. God had at least given him the 
capacity to work and die for communal peace. If there were anti-social 
elements in society, where a rowdy or a goonda plundered or killed a man 
whether Hindu or Muslim, his fast might not affect him. He knew his 
limitations. He fasted for the restoration of communal harmony. The sanity 
that had been in evidence for the last twenty-four hours was not enough for 
him. If the present company was going to assure him that it was a sincere affair 
and was going to be permanent, he would expect them to give him something My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 377  in writing. It must state that supposing Hindu-Muslim riots broke out once more 
in Calcutta, they should assure him that they would give their lives in the 
attempt to quell the riots. If they agreed, that would be enough. They must so 
work from tomorrow that real peace and common citizenship was created as a 
feature of Calcutta life, no matter what happened elsewhere. Communal peace 
should be their prime occupation. Their other occupations or avocations must 
henceforth occupy a second place. 
There was another matter, but that was a condition which automatically 
attached itself to the situation. As in Bihar, as in Noakhali, so also in Calcutta, 
he wanted to tell the friends who were making themselves responsible for the 
break of his fast, that if communal frenzy broke out in Calcutta again, he might 
have to go on an  irrevocable fast. The present fast was meant to activize the 
better, peace-loving and wise elements in society, to rescue them from mental 
sluggishness and make goodness active. 
Realizing their responsibility, the friends retired to another room. Free and 
frank discussions took place between them. Suspicions were freely expressed, 
fears that the signatories might not rise to the heights demanded of them were 
discussed in an atmosphere of frankness, and finally came the decision to sign 
the document with all its implications. 
Gandhiji felt glad. He took the signatories at their word, prayed that God might 
give them the courage and strength to implement their promise in daily life 
from the following morning; and with that prayer on his lips, he broke his fast 
last night. A-heavy responsibility now lies upon the people of Bengal who have 
to implement the promise made sacred in Gandhiji's presence. May we have the 
requisite wisdom, strength and perseverance to see it through. 
Calcutta, 5-9-'47  
Harijan,  14-9-1947 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 378   
147. WHY FAST? 
Q. Why does Gandhiji resort to a fast when he faces extreme difficulties? What 
is the effect of this action on the life of the public of India? 
A. Such a question has been put to me before but never, perhaps, precisely in 
the same terms. The answer, however, is easy. It is the last weapon in the 
armoury of the votary of Ahimsa. When human ingenuity fails, the votary fasts. 
This fasting quickens the spirit of prayer, that is to say, the fasting is a spiritual 
act and, therefore, addressed to God. The effect of such action on the life of 
the people is that when the person fasting is at all known to them their 
sleeping conscience is awakened. But there is the danger that the people 
through mistaken sympathy may act against their will in order to save the life 
of the loved one. This danger has got to be faced. One ought not to be deterred 
from right action when one is sure of the Rightness. It can but promote 
circumspection. Such a fast is undertaken in obedience to the dictates of the 
inner voice and, therefore, prevents haste.  
New Delhi, 10-12-'47  
Harijan,  21-12-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 379   
148. CURB ANGER 
Turning to the burning question of the day Gandhiji said in his post-prayer 
address that he was prepared to understand their resentment and the 
consequent impatience. But if they deserved their independence, they would 
learn to subdue their resentment and trust their Government to do the best. He 
was presenting to them not his own way of non-violence, much as he would like 
to. He knew that he was out of court today. He suggested to them the adoption 
of the path that all democratic nations had adopted. In democracy the 
individual will was governed and limited by the social will which was the State, 
which was governed by and for democracy. If every individual took the law into 
his own hands there was no State, it became anarchy, i.e. absence of social law 
or State. That way lay destruction of liberty. Therefore, they should subdue 
their anger and let the State secure justice. In his opinion, if they permitted 
the State to do its duty, he had no doubt that every Hindu and every Sikh 
refugee would return to his home with honour and dignity. He was free to 
admit that they had suffered much in Pakistan, many homes had become 
desolate, lives had been lost, girls had been abducted, there had been forcible 
conversions. If they had self-control and did not allow their anger to get the 
better of their reason, girls would be returned, forcible conversions would be 
null and void and their properties returned to them. But this could not be done 
if they interfered with the even course of justice and thus-spoiled their own 
case. They could not expect these things if they expected that their Muslim 
brothers and sisters should be driven out of India. He regarded any such thing 
as a monstrous proposition. They could not have the cake and eat it too. More-
over whilst it was true that the minorities, i.e. the Hindus and the Sikhs were 
badly treated in Pakistan, it was equally true that the East Punjab has also 
treated its minority, the Muslims, likewise. Guilt could not be weighed in 
golden scales. He had no data to measure the guilt on either side. It was surely 
sufficient to know that both the sides were guilty. The universal way to have 
proper adjustment was for both the States to make a frank and full confession My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 380  of guilt on either side and come to terms, failing agreement to resort to 
arbitration in the usual manner. The other and crude way was that of war. The 
thought repelled him. But there was no escape from it if there was neither 
agreement nor arbitration. Meanwhile, he hoped that wiser counsels would 
prevail and the Muslims who had not of their own free will chosen to migrate to 
Pakistan, should be asked by the neighbours to return to their homes with a 
perfect feeling of safety. This could not come about with the aid of the 
military. It could be done by return to sanity by the people concerned. He had 
made his final choice. He had no desire to live to see the ruin of India through 
fratricide. His incessant prayer was that God would remove him before any such 
calamity descended upon their fair land. And he asked the audience to join in 
the prayer. 
Harijan , 28-9-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 381   
149. PASSIVE RESISTANCE VERSUS NON-VIOLENCE 
"I see that you have grasped the fundamental difference between passive 
resistance and non-violent resistance. Resistance both forms are, but you have 
to pay a very heavy price when your resistance is passive, in the sense of the 
weakness of the resister. Europe mistook the bold and brave .resistance full of 
wisdom by Jesus of Nazareth for passive resistance, as if it was of the weak. As 
I read the New Testament for the first time, I detected no passivity, no 
weakness about Jesus as depicted in the four gospels, and the meaning became 
clearer to me when I read Tolstoy's Harmony of the Gospels and his other 
kindred writings. Has not the West paid heavily in regarding Jesus as a Passive 
Resister? Christendom has been responsible for the wars which put to shame 
even those described in the Old Testament and other records, historical or 
semi-historical. I know that I speak under correction for I can but claim very 
superficial knowledge of history—modern or ancient. 
"Coming to my personal experience, whilst we undoubtedly got through passive 
resistance our political freedom, over which lovers of peace like you and your 
good husband of the West are enthusiastic, we are daily paying the heavy price 
for the unconscious mistake we made or better still, I made in mistaking 
passive resistance for non-violent resistance. Had I not made the mistake, we 
would have been spared the humiliating spectacle of weak brother killing his 
weak brother thoughtlessly and inhumanly. 
"I am only hoping and praying and I want all the friends here and in other parts 
of the world to hope and pray with me that this blood-bath will soon end and 
out of that, perhaps, inevitable butchery, will rise a new and robust India—not 
warlike, basely imitating the West in all its hideousness, but a new India 
learning the best that the West has to give and becoming the hope not only of 
Asia and Africa, but the whole of the aching world. 
"I must confess that this is hoping against hope, for, we are today swearing by 
the military and all that naked physical force implies. Our statesmen have for 
over two generations declaimed against the heavy expenditure on armaments My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 382  under the British regime, but now that freedom from political serfdom has 
come, our military expenditure has increased and still threatens to increase 
and of this we are proud! There is not a voice raised against it in our legislative 
chambers. In spite, however, the hope lingers in me and many others that India 
shall survive this death dance and occupy the moral height that should belong 
to her after the training, however imperfect, in non-violence for an unbroken 
period of thirty-two years since 1915."  
New Delhi, 29-11-'47 
Harijan,  7-12-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 383   
150. WORKING OF AHIMSA 
This evening when as usual before the prayer meeting the audience was asked 
if there was any objector to the Koran verses being recited as part of the 
prayer, one member spoke up and persisted in his objection. Gandhiji had 
made it clear that if there was such objection, he would neither have public 
prayer nor the after-prayer speech on current events. Consequently, he sent 
word that there would be neither prayer nor speech before the public. But the 
gathering would not disperse without seeing Gandhiji. He, therefore, went to 
the rostrum and said a few words on the reason for abstention and the working 
of Ahimsa as he understood it. He said that it was unseemly for anyone to 
object to the prayer, especially, when it was on a private lawn. Nevertheless, 
his Ahimsa warned him against disregarding even one objector when 
overwhelming majorities were likely to overawe one person into silence. It 
would be otherwise if the whole audience objected. It would then be his duty 
to have the prayer even at the risk of being molested. There was also the 
further consideration that the majority should not be disappointed for the sake 
of one objector. The remedy was simple. If the majority restrained themselves 
and entertained no anger against, or evil design on, the solitary objector it 
would be his duty to hold the prayer. The possibility, however, was that if the 
whole audience was non-violent in intention and action, the objector would 
restrain himself. Such he held was the working of non-violence.  
Birla House, New Delhi, 30-10-'47 
Harijan,  9-11-1947 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 384   
151. FIRM ON NON-VIOLENCE 
A correspondent rebuked Gandhiji for having dared to advise Mr. Winston 
Churchill, Hitler, Mussolini and the Japanese, when they were about to lose 
their all, that they should adopt his technique of non-violence. The writer of 
the letter then went on to say that if he could give that advice when it was safe 
for him to do so, why did he abandon his non-violence when his own friends in 
the Congress Government had forsaken it and even sent armed assistance to 
Kashmir? The letter concluded by inviting Gandhiji to point out definitely how 
the raiders were to be opposed non-violently by the Kashmiris. 
Replying Gandhiji said that he was sorry for the ignorance betrayed by the 
writer. The audience would remember that he had repeatedly said that he had 
no influence in the matter over his friends in the Union Cabinet. He held on to 
his views on non-violence as firmly as ever, but he could not impose his views 
on his best friends, as they were, in the Cabinet. He could not expect them to 
act against their convictions and everybody should be satisfied with his 
confession that he had lost his original hold upon his friends. The question put 
by the writer was quite opposite. Gandhiji's answer was simple. His Ahimsa 
forbade him from denying credit, where it was due, even though the creditor 
was a believer in violence. Thus, though he did not accept Subhas Bose's belief 
in violence and his consequent action, he had not refrained from giving un-
stinted praise to him for his patriotism, resourcefulness and bravery. Similarly, 
though he did not approve of the use of arms by the Union Government for 
aiding the Kashmiris and though he could not approve of Sheikh Abdulla's resort 
to arms, he could not possibly withhold admiration for either for their 
resourceful and praiseworthy conduct, especially, if both the relieving troops 
and the Kashmiri defenders died heroically to a man. He knew that if they 
could do so, they would perhaps change the face of India. 
But if the defence was purely non-violent in intention and action, he would not 
use the word 'perhaps', for, he would be sure of change in the face of India My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 385  even to the extent of converting to the defender's view the Union Cabinet, if 
not even the Pakistan Cabinet. 
The non-violent technique, he would suggest, would be no armed assistance to 
the defenders. Non-violent assistance could be sent from the Union without 
stint. But the defenders, whether they got such assistance or not, would defy 
the might of the raiders or even a disciplined army in overwhelming numbers. 
And defenders dying at their post of duty without malice and without anger in 
their hearts against the assailants, and without the use of any arms including 
even their fists would mean an exhibition of heroism as yet unknown to history. 
Kashmir would then become a holy land shedding its fragrance not only 
throughout India, but the world. Having described non-violent action he had to 
confess his own impotence, in that his word lacked the strength, which perfect 
mastery over self as described in the concluding lines of the second chapter of 
the Gita, gave. He lacked the  tapashcharya  requisite for the purpose. He could 
only pray and invite the audience to pray with him to God that if it pleased 
Him, He might arm him with the qualifications he had just described. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 5-11-'47 
Harijan , 16-11-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 386   
152. DEATH—COURAGEOUS OR COWARDLY 
A Bengali friend writes a long letter in Bengali on the exodus from East 
Pakistan. Its purport is that though workers like him understand and appreciate 
my argument and distinction between death—courageous and cowardly—the 
common man detects in my statement a not too hidden advice in favour of 
migration. "If death is to be the lot in any case, courage becomes of no count; 
for man lives but to escape death," he says. 
This argument seems to beg the question. Man does not live but to escape 
death. If he does so, he is advised not to do so. He is advised to learn to love 
death as well as life, if not more so. A hard saying, harder to act up to, one 
may say, every worthy act is difficult. Ascent is always difficult. Descent is easy 
and often slippery. Life becomes livable only to the extent that death is 
treated as a friend, never as an enemy. To conquer life's temptations, summon 
death to your aid. In order to postpone death a coward surrenders honour, 
wife, daughter and all. A courageous man prefers death to the surrender of 
self-respect.. When the time comes, as it conceivably can, I would not leave 
my advice to be inferred, but it will be given in precise language. That today 
my advice might be followed only by one or none does not detract from its 
value. A beginning is always made by a few, even one. 
New Delhi, 23-11-'47 
Harijan,  30-11-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 387   
153. NO LIMITATIONS 
A correspondent says in substance: 
"Individual Ahimsa I can understand. Corporate Ahimsa between friends is also 
intelligible. But you talk of Ahimsa towards avowed enemies. This is like a mirage. 
It will be a mercy if you give up this obstinacy of yours. If you do not, you will 
forfeit the esteem you enjoy. What is worse, you, being considered a Mahatma, 
mislead many credulous persons to their own and society's harm." 
That non-violence which only an individual can use is not of much use in terms 
of society. Man is a social being. His accomplishments to be of use must be such 
as any person with sufficient diligence can attain. That which can be exercised 
only among friends is of value only as a spark of non-violence. It cannot merit 
the appellation of Ahimsa. 'Enmity vanishes before Ahimsa,' is a great aphorism. 
It means that the greatest enmity requires an equal measure of Ahimsa for its 
abatement. Cultivation of this virtue may need long practice, even extending to 
several births. It does not become useless on that account. Travelling along the 
route, the pilgrim will meet richer experiences from day to day so that he may 
have a glimpse of the beauty he is destined to see at the top. This will add to 
his zest. No one is entitled to infer from this that the path will be a continuous 
carpet of roses without thorns. A poet has sung that the way to reach God 
accrues only to the very brave, never to the faint-hearted. The atmosphere 
today is so much saturated with poison that one refuses to recollect the wisdom 
of the ancients and to perceive the varied little experiences of Ahimsa in 
action. 'A bad turn is neutralized by a good', is a wise saying of daily experience 
in practice. Why can we not see that if the sum total of the world's activities 
was destructive, it would have come to an end long ago? Love, otherwise 
Ahimsa, sustains this planet of ours. 
This much must be admitted. The precious grace of life has to be strenuously 
cultivated, naturally so because it is uplifting. Descent is easy, not so ascent. A 
large majority of us being undisciplined, our daily experience is that of fighting 
or swearing at one another on the slightest pretext. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 388  This, the richest grace of Ahimsa will descend easily upon the owner of hard 
discipline.  
New Delhi, 8-12-'47 
Harijan,  14-12-1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 389   
154. MY FAST AS A PROTEST 
One fasts for health's sake under laws governing health, fasts as a penance for a 
wrong <done and felt as such. In these fasts, the fasting one need not believe 
in Ahimsa. There is, however, a fast which a votary of non-violence sometimes 
feels impelled to undertake by way of protest against some wrong done by 
society, and this he does when he as a votary of Ahimsa has no other remedy 
left. Such an occasion has come my way. 
When on September 9th, I returned to Delhi from Calcutta, it was to proceed to 
the West Punjab. But that was not be. Gay Delhi looked a city of the dead. As I 
alighted from the train I observed gloom on every face I saw. Even the Sardar, 
whom humour and the joy that humour gives never desert, was no exception 
this time. The cause of it I did not know. He was on the platform to receive 
me. He lost no time in giving me the sad news of the disturbances that had 
taken place in the Metropolis of the Union. At once I saw that I had to be in 
Delhi and 'do or die*. There is apparent calm brought about by prompt military 
and police action. But there is storm within the breast. It may burst forth any 
day. This I count as no fulfillment of the vow to 'do' which alone can keep me 
from death, the incomparable friend. I yearn for heart friendship between the 
Himdus, the Sikhs and the Muslims. It subsisted between them the other day. 
Today it is non-existent. It is a state ithat no Indian patriot worthy- of the name 
can contemplate with equanimity. Though the Voice within has been beckoning 
for a long time, I have been shutting my ears to it, lest it may be the voice of 
Satan otherwise called my weakness. I never like to feel resourceless, a 
Satyagrahi never should. Fasting is his last resort in the place of the sword—his 
or other's. I have no answer to return to the Muslim friends who see me from 
day to day as to what they should do. My impotence has been gnawing at me of 
late. It will go immediately the fast is undertaken. I have been brooding over it 
for the last three days. The final conclusion has flashed upon me and it makes 
me happy. No man, if he is pure, has anything more precious to give than his My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 390  life. I hope and pray that I have that purity in me to justify the step. 
 
Worthy of Blessing 
I ask you all to bless the effort and to pray for me and with me. The fast begins 
from the first meal tomorrow. The period is indefinite and I may drink water 
with or without salts and sour limes. It will end when and if I am satisfied that 
there is a reunion of hearts of all the communities brought about without any 
outside pressure, but from an awakened sense of duty. The reward will be the 
regaining of India's dwindling prestige and her fast fading sovereignty over the 
heart of Asia and therethrough the world. I flatter myself with the belief that 
the loss of her soul by India will mean the loss of the hope of the aching, storm-
tossed and hungry world. Let no friend, or foe if there be one, be angry with 
me. There are friends who do not believe in the method of the fast for the re-
clamation of the human mind. They will bear with me and extend to me the 
same liberty of action that they claim for themselves. With God as my supreme 
and sole counsellor, I felt that I must take the decision without any other 
adviser. If I have made a mistake and discover it, I shall have no hesitation in 
proclaiming it from the housetop and retracing my faulty step. There is little 
chance of making such a discovery. If there is clear indication, as I claim there 
is, of the Inner Voice, it will not be gainsaid. I plead for all absence of 
argument and inevitable endorsement of the step. If the whole of India 
responds or at least Delhi does, the fast might be soon ended. 
 
No softness 
But whether it ends soon or late or never, let there be no softness in dealing 
with what may be termed as a crisis. Critics have regarded some of my previous 
fasts as coercive and held that on merits the verdict would have gone against 
my stand but for the pressure exercised by the fasts. What value can an 
adverse verdict have when the purpose is demonstrably sound? A pure fast, like 
duty, is its own reward. I do not embark upon it for the sake of the result it 
may bring. I do so because I must. Hence, I urge everybody dispassionately to My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 391  examine the purpose and let me die, if I must, in peace which I hope is 
ensured. .Death for me would be a glorious deliverance rather than that I 
should be a helpless witness of the destruction of India, Hinduism, Sikhism and 
Islam. That destruction is certain if Pakistan ensures no equality of status and 
security of life and property for all professing the various faiths of the world, 
and if India copies her. Only then Islam dies in the two Indias, not in the world. 
But Hinduism and Sikhism have no world outside India. Those who differ from 
me will be honoured by me for their resistance however implacable. Let my 
fast quicken conscience, not deaden it. Just contemplate the rot that has set in 
beloved India and you will rejoice to think that there is an humble son of hers 
who is strong enough and possibly pure enough to take the happy step. If he is 
neither, he is a burden on earth. The sooner he disappears and clears the 
Indian atmosphere of the burden the better for him and all concerned. 
I would beg of all friends not to rush to Birla House nor try to dissuade me or be 
anxious for me. I am in Cod's hands. Rather, they should turn the searchlights 
inwards, for this is essentially a testing time for all of us. Those who remain at 
their post of duty and perform it diligently and well, now more so than 
hitherto, will help me and the cause in every way. The fast is a process of self-
purification. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 12-1-'48 
Harijan , 18-1-1948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 392   
155. THE BREAKING OF THE FAST 
The feverish anxiety into which the whole city of Delhi and the country at large 
had been plunged was terminated when Gandhiji broke his fast at Birla House, 
New Delhi, today at 12-45 p.m. with due solemnity. Earlier in the day, 
representatives of all the important groups and organizations in the city, 
including representatives of the refugees and from the three worst affected 
parts of the city, namely, Karol Bagh, Sabzi Mandi and Paharganj, had 
assembled under the chairmanship of Dr. Rajendra Prasad at the latter's 
residence and put their signatures to a seven- point declaration covering the 
conditions laid down by Gandhiji for breaking his fast. The document was 
recorded in both the Persian and Devanagari scripts at Gandhiji's special 
insistence. At the meeting were also present Maulana Azad Saheb and Major 
General Shah Nawazkhan. Delhi Muslims were represented by Maulanas Hifzur 
Rahman and Ahmed Saeed of the Jamiat-ul-Ulema and Maulana Habibur-
Rahman. Goswami Shri Ganesh Datta, Shri Basantlal and Shri Narain Das 
represented the Rashtriya Sevak Sangh and the Hindu Mahasabha. There were 
too the representatives of the various Sikh organizations. They then all repaired 
(numbering over 100) to Birla House, where they assembled in Gandhiji's room, 
to request him to break the fast. Maulana Saheb and Pandit Jawaharlalji had 
arrived there already and Janab Zahid Hussain Saheb, the Pakistan's High 
Commissioner, came in a little later. 
Dr. Rajendra Prasad opened the proceedings by narrating to Gandhiji how they 
had all assembled on the previous night at the former's residence and after full 
discussion decided to sign the declaration then and there. But as 
representatives of some organizations were not present in that meeting, they 
felt that they should not go to Gandhiji immediately with the signed document 
hut wait till the remaining signatures were obtained. They had accordingly met 
again in the morning when all those who were absent during the previous 
night's meeting came and gave their signatures. It was found in the course of 
the morning meeting, Dr. Rajendra Prasad reported, that even those who had My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 393  some lingering doubts on the previous night were now confident that they could 
ask Gandhiji with a full sense of their responsibility to break the fast. As the 
President of the Congress, Dr. Rajendra Prasad said that he had signed the 
document in view of the guarantee which they had all jointly and severally 
given. Janab Khurshid, the Chief Commissioner, and Shri Randhawa, Deputy 
Commissioner of Delhi, who were present, had signed the document on behalf 
of the administration. It had been decided to set up a number of committees to 
implement the pledge. Dr. Rajendra Prasad hoped that Gandhiji would now 
terminate his fast. 
Shri Deshabandhu Gupta, speaking next, described some touching scenes of 
fraternization between the Hindus and Muslims which he had witnessed when a 
procession of about 150 Muslims was taken out that morning in Sabzi Mandi and 
was received with ovation and offered fruit and refreshments by the Hindu 
inhabitants of that locality. 
Gandhiji replying said that what they had told him had touched him deeply. 
They had given him all that he had asked for. But if their words meant that 
they held themselves responsible for communal peace in Delhi only and what 
happened in other places was no concern of theirs, then their guarantee was 
nothing worth and he would feel and they too would one day realize that it was 
a great blunder on his part to have given up his fast. As an illustration he 
referred to the report of the happenings in Allahabad that had appeared in the 
Press. Representatives of both the R.S.S. and the Hindu Mahasabha were among 
the signatories to the seven-point declaration. If they were sincere in their 
professions, surely, they could not be indifferent to outbreaks of madness in 
places other than Delhi. It would be a fraud upon God if they did so. Delhi was 
the heart of the Indian Dominion and they (the representatives gathered there) 
were the cream of Delhi. If they could not make the whole of India realize that 
the Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims were all brothers, it would bode ill for the future 
of both the Dominions. What would happen to Hindustan if they quarrelled with 
one another? My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 394  Here Gandhiji broke down owing to overwhelming feeling as he explained on 
resumption. What he had said was repeated aloud by one or two friends sitting 
near him. 
Resuming his remarks after the interval, Gandhiji again appealed to them to 
search well their hearts so that they might not take any step which they would 
have to regret afterwards. The occasion demanded of them bravery of the 
highest order. They should clearly realize the implications of their pledge. It 
was nothing less than that what they had achieved in Delhi had to be realized 
in the whole of India. That did not mean that the ideal could be realized in a 
day. But it did mean that whilst in the past they had turned their face towards 
Satan, they had now resolved to turn it Godward. If, in their hearts, they did 
not accept what he had placed before them or if they had made up their minds 
that it was beyond them, they should plainly tell him so. 
There could be nothing more wrong on their part, continued Gandhiji, than to 
hold that Hindustan belonged only to the Hindus and the Muslims could have no 
place in it, or on the reverse that Pakistan belonged to the Muslims only and 
the Hindus and Sikhs could have no place in it. He wanted the refugees to 
understand that if they set things right in Delhi, as he had suggested, that was 
the only way to set things right in Pakistan too. He reminded them that he was 
not a man to shirk another fast, should he afterwards discover that he had been 
deceived or had deceived himself into breaking it prematurely. They should, 
therefore, act with circumspection and cent percent sincerity. He invited the 
representatives of Mussalmans who had been meeting him frequently to tell 
him whether they were satisfied that the conditions in Delhi were now such as 
to warrant breaking the fast on his part. 
Addressing next a few words to the Muslims especially, he asked if there was 
any ground for the suspicion that the Muslims did not regard India as their 
country. They lived in it in the midst of the Hindus because they could not help 
it, but one day they had to part company. He hoped that that suspicion was 
baseless. Similarly, if there was a Hindu who regarded the Muslims as  yavanas My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 395  or asuras  incapable of realizing God, he was guilty of the worst blasphemy, 
which could possibly have no room in the covenant v/hich they had signed. 
He then referred to a book which a Muslim friend had lovingly presented him at 
Patna. In that book the writer had propounded that according to the Koran,  
kaffirs (i.e. Hindus) were worse than poisonous reptiles and fit only to be 
exterminated. Not only was there no sin in using every conceivable variety of 
force or fraud to compass that end, it was meritorious in the eyes of God. He 
was sure that no God-fearing Muslims could subscribe to or even secretly 
sympathize with that creed. Some dubbed Hindus as image worshippers, 
proceeded Gandhiji. But it was not the stone image which they worshipped but 
the God within, without whom not a particle of matter existed. If a devotee 
saw God in an image, it was not a thing for anyone to cavil at. Granting that his 
belief was a delusion, it deluded nobody but himself. It required magnanimity 
and breadth of outlook to understand and appreciate the religious convictions 
and practices of others. It was the same thing if they considered the Koran or 
the Granth Saheb as God. 
Concluding, Gandhiji remarked that if they fully accepted the implications of 
their pledge, they should release him from Delhi so that he might be free to go 
to Pakistan. In his absence they should welcome such refugees from Pakistan as 
might want to return to their homes. The latter were none too happy over 
there just as the Hindus in the Indian Dominion were none too happy to lose 
large numbers of Muslim artisans and craftsmen. It was not easy to reproduce in 
a day traditional skill that had been acquired through generations. It was a loss 
on both sides which no sane people would like willingly to perpetuate. 
Gandhiji ended by once more asking them to turn the searchlight inward and 
not to deceive themselves or others by asking him to give up his fast, if what he 
had said did not find a responsive echo in their hearts. 
Maulana Saheb Abul Kalam Azad, being next asked to say something, remarked 
that so far as the guarantee of communal peace was concerned it could be 
given only by the representatives of the citizens of Delhi. He, however, did not 
want to leave unchallenged the Muslim friends' observation to which Gandhiji My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 396  had referred, as it referred to the teachings of Islam. He had no hesitation in 
characterizing it as a libel on Islam. He quoted a verse from the' Koran which 
was to the effect that all mankind are brethren, irrespective of their race or 
religion. The remarks to which Gandhiji had referred were abhorrent to the 
teachings of Islam. They were only indicative of the insanity that had of late, 
seized some sections of the people. 
He was followed by Maulana Hifzur Rahman Saheb, who categorically 
repudiated the allegation that his coreligionists did not regard India as their 
country which claimed their full and undivided allegiance, but only as a place 
where they were forced to live by expediency and by the compulsion of 
circumstances. Their thirty years' unbroken record of service of the nationalist 
cause gave the lie to that charge. They regarded it as an insult to their 
nationalism to be asked to reiterate their loyalty to India. He recalled how 
during the recent disturbances at one stage their Congress friends and 
colleagues had offered to provide a safe asylum to them outside Delhi as they 
were not sure that they would be able to give them adequate protection in 
Delhi. But they had declined that offer and had preferred to stay in and go 
about the city without any police escort, trusting to God alone. Speaking of the 
Jamiat, he could say that its members were staunch followers of Maulana Azad 
Saheb and the Congress. Those who had left for Pakistan had done so out of 
fear for their lives and worse. They all wanted to remain in India as citizens of 
India with self-respect and honour, in their own right, not on the mercy or 
sufferance of anybody. He asserted that if India were to be attacked they 
would all defend it to the last man as their country. They had plainly said on 
more than one occasion that those who were not prepared to do so should 
leave India and go to Pakistan. 
Describing next the change that had come over the city as a result of Gandhiji's 
fast, he said that they regarded it as a happy augury and a presage of things to 
come. They were satisfied that the tide had definitely turned and was now fast 
flowing in the direction of communal harmony and peace when previously 
bitterness and hatred ran riot. Now that the administration had underwritten My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 397  the assurance given by the representatives of the people, they were satisfied 
that they would be implemented, though it might take some time. He, 
therefore, joined Dr. Rajendra Prasad in his appeal that Gandhiji should break 
the fast. 
After Shri Ganesh Datt had on behalf of the Hindu Mahasabha and the R.S.S. 
reiterated that appeal, Janab Zahid Hussain Saheb addressed a few words to 
Gandhiji. He was there, he said, to convey to Gandhiji how deeply concerned 
the people in Pakistan were about him and how they were daily inundating him 
with anxious inquiries about his (Gandhiji's) health. It was their heart's desire 
that circumstances might soon prevail which would enable him to break the 
fast. If there was anything that he would fittingly do towards that end he was 
ready and so were the people of Pakistan. 
Janab Zahid Hussain Saheb was followed by Janab Khurshid and Shri Randhawa 
who on behalf of the administration reiterated the assurance that all the 
conditions mentioned in the citizens' pledge would be duly implemented, and 
no effort would be spared to restore to the Indian capital its glorious old 
tradition of communal harmony and peace. 
Sardar Harbans Singh endorsed on behalf of the Sikhs what his predecessors had 
said. Gandhiji then expressed his readiness to break the fast, which was done 
with the usual ceremony of prayer at which texts from the 
Japanese, Muslim and Parsi scriptures were recited followed by the  mantra:  
"Lead me from untruth to truth,  
From darkness to light,  
From death to immortality." 
 A Hindustani hymn and the Christian hymn: "When I survey the wondrous 
cross", were then sung by the girl inmates of the Ashram followed by 
Ramadhun. A glass of fruit juice was handed by Maulana Saheb and Gandhiji 
broke the fast after fruit was distributed to and partaken by all present.  
New Delhi, 18-1-'48 
Harijan,  25-1-1948 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 398   
156. FROM THE LAST POST-PRAYER SPEECHES 
Bomb at the Prayer 
Speaking after prayers on Wednesday evening, Gandhi referred to the previous 
day's bomb explosion in the Birla House compound. He had been receiving 
anxious enquiries and praise for being unruffled at the accident. He thought 
that it was military practice and, therefore, nothing to worry about. He had not 
realized till after the prayers that it was a bomb explosion and that the bomb 
was meant against him. God only knew how he would have behaved in front of 
a bomb aimed at him and exploding. Therefore, he deserved no praise. He 
would deserve a certificate only if he fell as a result of such an explosion and 
yet retained a smile on his face and no malice against the doer. What he 
wanted to say was that no one should look down upon the misguided youth who 
had thrown the bomb. He probably looked upon Gandhiji as an enemy of 
Hinduism. After all, has not the Gita said that whenever there was an evil-
minded person damaging religion, God sent someone to put an end to his life? 
That celebrated verse has a special meaning. The youth should realize that 
those who differed from him were not necessarily evil. The evil had no life 
apart from the toleration of good people. No one should believe that he or she 
was so perfect that he or she was sent by God to punish evil-doers, as the 
accused seemed to flatter himself he was. 
He (Gandhiji) had heard that the youth had without permission occupied a  
masjid for lack of other accommodation and now that the police were getting 
all mosques evacuated, he resented the act. It was a wrong thing on his part to 
have occupied the  masjid in the first place and it was doubly wrong to defy the 
authorities, who asked him to vacate it. 
 
Serving Hinduism 
To those who were at the back of the youth, he would appeal to desist from 
such activity. That was not the way to save Hinduism. Hinduism could be saved My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 399  only by Gandhiji's method. Gandhiji had practised Hinduism from early 
childhood. His nurse had taught him to invoke Rama when he feared evil spirits. 
Later on he had come in contact with Christians, Muslims and others and, after 
making a fair study of other religions, had stuck to Hinduism. He was as firm in 
his faith today as in his early childhood. He believed God would make him an 
instrument of saving the religion that he loved, cherished and practised. In any 
case, one had to have constant practice and acquaintance with the 
fundamentals of religion before being qualified for becoming God's instrument. 
 
Pity the Bomb Thrower 
He had told the Inspector General of Police also, not to harass him in any way. 
They should try to win him over and convert him to right thinking and doing. He 
hoped that the youth and his guides would realize their error. For, it was a 
wrong done to Hinduism and the country. At the same time Gandhiji warned his 
hearers against being angry with the accused. He did not know- that he was 
doing anything wrong. They should pity him. If they harboured resentment 
against Gandhiji's fast and had still pledged themselves to maintain peace in 
order to save an old servant of the nation, the guilt was theirs, not that of the 
young man who had thrown the bomb. If, on the other hand, they had signed 
the Peace Pledge whole-heartedly, persons like the young man were ultimately 
bound to come to their way of thinking. 
Gandhiji said that he expected the audience to go on with the prayers in spite 
of bomb explosions or a shower of bullets. He was glad to learn that a poor 
unlettered woman was the cause of the arrest of the miscreant. If the heart 
was sound, if there was right thought, lack of letters was not of any 
consequence. He congratulated the unlettered sister on her simple bravery. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 21-1-'48 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 400  Poverty No Shame 
A difficulty to which his attention was drawn was that while the Congress had 
been in the wilderness it had set before the people the ideal of service, self-
denial and simplicity. In those days it was difficult to collect even a lakh of 
rupees. Today, the Congress Government was in charge of crores of rupees and 
could raise as much as it liked. Were they to spend it as if there was no change 
from foreign rule to indigenous rule? Some people seemed to think that India's 
leaders and ambassadors must live and spend money in a style befitting their 
independent status and vie with independent America and England in stylish-
ness. They thought that such expenditure was necessary in order to uphold 
India's prestige in foreign countries. Gandhiji did not think so. There was no 
merit in hiding our poverty. India's status in the world depended upon her moral 
supremacy which her passive resistance had brought her. In this she had no 
rival as yet, for the other nations, great or small, were proud of their 
armaments and military valour. That was their capital. India possessed only her 
moral capital, which increased with the spending. On any other condition the 
Congress claims to revolutionize values, when they came into power, would be 
forfeited. People criticized the Ministers for accepting high salaries and not 
bringing the artificial British standard down to the natural Indian standard. 
These critics knew nothing of the private life of their Ministers. But the fashion 
was for Congressmen and others to expect high emoluments wholly out of 
keeping with what one was making out of office. 
One who managed to live on Rs. 150 per month would not hesitate to demand 
and expect Rs. 500. Such persons felt that they would not be appreciated 
unless they demanded high salaries and lived in the old Civil Service style and 
dressed up as such. That was not the way to serve India. They should not forget 
that a man's value did not depend upon the amount of money that he earned. 
The process of self-purification, which they all must share, demanded right 
thought and action. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 22-1-'48
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 401  How to Deal with Traitors 
Gandhiji had received a telegram from Meerut. It said that they had no ill 
feelings against the Nationalist Muslims, but they did not believe that those 
League Muslims who, until yesterday, had been collecting arms and even now 
intended to help Pakistan, could ever be loyal to the Union. He (Gandhiji) 
would have to repent if he put his trust in them. They also said that religion 
and politics were quite separate and non-violence could never work in politics. 
It was rather late in the day to tell him, he said, that non-violence could not 
work in politics. In politics they could not begin with distrust. Those in charge 
of the Government were men of great courage and self-sacrifice. They would 
deal with traitors when the occasion came. Traitors might be found in any 
community and not only among the Muslims. They had decided to live with the 
Muslims as brothers and he wanted them to stick to their resolve. All Leaguers 
were not bad. They should report against those who indulged in questionable 
activities and let the Government deal with them as severely as it liked. They 
must on no account take the law into their own hands. That would be 
barbarous. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 23-1-'48
 
Independence Day 
This day, 26th January, is Independence Day. This observance was quite 
appropriate when we were fighting for independence we had not seen nor 
handled. Now! We have handled it and we seem to be disillusioned. At least I 
am, even if you are not. 
What are we celebrating today? Surely not our disillusionment. We are entitled 
to celebrate the hope that the worst is over and that we are on the road to 
showing the lowliest of the villager that it means his freedom from serfdom, 
and that he is no longer a serf born to serve the cities and towns of India but 
that he is destined to exploit the city dwellers for the advertisement of the 
finished fruits of well thought out labours, that he is the salt of the Indian My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 402  earth, that it means also equality of all classes and creeds, never the 
domination and superiority of the major community over a minor, however 
insignificant it may be in number or influence. Let us not defer the hope and 
make the heart sick. Yet what are the strikes and a variety of lawlessness but a 
deferring of the hope? These are symptoms of our sickness and weakness. Let 
labour realize its dignity and strength. Capital has neither dignity nor strength 
compared to labour. These the man in the street also has. In a well-ordered 
democratic society there is no room, no occasion for lawlessness or strikes. In 
such a society there are ample lawful means for vindicating justice. Violence, 
veiled or unveiled, must be taboo. Strikes in Cawnpore, coal mines or 
elsewhere mean material loss to the whole society not excluding the strikers 
themselves. I need not be reminded that this declamation does not lie well in 
the mouth of one like me who has been responsible for so many successful 
strikes. If there be such critics they ought not to forget that then there was 
neither independence nor the kind of legislation we have now. I wonder if we 
can remain free from the fever of power politics or the bid for power which 
afflicts the political world, the East and the West. Before leaving this topic of 
the day, let us permit ourselves to hope that though geographically and 
politically India is divided into two, at heart we shall ever be friends and 
brothers helping and respecting one another and be one for the outside world. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 26-l-'48
 
Urs at Mehrauli 
Gandhiji described his morning visit to the  Dargah Sharif  at Mehrauli. The  urs 
had attracted a large concourse of Muslims and what gladdened Gandhiji was to 
find an equal number of Hindus and Sikhs. Due to some wild and misleading 
rumours, however, the attendance of Muslims was thinner than in the previous 
years. It was a matter of shame that man should have to be afraid of man. 
Gandhiji was also distressed to see the costly marble trellis damaged. It was no 
answer to say that similar or worse things had happened in Pakistan. Had we 
fallen so low as to stoop to such acts of vandalism? Granting that such incidents My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 403  had occurred on a larger scale in Pakistan, it would be improper to institute 
comparisons in evil doing. Even if the whole world did wrong, should we do 
likewise? If today Gandhiji took to evil courses, would it not distress them? For 
him it would be worse than death. Similarly, they had reason to feel ashamed 
at the damage done to the Dajrgah.  The friend in charge had related to the 
audience the history of the shrine and Gandhiji felt that it behoved them all to 
show to such a holy place the veneration due to it. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 2 7-1-'48
 
Satyagraha in South Africa 
Gandhiji referred to the Satyagraha launched by the Indian community in South 
Africa. Indians in South Africa were not permitted free entry into the various 
provinces. In defence of their honour as men and women, the Satyagrahis had 
marched to Volkurst and then motored to Johannesburg where they held a 
meeting. This was a courageous step and if the people as a whole became 
Satyagrahis in the right spirit, victory was sure to crown their efforts. In the 
question of the march the Government had shown a degree of tolerance and 
not effected any arrests. But with the progress of the movement, it was feared 
that arrests would follow. So long, however, as the movement was conducted 
peacefully, there was no reason for the Government to resort to persecution. 
Why should whites consider it  infra dig  to talk matters over with non-whites? 
Gandhiji suggested that the authorities should contact the Satyagraha leaders 
and satisfy their reasonable demands. Today, India and Pakistan, just become 
new Dominions, were entitled to expect friendly treatment from sister 
Dominions of the Commonwealth. But if the South African Government still 
treated Indians as inferiors on the score of colour, he had no hesitation in 
declaring that they would be putting themselves in the wrong. It was 
unthinkable that Dominions should quarrel among themselves. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 28-1-'48
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 404  Their Servant 
Gandhiji next spoke of a deputation of about forty refugees from Bannu, who 
had called on him in the afternoon. Poor men, they were in an afflicted state 
and he prized their  darshan.  As he had other engagements, they were good 
enough at his request to have their statements recorded by Shri Brijkrishna. 
One of them, however, exclaimed that they owed their miseries to him and 
angrily asked him to leave them alone and retire to the Himalayas. Gandhiji 
asked him at whose bidding he should go. Some were annoyed and a few went 
to the length of abusing him, while many eulogized his efforts. The only course, 
therefore, open to him was to follow the dictates of God who spoke to men in 
the inmost chamber of the heart. There were women too in the company. He 
regarded them as his brothers or sisters. God was our one true friend. We were 
entirely in His hands. He would not care to go and enjoy the peace of the 
mountains but would be content with what peace he could extract from the 
surrounding turmoil. He, therefore, preferred to stay in their midst, adding 
that if they all went to the Himalayas, he might follow them as their servant. 
 
Bread Labour 
Proceeding Gandhiji referred to the complaints brought to him that the 
refugees, though provided with food, shelter and clothing, were averse to any 
work. If a man was in distress, the key to his happiness lay in labour. God did 
not create man to eat, drink and make merry. The Gita taught that one should 
perform  yajna  (bread labour) and partake of the fruits of that labour. 
Millionaires who ate without work were parasites. Even they should eat by the 
sweat of their brow or should go without food. The only permissible exception 
was the disabled for whom society provided. There was a variety of work for 
the refugees to do, such as maintaining sanitation including cleaning of 
latrines, spinning and other crafts. They should learn to make the best of the 
situation in which they found themselves. 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 405  Kisans 
Gandhiji then spoke about peasants. If he had his say, our Governor-General 
and our Premier would be drawn from the Kisans. In his childhood he had learnt 
from school books that the Kisans were heirs to the kingdom of the earth. This 
applied to those who laboured on the land and ate from what they produced. 
Such Kisans to be worthy of high offices might be illiterate provided they had 
robust common sense, great personal bravery, unimpeachable integrity and 
patriotism above suspicion. As real producers of wealth, they were verily the 
masters while we had enslaved them. It had been suggested to Gandhiji that 
the higher secretariat posts should also be manned by Kisans. He would endorse 
this -suggestion provided they were suitable and had knowledge of the work 
expected of them. When Kisans of this type were forthcoming, he would 
publicly ask ministers and others to make room for them. 
Birla House, New Delhi, 29-1-'48 
Harijan,  8-2-1948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 406   
157. HIS LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT 
[The following is the constitution, drafted by Gandhiji, for the Congress on the day of his 
assassination. His intention was to show how the Congress which was till now mainly 
concerned with achieving political independence may convert itself into an Association for 
the Service of the People (Lok Sevak Sangh), and work for the establishment of a non-
violent society. —Ed.] 
Though split into two, India having attained political independence through 
means devised by the Indian National Congress, the Congress in its present 
shape and form, i.e. as a propaganda vehicle and parliamentary machine, has 
outlived its use. India has still to attain social, moral and economic 
independence in terms of its seven hundred thousand villages as distinguished 
from its cities and towns. The struggle for the ascendency of civil over military 
power is bound to take place in India's progress towards its democratic goal. It 
must be kept out of unhealthy competition with political parties and communal 
bodies. For these and other similar reasons, the A.I.C.C. resolves to disband the 
existing Congress organization and flower into a Lok Sevak Sangh under the 
following rules with power to alter them as occasion may demand. 
Every Panchayat of five adult men or women being villagers or village-minded 
shall form a unit. 
Two such contiguous Panchayats shall form a working party under a leader 
elected from among themselves. 
When there are one hundred such Panchayats, the fifty first grade leaders shall 
elect from among themselves a second grade leader and so on, the first grade 
leaders meanwhile working under the second grade leader. Parallel groups of 
two hundred Panchayats shall continue to be formed till they cover the whole 
of India, each succeeding group of Panchayats electing a second grade leader 
after the manner of the first. All second grade leaders shall serve jointly for the 
whole of India and severally for their respective areas. The second grade 
leaders may elect, whenever they deem necessary, from among themselves a 
chief who will, during pleasure, regulate and command all the groups. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 407  (As the final formation of provinces, or districts is still in a state of flux, no 
attempt has been made to divide this group of servants into Provincial or 
District Councils, and jurisdiction over the whole of India has been vested in 
the group or groups that may have been formed at any given time. It should be 
noted that this body of servants derive their authority or power from service 
ungrudgingly and wisely done to their master, the whole of India.) 
1 Every worker shall be a habitual wearer of Khadi mad e from self-spun yarn 
or certified by the A.I.S.A. and must be a teetotaller. If a Hindu, he must 
have abjured untouchability in any shape or form in his own person or in 
his family and must be a believer in the ideal of inter- communal unity, 
equal respect and regard for all religions and equality of opportunity and 
status for all irrespective of race, creed or sex. 
2 He shall come in personal contact with every village r within his 
jurisdiction. 
3 He shall enroll and train workers from amongst the v illagers and keep a 
register of all these. 
4 He shall keep a record of his work from day to day. 
5 He shall organize the villages so as to make them se lf-contained and self-
supporting through their agriculture and handicrafts. 
6 He shall educate the village folk in sanitation and hygiene and take all 
measures for prevention of ill health and disease among them. 
7 He shall organize the education of the village folk from birth to death 
along the lines of Nayee Talim, in accordance with the policy laid down by 
the Hindustani Talimi Sangh. 
8 He shall see that those whose names are missing on t he statutory voters' 
roll are duly entered therein. 
9 He shall encourage those who have not yet acquired t he legal 
qualification, to acquire it for getting the right of franchise. My Non-violence 
 
www.mkgandhi.org Page 408  10 For the above purposes and others to be added from t ime to time, he shall 
train and fit himself in accordance with the rules laid down by the Sangh 
for the due performance of duty. 
The Sangh shall affiliate the following autonomous bodies : 
*1. A. I. S. A.  
2. A. I. V. I. A.  
3. Hindustani Talimi Sangh  
4. Harijan Sevak Sangh  
5. Goseva Sangh 
 
Finance 
The Sangh shall raise finances for the fulfilment of its mission, from among the 
villagers and others, special stress being laid on collection of the poor man's 
pice.  
New Delhi, 29-1-'48  
Harijan,  15-2-1948 
 
1. All India Spinners' Association. 
2. All India Village Industries Association. 
3. Society for Basic Education. 
4. Society for service of "untouchables". 
5. Society for Cow Protection and Improvement. 
 
 